@@@@@


doc= 27227


Thomas, John (1821-1892), Congregational minister, the son of Owen Thomas (1785-1831), stonecutter, and his wife, Mary, was born in Thomas Street, Holyhead, on 3 February 1821. He had three sisters and four brothers, of whom Owen Thomas (1812-1891) was one. The family moved to Bangor in 1827. With the death of his father on 8 October 1831 the family suffered extreme poverty and John was put out to work, first as a shop assistant then as a shoemaker. His early education was meagre. In September 1838 he left the Calvinistic Methodist church of his childhood and joined the Congregational church at Bangor under the ministry of Dr Arthur Jones (1776-1860), who encouraged him to start preaching. From February to June 1838 he kept a school at Prestatyn, and from October 1839 to spring 1840 one at Penmorfa, Caernarvonshire. He spent a few weeks as a student at the school of John Jones (1798-1840) at Marton, Shropshire, and six months in 1841 at the academy conducted by Dr William Davies (1805-1859) at Ffrwd-fal, Carmarthenshire. Thomas in later life bewailed his lack of an effective education. 
Thomas was ordained minister of the Congregational church at Bwlchnewydd, Carmarthenshire, on 15 June 1842, but moved to Addoldy, Glyn-nedd, Glamorgan, being inducted there on 18 April 1850. On 14 May 1854 he was inducted minister of the Tabernacle Welsh Congregational Church, Liverpool, and remained there until his death. On 23 January 1843 he married Eliza, the widow of Owen Owens, his predecessor at Bwlchnewydd. She died on 1 August 1888, aged seventy-six. She had five children from her first marriage and four from her second. 
Thomas was a man of immense energy. He first attracted public attention as a temperance advocate when no more than eighteen years of age. He soon attained the front rank as a preacher, delivering a vast number of sermons over the years in every part of Wales. As a militant dissenter, he organized the campaign to celebrate the bicentenary of the Ejection of 1662. His plan was to erect a new Congregational college that would absorb the three colleges that served the denomination in Wales. The new building, on the site of the existing Brecon College, was opened in September 1869 as Brecon Memorial College, but the other two colleges refused his 'one college' plan. This brought him into conflict with the formidable principal of Bala College, Michael D. Jones (1822-1898), the pioneer of modern Welsh nationalism. It developed into an intensely acrimonious controversy which convulsed the churches until 1890. One of the points at issue was Thomas's policy (opposed by Jones) of seeking to create a more organized and centralized form of Congregationalism. During the controversy Thomas displayed his abilities as a campaign organizer and as a leader who was adept at concealing an unbending determination behind a veil of Victorian courtesy. He was the prime mover in the formation of the Union of Welsh Independents in 1871 and was its chairman in 1878. He was chairman of the Congregational Union of England and Wales in 1885. 
Thomas was also an able journalist and author. He edited two monthly magazines, 'Y Gwerinwr' in 1855 and 1856, and 'Yr Anibynnwr' from 1857 to 1861. His most influential literary platform, however, was the weekly newspaper 'Y Tyst', which he edited jointly with William Rees (1802-1883) until 1872, and on his own until his death. After the general election of 1868 he took an enthusiastic interest in Liberal politics, and was one of the leading advocates of disestablishment. He published sermons, biographies, novels, and a massive five-volume history of the Welsh Congregational churches, in co-operation with Thomas Rees (1815-1885). 
John Thomas died at Old Colwyn on 14 July 1892 and was buried at Anfield cemetery, Liverpool. 


@@@@@


doc= 27228


Thomas, John Evan (1810-1873), sculptor, was born in Brecon, Brecknockshire, on 15 January 1810, the eldest son of John Thomas of Castle Street, Brecon, and his wife, Jane Evans of Aberedw, Radnorshire. His father encouraged his talent in carving and sent him to London to study under Francis Chantrey, and on the continent. Thomas produced the first of numerous church monuments in 1831, and began to practise as a portrait sculptor in London in 1834. He established a studio at 7 Lower Belgrave Place, from which he frequently exhibited marble portrait busts at the Royal Academy until 1862. His brother William Meredyth Thomas (1819-1877), also a student of Chantrey, was his assistant for thirty years. In 1840 Thomas married Mary, daughter of William Gunter. 
Despite his move to London, Thomas retained close links with the gentry of his home town, and the principal Welsh landed families. These sitters and patrons included the marquess of Camden (1840), Sir Watkin Williams Bailey Wynn (1840), Sir Charles Morgan (1841), Sir Joseph Bailey (1841, 1853) and Joseph Bailey jun. (1851, 1870), the marquess and marchioness of Bute (1842, 1844, 1848), Walter de Winton (1843) and John Parry de Winton (1850, 1870), vice-chancellor Sir James Lewis Knight-Bruce (1844, 1849), the first Lord Clive (1845, 1857), M. Williams, canon of St David's (1845), Sir William Nott (1848), Colonel Gwynne (1848), Viscount Hereford (1848), Sir Benjamin Hall (1852), William Daniel Conybeare, dean of Llandaff (1853), Alfred Ollivant, bishop of Llandaff (1853), and Rear-Admiral David Price (1855). 
In 1834 Thomas received a commission from Queen Victoria to produce a tablet in memory of Madame Louis. In 1844 he exhibited at Westminster Hall his model for the statue of the second marquess of Londonderry, which was executed in marble and erected in Westminster Abbey in 1850. It received a mixed response, being described by the 'Literary Gazette' as 'without dignity in the head and without dignity in the attitude', while the 'Art Union' considered that it had 'very considerable merit' (both cited in Gunnis, 390). Thomas contributed statues of Henri de Londres, archbishop of Dublin, and William, earl of Pembroke, to Augustus Welby Pugin's rebuilding of the House of Lords in 1848. In the same year, his monumental seated bronze statue of Sir Charles Morgan was 'rapidly progressing' ('ILN', 3 June 1848, 363); it was erected at Newport in 1851. 
Thomas won the prize of 70 guineas at an eisteddfod in Abergavenny in 1848 for 'The Death of Tewdrig, King of Gwent and Morganwg', 'the best model in plaster illustrative of Cambro-British history', designed with the aid of suggestions by Lady Llanover, and modelled by his brother William (Poole, 121). At the Royal Academy in 1849, the 'Illustrated London News' found it 'a composition of high merit', 'and we hope to hear of its being executed in marble' (11 Aug 1849). It was cast as an electrotype by Elkington, Mason & Co. and was included in their display at the Great Exhibition of 1851. A cast was presented in 1876 to the antiquary Morris Charles Jones, who gave it to the Powisland Museum in Welshpool. Another, bequeathed to the Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery in 1889, was later transferred to the Brecknock County Museum. 
In 1849 Thomas was commissioned to execute a statue of the second marquess of Bute, for a fee of $1900. It was exhibited with its model at the Great Exhibition, in addition to a plaster relief, 'Science Unveiling Ignorance', now at Cardiff city hall. The Bute statue was cast in bronze, and erected by public subscription in Cardiff in 1853. The 'Illustrated London News' described the figure as 'standing in a dignified and unaffected attitude, as if addressing a public assembly. The effect is highly agreeable; and the likeness we believe to be undisputable' (19 March 1853). In 1852 Thomas was commissioned by the corporation of Brecon to design a statue in memory of the duke of Wellington, incorporating a relief of the death of General Thomas Picton. The sculptor himself contributed $700 towards the memorial's cost of $1200, and it was set up in 1854. That year he also submitted proposals for the Wellington memorial in the London Guildhall. In 1857 Thomas's bronze statue of John Henry Vivian was erected in the courtyard of the old guildhall in Swansea. According to the 'Illustrated Times', 'The individuality of the original is well and gracefully preserved... the position is easy and dignified, and the relative proportions of the statue and the pedestal are excellent' (20 June 1857). In the same year, the prince of Wales sat to Thomas for the full-length marble statue which the sculptor presented to the Welsh School in Ashford, Middlesex. In 1857-8, following the death of Victoire, duchesse de Nemours, Thomas was commissioned by the duc de Nemours to produce a posthumous bust of his late wife and a portrait of her infant daughter Blanche. In 1865 his marble statue of the prince consort was erected on Castle Heights at Tenby, Pembrokeshire. 
Elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London in 1842, Thomas was one of the original sponsors of the Great Exhibition of 1851. He retired to Penisha'r-Pentre, a mansion at Llansbyddyd, Brecknockshire, in 1857 and served as a JP, deputy lieutenant of Brecknockshire in 1862, and high sheriff in 1868. His nephew recalled that: 'Mr Evan Thomas' social qualities endeared him to a large circle of friends, and his conversational powers and fund of anecdote, as well as his mature judgement of all matters concerning art, made him an honoured guest in all the houses of the great in rank, literature and opulence. (Thomas)' His early style was based upon the classicism of his master, Francis Chantrey, and subsequently loosened into a more diverse Victorian manner. He ran a prolific and successful studio and was the first Welsh sculptor to establish a significant career and reputation largely through Welsh patronage. John Evan Thomas died at his London address, 58 Buckingham Palace Road, on 9 October 1873, his wife having predeceased him; he was buried on 14 October in Brompton cemetery, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 27229


Thomas, John Fryer (1797-1877), East India Company servant, was born on 12 November 1797, probably in the parish of St Mary, Newington, Surrey, the son of James Thomas, formerly a commander in the company's service, and his wife, Ann. In 1814 he obtained a writership in the East India Company's service and joined Haileybury College. After the customary two years' study, he landed at Madras in July 1816, which marked the beginning of a long career in the Madras civil service. On 24 October 1820 he married Diana Elizabeth Wheen (1799/1800-1839), with whom he had at least one surviving child, a daughter. Diana died in May 1839 and was buried in the cemetery of St George's Cathedral, Madras. 
In 1844, after holding appointments in the 'sadr adalat' and officiating in various revenue and judicial appointments, including that of judge of the provincial court of appeal and circuit, Thomas was appointed revenue secretary, and, in the following year, chief secretary, to the government of Madras. In both positions he exercised considerable influence over the governor, George Hay, eighth marquess of Tweeddale, and several of his minutes attracted favourable notice from the court of directors. In 1850 he became a member of the governor's council and chief judge of the 'sadr diwani' and 'faujdari adalat'. In 1853, prompted in part by the recent Moplah uprisings in Malabar, he published a 'Memorandum of Suggestions for the Amelioration of the Madras Ryotwar'. His five-year term on the council expired in 1855, whereupon he resigned from the service and returned to England. The governor, third Baron Harris, was happy to recommend him to Sir Charles Wood as a man of 'considerable sagacity' but warned Wood that he was not without his 'crotchets' (Harris to Wood). 
Thomas's minutes were locally renowned for their incisive language. Most notably, he produced a review of T. B. Macaulay's draft of the Indian penal code and a minute on Indian education, the latter written in 1850 shortly after he had joined the council. Thomas's unequivocal views on education were rooted in his conviction that it was Britain's duty to effect the social and moral elevation of India. He disliked the education policy of the anglicists, with its emphasis on Western-style higher education institutions, and argued that the funds available, limited as they were, would be best spent in educating the masses through the medium of the vernacular languages. But, although a champion of vernacular education, he had no desire to uphold or reinforce indigenous values or culture. An evangelical, his hostility to Western-style institutions stemmed solely from his fear that government colleges were educating Indians in a moral vacuum and turning them into lawless atheists. He abhorred both Islam and Hinduism, condemning the scriptures of the latter for their 'puerile absurdities', and threw himself behind the missionaries in their long battle to get the 'Bible' taught in government schools. In retirement he stepped up his attack on secular education and in 1860 published a pamphlet entitled 'Bible Education in India', which argued that diffusion of Christianity in India was the only way to build loyalty and prevent another catastrophe like the uprising of 1857. 
Thomas died at his home at 22 Vanbrugh Park, Blackheath, on 7 April 1877. He was survived by his daughter, Louisa Ann, who at the time of his death was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 27230


Thomas, John Wesley (1798-1872), Methodist minister, writer, and translator, was born on 4 August 1798 in Exeter, the son of John Thomas, an Exeter tradesman and preacher, and younger brother of Elijah, who was also to enter the ministry. After a childhood revelation, at nineteen Thomas went to London, hoping to become a missionary, but instead he was selected for the itinerant ministry, and for the next half century passed between one and three years in twenty-six different British locations. Largely self-educated, Thomas acquired several languages, was a respected miniaturist, and wrote authoritatively on a wide variety of topics. His magpie mind acquired enormous general knowledge, exploited in frequent articles, notably for the 'Wesleyan Methodist Magazine' and 'Notes and Queries', on subjects as diverse as William the Silent, Wesleyan hymns, and Cornish fairies. His first book was 'An Apology for 'Don Juan'', really a satire against Byron's agnosticism, in a witty parody of his style. His major work, 'The Trilogy, or, Dante's Three Visions', was published by Bohn's from 1859, although extracts appeared as early as 1840. Retaining the original metre, with copious notes and even diagrammatic illustrations by Thomas himself, it is an impressive achievement. One of his aims was to prove that Dante's Christianity more resembled John Wesley's than Pius IX's; 'Purgatorio' (1862) is dedicated 'To Garibaldi and the people of Italy'. 
Thomas was 'thin, and somewhat of a stooping form... His face, however, would at once fix attention' (Christophers, 345). This was certainly so in 1850 when he filled Dudley town hall to capacity, attacking the papacy. He also turned his satire against Mormonism; and against Bishop Phillpotts of Exeter in a poem, 'The War of the Surplice' (2nd edn, 1871). An associate of Lord Brougham, he spent much time at Brougham Castle when minister at Penrith (1858-61). John Wesley Thomas died at Dumfries on 7 February 1872, leaving his widow, Louisa, 'nee' Drayton, and a daughter and four sons, two of whom followed him into the ministry. 


@@@@@


doc= 27231


Thomas, Joshua (d. 1759), author and Church of England clergyman, was born at Penpiod, Llanllywenfel, Brecknockshire, early in the eighteenth century. Virtually nothing is known of his early life though he is reputed to have graduated from the Queen's College, Oxford, a fact not recorded by Foster in 'Alumni Oxonienses'. Following curacies at Nantmel, Radnorshire, and thereafter at Tirabad and Llanwrtyd in his home county, and at Llangamarch and Llanllywenfel, also in Brecknockshire, where he served under Theophilus Evans (1693-1767), he was presented with the living of Merthyr Cynog in 1741; he added Llanbister in the neighbouring county of Radnorshire five years later. He also served as a chaplain to the earl of Powys, before returning to his home parish at Llanllywenfel in 1758. His son, also called Joshua, matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, in May 1758, graduating BA in 1762 and MA two years later. 
The elder Joshua Thomas was principally known as a translator into Welsh of pious and didactic works of an Anglican hue. His earliest published work was a translation of Andrew Jones's 'The Black Book of Conscience', which he entitled 'Lyfr du y gydwybod' (1723), followed, in 1728, by excerpts from Matthew Henry's 'Exposition on the Old and New Testaments', and, in 1733, by Archbishop Edward Synge's 'An Essay towards Making the Knowledge of Religion Easy' and Robert Warren's 'The Daily Self-Examiner'. Further works were Bishop George Bull's 'Discourse Concerning the Spirit of God' ('c'.1740) and a selection from the writings of Dr John Scott of St Giles-in-the-Fields entitled 'Yr angenrheidrwydd o gredu gwobrwyon a chosbedigaethau y byd arall tu ag at fod yn wir grefyddol' ('The necessity of believing in rewards and punishments in the next world in order to become truly religious'; 1743). His most celebrated and accomplished work was his translation of Scott's 'Christian Life' entitled 'Y Fuchedd Grist'nogol, o'i dechreu i'w diwedd mewn gogoniant' (1752), which, stylistically, was of a very high standard. 
Although hardly known beyond the borders of Brecknockshire and the diocese of St David's, Thomas typified the orthodox Welsh clergy of his day in his loyalty to a sober Anglicanism which steered well clear of Methodist enthusiasm on the one hand and popish superstition on the other. He died on 23 June 1759 at Llanllywenfel, and was buried there in the parish church. 


@@@@@


doc= 27232


Thomas, Joshua (1719-1797), Particular Baptist minister and historian, was born on 22 February 1719 at Ty-hen, Caeo, Carmarthenshire, the eldest son of Thomas Morgan ('c'.1690-1760), carpenter, and his wife, Jane Hughes ('b'. 'c'.1689). After a rudimentary education at a school kept by the Independent minister David Williams at Bwlch-y-rhiw, in his home parish, he left for Hereford in 1739 to pursue an apprenticeship, possibly as a mercer. Within months of his departure the family, who had been Independents, transferred their allegiance to the Baptist cause, while Joshua Thomas himself was baptized by immersion at Leominster in May 1740. 
On his return from Herefordshire to Caeo in 1743 Thomas became closely involved in the activities of the recently established Bethel branch of the Aberdyar Baptist Church, at which his brother Timothy had been ordained minister. In 1746 he married Elizabeth Jones ('c'.1725-1807) from Cardiganshire before settling, in May of that year, at Hay, Brecknockshire, taking up membership at the Trosgoed (subsequently Maesyberllan) church. It was during this time that he began preaching, confining his labour to Trosgoed's branches at Olchon, on the Hereford side of the Welsh border, and Capel-y-ffin. It was there in 1749 that he was ordained as ministerial assistant. A further move occurred in November 1754, when he accepted a call to the ministry of the Baptist congregation at Leominster, Herefordshire, where he was to remain for the rest of his life. 
It was during his Leominster pastorate that Thomas's skills as a researcher were first nurtured and his reputation as a sound historian and accomplished author came to fruition. He had already published a short work, 'Ateb i'r ugain rhesymmau' (1751), a reply to an anti-Baptist polemic, during his time at Hay, but a growing fascination with the beginnings of his Leominster congregation during the protectorate served to hone his interest in dissenting history. Using church records and the recollections of his oldest members as his source, in 1764 he began to compose 'A brief history of the Baptist church at Leominster', completing the manuscript five years later. This provided an apprenticeship for subsequent works, including what was to become his most accomplished volume, 'Hanes y Bedyddwyr ymhlith y Cymry' ('A history of the Baptists among the Welsh'; 1778), and the one for which he remains best remembered. Although he had been encouraged by his ministerial colleagues as early as 1751 to write a sketch delineating the history of the Welsh Baptists, he did not begin to collate material until 1774. He spent the summer of 1776 travelling throughout south Wales visiting churches and gleaning information, and when the attractive 468-page quarto volume was published it was immediately apparent that a judicious historian and writer of the most elegant Welsh prose had emerged. The 'Hanes' would become the principal source for early Welsh Baptist historians for generations to come and a notable contribution to Welsh historiography. His succeeding work, the two-volume manuscript 'Ecclesiastical history of Wales', which described the legends which accompanied the coming of Christianity to Wales and its subsequent history up to the puritan ascendancy, was completed by 1779, while a virtual translation of the 'Hanes' entitled 'Materials for a history of the Baptist churches in the principality of Wales from about the year 1630 to 1782' was completed three years later. Although less anecdotal than the original, its factual content had been strengthened by the inclusion of information which Thomas had received from American sources provided by Isaac Backus and Morgan Edwards in Philadelphia. This formed the basis of his meticulous and detailed contributions to John Rippon's 'Baptist Annual Register' (1791-), which prompted Rippon's description of him as 'the best informed person on earth concerning the origin and growth of the baptized Churches in Wales'. The bulk of a further manuscript history, 'A history of the Baptist churches in Wales', was completed by 1794, and this became the basis for Benjamin Davies's Welsh translation of 1885, which gave Thomas's historical work a new lease of life and further confirmed his reputation among Victorian nonconformists. His final published work, also based upon his contribution to Rippon's 'Register', was 'History of the Baptist Association in Wales from the Year 1659 to the Year 1790' (1795), though less substantial histories of individual churches, including Bewdley, Worcestershire, Hook Norton, Oxfordshire, and Colchester, remain in manuscript form. 
Along with his contribution as denominational historian, Thomas was a key figure in eighteenth-century Baptist life in the east midlands as well as in Wales. His long correspondence with his close friend and colleague Benjamin Francis (1734-1799), another expatriate Welshman whose career was spent ministering to Baptist congregations in the west of England, affords a fascinating glimpse of mid-eighteenth-century dissenting life. Though eirenic by temperament he nevertheless argued strongly for doctrinal orthodoxy, as witnessed by his widely used translation of the London Particular Baptists' 1689 confession, 'Cyffes ffydd wedi ei gosod allan' (1791) and his 1794 translation of Robert Hall's essay on the Trinity. His evangelical Calvinism was shared by his brothers Timothy (1720-1768), author of a very able treatise on the doctrine of justification, 'Traethiad ar y wisg-wen ddisglair' (1759), and Zacharias (1727-1816), both of whom served as ministers of the Aberdyar church. 
The best known of the five of Joshua Thomas's children to survive infancy was 
Joshua Thomas died, aged seventy-eight, on 25 August 1797 at Etnam Street, Leominster, Herefordshire, having served the Baptist community there for forty-three years. He was buried three days later in the Etnam Street churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 27233


Thomas, Lewis (1568?-1619?), Church of England clergyman, was probably born in Glamorgan, although he may have been born in Radnor. He matriculated, as Lewis Evans, at Gloucester Hall, Oxford, on 11 December 1584, and graduated BA as Lewis Evans alias Thomas from Brasenose College on 15 February 1587. Shortly afterwards he was ordained and received a benefice 'in his native county of Glamorgan and elsewhere' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.'). 
During his ministry Thomas wrote two volumes of sermons. The first, 'Seaven sermons, or, The exercises of seven sabbaoths; together with a short treatise upon the commaundements' (1599), dedicated to Richard Broughton, an assize judge for north Wales, expounded a variety of texts from the 'Old' and 'New' testaments, and proved very popular, appearing in ten further editions up to 1630. In the first two sermons he attacked the vanity and corruption of the period and asserted the need for repentance. Thomas also recalled the 'generall plague' and 'famine' which had devastated the land, in that 'time of sorrow and perplexity' when friends and neighbours kept their distance and 'they who this day carried the dead bodies to their graves, were themselves on the morrow carried by others into their graves' (L. Thomas, 'Seaven Sermons', 1599, 21-2). Later sermons attacked transubstantiation as 'a grosse and most absurb opinion, that we should rent with our teeth the very flesh of Christ our Saviour. This is even to crucifie Christ againe like the Jews' (ibid., 33) and claimed that the pope offered 'counterfaite phisicke to purge mens soules and to cleane their sins by his bulls, pardons and indulgences, and such trumpery' (ibid., 69). 'The forming of Eve' spoke of women's duty to help their husbands through hard work, but also presented an ideal of reciprocal responsibility and a mutually supportive, companionate relationship, where 'No bitter wordes must passe betweene them, much less blowes' (ibid., 91-2). 
Thomas's 'Demegoriai: Certaine Lectures upon Sundry Portions of Scripture' (1600), consisting of eight sermons, again on diverse biblical passages, and dedicated to his first patron, Sir Thomas Egerton, lord keeper of the great seal, expressed conventional Christian values and offered sage advice to magistrates and his parishioners. The former were to 'circumspectly looke into the disorders there' and to avoid corruption which, he noted, was the fashion 'of many magistrates that carry no conscience' (L. Thomas, 'Demegoriai', 1600, 'Christ travailing unto Jerusalem'). He recommended that they ought to examine all crimes, large and small, and punish accordingly. Thus their 'judiciall censures must not be like Spyders webs, which intangle onely the small flies... [they] ought to be Eagle-sighted, the better to looke into abuses... into every corner of corruption, that no sinne may escape without his censure' (ibid.). They were to be like 'Gods' to ensure that 'no weake, or corrupt, or blinde Magistrate be preferred: but the wisest and best approved' (ibid.). In 'The history of the Lord's birth' Lewis observed further that good housekeeping and hospitality were in danger of becoming 'lost through pride and prodigalitie' while in 'The anatomy of tale-bearers' he called on the gentry to remember the poor. All sections of the community were similarly warned about tale-bearing for gossips were 'worse than crowes: for they feed but upon dead carkasses but these carriers of tales feede upon them that are alive'. It is believed that Thomas died in 1619 in Glamorgan, but the exact date and whereabouts of his death and burial are unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 27234


Thomas, Matthew Evan (1788-1830), architect, became a student of the Royal Academy in 1812, and in 1815 he gained the academy's gold medal for a design for a palace. He went to Italy in the following year, and remained there until 1819. During his stay he was elected a member of the academy at Florence, and of the Accademia di San Luca at Rome. After his return he exhibited architectural drawings at the Royal Academy between 1820 and 1822. In 1826 he exhibited at the Society (later Royal Society) of British Artists 'All Souls College, Oxford' and 'L'arco dei Bosari, Verona'. In 1827 and 1828 he exhibited three portraits. Thomas appears in the left foreground of Sir George Hayter's 'The Trial of Queen Caroline' (1820-23), holding a pencil, and with a small notebook balanced on the back of the chair behind which he is standing. His name is included in 'Hayter's Key' for the picture and he is described in the National Portrait Gallery's publication of the Key as 'a reporter' (Walker, 1.614). He died at Hackney on 12 July 1830, and was buried in St John's Wood Chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 27235


Thomas, Sir Noah (1720-1792), physician, was born at Neath, Glamorgan, the son of Hophni Thomas, master of a merchant vessel. He was educated at Oakham School, and went to St John's College, Cambridge, in 1738. He graduated BA in 1742, MA in 1746, and MD in 1753. He then settled in London. He was made a fellow of the Royal Society in 1753, was elected a fellow of the College of Physicians in 1757, and delivered the Goulstonian lectures in 1759. In 1761, 1766, 1767, and 1781 he was one of the censors. He became physician-extraordinary to George III in 1763, and physician-in-ordinary in 1775, and was knighted in that year. He was also physician to the Lock Hospital, London. He died at Bath on 17 May 1792. In the College of Physicians he was esteemed for his learning, but he never published any book. 


@@@@@


doc= 27236


Thomas, Owen (1812-1891), Calvinistic Methodist minister, son of Owen (died 1831) and Mary Thomas, was born in Edmund Street, Holyhead, on 16 December 1812. John Thomas (1821-1892) was a younger brother. His father was a stonemason, and he followed the same occupation from the time of the family's move to Bangor in 1827 until he was twenty-two. In 1834 he began to preach in connection with the Calvinistic Methodists, among whom his father had been a lay officer until his death in 1831, and at once took high rank as a preacher. After keeping school in Bangor for some years, he entered in 1838 the Calvinistic Methodist college at Bala, and thence proceeded in 1841 to the University of Edinburgh. 
Poverty forced Thomas to cut short his university course before he could graduate, and in January 1844 he became pastor of Penmount Chapel, Pwllheli. In the following September he was ordained in the North Wales Association meeting at Bangor. Two years later he moved to Newtown, Montgomeryshire, to take charge of the English Calvinistic Methodist church in that town, and at the end of 1851 he accepted the pastorate of the Welsh church meeting in Jewin Crescent, London. On 24 January 1860 he married Ellen (died 1867), youngest daughter of the Revd William Roberts of Amlwch. In 1865 he moved again to Liverpool, where he spent the rest of his days as pastor: first, of the Netherfield Road, and then (from 1871) of the Princes Road Church of the Calvinistic Methodists. He was moderator of the North Wales Association in 1863 and 1882, and of the general assembly of the denomination in 1868 and 1888. 
Throughout life Thomas was a close student, and his literary work bears witness to his wide theological reading and talent for exposition. Besides biblical commentaries, Thomas published biographies of the Revds John Jones, Talsarn, and Henry Rees. He was a contributor to the 'Traethodydd' from its inception, and for a time one of its two joint editors. Many of the articles in the first edition of the 'Gwyddoniadur', a Welsh encyclopaedia in ten volumes (1857-77), were from his pen. In 1877 the degree of DD was conferred upon him by Princeton College, New Jersey. 
It was as a preacher, however, that Thomas won the commanding position he occupied in Wales; his eloquence enabled him to wield in the pulpit an influence which was said to recall that of John Elias, and he never appeared to better advantage than at the great open-air services held in connection with the meetings of the two associations. He died at his home in Catharine Street, Liverpool, on 2 August 1891, and was buried in Anfield cemetery, Liverpool. 


@@@@@


doc= 27237


Thomas, Richard Darton (1777-1857), naval officer, son of Charles Thomas, was born at Saltash, Cornwall. He entered the navy in May 1790 on the 'Cumberland' with Captain John Macbride. Afterwards he was in the 'Blanche' in the West Indies, and when she was paid off in June 1792 he joined the sloop 'Nautilus', in which he went to the West Indies, and was at the capture of Tobago, Martinique, and St Lucia. At Martinique he commanded a flat-bottomed boat in the brilliant attack upon Fort Royal. He returned to England in the 'Boyne', and he was still with her when she was burnt at Spithead, off Portsmouth, on 1 May 1795. He was afterwards in the 'Glory' and 'Commerce de Marseille' in the English Channel, and in the 'Barfleur' and 'Victory' in the Mediterranean, and on 15 January 1797 he was promoted lieutenant of the 'Excellent', in which, on 14 February, he was present in the battle of Cape St Vincent, off the coast of Portugal. He continued in the 'Excellent' off Cadiz until June 1798, when he was moved to the 'Thalia'. In February 1799 he was transferred to the 'Defence', in December to the 'Triumph', and in October 1801 to the 'Barfleur', Collingwood's flagship in the channel. During the peace he was in the 'Leander' on the Halifax station, and was promoted commander on 18 January 1803. The packet 'Lady Hobart', in which he took a passage for England, was wrecked on an iceberg. After seven days in a small boat he and his companions reached Cove Island, north of St John's, Newfoundland. On his arrival in England he was appointed, in December 1803, to the bomb-vessel 'Etna', which he took out to the Mediterranean. On 22 October 1805 he was posted to the 'Bellerophon' (74 guns), from which he was moved to the 'Queen' (98 guns) as flag captain to Lord Collingwood, with whom, in the 'Ocean' (98 guns) and the 'Ville de Paris' (110 guns), he continued until Collingwood's death in March 1810. He remained in the 'Ville de Paris' until December, and in February 1811 he was appointed to the 'Undaunted' (38 guns), in which he assisted the Spanish along the coast of Catalonia. In February 1813, after nine years' continuous service in the Mediterranean, he was obliged by ill health to return to England. 
From 1822 until 1825 Thomas was captain of the Ordinary at Portsmouth, and he was in the same capacity at Plymouth from 1834 until 1837. He married, on 2 October 1827, Gratina, daughter of Lieutenant-General Robert Williams of the Royal Marines; they had a son and a daughter. Thomas became rear-admiral on 10 January 1837, and was commander-in-chief in the Pacific from 1841 until 1844, a troubled period. He was involved in obtaining compensation for British residents of San Salvador and Costa Rica, events at Tahiti and the Sandwich Islands, and the detention of a Peruvian squadron until redress was made to British subjects. His conduct was commended by the British government. He was thanked by the American government for helping Americans resident in the Sandwich Islands, and was made an honorary member of the American protestant missionary organization, the Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions. He was promoted vice-admiral on 8 January 1848 and admiral on 11 September 1854, and he died at Stonehouse, Devonport, Plymouth, on 21 August 1857. That Collingwood kept him as his flag captain for five years is the highest testimony to Thomas's seamanship, professionalism, and personal qualities. 


@@@@@


doc= 27238


Thomas, Samuel (1626/7-1693), nonjuring Church of England clergyman, was born at Ubley in Somerset, the son of William Thomas (1592/3-1667), the rector there, and his wife, Thomasine (died in or after 1667). A student at both Cambridge and Oxford during the interregnum, Samuel Thomas matriculated pensioner at Peterhouse, Cambridge, in Lent term 1646 and graduated BA in 1649, before moving in 1651 to St John's College, Oxford, where he was made a fellow. Incorporated at Oxford on 20 August 1651, he proceeded MA on 17 December 1651. 
Though his father was a presbyterian who was ejected from Ubley in 1662 Samuel Thomas was a devoted episcopalian from early on in his life. In the early 1650s, much to the displeasure of his father, he encouraged George Bull, the future bishop of St David's and at that time William Thomas's student, to read episcopalian writers such as Henry Hammond and Richard Hooker in the hope of winning Bull over to Anglicanism. In October 1658 William Thomas complained to Richard Baxter how his son was 'in a dangerous condition... being now 30 year old & yet unsetled in divers more material points of religion, & propending... in things controverted to the worse side of the controversie' (Keeble and Nuttall, 1.351). Samuel was sent to live with or near Baxter, but the hope that their regular conversation would set Samuel 'in the right way' was disappointed (ibid., 1.405). Baxter sent him back to his father in August 1659. Samuel, he wrote, was unwilling to dispute 'originall sin, & speciall grace & many of the rest in which we differ' either orally or 'expeditiously' in writing. Baxter could 'live comfortably' with Samuel, 'he being of a quiet disposition, & a blamelesse disposition', but as a busy man he simply did not have time 'to follow him any further in his way of copious & long deliberated writings'. That form of debate could as well be done without Samuel's living with him, and indeed the two do seem to have maintained a correspondence for a while (ibid., 1.404). The errors which William Thomas deplored in his son -- his 'Exaltation of natural (which is ever corrupt) reason above its due pitch', a preference for 'natural Theology' and 'presumption... upon natural parts' -- all suggest the influence of an important strand developing within Anglican theology (ibid., 1.405). In early 1660 Samuel sought the advice of Henry Hammond on the question of original sin. 
At the Restoration Samuel Thomas was deprived of his fellowship at St John's by the royal commissioners, despite his episcopal leanings. However, John Fell, dean of Christ Church, Oxford, appointed him as chaplain or petty canon there. He held this position until his appointment in 1672 as chantour of Christ Church, vicar of St Thomas, Oxford, and curate of Holywell. The people of Oxford frequently visited these two suburban parishes because of 'his edifying way of preaching' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.908). Then, in 1681, he was made vicar of Chard, Somerset, and prebendary of Compton Bishop (3 August 1681) by Peter Mew, bishop of Bath and Wells. His refusal of the oath of allegiance to William and Mary after the revolution of 1688 led to the loss of both ecclesiastical posts on 1 February 1691. Never an active nonjuror Thomas died suddenly on 4 November 1693 at Chard aged sixty-six, and was buried in the chancel of the church on 15 November 1693. There is no evidence that he ever married. 
Despite his presbyterian roots Thomas became a strong apologist for the episcopal establishment and an outspoken opponent of Calvinism, leading Anthony Wood to speak of the 'unblameableness of our author's deportment and strictness and regularity of his life' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.908). His books included 'The presbyterians unmask'd, or, Animadversions upon a nonconformist book called the 'Interest of England in the matter of religion'' (1676). In 1680 he wrote a preface to the second edition of Thomas Tompkins's 'The New Distemper', republished in 1681 under the title 'The dissenter disarmed, or, A melius inquirendum upon a nonconformist book; viz, the 'Interest of England in the matter of religion'', where he rejected any attempts at conciliation with the dissenters, stating that the 'Presbyterian Party ought not in justice or reason of state to be protected and (much less encouraged), but to be rejected and depressed' (p. 195). His other works included 'The charge of schism renewed against the separatists, in an answer to the renewer (John Humphrey) of that pretended peaceable design, which is falsely called, 'An answer to Dr. Stillingfleet's sermon'' (1680); 'Remarks on the Preface to the 'Protestant Reconciler', in a Letter to a Friend' (1683); and possibly the anonymous 'Animadversions upon a Late Treatise Entit. 'The Protestant Reconciler'' (1683). These works earned him the enmity of his dissenting opponents, not least Richard Baxter, who referred to him as a 'shameless writer' (Allibone, 'Dict.', 3.2389). 


@@@@@


doc= 27239


Thomas, Sidney Gilchrist (1850-1885), metallurgist, was born on 16 April 1850 at Campanile Cottage, Canonbury Villas, Islington, London, the second of the four children of William Thomas (1808-1867), a Welsh clerk in the solicitor's department of the Inland Revenue office, and his wife, Melicent Gilchrist ('b'. 1816), eldest daughter of James Gilchrist, a Scottish nonconformist minister. Educated mainly at Dulwich College, London, where he was a day pupil from 1859 to 1866, Thomas expressed a strong inclination towards applied science, but the death of his father when he was not yet seventeen led him to begin to earn his livelihood immediately after leaving school, at first as an assistant master in a school in Essex. Later in 1867 he obtained a junior clerkship at Marlborough Street police court in London, whence in 1868 he transferred to the Thames court, Arbour Square, Stepney, where he continued until his resignation in May 1879. Meanwhile, after office hours, he studied law and applied chemistry; at the Birkbeck Institution, a sentence used by George Chaloner, teacher of chemistry, seems to have imprinted itself on Thomas's mind: 'The man who eliminated phosphorus by means of the Bessemer converter will make his fortune' ('DNB'). So it was that, about 1870, the solution of this problem became the main purpose of his life. 
The age of bulk steel can be said to date from the 1860s, when the two alternative techniques of Bessemer and Siemens both began to be applied extensively. However, neither of these 'steelmaking' processes removed phosphorus from the molten metal, and phosphorus rendered the resultant steel brittle and worthless. Consequently, only non-phosphoric ores could be used, so that the larger proportion of British, French, German, and Belgian pig irons remained untreatable by the new processes. As growth of bulk steel took place, so demand increased for a means to deal with the phosphorus; during the 1870s the commercial competition to obtain a solution intensified. 
Thomas devoted much of his leisure to the problem posed by phosphorus, attending the laboratories of various chemical teachers, reading up all he could about the subject, sitting examinations of the Department of Science and Art and of the Royal School of Mines, and even experimenting in the fireplace at home. Holidays from his police-court duties were largely spent in visiting ironworks in Britain and abroad. In 1873 he was offered the post of analytical chemist to a brewery at Burton upon Trent, but declined it from conscientious scruples about fostering the use of alcohol. During 1874 and several subsequent years he contributed to the technical journal 'Iron'. 
Towards the end of 1875 Thomas arrived at a theoretical and provisional solution to the problem of dephosphorization. This called for a substance which was chemically basic and physically able to withstand the high temperature involved in the process, because for commercial working the durability of the converter's lining was essential. For the material of the new lining, experiments led him to the selection of lime or its congeners magnesia or magnesian limestone, but the practical realization of such a lining engaged him and his associates until 1879. He foresaw not only that by employing such a lining it would become possible to 'fix' the phosphorus from the pig iron in a separate slag, but also that the phosphorus deposited in the basic slag itself represented a material of great potential value for agricultural purposes. 
Demand for the relatively new bulk steel was growing strongly, and makers were desperate for means to enable iron resources containing the element to be used. Thomas, with his single-minded, determined investigation of the subject over several years, produced a solution to the difficulty at exactly the crucial time and in the face of considerable competition. In achieving his goal he was sufficiently energetic, skilled, and personable to obtain the essential assistance and confidence of several other people and, despite acute shortages of money, he ensured that the key features of his innovation were well protected by patents for his subsequent financial advantage. Besides the invaluable experimental work undertaken from late 1877 by his cousin, Percy C. Gilchrist (later FRS), chemist at Blaenafon iron- and steelworks in south Wales, Thomas received sympathetic help from the manager at Blaenafon, E. P. Martin, and, after September 1878, from the manager of Bolckow Vaughan & Co.'s large works in Cleveland, E. W. Richards, together with his consultant, J. E. Stead. 
Thomas took out his first patent in November 1877, and others followed during 1878 and 1879. In the spring of 1878 he first announced, at a meeting of the Iron and Steel Institute in London, that he had successfully dephosphorized iron in the Bessemer converter, but this statement was disregarded by his hearers. On 4 April 1879 successful experiments on a large scale were performed publicly at Bolckow Vaughan's Middlesbrough works. These demonstrations at once secured the practical commercial triumph both of the process and of the inventor. A paper, written earlier by Thomas in conjunction with Gilchrist for the Iron and Steel Institute, on the 'Elimination of phosphorus in the Bessemer converter', was read in May 1879. There, the solution of the problem of how to dephosphorize pig iron cheaply during converting, now experimentally demonstrated by the 'basic' process, was clearly stated to comprise, first, substitution of a durable basic lining for the former siliceous one, and, second, provision of abundant basic material (such as lime) to secure a highly basic slag at an early stage of the blow. The process could also be adapted to the Siemens-Martin system of making steel in open-hearth furnaces. It transpired that the use of lime to separate phosphorus from liquid iron had previously been patented in 1872 by G. J. Snelus, while employment of hot tar as binder for the individual lime fragments in the vessel's lining was covered by a patent filed by E. Riley in November 1878. The interests of the parties were combined and protected by the formation, in 1882, of the Dephosphorizing and Basic Patents Company. 
The method was immediately adopted in 1879 and spread rapidly, enabling steel to be produced in much larger quantities. On the continent, the 'Thomas process' (of basic-Bessemer converting) and its product, 'Thomas steel', persisted strongly into the 1950s. In many steelmaking districts open-hearth furnaces using the 'basic' conditions enunciated by Thomas and Gilchrist predominated throughout the first half of the twentieth century. These same conditions continued to be fundamental features of most steelmaking techniques during the second half of the century, even though oxygen replaced air as the chief refining reagent. In 1885, the year of Thomas's death, world steel output amounted to some 6 million tons, of which 1 million tons, or nearly 17 per cent, was produced using his principles. A century later, in 1985, world steel output exceeded 700 million tons, with at least 550 million tons, or nearly 80 per cent, being made in the conditions he stipulated. Particularly in the years before 1960, besides the steel product, the basic processing yielded large quantities of slag rich in phosphorus, which, after grinding, was applied as agricultural fertilizer. In this way, by 1937 some 20 million tons of phosphoric acid had been returned to the land to increase its productivity. 
Evidently precocious, and brought up in a mentally stimulating home, Thomas was a lively and ready conversationalist and correspondent; he was well informed, with wide interests. His enthusiasm helped him to create a favourable impression upon many. He held pronounced views on the more equable distribution of wealth, wanting to ameliorate the lives of the 'working masses' and arranging to leave the great bulk of his money to 'doing good discriminately'. He believed in life after death. He lived with his mother and sister, and never married. In his youth he was energetic and enjoyed walking and travelling. However, in the pursuit of his objective he drove himself hard and became habitually careless about food and rest. In 1877 he suffered a period of poor health: a few years later serious lung trouble manifested itself, and it became clear that systematic overwork, perhaps coupled with exposure to the ill-ventilated atmosphere of the police courtroom, had resulted in disease. 
In early 1881 Thomas paid a triumphal visit to the USA, where he was enthusiastically welcomed by the leading metallurgists and ironmasters. In that year he also founded the North Eastern Steel Company to make products of basic steel in Middlesbrough. In 1882 he was elected a member of council of the Iron and Steel Institute, and in 1883 he was awarded a Bessemer gold medal of the institute, another medal being awarded to G. J. Snelus. Also in 1883 Thomas and Gilchrist received the gold medal from the Society of Arts. Already, however, Thomas was occupied in a vain search for restored health. He made a prolonged voyage round the world in 1883, by way of the Cape of Good Hope, India, Australia, and New Zealand, returning by way of the USA. The winter of 1883 and the first half of 1884 were spent in Algiers, after which he went to Paris with his mother and younger sister Lilian, who had been his close companion and was subsequently his executor. He died of emphysema at 61 avenue Marceau, Paris, on 1 February 1885 and was buried in the cemetery at Passy. 


@@@@@


doc= 27240


Thomas, Thomas (1553-1588), printer and lexicographer, was born, according to the 'Dictionary of National Biography', in the city of London on 25 December 1553, the son of Thomas Thomas, 'gentleman'. He was educated at Eton College between 1565 and 1571, and on 24 August 1571 entered King's College, Cambridge, as a scholar. Three years later, in accordance with custom, he was elected a fellow. He graduated BA in 1575 and MA in 1579. Probably in 1581 he resigned his fellowship, and it seems that by March 1583 he had married Anne (died 1610), widow of John Sheres (died 1581), a wealthy local bookbinder for whom Thomas had acted as an executor. Their daughter, Joan ('b'. 1583), survived him; a son, John ('b'. 1585), died in infancy. At King's, Thomas's contemporaries had included Richard Day, son of the printer John Day, and it was perhaps through him that Thomas developed an interest in printing. 
Thomas was appointed university printer on 3 May 1583. In autumn 1583, in a house in Regent Walk (the street that ran east-west between the west front of the university church and the Schools) he established the first printing house in Cambridge since John Siberch had printed his last work there in the 1520s. Thomas's first book, probably never completed, was a part of Pliny's 'Historia naturalis' (1583) intended for the use of university students: only a fragment of this survives, and there is no evidence that it was ever published. His press was established in the teeth of opposition from the London Stationers' Company, who saw him as a rival to their monopolies and who seized his press within a month of his appointment in an effort to prevent him. It was regained only after the intervention of Lord Burghley, chancellor of the university. Thomas's (and the university's) claim to the right to print rested on letters patent granted to the university in 1534 by Henry VIII enabling the university to print 'omnimodi libri'; though repeatedly challenged in courts of law these letters patent were upheld in succeeding generations. 
Thomas was known for his puritan views, and was referred to in one of the Martin Marprelate tracts as 'that puritan Cambridge printer' ('Oh Read Over D. John Bridges, for it is a Worthy Worke', 1588, 6). He concentrated his printing and publishing on two principal areas: educational texts primarily for the local market, and protestant theology. One of his first works was an edition of Ramus's 'Dialectica' by William Temple (1584); in 1585 he printed a translation of Ramus's Latin grammar; and in 1587 Plato's 'Menexenus' in Greek. In theology, his tastes were for the Heidelberg reformers, but his major author and staunch supporter was William Whitaker, regius professor at Cambridge. 
Thomas printed his own selection of Ovid for the use of students in 1584, and had presumably been working at this for a while before he resigned his college fellowship. In 1587 he published the first edition of his Latin dictionary, dedicated to Lord Burghley and based on the work of Guillaume Morel and Thomas Cooper. By 1631 Thomas's dictionary had passed through thirteen editions as the standard intermediate dictionary of its time. He continued the binding business inherited through his wife, though there is no evidence that he was himself a binder. Thomas died in Cambridge early in August 1588, and was buried on the 9th in Great St Mary's. His widow inherited the business, and on 6 February 1589 his stepdaughter Alice married John Legate, a printer from London who thus succeeded to his business and equipment. Thomas's will dated 28 July 1588 and proved on 12 October 1588 left his property mostly to his wife and daughter. The post-mortem inventory, with a detailed record of his equipment and stock-in-trade, reveals that he owned a single press, and about 2700 lb of type, with other materials: his estate as a whole was valued at $580. 


@@@@@


doc= 27241


Thomas, Vaughan (1775-1858), Church of England clergyman and author, was born on 18 August 1775 at Kingston, Surrey, where he was baptized on 20 September 1775, the son of John Thomas, of the same place, and his wife, Frances. Having matriculated from Oriel College, Oxford, on 17 December 1792, he was admitted a scholar of Corpus Christi College on 6 May 1794. He graduated BA in 1796 (MA, 1800; BD, 1809), and in 1803 was elected to a fellowship at Corpus. He was appointed vicar of Yarnton, Oxfordshire, in February 1803; vicar of Stoneleigh, Warwickshire, in June 1804; and rector of Duntisbourne Rouse, Gloucestershire, in March 1811. These three lucrative livings he held in plurality until the end of his life, while continuing to reside in Oxford. From 1814 he also acted as curate of Begbroke, Oxfordshire, on behalf of John Cooke, president of Corpus (1783-1823) and rector of Begbroke and Wood Eaton. In October 1811 he resigned his fellowship on his marriage to Charlotte, daughter of the Revd John Williams, vicar of Catherington, Hampshire. They had no children. She was the sister of George Williams MD, fellow of Corpus, regius professor of botany, and physician to the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford. 
Thomas was a conservative protestant high-churchman who deployed his formidable powers of management in combating every manifestation of the spirit of the age in the church and the university. In 1821 he opposed the candidacy of Richard Heber for the Oxford parliamentary seat on the grounds of Heber's alleged sympathy with the cause of Catholic emancipation. In 1831 Thomas published a pamphlet on 'The Legality of the Present Academical System of the University of Oxford', challenging the proposals for reform made by Sir William Hamilton in the 'Edinburgh Review'. As chaplain of his college from 1832 to 1844 he made it his campaign headquarters during a period of unprecedented controversy. In 1833 he was a co-founder of an association formed to defend orthodox doctrine, and in 1834-5 he masterminded the successful resistance to the admission of dissenters to the university. In February 1836 he was chairman of the 'Corpus committee' which co-ordinated the protest against the appointment of R. D. Hampden as regius professor of divinity. On all these issues he had the support of the Tractarians, but this marriage of convenience broke up after 1838, when Thomas was one of the prime movers behind the proposal to erect a memorial at Oxford to the protestant martyrs. The same year he published an attack on proposals for a general revision of the university statutes. He continued to defend the 'status quo' until his death, and his critique of Sir William Hamilton's proposals was re-issued in 1853 at the height of the debate on university reform. 
Thomas was energetic in his promotion of philanthropic and evangelical causes. It was he who prompted his friend Samuel Warneford to endow an asylum at Oxford for the insane which opened in 1826. In 1827 he published 'An Account of the Origin, Nature and Objects of the Asylum on Headington Hill', which sought to educate the public about mental illness. He was a shrewd chairman of the asylum's management committee for twenty-one years, combining broad vision with meticulous attention to detail. Physical exercise and occupational therapy were essential features of the benevolent regime, and restraint was kept to a minimum. Thomas himself designed the layout of the buildings and landscaped grounds. Patients were segregated by class and sex, and he was at pains to prevent 'intercourse by conversation and letter-writing' between males and females ('visitors' book', 28 July 1834, 2). In 1828 he instituted a 'fund for poor patients', named after him. 
Because of his local reputation for administrative competence, Thomas was appointed chairman of the board of health formed at Oxford in June 1832 upon the outbreak of cholera. His 'Memorials of the Malignant Cholera in Oxford' (1835), which took its text from Thucydides' account of the Athenian plague, provides a carefully documented account of the epidemic and the measures taken to combat it, as well as a historical survey of previous epidemics and their causes. 
A long-standing visitor and governor of the Radcliffe Infirmary, Thomas was assiduous in his attention to matters of diet, medication, and hygiene, and vigilant in maintaining the moral tone of the establishment. He was insistent that the hospital should promote godliness as well as physical health: the 'disorderly' were excluded, and even the reading matter of the patients did not escape his scrutiny. This pastoral zeal is evident also in his campaign to establish a residential college to provide for the tutelary care of students at the Birmingham Royal School of Medicine, also endowed by Warneford. Both he and Warneford were concerned to 'stamp the [medical] curriculum with the impress and signature of revealed truth' ('Christian Philanthropy Exemplified in a Memoir of the Revd S. W. Warneford', 1856, 11). 
Thomas was active in resisting the secularization of village schools, and maintained that the children of the poor should be taught only what they required for their spiritual welfare and the maintenance of their station in life. Anything that might encourage social mobility was to be discouraged. A watchful custodian of his parish charities, he excluded non-churchgoers and known reprobates from the list of beneficiaries. He served for many years as a justice of the peace, earning a reputation among poachers for the severity of his sentences, and he was equally draconian in his pronouncements on prison administration. 
Thomas published nearly fifty works, mostly tracts and pamphlets of a controversial nature. His long association with Stoneleigh bore fruit in a laborious 'Italian Biography of Sir Robert Dudley' (1861), and he was the author of some other antiquarian papers. After his wife's death in 1843 he married, in Brussels, on 4 December 1845, Catherine (1791/2-1871), daughter of Lieutenant-General G. Johnston of Norbiton Hill, Surrey. He moved from Holywell Street to a house at 83 High Street, overlooking Magdalen Bridge. He died there on 26 October 1858, and was buried on 2 November in his first wife's grave in the churchyard of St Peter-in-the-East. 


@@@@@


doc= 27242


Thomas, William (d. 1554), scholar, administrator, and alleged traitor, was of unknown parentage but almost certainly of Welsh descent. On 1 February 1552 a William Thomas received a grant of arms in which he was described as a gentleman from Llantomas, the seat of the Thomas family in the parish of Llanigon in Brecknockshire. On the basis of a comment that William Thomas made in 1545, in which he attributed an attempted embezzlement scheme to the 'fragilite and slipperiness of youth', it seems likely that he was in his early twenties at the time and in the service of Sir Anthony Browne, master of the horse (Adair, 133). 
Nothing is known of his education but Thomas clearly understood Latin and he quickly became fluent in Italian (thanks at least in part to the three years he spent in Italy in the mid-1540s). There are also references to classical texts in his later writing, and all of this speaks to his having received a formal education of some kind. It was once thought that he was the William Thomas who was admitted to the University of Oxford as a bachelor of canon law on 2 December 1529, but this identification has been discredited. Thomas might well have spent time at the university, but there is no definitive record of his having done so. Thomas was married by 19 May 1540, probably to Margaret (died in or before 1551), sister of David Watkyns of Hereford. William and Margaret Thomas were mentioned in a grant on 13 September 1544. She may have died by the time Thomas fled to Italy in early 1545, as no mention was made of her during the three years he spent abroad or even after he had returned home. He married, by 1553, his second wife, Thomasine ('b'. 'c'.1512, died in or after 1579), daughter of Thomas Mildmay of Chelmsford in Essex and his wife, Agnes, and widow of Anthony Bourchier of London (died 1551). Sir Walter Mildmay (1520/21-1589) was his brother-in-law. There is no record of children from his first marriage, but his second wife and he had at least one surviving child, Anne. 
Thomas's name was common enough to make identifying him firmly in the records between 1540 and 1545 a difficult task. He was probably involved in the dissolution of at least one religious house, the nunnery of Lynebroke, in May 1540 and this might very well have meant that he had come to the attention of Sir Richard Rich, who noted in a letter of 16 February that a William Thomas was living in a Fleet Street tenement formerly belonging to the white friars in London. This property is very likely the messuage called the Blacke Swann. Thomas may also have been the man who was in May 1540 granted a 21-year lease on Hay-on-Wye rectory, on the Welsh border, and the proximity of the property to Llanigon makes the connection more likely. Similarly, he probably was the person who, on 21 January 1542, was appointed a clerk of the peace and of the crown for the neighbouring counties of Brecknockshire, Radnor, and Montgomeryshire, who, on 23 February 1543, was given the next presentation to the vicarage of Sturminster Newton in Dorset with two other people, and who was living in St Saviour's parish in Southwark, Surrey, by 13 September 1544. This last residence is very likely the property that was reported by Watkyns in February 1554 as having been sequestrated by Mary I. 
What kind of duties Thomas carried out for Browne is unclear. What is certain is that he was trusted sufficiently to have access to large sums of Browne's money. Facing gambling debts of some kind Thomas stole some of this and set off for Italy. Along the way he deposited the funds with Acelyne Salvago, an Italian banker, receiving in return bills of exchange that he could cash in once he reached Venice. By 13 February 1545 a servant of Edward Seymour, earl of Hertford, was in hot pursuit, and on 25 March letters were sent to Edmund Harvel, Henry VIII's ambassador in Venice, warning him to be on the look-out for Thomas. By the time he reached Venice on 10 April, coincidentally the same day Harvel received his instructions from London, Thomas had had second thoughts about the whole affair and went immediately to the English ambassador to confess his indiscretions. Payment was stopped on the bills of exchange and Thomas put in prison. Harvel, though, convinced early on of Thomas's contrition, twice wrote to the privy council on his behalf. At a privy council meeting held on 31 May it was decided that Harvel should return the bills to Salvago so that the banker might repay the stolen money to Browne. 
Thomas was eventually released from prison though how he supported himself is unclear. He travelled extensively around Italy and was in Bologna, on his way from Florence to Venice, when news of the king's death reached him in February 1547. Once back in Venice he undertook a written defence of Henry, and its purpose may have been to restore Thomas to the good graces of the new government. The tract, which was entitled 'Peregryne', referring to his peregrinations, took the then popular form of a dialogue, in this case between the narrator and several gentlemen of Bologna. Thomas later translated the manuscript into Italian for publication in Italy as 'Ill pellegrino Inglese' (1552), but the original English tract did not appear in print until the eighteenth century. A copy of this tract, which may actually be the original itself, is preserved in the British Library (BL, Cotton MS Vespasian D. xviii). 
Thomas spent Christmas 1547 in Rome, and from his critical commentary on Paul III's procession into St Peter's, which he made in a later publication, along with his spirited defence of Henry in 'Peregryne', his religious sensibilities can be classified as protestant. Soon afterwards John Tamworth commissioned Thomas to write an Italian grammar and short dictionary so that he might better learn the language. Thomas had finished this task by 3 February 1548 and he forwarded the work to his patron from Padua. Thomas based his work on Alberto Accarigi's 'Vocabulario, grammatica, et orthographia de la lingua volgare' and Francesco Alunno's 'Le richezze della lingua volgare', both of which had first been published in 1543. Tamworth thought the work so important that he eventually sent it to his brother-in-law, Mildmay, so that it might be published. Thomas Berthelet, the king's printer, published it in 1550 as 'Principal rules of the Italian grammar, with a dictionarie for the better understandyng of Boccace, Petrarcha, and Dante'. 'Principal rules' had the distinction of being the first Italian dictionary and book of grammar published in English, and it was reprinted in 1562 and 1567. 
By the time that 'Principal rules' was published Thomas was back in England, having arrived there probably after the death on 28 April 1548 of his former master, Browne. Some time after his return Thomas finished 'The historie of Italie, a boke excedyng profitable to be rede: because it intreateth of the astate of many and divers common weales, how thei have ben & now be governed', begun probably during his final months abroad, since he mentions witnessing the papal procession at Christmas 1547. Berthelet published the work after 20 September 1549, the date of the dedicatory preface. By then, in the aftermath of the western rebellion and Kett's rebellion, Thomas could see which way the political wind was blowing, and he dedicated his work not to Hertford (now duke of Somerset and lord protector), but rather to John Dudley, earl of Warwick. It was a timely work. As Thomas explained at length in the dedicatory preface, 'The historie of Italie' provided examples of both good and bad governance, and suggested ways to achieve the one and to avoid the other. He was pragmatic in his approach, and he owed not a little to Niccolo Machiavelli, who was actually mentioned in Thomas's section on Florence. Thomas also seems to have been influenced by the 'Memoires' of Philippe de Commynes, a Burgundian and French diplomat. Copies of 'The historie of Italie' may have been burnt at the time of Thomas's execution as commentary on his treason, but reissues of the work in 1561 and 1562 testify to its lasting popularity. 
The next two years of Thomas's life are obscure. By 23 January 1552 he was returned for Old Sarum in Wiltshire in a by-election through the patronage of William Herbert, first earl of Pembroke. Sitting in Edward VI's first parliament, even though probably late in its session, may have contributed to his being returned to the March 1553 parliament for Downton in Wiltshire. Who his patron on the second occasion was is uncertain, although it was probably Pembroke again. In 1549 Thomas dedicated his book 'The Vanitie of this World', published by Berthelet, to Anne Herbert, William Herbert's wife. Pembroke exercised influence over Downton as a leading Wiltshire landowner, especially after Somerset's execution. Thomas was clerk of the privy council by 1552 and favoured by Warwick (now duke of Northumberland), who may have played some role in getting him returned for Downton. It is also possible that he knew John Ponet, bishop of Rochester, who was patron of the Downton seat, and approached him directly. Curiously enough the earliest description of a parliamentary division, or rather vote, occurs in Thomas's tract, 'Peregryne'. This seeming firsthand knowledge of parliamentary procedures suggests that he may have sat in an earlier parliament (perhaps one for which there are no surviving returns), or at the very least had good friends who did. 
It really is not until Thomas's appointment as clerk of the privy council on 29 April 1550 that he can be more clearly tracked in the records. His duty was to keep a detailed record of decisions made by the privy council. That he was previously engaged in other official affairs is perhaps suggested by the fact that the privy council discharged him from 'all other maner of businesse' so that he might give full attention to his duties as clerk ('APC', '1550-52', 4). The privy council's trust in him was further demonstrated in their order that the treasurers were not to pay out money unless authorizing warrants carried Thomas's signature, and this was regardless of whoever else might have signed them. For his labours Thomas received a salary of $33 6's'. 8died This was raised to $40 in May 1552. As was customary Thomas also received payments for the basic supplies of his office, such as paper, pens, and ink. The crown further assumed travel expenses related to the performance of his office, as when, for example, he was appointed secretary for the embassy of William Parr, marquess of Northampton, whose mission into France from 24 April to 12 August 1551 was to negotiate a marriage between the king and Henri II's daughter, Elizabeth, as a way of assuring the new amity between the two realms. 
In spite of the strict instructions issued by the privy council on his appointment as clerk, Thomas made entries in the conciliar register only to the end of August 1550, at which point other hands appear in the records. Presumably these several hands represented secretaries who worked under Thomas's direction, transcribing notes taken by him during privy council meetings. In addition to the possibility that other official duties took Thomas away from making regular entries in the register the introduction of these new hands may also indicate the point at which he became a mentor, albeit at a distance, to the king. 
How it came to pass that Thomas wrote eighty-five questions and several related essays for the benefit of Edward's political education is, as with so much in his life, something of a mystery. Thomas himself cultivated an air of secrecy about the relationship, asking the king to keep to himself the advice which he proffered, and to send whatever questions he might have through Sir Nicholas Throckmorton, a gentleman of the privy chamber. This secrecy, however, may have been more apparent than real, and may reflect a strategy on Northumberland's part to introduce the young king surreptitiously to the art of governing. It seems highly unlikely that, given the alleged attempt by Thomas Seymour, Baron Seymour of Sudeley, to kidnap the king in 1549, Northumberland or anyone else in a position of power would have been ignorant of these kinds of exchanges. 
The eighty-five questions, which Thomas called 'Common places of state', addressed issues related primarily to the power and authority of rulers. He produced at least six discourses in response to the king's interest in some of these topics, and several of them were infused with Machiavellian political philosophy, complete with emphasis on practical and pragmatic action. Indeed, Thomas's work on Italian subjects generally probably influenced his thoughts on the issue of governance. However, the discourse that seems most to have caught the king's attention concerned the reform of the coinage. Years of debasement under Henry had seriously undermined the royal finances, and Thomas urged immediate reform, which he estimated would cost 12 pence on the pound. When Edward received different but equally vehement opinions on the subject Thomas stood his ground, arguing that although it was an expensive remedy it was necessary to economic stability. Thomas's letters on the coinage probably coincided with the king's 'Chronicle' entries and the privy council's discussions on the subject in September and October 1551. This would mean that Thomas's 'Common places' and at least his opinions on the coinage were composed during the late summer and early autumn. 
Thomas was also at work on other literary projects during the last years of Edward's reign. In 1551 he made a translation of the thirteenth-century text 'De sphaera' for Henry Brandon, second duke of Suffolk. Interestingly, he used the preface of this translation to advocate serious study of the English language. The slavish attention to learning Latin in the schoolroom came at the expense of English, and this he greatly lamented. The same year Berthelet published another of Thomas's translations, which appeared as 'An argument, wherin the apparaile of women is both reproved and defended'. As a new year's present (probably for 1551 but possibly for 1552 or 1553), Thomas presented the king with a manuscript translation, 'The narration of Josaphat Barbaro, citezein of Venice, in twoo voyages, made th'one into Tana and th'other into Persia' (BL, Royal MS 17 C x), which had originally been printed in 1543. 
In addition to prospering politically and socially, Thomas enjoyed an improvement in his finances. Between January 1551 and March 1553 he acquired a considerable amount of property, and the right to exploit other land, in Sussex, Worcestershire, Gloucestershire, the Welsh marches, and especially Herefordshire. One of these purchases was offset by a generous royal grant of $248. By 26 January 1552 Thomas was one of the coroners for Gloucestershire, though how long he held the post is unknown. In August he applied for, and was granted, a commission to try pirates within the Cinque Ports. Thomas's activities, however, were not always successful or unimpeded. On 13 July 1551 the privy council turned down his application for the reversion of the auditorship of Sussex on the grounds that such appointments were a drain on the crown's finances. This rejection was tempered with the promise that he would nevertheless have the first vacancy that became available. About the same time Thomas's pursuit of an ecclesiastical appointment caused friction with Nicholas Ridley, bishop of London. Both men coveted the presentation of the prebend of Cantleurs at St Paul's Cathedral and they used what influence they had to thwart the other: Ridley approached the king's tutor, Sir John Cheke, for help in July 1551, writing on the 23rd that Thomas had 'in times past set the council upon me' in his attempts to obtain the presentation ('Works of Nicholas Ridley', 331-2). Although the privy council initially favoured Thomas in the dispute, one of Ridley's clients, though not the one he originally intended, was appointed to the living on 24 October. 
It would seem as though Thomas also pursued some kind of appointment abroad. In a letter he sent to Sir William Cecil on 14 August 1552 Thomas expressed an interest in returning to Venice for a year or two, so long as he was sent there, presumably, in some official capacity. No action seems to have been taken on his offer. By 31 March 1553 Thomas had surrendered the clerkship, though he continued in the employ of the privy council. In mid-June he carried letters to London from Charles V's court, and he was still connected with the privy council in the opening days of Mary's reign. 
Thomas's official connection with the privy council appears to have ended after August 1553, and it may be that he resigned or was relieved of his duties about that time. He was fully aware of what Mary's accession meant to religious reformers, and when his friend Thomas Hancock was omitted from the queen's first general pardon for his outspoken criticism of Catholicism, Thomas advised him to flee the country. Soon disaffection over the queen's proposed marriage to Philip of Spain became widespread and by the end of the year he was involved at the very least in discussions about deposing Mary, and possibly about assassinating her as well. The motives of this group, which included Sir Thomas Wyatt the younger, are difficult to gauge, though they seem to have been mainly political rather than religious, concerned as they were with the queen's marriage to a foreign prince. 
Most of what is known about Thomas's involvement in Wyatt's rebellion is from testimony given under duress by those involved. Supposedly on 21 December, Thomas met Sir Nicholas Arnold and broached with him how the queen's marriage might be prevented. He even reputedly suggested assassinating Mary, and nominated John Fitzwilliam for the job. Arnold told Sir James Croft about Thomas's proposal, and Croft repeated it to Wyatt. Both men later confessed to having been appalled at the suggestion, so much so that Wyatt claimed he carried a cudgel around with him for four or five days so that he might beat Thomas with it if he came across him. It is unclear whether or not Thomas knew of these conversations, as on 27 December he reputedly met Sir Peter Carew at Mohun's Ottery in Devon; Carew was supposed to lead an uprising in the south-west concurrent with Wyatt's in Kent. Carew was ordered to appear before the privy council on 2 January 1554, word of the conspiracy having leaked, and he fled to France on 25 January. Thomas remained in England and travelled to the home of John a Mynde in Bagendon, Gloucestershire, with his former brother-in-law, Watkyns, in tow. While recovering from some illness Thomas sent Watkyns to London on 9 February with a letter for his wife. During his absence Mynde reported that Thomas expressed the hope that his views on the subject of her marriage had not offended the queen. Watkyns returned on 14 February with a letter for Thomas and the news that Mary had sequestrated his house in Southwark. Thomas attributed this action to the rumour that he had fled with Carew, although as he explained to Mynde, his contact with him had been innocent enough, merely the completion of a sale between the two of them. Almost immediately Thomas set out for London with one of his tenants, Thomas Fowler, and Watkyns. Watkyns rode with them part of the way before returning to Mynde and eventually going on to Hereford. Fowler parted company with Thomas at Henley-on-Thames, Oxfordshire. He later noted in his deposition that Thomas had shaved his beard by this point, perhaps by way of a disguise. 
By 20 February Thomas had been arrested and sent to the Tower of London. Two days later depositions had been taken from his contacts in Gloucestershire. On the night of 25 February Thomas attempted to kill himself by thrusting a knife into his chest, but he succeeded only in hurting himself and delaying his indictment and trial for treason. As he recovered in the Tower Arnold, Croft, Wyatt, and several others involved in the uprising bandied his name about freely to their interrogators. There is some question about the degree of his guilt in this whole business. Throckmorton, who was also arrested for complicity in Wyatt's rebellion, demanded at his trial to be allowed to call Fitzwilliam in his defence, saying that Arnold was trying to save his own skin by accusing him and Thomas of plotting to murder the queen. It is probably significant that Fitzwilliam was not in the Tower along with everyone else but rather at court, presumably ready to confirm Throckmorton's statements. That the royal officials refused to allow him to testify suggests that they believed Fitzwilliam would indeed clear Throckmorton and Thomas of the charges. 
Nevertheless Thomas was formally indicted on 8 May of having encompassed Mary's death. He pleaded not guilty, though his defence in response to the charges has not survived. What does survive, however, in the notes of a contemporary judge, is Thomas's objection to the status of the jurors on his case, who he claimed were not his peers. It was quickly decided, though, that while Thomas was an esquire, merchants and other commoners worth $2 per annum in land or $100 in goods could sit in judgment on cases involving treason. Thomas was convicted, and on 18 May he was drawn on a hurdle from the Tower to Tyburn, where he was hanged, drawn, and quartered. His head was placed on London Bridge while the rest of him was displayed over Cripplegate. For their part, Arnold, Croft, and Carew all escaped punishment. On 13 December some of Thomas's property interests were restored to his widow on compassionate grounds. She was still pursuing some of her husband's forfeited rights a couple of years later, specifically the presentation to the prebend of Nonnington in the diocese of Hereford, which had been granted by the queen to Henry Walshe. Thomasine Thomas wanted to present the living to Mynde, and she and Walshe fought over the issue in court. In 1563 Anne Thomas was restored in blood, and on 18 April 1566 she received yet more property formerly belonging to her father. 
By the end of Edward's reign William Thomas had become a moderately wealthy man with property in London but especially in the marches. Further, he had acquired administrative experience locally and in central government. He had already made a significant contribution in popularizing the Italian language and Italy's history and culture in England and might have continued to do so had he lived longer. However, he was an impetuous man, and his rash actions, even though almost immediately regretted, ultimately cost him his life. 


@@@@@


doc= 27243


Thomas, William (1592/3-1667), clergyman and ejected minister, was probably born at Whitchurch, Shropshire. He was almost certainly educated locally before being admitted as a plebeian scholar to Brasenose College, Oxford, on 1 December 1609, aged sixteen. He graduated BA on 8 February 1613 and, having proceeded MA on 17 June 1615, was instituted rector of the church at Ubley, Somerset on 4 January 1618. By 1627, when his only surviving child, Samuel Thomas (1626/7-1693), was born, he had met and married his wife, Thomasine. 
Thomas's entire adult life was directed by an uncompromising adherence to godly religion. During the 1620s he became a well-known lecturer in Somerset and he was rewarded in 1633 when he was granted licence to preach throughout the diocese of Bath and Wells. Almost immediately, however, he was in serious trouble with the diocesan authorities. In October 1634 he was suspended for refusing to read the 'Book of Sports', a sentence confirmed on 23 June 1635. Five days later he was removed from his living and excommunicated for three years. Subsequently he was reinstated by Archbishop William Laud after a petition from colleagues in Somerset. Edward Chetwynd, dean of Bristol and renowned godly preacher, named Thomas in his will of November 1638 as a 'dear friend'. Despite his reinstatement, however, by the outbreak of civil war Thomas was an embittered opponent of the Stuart church. 
During the royalist occupation of Somerset between July 1643 and March 1645 Thomas was prevented from preaching. Frustrated, he took the covenant and fled to London, becoming a regular preacher in the parish of St Pancras, Soper Lane. In August 1645 he was named as rector of the parish, and the same year he became a trier for the second classis, a position which he held until early 1646. Encouraged by his success he returned to Somerset and became minister at the church of St Cuthbert, Wells, before April 1646. In 1647 he helped to establish nine 'classes' in the county, and in the following year signed an attestation of ministers wishing to establish presbyterian government in Somerset. Thomas's circle included his neighbour Samuel Crooke of Wrington, at whose funeral on 3 January 1650 he delivered an exhortation, subsequently published by Thomas and John Chetwynd in 'The Dead Saint Speaking' (1653). Thomas may also have been the W. T. who contributed a Latin epitaph to W. G., 'Anthologia: the Life and Death of Mr Samuel Crooke' (1651). 
During the interregnum Thomas built a schoolhouse in his birthplace of Whitchurch. He strove to promote moral reformation and to arrest the spread of Independents who claimed to be 'more perfect saints' (Underdown, 146) and in 1654 he assisted the Somerset committee for the ejection of scandalous ministers. During 1656 and 1657 he published three passionate refutations of the work of the Bristol Quaker Thomas Speed, principally over Speed's uses of scripture, preaching, and the question of tithes. Progressively, however, Thomas devoted more of his time to scholarship. He frequently corresponded with the Worcestershire divine Richard Baxter, and reportedly sent his son, Samuel, to Baxter for a disputation over the nature of free will. He was reputed to have assembled volumes of 'Anniversaria', or diaries of comments on events, and more specialized works of 'Aegrotorum visitationes' and 'Meditationes vespertinae' on particular subjects. 
After the Restoration Thomas continued to preach at Ubley and considered the establishment of philanthropic projects. His 'Christian and Conjugal Counsell... Applyed unto the Maried Estate' appeared in 1661 and 'A Preservative of Piety', a manual for the Christian household, the following year. By then, however, he was again in trouble with authority. When asked his view of the prayer book he remarked that 'I bless God, it is so good, but yet it might be better', for which he was ejected on 21 August 1662 ('VCH Somerset', 2.52-3). In 1666, he took the Oxford oath, which, by forbidding his coming within 5 miles of any town or city, effectively ended his preaching career, although he has been credited as the author of 'The Counties Sense of Londons Sufferings' (1667), an application of lessons from the 'Lamentations' of Jeremiah to the great fire of 1666. Subsequently his health declined, and his final days were spent at Ubley, where he died on 15 November 1667, probably survived by his wife. Perhaps fittingly, his will of 24 April that year bequeathed 50's'. to the parish church which he had served so faithfully and controversially, together with lands in trust for the Whitchurch schoolhouse. He was buried at Ubley, where his son erected a monument in his memory. The future bishop George Bull of St David's, who had lodged in Thomas's household during the 1650s, uncharitably recorded that he had 'received little or no improvement or assistance from him in the study of theology' ('DNB'). However, Thomas's request to his executors (who included John Chetwynd) to publish some of his writings bore fruit in 'Practical Piety, or, The Pastor's Last Legacy' (1681), which testifies to a lasting reputation among some of the godly. 


@@@@@


doc= 27244


Thomas, William (1613-1689), bishop of Worcester, was born on 2 February 1613 at Bristol Bridge, Bristol, the son of John Thomas, a linen draper who had removed there from Carmarthen, and his wife, Elizabeth Blount. William Thomas claimed descent from Henry Fitzherbert, chamberlain to Henry I, and kinship to the lords Ferrers of Groby and Robert Ufford, earl of Suffolk (1238-1269). More immediately, if more parochially, his grandfather, another William Thomas, was prominent in the civic life of Carmarthen, where he was alderman, mayor twice, and recorder by 1603. He is likely to have attended Lincoln's Inn from 1590, and certainly sat in parliament as member for Carmarthen Boroughs in 1614. He subsequently filled various local offices in and around Carmarthen, where his grandson William Thomas was first educated, at the grammar school under the auspices of Morgan Owen, later bishop of Llandaff. After matriculation at St John's College, Oxford, on 13 November 1629, Thomas graduated BA from Jesus College on 12 May 1632, and proceeded MA on 5 February 1635. He became a fellow of Jesus College. He may have received the degree of BCL from St John's on 9 July 1635, was ordained deacon at Oxford on 4 June 1637, and priest the following year. Shortly after this Thomas was presented to the living of Penbryn, Cardiganshire, and apparently became chaplain to Algernon Percy, tenth earl of Northumberland. Through Northumberland's interest he is said to have acquired the livings of Laugharne and Llansadyrnin in Carmarthenshire. The report that his appointment was contested is unsurprising, since the earl is not known to have had significant proprietorial interests in south Wales. 
About this time Thomas married Blanch (died 1677), daughter of Peter Samyne, a London merchant: the couple had four sons and four daughters. In 1644 Thomas was confronted by parliamentarian soldiers in Laugharne church, who threatened to shoot him if he persisted in reading the 'Book of Common Prayer' and in praying for Queen Henrietta Maria, a Roman Catholic. The source of this story, a descendant of Thomas's, may embellish its subject's heroism, just as he himself after 1660 exaggerated his sufferings during the Commonwealth. This same source records that Thomas lost $1500 through his sufferings down to 1660, and kept school at Laugharne as a way of augmenting his reduced income: he had been ejected from the living of Penbryn. Although he is reported as having been ejected also from Laugharne, Thomas was still there in 1657, and was well enough attuned to the regime of the protectorate to deliver an extremely learned sermon to the great sessions at Carmarthen on 16 March 1657, evidently at the invitation of the authorities. This sermon, typical of the genre of assize sermons, was framed as 'a caution for the client, the witness and the counsellor' (Thomas, 'The Regulating of Law-Suits', title-page), and implied an orthodox and uncontroversial view of church-state relations. It was published in London later that year. 
In 1660 Thomas was one of many clergy who petitioned on 23 June for a restoration to their livings, citing his ejection from Penbryn. He was quickly successful in securing preferment, first as precentor of the remote and ruinous cathedral of St David's, on 4 August, and was installed there on the 28th of that month. On 2 August he was created DD at Oxford. Thomas was evidently well thought of by Edward Hyde, earl of Clarendon, who was influential in promoting him, on behalf of the crown, to the living of Llanbedr Felffre in Pembrokeshire in 1661. Through Clarendon he came to the attention of his grandest patron, James, duke of York, who selected him as one of his chaplains at a salary of $50 per annum. Thomas is said to have accompanied James during a naval engagement with the Dutch, presumably in 1665. James and Clarendon advanced Thomas to become dean of Worcester, where he was installed on 25 November 1665. Thomas held the deanery 'in commendam' with his post at St David's, and still retained the living of Laugharne. With or without the help of his powerful backers Thomas was evidently quickly able to befriend the dominant revanchist cavalier group in Worcestershire, notably Thomas, Lord Windsor, and Sir John Pakington of Westwood. These men formed a nascent tory interest, and Pakington was sufficiently taken with Dean Thomas to appoint him to his living of Hampton Lovett on 12 June 1670, upon which Thomas finally gave up Laugharne. 
On 19 November 1677 Thomas was elected bishop of St David's, and was consecrated on 27 January following. With this promotion he was allowed still to hold the Worcester deanery 'in commendam', but he was evidently an active Welsh bishop. His fluency in the Welsh language, and west Wales family roots, provided him with a natural affinity with the gentry and clergy of his see, as did his interest in publishing religious texts in Welsh. Through his encouragement the third part of the works of Rhys Prichard (Vicar Prichard) had been published in 1672, and earned him a place as a dedicatee of the work; in 1671 and 1672 were published a new Welsh language 'Bible' and book of 'Psalms', and Thomas's influence has been detected in assisting their appearance. The ministers Stephen Hughes and Thomas Gouge were the principal movers in publishing these and the Welsh 'Bible' of 1677, but Thomas doubtless helped foster an environment in which these ventures could prosper. While at St David's he addressed the problems of dilapidation in his see; a start was made in rebuilding the palaces of Abergwili and Brecon. He attempted to move the cathedral services from St David's to the more populous and wealthy town of Carmarthen, but was unable to see through to completion either the rebuilding or the reorganization of the diocese. 
On 14 December 1678 Thomas spoke in the House of Lords against the denunciation by Henry Whitaker, recorder of Shaftesbury and an MP in several parliaments, of most of the episcopate as papists. Thomas robustly asserted the protestantism of his colleagues, and was indeed regarded by Richard Baxter as among those bishops most sympathetic to nonconformity, or rather, least likely to persecute protestants excluded from the Church of England. He was in reality a classic defender of the claim by the Church of England to uniqueness. His book, 'An Apology for the Church of England in Separation from it', published in 1679, was, he explained to his archbishop, 'composed, rather huddled... in the eclipse of the Church of England, in a time of discomposure' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 146, fol. 121) during the 1650s. 
Thomas was confirmed in his translation to the bishopric of Worcester on 27 August 1683. Ill health was by then beginning to take its toll on him, and accounted for his reluctance to travel to London. During his time at Worcester as bishop he gained a reputation for liberality towards the poor, who were fed daily at his door and twice weekly if they were in Worcester gaol. He enhanced the stock and accommodation of the cathedral library. In January 1684 he provided Archbishop Sancroft with an account of the Sunday morning service at Worcester Cathedral, where the congregation moved from the choir to the nave to hear the sermon because its numbers were augmented at sermon time by auditors from other churches. He assured Sancroft of his willingness to tackle irregularities among the cathedral clergy: 'I have not a fondness for any popularity' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 34, fol. 251). Thomas entertained his patron, now James II, at Worcester on 23 August 1687, when James was impressed by the lavish decoration laid on in his honour. But even on this ceremonial occasion tensions were evident between the Catholic king and the Anglican bishop. When Thomas offered to say grace the king substituted his own chaplain, 'upon which the good old man withdrew, not without tears in his eyes' (Nash, 2, appx, clxi). Thomas responded to James's suspension of the penal laws against nonconformists by declining to distribute the declaration of indulgence in his diocese, provoking James's displeasure, but the bishop was in outright opposition to the revolution of 1688. He refused to take the oath of allegiance, and his assertion to the dean of Worcester, George Hickes, that he would suffer at the stake rather than take the oath, provided encouragement to the nonjurors ['see also 'Nonjuring bishops]. Had he survived Thomas would surely have been removed from office, but he died at the bishop's palace on 25 June 1689, and was buried in the cloisters of Worcester Cathedral. Little of his estate of $800 remained after debts and small legacies had been settled. 'He was of a stature somewhat tall and slender, of a long visage, his forehead large, his countenance graceful and his aspect venerable' (ibid., clxii). His grandson William Thomas was a noted antiquary who revised for publication 'The Antiquities of Warwickshire' by Sir William Dugdale. 


@@@@@


doc= 27245


Thomas, William (1670-1738), Church of England clergyman and antiquary, was born in Worcester, the only son of John Thomas and Mary, daughter of William Bagnall of Sidbury, Worcestershire. He was educated at Westminster School from 1685 and at Trinity College, Cambridge, from 1688; he graduated BA (1692) and proceeded MA (1695), BD (1723), and DD (1729). A skilful classicist and Anglo-Saxonist, he became fluent in French and Italian on his tour to France and Italy in 1700. Shortly after his return to England he was ordained in the Church of England, and through the influence of Lord Somers, a distant relative, he was presented to the rectory of Exhall, Warwickshire. Queen Anne was well disposed towards him, for his grandfather William Thomas (1613-1689), bishop of Worcester, had been her preceptor, but Thomas declined all court preferment. 
Thomas married Elizabeth, daughter of George Carter of Brill, Buckinghamshire, from whom he gained 'a considerable fortune' (Nash, clxiii), part of which was a large estate at Atherstone upon Stour, in Warwickshire. He previously had acquired from his uncle William Thomas an estate at Teddington, in Gloucestershire. He and his wife had nine daughters and five sons, and in 1721 the family moved to Worcester for their education. In 1723 he was appointed rector of St Nicholas, in Worcester, through the influence of the bishop, John Hough, to whom he dedicated his published works. 
Thomas published three valuable works on the history and antiquities of Worcestershire and Warwickshire. The first was an account of Malvern's antiquities, published in 1725 under the title 'Antiquitates prioratus majoris Malverne in agro Wicciensi'. Thomas made considerable use of Thomas Habington's collections and supplemented them with his own transcripts from episcopal, parish, and corporation records, with the intention of publishing a history of Worcestershire. To this end he 'hardly allowed himself time for sleep, meals, or amusement' (Chambers, 338) but the work remained incomplete at his death. In 1730 he produced a fine edition of Sir William Dugdale's 'The Antiquities of Warwickshire', originally published in 1656, which boasted much new material from his own archival research and excellent maps by Henry Beighton. He next published 'A survey of the cathedral-church of Worcester, with an account of the bishops thereof... to 1660' (1736). 
Thomas died in Worcester on 26 July 1738 and was buried in the cathedral cloisters, close to his grandfather's tomb. Most of his children predeceased him; only one son, George (died 'c'.1746), survived him and only his daughter Elizabeth, who married George Wingfield of Lipard, near Worcester, was alive in 1782, when Treadway Nash wrote his memoir of Thomas. Thomas's Worcestershire collections were purchased by Charles Lyttelton, who had encouraged him in his history and left the papers to the Society of Antiquaries, where they were used by Nash. 


@@@@@


doc= 27246


Thomas, William (d. 1800), architect, was the son of Elizabeth and William Thomas (1710-1800) of The Green, Pembroke; his father, 'a man of exemplary piety', claimed descent from the Flemish settlers of Pembrokeshire ('GM', 70, 1800, 87). The date of his birth and details of his early life and training have not been established. By 1780, when he first exhibited an architectural drawing, Thomas was established in Marylebone, where he remained for the next twenty years, maintaining an office at Allsop's Buildings. 
Thomas was something of a virtuoso: a surveyor and sophisticated architect, draughtsman, and engraver who enjoyed the company of artists and engineers. He exhibited eight times at the Royal Academy of Arts between 1780 and 1799, and was a member of the Society of Arts and of the Society of Civil Engineers (1781-92). He advertised his competence by publishing 'Original Designs in Architecture' (1783), a folio with twenty-seven plates (some his own engravings) of exemplary neo-classical designs for houses, interior features, and garden buildings. The 176 subscribers included nobility and politicians, architects -- notably Robert Adam, who influenced Thomas's designs -- several patrons, and fellow Pembrokeshire countrymen. His introduction was an interesting statement of the tension between architecture considered as a science and as an art, and also declared Thomas's attachment to a 'favourite science', probably civil engineering. Thomas's engravings included two executed commissions (Brownslade House, Pembrokeshire; the Surrey Chapel, Southwark), but his early work is not well documented. His principal commission was Willersley Castle, Derbyshire, for Sir Richard Arkwright, completed in 1790, an early example of an industrialist's castle-house with Thomas's designs extending to the interior detail. 
A portrait depicts Thomas in affluent middle age holding the design for Willersley Castle (RIBA, London). Latterly, Thomas was styled 'architect to HRH the Duke of Clarence' (as was his pupil Thomas Dearn, who probably succeeded Thomas in practice) for his admired geometrical design for a 'grand Naval Obelisk', a monument commemorating the Royal Navy's victories which was to be erected near Portsmouth by public subscription under the duke's patronage ('GM', 68, 1798, 24-7). The design was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1799 but Thomas died in October the following year (nine months after his father) and the monument was never erected. Thomas was buried at St Marylebone on 25 October 1800, and his drawings were subsequently auctioned at Covent Garden. He seems never to have married and there is no surviving memorial to him. 


@@@@@


doc= 27247


Thomas, William (1832-1878), Welsh-language poet, was born on 3 April 1832 at Ty'r Agent, near Ynys-ddu, in the parish of Mynyddislwyn, Monmouthshire, the ninth child and youngest son of Morgan Thomas (1776-1857) and his wife, Mary (1789-1866). His home language was English, and he enjoyed a comfortable upbringing. His father intended that he should become a surveyor, sending him to private schools and, finally, to Dr Evan Davies's College in Swansea. But he was accepted as a preacher in August 1854, and ordained as a Calvinistic Methodist minister in 1859 (he never accepted a pastorate) after experiencing a religious conversion under the ministry of his brother-in-law, Daniel Jenkyns. It was Jenkyns who first recognized his promise and introduced him to local poets and bardic teachers, particularly Gwilym Ilid 
(William Jones; 'fl'. 1835-1853)
and Aneurin Fardd 
(Aneurin Jones; 1822-1904)
. Thomas adopted his bardic name in the early 1850s, taking it from Mynyddislwyn (Islwyn's Mountain) near his birthplace. Before long Islwyn was well known in the literary life of Gwent, writing in both strict and free metres and competing, with some success, in local eisteddfodau. During his time in Swansea he became engaged to Anne Bowen. In October 1853 she collapsed and died, aged twenty, a traumatic experience for the young man which left him with a lifelong psychological scar, although in 1864 he married Martha Davies, the daughter of Anne Bowen's mother's second marriage. Soon after the death of Anne, Islwyn began his major work, a long epic of the soul, 'Y storm' ('The Storm'), written in two parts. The first, a poem of over 6500 lines in blank verse and other metres, was composed between December 1854 and February 1856. In May 1856 he began a second version, finishing in July of that year. Extracts from both parts appeared subsequently in periodicals and in his 'Caniadau' (1867), but the poem was not published in its entirety during Islwyn's lifetime. In 1897 a confused text was included in 'Gwaith barddonol Islwyn', edited by Owen M. Edwards. Both parts received more expert editorial treatment from Meurig Walters in 1980 and 1990. 
Modern critics, concentrating on one or other of Islwyn's versions, have attempted to elucidate a putative plan for his poem. It is, perhaps, safest to say that 'The Storm' is a discursive, comprehensive meditation, asserting eternal providence and justifying the ways of God to men. The death of Anne Bowen may well have been the initial trigger, but the poem soon broadens its boundaries in ways no Welsh poet had attempted, using the storm image imaginatively to pursue Milton's basic theme. Here and there the Miltonic pattern of paradise lost and regained saves the work from falling apart: a world without spiritual and physical storms (paradise and memories of Eden); the storm (and its metaphorical implications); the restoration of a stormless world (through divine grace and resurrection). 'The Storm' shows that Islwyn was indebted to the popular contemporary Spasmodic school for much of his stance as a poet. Islwyn followed Alexander Smith's 'Life-Drama' (1853) in holding that the poet's duty was to go forward 'in his spirit's strength' to wring meaning from 'the questions of all time'. The poet was an intensely imaginative, uniquely sensitive, suffering being, able to pursue these 'king thoughts' in divinely inspired (and often long-winded) poems, finally asserting what another spasmodic, Philip James Baily, described as 'confidence in God and good'. In addition, Islwyn admired Ralph Waldo Emerson and welcomed the American's emphasis on the poet as a prophetic interpreter who should rise above 'stock poetry' and 'the coils of rhythm and number'. This influence helped the Welsh poet to stand apart from the laboured arguments in Wales about the appropriate metre for epic poetry, freeing him to make lively use of a variety of metres (but favouring blank verse), including a pastiche of Longfellow's 'Hiawatha' medium and a section in strict metres. He also made consistent and effective use of the Romantic reconciliation of opposites. The grave is a beginning not an end, and is to be welcomed, not feared. The night is full of stars. The storm signifies judgment, death, and destruction, but is followed by peace and happiness. Suffering inspires spiritual victory. The poet of 'The Storm' is Carlyle's hero-soul, seeking to show the ultimate harmony of the apparent opposites and inconsistencies in spiritual life and nature. 
Islwyn never again wrote anything to equal this multi-layered poem, which stands unique in nineteenth-century Welsh literature. He went on to busy himself with preaching and editing the poetry columns in several periodicals and newspapers and to reassume the familiar role of a competitive eisteddfod poet and adjudicator, winning prizes but never a major national eisteddfod prize. Always delicate, by 1877 his health was deteriorating, and he died at Y Glyn, Ynys-ddu, on 20 November 1878, saying, according to the testimony of his niece, 'I am going to Anne now'. He was buried at Y Glyn seven days later. The unfortunate legacy of 'Y storm' was the creation of a school of so-called new poets in the last decade of the nineteenth century. Islwyn had sought to make poetry a unique method of understanding man's relation to nature and God, but the attempts of the new poets to imitate him were feeble, lacking his conviction and originality. 


@@@@@


doc= 27248


Thomas, William Luson (1830-1900), wood-engraver and newspaper proprietor, the son of William Thomas, a shipbroker, and his wife, Alicia Hayes, was born on 4 December 1830 in London. Little is known of his early life, though he was educated at Fulham, Middlesex. After leaving school he joined his brother George Housman Thomas (1824-1868) in Paris, where he had set up an engraving business with his brother-in-law, H. Harrison. He learned engraving from his brother and became the major engraver of his work. In 1846 he travelled to the United States with George and Harrison to work on illustrated newspapers, including 'The Republic' and the 'Picture Gallery'. After returning to England because of George's ill health, the brothers travelled to Rome, where William studied art at the Academie de France. The large artistic community in which he mixed there gave him a unique insight into artistic life, which proved invaluable for his later career in art journalism. 
In 1851 Thomas became an assistant to W. J. Linton in London and established himself as a leading engraver. On 12 July 1855 he married Annie Carmichael, daughter of the marine artist John Wilson Carmichael (1799-1868); among their children was George Holt Thomas. Between 1852 and 1855 he worked from an office at 17 Essex Street, the Strand, which he shared with the wood-engraver Horace Harral. In 1856 Thomas and Harral moved to 11 Serjeants' Inn, Fleet Street, and in 1860 to 4 Palgrave Place, the Strand. During this period he engraved and illustrated many books and periodicals, including Edward Macdermott's 'The Merrie Days of England' (1859), Hans Christian Andersen's 'Eventyr, fortalte for born' (as 'Tales for Children', 1861), and the 'Illustrated London News'. By 1868 his engraving business brought him an annual income of some $800. He continued to paint for leisure and achieved some distinction as a watercolourist, exhibiting regularly at the Suffolk Street Gallery from 1860. He became an associate of the Institute of Painters in Water Colours in 1864, where he exhibited regularly until his death in 1900. He became a full member of the society in 1875 and an RI when it achieved royal status in 1884. In 1868 his brother died: deeply grieved, he planned to produce an 'in memoriam' volume of his work for the benefit of his widow and her family. It was published in 1869 as 'One Hundred of the Best Drawings by George Housman Thomas' and included many of George's book and small magazine illustrations, but none of his work for the 'Illustrated London News'. The periodical had refused to lend the woodblocks of George's drawings for publication, a decision which both angered William and strengthened his resolution to set up an illustrated newspaper in opposition to the weekly, which had hitherto held off any rivals. 
'I was ready', Thomas wrote, 'for some big, interesting, far-reaching enterprise' (Thomas, 81) -- the founding of an illustrated weekly newspaper characterized by artistic excellence. His good business sense was combined with a rare eye for talent and a deep sympathy and understanding of artists and their working methods, something quite unknown at that time for the director of a pictorial weekly. He later wrote of the unique philosophy which characterized 'The Graphic': 'The originality of the scheme consisted in establishing a weekly illustrated journal open to all artists, whatever their method, instead of confining my staff to draughtsmen on wood as had been hitherto the general custom.... it was a bold idea to attempt a new journal at the price of sixpence a copy in the face of the most successful and firmly established paper in the world, costing then only fivepence. (ibid.)' 
'The Graphic' was an immediate success and became known for the excellence of its wood-engravings and the notable artists who worked on the paper, some of whom included Luke Fildes, Hubert von Herkomer, A. B. Houghton, Frederick Walker, and William Small. The format of the paper offered artists an unprecedented opportunity to explore social subjects, and its images of poverty made it a catalyst for the development of social realism in British art. Many of the wood-engravings which it featured were developed into major paintings: Luke Fildes's 'Houseless and Hungry', which appeared in the first edition on 4 December 1869, became the celebrated painting 'Applicants for Admission to a Casual Ward' (1874, Royal Holloway and Bedford New College, University of London, Egham), exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1874. 
Thomas established the Graphic Gallery to complement the periodical and he commissioned artists of stature to paint images for the paper's summer and winter colour supplements. He also commissioned several notable series, including 'Shakespeare's Heroines', portrayed by artists such as Leighton and Alma-Tadema, which were exhibited at the gallery and engraved in the paper. 'The Graphic' also serialized and illustrated fiction, including Thomas Hardy's 'Tess of the D'Urbervilles', which was illustrated by Herkomer and a select group of his students. With the development of photography and new print techniques the artistic quality of the images declined, but even here Thomas saw a new opportunity: in 1890 he established the 'Daily Graphic', the first daily illustrated paper published in England. He died on 16 October 1900 at Weir Cottage, Chertsey, Surrey, and was cremated at Woking, Surrey, on 19 October. He was survived by his wife. 
Thomas's achievement was impressive. The influence of 'The Graphic' within the art world was immense: among its many admirers were Vincent Van Gogh, and Hubert von Herkomer, who wrote that Thomas 'did more... than improve illustrated journalism, he influenced English art, and that in a wholesome way' ('The Times', 19 Oct 1900, 9). A precise, good-natured man, Thomas was involved with many charitable works, including the Artists' Benevolent Institution and the Prince of Wales Hospital Fund. His obituarist in 'The Sketch' (24 October 1900, 8) described him somewhat unctuously as 'Fair-bearded till time and hard work silvered his hair,... Mr. Thomas was a true gentleman -- one, indeed, of Nature's noblemen.' 


@@@@@


doc= 27249


Thomason, Sir Edward (bap. 1769, d. 1849), manufacturer of buttons and jewellery and publisher of medals, was baptized in Birmingham on 14 November 1769, the son of Edward Thomason, a buckle manufacturer, and his wife, Catherine. He served as an apprentice in Matthew Boulton's factory in Soho, Birmingham, from the age of sixteen to twenty-one. In the early 1790s he opened his own factory, in the premises in Church Street, Birmingham, where his father, then retired, had previously had his business. He began by manufacturing gilt and plated buttons, expanding subsequently into the production of jewellery; a medal and token department was added by 1807; three years later he began plating steel cutlery, and the silver- and gold-plating side of the business expanded to include larger objects thereafter. He also did large-scale castings. His experiments with various mechanical devices, recorded in his 'Memoirs' (1845), were not always successful, and the automatically folding carriage step, for which he took out patents in 1796 and 1798, was defeated by the fashion from 1799 for curved carriage doors. Nevertheless, in 1800 he was a founder member of the Birmingham Philosophical Society, and, as a result of his entrepreneurial skills and flair for self-promotion, grew to become an eminent citizen of 'the toy shop of Europe', as Birmingham came to be known. 
In 1807 Thomason produced the first British electioneering medals, for the candidates in the Yorkshire elections. In 1809 he manufactured a medal of his former employer Matthew Boulton, engraved by Peter Wyon after Peter Rouw, which was one of the largest medals then to have been struck. About this time he also made his first medallic series, of six European sovereigns. In 1811-12 he struck many tokens, produced in response to the scarcity of small change. Notable among these are those produced for his own establishment, for the Douglas Bank Company of the Isle of Man, and for the ironmaster Samuel Fereday, all of 1811. In 1812 he produced gold and silver tokens for Berkeley Monck, and in 1815 he struck penny tokens for Magdalen Island, Canada. In May 1814 Thomason travelled to Paris with his wife, Phillis Bown Glover (died 1861), whom he had married on 26 August 1799, and his son Henry Botfield Thomason (1802-1843). 
The Napoleonic wars offered plentiful subjects for medals: one celebrating the treaty of Paris (1814) was especially popular. In 1817 Thomason entered into an agreement with James Mudie to strike a series of medals recording British victories over Napoleon; the dies were engraved by English and French artists, and the results were published by Mudie in 'An Historical and Critical Account of a Grand Series of National Medals' (1820). Thomason subsequently purchased the dies. In 1819 he began a series of forty-eight medals of the Elgin marbles in the British Museum, which was completed by 1823. In 1828 his workmen finished a series of sixteen medals on scientific subjects, and two years later sixty medals on biblical subjects. Developing his usual practice of presenting medals to important figures, he sent examples of the biblical series to all European monarchs, as well as to the president of the United States and the emperor of China (who returned his). In return for these, and also for his work as vice-consul for Birmingham for several countries, he received several orders and decorations. 
Thomason was knighted by William IV in 1832. A series of medallets of 'Bible truths' and 'Testamental Truths' was published in 1835. He also continued to strike a series of medals of British monarchs from eighteenth-century dies engraved by the Dassiers. Among the Birmingham engravers to work for Thomason were Thomas Halliday and Thomas Webb, and he was also associated with Charles Jones. Thomason sold his factory to George Richmond Collis, seemingly in 1835, and retired fully in 1844. He subsequently lived in Ludlow, Bath, and Warwick, and died at his home in Jury Street, Warwick, on 29 May 1849. He was buried at St Philip's Church, Birmingham. 


@@@@@


doc= 27250


Thomason, George (c.1602-1666), bookseller and collector of civil-war tracts, was the son of George Thomason, husbandman of Sudlow, Cheshire, where Thomason may have been born (some sources suggest he was born at Westham in Sussex). He was apprenticed to Henry Fetherstone, bookseller at The Rose in St Paul's Churchyard, London, on 29 September 1617, and became free of the Stationers' Company on 5 June 1626. Soon afterwards Fetherstone ceased publishing and Thomason took over the management of his business. 
Thomason's name appears in the Stationers' register from November 1627, initially in partnership with Octavian Pulleyn, with whom he published six titles. The partnership was dissolved in 1643 and Thomason moved to new premises at the Rose and Crown, St Paul's Churchyard. He was notable as an importer of continental books and as a supplier of the libraries of Oxford and Cambridge universities, regularly attending the Frankfurt book fair; he also visited the Low Countries, Germany, and Switzerland for business purposes. He advertised 2000 works that had been collected during a trip to Italy following his wife's death in 1646, describing them in Latin as 'more Rabbinical and Oriental books and manuscripts than have ever before been collected together' ('Catalogue of Pamphlets', vi). Parliament authorized purchase on behalf of Cambridge University, where they formed the basis of the oriental collection, but there is no evidence that he received payment. 
In 1645 Thomason was implicated in the anonymous publication of David Buchanan's 'Truth its Manifest', which attacked parliament and was burnt by the hangman. After publishing in 1646 Philip Freher's 'Treatise Touching the Peace of the Church', he published nothing until 1659, when Rushworth's 'Historical Collections' appeared under Thomason's imprint. He played an active role in the financial administration of the Stationers' Company from 1641. After 1645 he began to press for democratic reforms within the company's elections. In 1651 he was assistant warden, junior warden in 1657, and senior warden in 1661, when he was involved in re-establishing the company's business following the Restoration. 
About 1631 Thomason married Catharine Hutton (died 1646), Henry Fetherstone's niece and ward. The couple had many friends among the presbyterian party, including William Prynne, Henry Parker, John Rushworth, and Edmund Calamy. Other family friends included Edward Reynolds (later bishop of Norwich), Thomas Lockey, (keeper of the Bodleian Library), and the poet John Milton, who wrote his sonnet 14 to the memory of Catharine. Following Catharine's death in 1646, Thomason never remarried; his will spoke of his 'late dear and only wife'. The couple had at least nine children, six of whom were living in 1664. The eldest child, also named George, became a prebendary of Lincoln Cathedral in 1683; the remaining survivors were named Katharine, Edward, Grace, Henry, and Thomas. 
In 1642 and 1643 Thomason was a parish collector of subscriptions for the parliamentary army, and in 1646 he was involved in a petition to the lord mayor and common council supporting the presbyterian petition. The following year he became a common councillor for the ward of Farringdon Within. After King Charles's surrender in 1647 Thomason and other members of the council called for a personal treaty with the king; they were thereafter deprived of office following Pride's Purge in December 1648. After the execution of Charles I in 1649 he became involved in the overtures between the presbyterians and Charles II, known as the Love conspiracy. He was implicated in the plot and arrested in April 1651, and he spent several weeks in prison at Whitehall before being bailed for $1000 at the end of May. His estate was seized but later restored to him, and he was not prosecuted. Milton may have interceded on his behalf at this time. Thereafter he suffered bouts of illness, due to his imprisonment, and he ceased political activities. Thomason died at Mickleham, Surrey, and was buried in the church of St Dunstan-in-the-West on 13 February 1666 (although Richard Smyth says he was 'buried out of Stationers' Hall (a poore man) 10 Apr 1666' ('Catalogue of Pamphlets', xiii). His will, dated 1664, included legacies to his children, grandchildren, servants, the Stationers' and the Haberdashers' companies, St Paul's Cathedral, and St Dunstan-in-the-West. However, by his death he was in reduced circumstances, indicated by later codicils. 
Thomason's name is remembered for his remarkable collection of political and religious tracts between 1640 and 1661. In 1641 he 'systematically began his collection, acquiring, either by purchase or occasionally by presentation, every book, pamphlet and newspaper issued in London, and as many as he could obtain from the provinces or abroad' ('Catalogue of Pamphlets', v). According to Falconer Madan, 'Thomason's achievement is unparalleled in its kind' (Madan, 292), encompassing more than 22,000 items in over 2000 volumes, subsequently catalogued in twelve volumes, either by him or by his friend Marmaduke Foster, book auctioneer. His practice of adding the dates of publication or acquisition on the works' title-pages has proved invaluable in establishing the chronology of events during this turbulent period, and his marginal notes identify anonymous authors and the clandestine manner in which some works were distributed. The comprehensiveness of this collection, and the historical value of the two surviving manuscript catalogues, were the subject of detailed analysis and debate in the journal 'Albion' in 1988 and 1990. 
After Thomason's death his collection was subject to many vicissitudes, but remained intact. The works were acquired from his descendants by the bookbinder Samuel Mearne for Charles II, about 1678. Mearne rebound them, but was never paid and the collection remained in his family. For eighty years members of the Mearne and Sisson families repeatedly tried to sell the collection to the Bodleian Library, Cambridge University, Prince Frederick, and others, without success. Eventually, in 1761, it was sold to George III for $300, and was presented to the British Museum in 1762. 


@@@@@


doc= 27251


Thomason, James (1804-1853), administrator in India, was born at Little Shelford, near Cambridge, on 3 May 1804, the son of Thomas Truebody Thomason (1774-1829) and his first wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Fawcett (died 'c'.1825). His father, who had been curate to the Cambridge evangelical Charles Simeon, in 1808 accepted a post in Bengal, where he became a student of Indian languages and culture, a promoter of Indian education, a noted churchman, and, for a time, chaplain to Lord Moira. Mrs Thomason founded the European Female Orphanage, Calcutta. 
James Thomason was sent back to England from India in 1814 to live with his grandmother Mrs Dornford, and Charles Simeon, both powerful advocates of Christian beliefs, who moulded his firm but unobtrusive adherence to the Church of England. At Aspenden Hall School in Hertfordshire his contemporaries included T. B. Macaulay. In 1818 he moved to a school at Stanstead in Sussex, and then went to the East India College at Haileybury, where he distinguished himself in literary subjects, mathematics, and political economy. He obtained an appointment as a writer with the East India Company, and arrived in Calcutta in September 1822. 
Thomason became proficient in vernacular languages at Fort William College, spent his early service in the judicial branch, and was for a while in governor-general Lord William Bentinck's secretariat. About 1825, following his mother's death, illness took him back to England, where he proposed to Maynard Eliza Grant (died 1839). He returned to India and became registrar to the Bengal 'sadr' court, where he developed skills in both Hindu and Muslim law, and spent a period as a district judge. Ill health again sent him to England in 1827. After his return to India, on 19 February 1829 he married Maynard Eliza Grant at Malda, where her father, William Grant, was stationed as a civil servant. They were to have some seven children. In 1832 his career took a decisive turn with his request for appointment as magistrate and collector of Azamgarh in the North-Western Provinces, to gain first-hand knowledge of district administration. Azamgarh came to have special significance for Thomason, who later recorded that 'It was to me a field of victory, where such repute and status as I had in the service was founded' (Temple, 'James Thomason', 54). He spent five years as magistrate, collector, and settlement officer at a time when the reassessment of land revenue by revenue commissioner Robert M. Bird was in train, and produced a well-known work, 'Report on the Settlement of Chuklah Azimgurh', in 1837. This experience influenced Thomason in favour of peasant proprietors, and, more generally, laid the foundations for his later success as lieutenant-governor of the North-Western Provinces. In 1837 he was appointed secretary to the North-Western Provinces government, but had to return to England, this time because of the illness of his wife, who subsequently died in London in 1839. Thomason returned to Agra in 1840, succeeding R. M. Bird as a member of the board of revenue, and in 1842 he became foreign secretary to the government of India. 
On 12 December 1843 Thomason was made lieutenant-governor of the North-Western Provinces, at the comparatively early age of thirty-nine. His responsibilities were vast, including aspects of most of the civil and judicial administration of the provinces. His tenure of office was to be formative in the development of a devolved system of government. The administration of land revenue was of special importance. The settlement under regulation IX of 1833 had just been completed, and Thomason brought an acute mind to the completion of Bird's work. He was determined to set down his interpretation of land revenue principles clearly; he saw a just assessment as crucial to the happiness of the people. The assessment should determine the value of the land and establish the rights that went with it: 'The object of this investigation is not to create new rights but to define those which exist' (Temple, 'James Thomason', 145), he wrote. He was inclined to award responsibility for the revenue, and any profit accruing to cultivation, to the peasant cultivators. Joint responsibility was 'an original and well recognised principle in all village communities... the very bond which had held them together', and it was essential to make the community feel 'the strength of the bond which unites them and the necessity of common exertion for the safety of the whole' (Metcalf, 119-20). Thomason clashed with the board of revenue in support of the village community concept. 
Thomason was less doctrinaire than Bird in his interpretation of the 1833 settlement, and recognized that individual cultivators were often unable to stand alone when deprived of the 'talukdars' as intermediate revenue holders. He was willing in principle, therefore, to accept 'talukdars' being awarded the revenue engagements where peasant and intermediary were of the same kin and mutually anxious to maintain their connection. Thomason was, nevertheless, keen to cut the traditional share of intermediaries by about half, to 10 per cent of the revenue, despite the qualms of the East India Company directors. He was inclined to allow prompt sale of defaulting estates despite the reservations of district collectors, and took the typically early Victorian view that 'the measures of the Government ought to be made to favour the industry of the thrifty rather than to save the unthrifty from the effects of their unthriftyness' (Metcalf, 122). 
Thomason's views of land revenue administration in the North-Western Provinces were embodied in his authoritative and influential works 'Directions for Settlement Officers' and 'Directions for Collectors', both of 1844, the first complete codes of settlement compiled in India, which continued in use for many years. The place of his land revenue policy in the causes of the Indian mutiny is still debated. While some 'talukdars' certainly lost by its working, many other factors have to be taken into account to explain the events of 1857. 
Thomason contributed importantly in the area of public works. He was, probably more than any other single individual, the facilitator of two great schemes of northern India -- the grand trunk road and the Ganges Canal. The grand trunk road was macadamized and had police posts, resthouses, and caravanserais established. The canal, largely the brainchild of Sir P. T. Cautley, was a vast and unique work, and the first purely British scheme of its kind in India. It stretched 350 miles from Hardwar to Cawnpore, and opened between 1854 and 1857. 
Land revenue and public works were connected to Thomason's contributions to education. He thought that a carefully recorded land settlement would be an incentive to basic education. The Roorkee Engineering College, founded in 1848, provided public works training for both Europeans and Indians, and Thomason was keen to see this principle extended elsewhere in education. His first biographer called him 'the father of primary education by the state in Northern India... no matter lay closer to his heart than this' (Temple, 'Men and Events of my Time in India', 48). Thomason's scheme envisaged a school for each group of villages, government inspection, scholarships, and the establishment of several state-funded schools as models. He wanted to 'stimulate the people to exertions on their own part to remove ignorance', to encourage self-improvement 'in a manner consonant with Native institutions and ideas', rather than 'actually supplying to them the means of instruction at the cost of Government' (ibid., 174-5). He also encouraged training and a more systematic approach within the administration, touring widely among his subordinates, and initiated a statistical department to produce analysis of public policy for wider debate. When the Punjab was annexed in 1849, the governor-general, Lord Dalhousie, turned to Thomason to help provide the officers necessary to administer the new territory. Thomason considered the transfer of nineteen men 'a heavy tax' (Mason, 303), but it was of immense significance to the British administration in India. 
Thomason recognized that the British had obligations towards India, noting after the Second Anglo-Sikh War that: 'it is in the quiet operations of peace, which ensue from such a turmoil, that constancy, perseverance, circumspection and diligence are called forth. That is the quiet and unostentatious labour, but also the high and responsible duty, to which we are now called to address ourselves, with regard to this great country, which God has placed in our hands. (Temple, 'James Thomason', 122)' He hoped that Christianity might spread within India and supported protestant missionaries in his private capacity, but was opposed to any official propagation of the religion; he would not, for example, allow any religious teaching in government schools. He was an unstinting and generous personal supporter of charities and churches, colleges, schools, and dispensaries. 
James Thomason became a key figure in the East India Company's government, but at the cost of unremitting effort. In August 1853 he experienced an ill-defined but persistent decline in health; he died at Bareilly, North-Western Provinces, while staying with his married daughter, Mrs Maynie Hay, on 27 September 1853, the day that his appointment as governor of Madras was confirmed in Britain. He was buried at Bareilly church the next day. Dalhousie commented, 'He was a first-rate man, invaluable to India and to me' (Baird, 265). The engineering college at Roorkee was renamed Thomason College (later the University of Roorkee) as a fitting tribute. 


@@@@@


doc= 27252


Thomasson, Thomas (1808-1876), cotton manufacturer, was born on 6 December 1808 at Turton, near Bolton, Lancashire, the second son of John Thomasson (1776-1837), a cotton manufacturer, and his wife, Elizabeth Marsh, the daughter of a farmer at Topping, near Bolton. He attended the Friends' Ackworth School from 1813 to 1816, then joined his father, who having been briefly a partner with his sister's husband, John Ashworth, and later manager of Old Mill, Eagley, had set up on his own account at Mill Hill, Haulgh. Rebuilt in 1829, this was a medium-sized mill, combining steam and water power. Following the death of his father, and after a short-lived partnership with his brother-in-law Richard Pennington, Thomasson built a second mill in 1841, an ambitious project at the trough of an intense commercial depression, but one which paid off in the expanding markets of the later 1840s. After further expansion in the 1850s, the firm employed 650 workers and had gained a considerable hold on the production of warps. Energetic and sagacious, Thomasson had a keen practical command of the market for raw cotton, importing on his own account and for speculation. He later took into partnership his nephew Joseph Mellor and his son John Pennington Thomasson (1841-1904). 
Thomasson was distinguished among his fellow cotton masters for his strong radical and democratic beliefs. These perhaps owed much to his Quaker upbringing, but on 17 December 1834 he married, outside the society, Maria, the daughter of John Pennington, a cotton manufacturer and merchant. Thereafter (until the Crimean War) he attended with her Bolton parish church. Unusually among his peers, he was a reader of Spinoza and a freethinker; he earned the admiration of G. J. Holyoake (who wrote his notice in the 'Dictionary of National Biography') and donated sizeable sums to T. H. Huxley. Thomasson's unconventionality was also seen in his support for universal suffrage in the 1830s -- for example, his readiness to second Chartist motions at Kersal Moor in September 1838 -- and in his opposition (as a poor-law guardian) to the full implementation of the new poor law. However, he differed from the Chartists in wishing first to seek the repeal of the corn laws as the best way in which to reverse 'the black catalogue of the sins of the landed interest against the comforts of the poor'. He therefore became an early supporter of repeal in Bolton: he promoted in 1838 its Anti-Corn Law Association and, to tory anger, urged free-trade motions within the town council. He also became a leading financial supporter of the Anti-Corn Law League and a close friend of its leaders Cobden and Bright. Thereafter he was one of the staunchest followers of the Manchester school, supporting the National Parliamentary and Financial Reform Association, the peace movement, and the campaigns against the 'taxes on knowledge' and for cheap postage. He later became a leading backer (and chairman in 1865) of the National Reform Union and the Reform League. Thomasson was never visibly prominent in these movements but was a ready source of financial support. A fervent admirer of Cobden, he gave generously to the Cobden Testimonial Funds in 1846 and 1860 and later privately donated $20,000 to Cobden's widow. He also acted as one of Cobden's executors, sorting out his tangled business affairs. 
Thomasson was intimately involved in the civic life of Bolton. He played a leading part in the movement for its incorporation and served on its council (1838-50, 1853-9). But he was an emphatic advocate of municipal economy, seeking to run public affairs on private business principles. He also defended the Little Bolton Trust (on which he served) and the waterworks (of which he was a director) against the pretensions of the tory-dominated council. An advocate of non-sectarian education and of self-improvement, he served on the committee of the All Saints' British School, and was a patron of the Bolton Mechanics' Institute and of Bolton's industrial school, library, and museum. He was also president of the local Liberal association. 
Holyoake's description of Thomasson as 'a political economist' seems awry, but he was undoubtedly among the most radically minded of mid-Victorian entrepreneurs, driven by a strong hostility to aristocratic government and a keen desire for the welfare of the people by voluntary means. But he was also privately kind and strikingly generous in individual cases. He enjoyed salmon fishing and shooting in Scotland, often in the company of John Bright. Thomasson retired in 1871, died at his home, High Bank, Haulgh, Bolton, on 8 March 1876, and was buried on 13 March at Turton church, without any church service. His son John Pennington was MP for Bolton (1880-85) and a millionaire, and his grandson Franklin (1873-1941) was the proprietor of 'The Tribune' newspaper and MP for Leicester (1906-10). 


@@@@@


doc= 27253


Tomlinson, Matthew, appointed Lord Tomlinson under the protectorate (bap. 1617, d. 1681), parliamentarian army officer and politician, was baptized at St Michael-le-Belfry, York, on 24 September 1617, two months after the death of his father, John Thomlinson. When Matthew was nine his mother, Eleanor, daughter of Matthew Dodsworth, married Thomas Coventry. 
In 1642 Tomlinson was one of the gentlemen of the inns of court who enlisted under Sir Philip Stapleton in the earl of Essex's company of life guards. In spring 1645 he was campaigning in Oxfordshire. He had become a major and eventually took over command of Sir Robert Pye's troop of horse as colonel in 1647. His importance in the New Model Army was indicated in June 1647 when he was chosen to present the army's remonstrance to the House of Commons. He and his regiment were among those who arrived in London in August 1647, and the following October he participated in the debates at Putney over the future settlement of the kingdom. However, he was never conspicuous in political debate. His continuing importance in the army was shown in 1648. On 28 November he was one of those charged with justifying the army's fresh descent on London. Soon afterwards he commanded the troop which guarded Charles I during his trial (to which Tomlinson had been appointed as one of the judges, but had declined to sit) and attended the king to the scaffold. Charles acknowledged the courtesy with which he had been treated by Tomlinson, giving him a golden toothpick and case. 
Tomlinson saw renewed fighting in the summer of 1649, quelling trouble in Kent. In 1650 he and his regiment joined Cromwell in Scotland. They were present at the battle of Worcester on 3 September 1651. Residual legal expertise may explain his inclusion by the Rump Parliament among the members of the Hale commission, set up to recommend reforms in the law. With the end of the Long Parliament, in May 1653, he was named to the council of state, and was then co-opted into Barebone's Parliament. His services were already exploited on a number of financial committees. Tomlinson made substantial purchases of crown land during the interregnum. He bought in 1653 Ampthill Great Park, Bedfordshire, for $6140 and the following year part of the manor of Dyndathway, Anglesey, for $2754. He also bought Lincoln dean and chapter lands for, in all, $1671. 
In August 1654 Tomlinson was included in the council which was to help Charles Fleetwood govern Ireland. Soon Fleetwood was effectively superseded by Henry Cromwell. Tomlinson was out of sympathy with what he -- and others -- regarded as the more conservative tenor of the administration, as it sought to widen its appeal among local civilians. Nevertheless outward courtesies were maintained, with Henry Cromwell knighting Tomlinson on 24 November 1657. Shortly afterwards, he was named to the other house of the Westminster parliament, but his duties in Ireland prevented his attendance. His sympathies with the opponents of the Cromwellian protectorate led to his reappointment to the successor government in Ireland as a parliamentary commissioner in July 1659. He collaborated with another proponent of 'the good old cause', Edmund Ludlow. He was toppled when a more conservative group seized Dublin Castle in December 1659, and was returned as a prisoner to England. At risk because of these sympathies, after Charles II's return he was imprisoned but not tried. For the rest of his life he was unobtrusive. In 1669 he was noted as pleading for religious toleration for protestant nonconformists. He had married well: his wife, Pembroke (died 1683), daughter of Sir William Brooke, was an heir to the Cobham estates. They had two daughters, Jane (died 1703) and Elizabeth (died 1692). Tomlinson died at East Malling, Kent, on 3 or 5 November 1681 and was buried in the parish church there. 


@@@@@


doc= 27254


Thomlinson, Robert (bap. 1668, d. 1748), benefactor, was baptized on 10 August 1668 at Wigton, Cumberland, the youngest son of Richard Thomlinson of Akehead, near Wigton, of an old Durham family. He was educated at Queen's College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 22 March 1686, and graduated BA from St Edmund Hall in 1689, proceeding MA in 1692. He was later incorporated at Cambridge, in 1719, and graduated DD from King's College in that year. In 1692 he held for a time the post of vice-principal of St Edmund Hall, and in 1695 he was appointed lecturer of St Nicholas's Church, Newcastle upon Tyne. On 8 April 1702 he married Martha Ray, at East Ardsley, near Leeds, Yorkshire; they do not appear to have had any children. In 1712, after holding minor posts, which he probably owed to a family connection with Dr John Robinson, he became rector of Whickham, co. Durham, on the recommendation of Lord Crewe, bishop of Durham. In 1715 he was appointed master of St Mary's Hospital, Newcastle, and four years later Robinson appointed him to a vacant prebend at St Paul's Cathedral, London. 
Between 1720 and 1725, as executor of his brother John, rector of Rothbury, Northumberland, Thomlinson erected at Wigton a hospital (the College of Matrons) for the widows of poor clergymen; he himself contributed part of the expense and provided a schoolmaster's house for the parish. In 1734 he gave liberally to the rebuilding of St Edmund Hall, Oxford, under Thomas Shaw, and shortly afterwards donated some 1600 books to form the nucleus of a public library for Newcastle. A building was provided to accommodate the books, and the library was opened to the public in October 1741. The librarian's salary was funded by an endowment from Sir Walter Blackett, and Thomlinson endowed the library with an annual income of $5 to be spent on the purchase of books. He was also responsible for the rules of the library, which were enforced by the first librarian, Nathaniel Clayton. After Thomlinson's death the library was neglected -- a catalogue of 1829 revealed high levels of theft and disrepair -- but the collection was later salvaged and housed at the city's central library. 
Thomlinson's other benefactions included a chapel of ease at Allenby in Cumberland, the charity school at Whickham, and considerable bequests to Queen's College, Oxford, to the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel (of which he was one of the earliest members), and to the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge. He died at Whickham on 24 March 1748 and was buried in the north aisle of Whickham church. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 27255


Thompson, Sir Benjamin, Count Rumford in the nobility of the Holy Roman empire (1753-1814), natural philosopher and philanthropist, was born on 26 March 1753 at North Woburn, Massachusetts, the only son of Benjamin Thompson (died 1754) and his wife, Ruth Simonds, daughter of an officer who had fought against the French and the North American Indians in the Seven Years' War. He was descended from James Thompson, who had gone to Massachusetts with John Winthrop in 1630. Thompson's mother married again when he was three, and reared a large family; a small legacy for Benjamin's maintenance came from his grandfather, who died in 1755. He went to school at Woburn, at Byfield, and then at Medford; he is said to have been especially interested in mathematics, and enthusiastic about mechanical contrivances. 
After leaving school at thirteen Thompson was apprenticed at the seaport of Salem, about 20 miles from home, to John Appleton, a storekeeper selling imported dry goods. However, in 1769 merchants in New England signed a non-importation agreement in protest against taxes levied upon them by the British government and this so damaged Appleton's business that he could no longer support Thompson. Briefly unemployed, the latter wrote memoirs on wind, light, and heat before, on 11 October 1769, Hopestill Capen of Boston wrote to Appleton for a reference, and duly offered Thompson a similar job. Soon, however, Capen was writing to Thompson's mother that 'he oftener found her son 'under' the counter with gimlets, knife and saw constructing some little machine or looking over some book of science, than 'behind' it arranging the cloths or waiting upon customers' (Brown, 'Count Rumford', 3); the story is told that Thompson lost this job in 1770 after an explosion when he was making fireworks to mark the repeal of the 'Stamp Act'. 
Less than a year later Thompson was apprenticed to the physician in Woburn, Boston, Dr Hay, with a view to becoming a general practitioner. With a friend, Loammi Baldwin, he constructed an electrical machine -- electrotherapy was then becoming fashionable and Benjamin Franklin's dangerous experiment with a kite (which the boys repeated) had made electrical science exciting. Thompson attended some lectures at Harvard, but never matriculated, and wrote out a timetable of medical study for himself. He does not seem to have been a very systematic student and early in 1772 his apprenticeship was terminated. 
Thompson had already done some schoolteaching, at Wilmington and at Bradford, Massachusetts, and was now invited to teach in Rumford (now Concord), New Hampshire. The clergyman responsible for the invitation was Timothy Walker, whose recently widowed daughter Sarah (1739-1792) had been married to the local landowner, Colonel Benjamin Rolfe. She soon fell in love with the young schoolmaster, handsome, auburn-haired, and nearly 6 foot tall, and about November 1772 they were married. Their only child, Sarah, was born on 18 October 1774. Thompson settled down as a landowner, at the same time cultivating John Wentworth, the royal governor of New Hampshire, who was interested in natural philosophy and in agricultural improvement. In 1773 the governor made him a major in the second provincial regiment, to the fury of experienced junior officers hoping in vain for promotion. Among Thompson's many talents, the capacity to recommend himself to the mighty was prominent. 
Thompson began experiments on gunpowder which were to be a long-term interest, but in December 1775 he was brought before the local committee of safety and accused of being hostile to American freedom -- he had made no secret of his support for the established order. The case was dismissed but faced with threats from a mob Thompson fled to Boston, leaving his wife behind; he never saw her again. In Woburn and in Boston he was involved in covert and then overt support for the royal government, like many other loyalists or tories among the colonists. In March 1776 the British army withdrew from Boston; Thompson sailed for England in the frigate bringing the news from General Thomas Gage to the secretary of state, Lord George Germain. 
Once in Britain Thompson presented himself as an expert on America rather than as a refugee and became the main contact between American loyalists in England and the British government, as private secretary to Germain. In 1779 he was appointed secretary for Georgia, a barren honour under the circumstances, and in September 1780 to the more profitable office of under-secretary for the colonies. In 1779 his research on gunpowder led to a cruise with the Royal Navy, when he became interested in signalling and in ship design, and then in 1781 to his first publication in the Royal Society's 'Philosophical Transactions' and his subsequent election as a fellow. Amid rumours of embezzlement and treason, and blamed for what he saw as Germain's incompetence, in the summer of 1781 Thompson raised a regiment, the King's American dragoons, sailing with them to Charles Town, and then to New York. In camp at Huntington, Long Island, he became infamous for pulling down a church for fortifications, and building baking-ovens from the gravestones. When peace was made in 1783 he returned to England, retiring from the army on half-pay. On 17 September he went abroad, crossing the channel with his horses on the same packet as Gibbon. 
At Strasbourg Thompson attended a review in uniform, and procured an introduction to Duke Maximilian de Deux-Ponts (or Zweibrucken), whose regiment had fought for the Americans; the duke gave him warm letters of introduction to his uncle, the Elector Karl Theodor of Bavaria, who was trying to modernize his country and promptly offered Thompson a position at court. Returning to England Thompson secured permission to enter foreign service, and a knighthood from George III on 23 February 1784. Back in Munich he applied scientific analysis to the problems of clothing and feeding the Bavarian army, in which he was given the rank of colonel. In order to provide cheaper and warmer uniforms he investigated the insulating properties of cloth, and this led him to the discovery of convection currents in gases and liquids: he then realized that fabric where air was trapped would be warmest. 
On new year's day 1790 Thompson rounded up the many and troublesome beggars of Munich into workhouses, where they were to manufacture suitable cloth and where nourishing meals were provided and there were schoolteachers for the children. Feeding these workers and the soldiers led him into studies of nutrition, and also into the improvement of fireplaces and stoves, with fuel economy and freedom from smoke as the objectives. He introduced potatoes into the Bavarian diet; his recipes for thick soups became famous, and he also promoted the drinking of coffee as an alternative to alcohol. Faced with idle and ill-paid soldiers he set garrisons to work growing vegetables for their own use and for the workhouses, while around them the engineers practised building walls and fortifications. In Munich he constructed the English Garden (out of the elector's former deer park) for the recreation of the inhabitants. 
His successes led to Thompson's appointment as minister of war, minister of police, major-general, chamberlain, and councillor of state, and in 1792 he was created Count Rumford. His stoves were the ancestor of the kitchen range, and he also invented a photometer, for comparing light intensities against a 'standard candle', and then an improved lamp for use in his institutions. With all these exertions his health broke down. He went to Italy for sixteen months, returning in 1793 to Munich amid public acclamation. 
In the course of his duties as inspector-general of artillery Rumford oversaw experiments on cannon-boring, and found that enormous quantities of heat were generated by friction in the process. Heat, in the newest theory associated with Antoine Lavoisier's chemistry, was a weightless fluid element: Rumford's experiments convinced him of the truth of the older theory, that heat was the motion of the particles composing matter. Taking up his studies on convection he turned to the question of why water freezes from the top downwards. He found in a series of ingenious experiments that instead of contracting steadily as it cools, water reaches maximum density at about 41 degree F. Investigating radiant heat he concluded that black is the best colour for stoves, or for clothes in warm climates. 
In 1795, anxious to publish his work, Rumford obtained permission to go to London. There his private papers were taken in a daylight robbery which he attributed to political enemies, perhaps in search of information about Bavaria. He spent two happy years in Britain, advising on fireplaces and chimneys. His studies on convection currents enabled him to eliminate downdraughts by installing a narrow throat and a smokeshelf, notably at Lord Palmerston's house in Hanover Square. He was appalled at the waste of fuel indicated by the clouds of smoke which hung over London. In the spring of 1796 he visited Ireland with Lord Pelham, suggested improvements to hospitals and workhouses, and was much acclaimed. In 1796 he gave the Royal Society and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in Boston $1000 each, the interest to be used for a gold and a silver medal to be presented every second year for research into light and heat and their applications. He was to be awarded the first medals by the Royal Society in 1802, but the American prizes were not awarded until after his death, and a simplification of the conditions in 1829. 
In August 1796 Rumford was urgently recalled to Munich, upon which French and Austrian armies were converging. Accompanied by his unsophisticated daughter, and travelling dangerously from Hamburg, he found himself commanding the Bavarian army. The elector withdrew to Mannheim, leaving Munich in the path of the opposing armies. Rumford persuaded the Austrians, who were first on the scene, to camp outside the city; he then urged the French that, since there were no Austrians within it, they should not attack the city. Confined with a garrison of 12,000 soldiers, and menaced by artillery, he patiently negotiated with the two generals until after two weeks the French withdrew following a defeat elsewhere, at which point the Austrians also retired. In a bloodless victory against the odds he had saved the city and Bavarian neutrality, and in the course of the siege he had invented a portable field stove and set up soup kitchens throughout the city. Rumford's cockiness and enormous prestige made him enemies who detested this foreign royal favourite, and in 1798 the elector sent him as ambassador to London. 
To Rumford's chagrin, and to the detriment of relations with Bavaria, George III refused to receive one of his own subjects as the representative of a foreign power. Deprived of diplomatic status, and despite his loyalism in the 1770s, Rumford sought a post in America, giving $2000 for poor children in Rumford. President John Adams contemplated making him superintendent of the military academy being set up at West Point, and eventually did propose that he become inspector-general of artillery -- having been assured that Thompson would decline. In London Thompson now found a new opportunity to use his gifts for promoting science and invention; he was the prime mover in setting up the Royal Institution in Albemarle Street. This became a great centre for research and fashionable public lecturing in the sciences, providing the laboratory where Humphry Davy, Michael Faraday, John Tyndall, and others did their fundamental work. 
This was not really what Rumford had anticipated, though Davy did preach and practice his gospel of applied science, promoting industrial revolution. Rumford represented to the upper classes 'the essence of scientific philanthropy' (Berman, 11) and the proposals for the institution were approved at a meeting at Sir Joseph Banks's house (where Rumford had improved the chimneys) on 7 March 1799. Its aim was to diffuse knowledge, and introduce useful inventions; Rumford hoped that manufacturers would exhibit new devices (notably stoves), and that there would be lectures, especially concerned with heating and cookery. A steam central-heating system, a handsome lecture theatre to his design (with a separate entrance to the gallery, for artisans), and a basement laboratory were installed in the Albemarle Street premises, and Rumford lived there for a time, and then in leafy Brompton. He became sufficient of a celebrity to be lampooned by Peter Pindar (John Wolcot): '
Now to a Yankey tunes the willing lyre: 

Spite of th'ingratitude of COOKS and... 

Strikes to COUNT RUMFORD'S 'tuneful' name the strings, 

Who from his fav'rite little RUMFORD came, 

To build on 'smoke' his fortune and his fame. 
(Pindar, 2)' There are also Gillray cartoons, one of Rumford warming himself in front of his fireplace, and another in which he is administering laughing gas in a lecture. (Occupations in his later years included designing a carriage with wide wheels, and a special coffee-pot.) 
Rumford's great success was in appointing Davy, but Rumford's high-handed and dogmatic ways provoked resistance so that when he returned to Bavaria to greet Duke Maximilian, now elector, he left London in September 1801 under something of a cloud. He returned via Paris, where he was feted, and after packing up in London he left for France in May 1802, never to return. His wife had died on 19 January 1792, and in Paris Rumford had met and fallen in love with Lavoisier's wealthy widow, Marie Anne Paulze (1758-1836). He took her to Bavaria, where he recommended the transformation of the academy into another Royal Institution. They were married in Paris on 24 October 1805, but the marriage was not successful; his wife was far more sociable than Rumford, and they separated on 30 June 1809. Rumford lived thereafter at Auteuil, near Paris, where his daughter joined him from 1811. He died there on 21 August 1814, and was buried in the local cemetery. 
Rumford bequeathed money for a chair of physics at Harvard University, and $1000 and his apparatus to the Royal Institution. Like Davy's, Faraday's, and Tyndall's, Rumford's is a story of the social mobility which science could bring: the farm boy and shop assistant became the Massachusetts Yankee at the courts of Europe. He spoke well German, French, Spanish, and Italian; he played billiards, against himself, and enjoyed chess; he was a good draughtsman; indifferent to literature, sculpture, and painting he had a great taste for landscape gardening. His daughter, Countess Rumford, returned to America and died in 1852. 
In his 'eloge' at the Institut de France on 9 January 1815 Georges Cuvier emphasized the revolutions, warfare, and conflicting loyalties which had dominated Rumford's life, and was mildly embarrassed by his pursuit of honours and wealth. He stressed the value of Rumford's practical inventions, with their scientific basis. Later, to Tyndall lecturing at the Royal Institution in 1883, Rumford's researches on the nature of heat put him firmly in the tradition leading to James Joule, conservation of energy, and modern thermodynamics. To the Americans George Ellis, his first editor, and Sanborn Brown, whose edition is now the standard, Rumford's failure to take the right side at independence is perplexing; indeed, with his various loyalties went a certain capacity for opportunism and underhand dealings. Certainly nobody could have risen as he did, in a world of patronage, without great ambition, charm, and determination; he seems to have preferred humanity in the mass to actual people, and had few friends. Brown places his researches on heat in their context, where the implications Tyndall saw were not perceived by Rumford or his contemporaries, and where the diversity and utility of his discoveries, based on research rather than empiricism, were most impressive. He has an important place in the origins of applied science. 


@@@@@


doc= 27256


Thompson, Benjamin (1775/6-1816), playwright and translator, was the son of Benjamin Blaydes Thompson, a merchant and magistrate of Kingston upon Hull and Eastdale, Yorkshire, and his wife, Deborah Walter. Having 'received a liberal education' ('Some account', 4), he was intended for the law, but, finding it uncongenial, went instead to Hamburg as his father's agent. His leisure hours were spent translating August Kotzebue, whose vogue in England was just beginning and whom he came to know personally. Thompson's translation of 'Menschenhass und Reue' ('Misanthropy and repentance') as 'The Stranger' was selected for Drury Lane. Revised by R. B. Sheridan -- who improved Thompson's stagecraft and contributed the songs -- it was performed with John Philip Kemble in the title role on 24 March 1798. The third most successful hit of the season, it became a staple ingredient of the stage throughout London and the provinces for at least the next fifty years. When the play was first printed in 1800, Thompson was obliged to defend it from imputations that translations of 'The Stranger' by competitors Schink and Papendick (both published 1798) were the basis of the stage production. After Thompson's death Sheridan, with less than justice, reportedly claimed 'The Stranger', 'as it is acted', as essentially his work, not Thompson's ('Journal of Thomas Moore', 2.754). It was reprinted, correctly under Thompson's name, in virtually every play series of the century; and its overwhelming success earned him the sobriquet 'Stranger Thompson'. None of Thompson's other translations of Kotzebue was ever performed, but they were printed collectively (3 vols., 1801) and also issued, with unacted translations of Schiller, Babo, Goethe, Iffland, Lessing, Reitzenstein, and Schroeder, as 'The German Theatre' (6 vols., 1801 etc.). The melodrama 'Rokeby, or, The Buccaneer's Revenge', based on Scott's poem, was printed in Dublin (1814). 
After Thompson's marriage at Chesterfield on 23 May 1799 to Jane ('bap'. 1775), the youngest daughter of the Revd John Bourne, rector of Sutton-cum-Duckworth and South Wingfield, Derbyshire, the couple settled in Arnold, Nottingham. In the summer of 1808 Thompson's theatrical friends Tom Dibdin and Charles Farley visited and spent 'a most delightful week among some of the leading families of the town and neighbourhood' (Dibdin, 1.419). At this time Thompson published his only novel, 'The Florentines' (1808). About 1810 Thompson and his family settled in London, where he supplemented his income by editing and theatrical reviewing. At his death he was negotiating to assist Dibdin in his new management venture at the Surrey Theatre. 
Outside literature Thompson had a keen interest in agriculture (in which he speculated unwisely), especially sheep-farming. For a short period, until ill health forced his retirement, he was secretary to the Merino Society and translated, from the French of C. P. Lasteyrie, a treatise on the introduction of merinos into Europe and the Cape of Good Hope (1810). 
Thompson's two other dramas, performed at Drury Lane, failed badly: an operatic drama, 'Godolphin, or, The Lion of the North' (12 October 1812), a historical piece set in Nottingham, and the romance, 'Oberon's Oath' (21 May 1816), adapted from Christophe-Martin Wieland. Despite Thompson's high hopes for the latter, it fell victim to an organized claque. According to 'The Times', 'a violent, and, as it appears to us, a most unprovoked and offensive effort, was made by some party, who were scattered through the house, to damn this unpretending production, without the least regard to its actual merits' (23 May). This disappointment, coupled with depression resulting from an earlier illness, is said to have caused Thompson's death from an apoplectic fit at his house in Blackfriars Road, London, on 26 May 1816; he was buried on the 31st. Immediately a public appeal was launched by means of printed bills beseeching 'the benevolence of the public' (Royal Literary Fund archive) towards his distressed widow and six children, the youngest, a girl aged three, being nearly blind. Jane Thompson's application to the Literary Fund, supported by a recommendation from the bookseller-publisher Henry Colburn, produced $25; and a subscription edition of 'Oberon's Oath' attracted over 350 subscribers, including Lady Caroline Lamb and old friends like Tom and Charles Dibdin, Grimaldi, and Edmund Kean. In the prefatory memoir Thompson is described as strict in manners but 'an affectionate husband, and a tender father; sincere in his friendship, and scrupulously honourable in all his engagements' ('Some account', 12). 


@@@@@


doc= 27257


Thompson, Sir Charles, first baronet (c.1740-1799), naval officer and politician, was the illegitimate son of Norborne Berkeley, later fourth Baron de Botetourt (1717-1770), of Stoke Gifford, Gloucestershire, governor of Virginia; his mother was a Mrs Thompson of Edinburgh, with whom Berkeley had another son. He first went to sea in a merchant ship but in 1755, shortly before the outbreak of the Seven Years' War, he entered the navy on the 'Nassau'. Between 1755 and December 1760 he served successively in the 'Nassau', in the 'Prince Frederick', and with Captain Samuel Barrington in the 'Achilles'. On 16 January 1761, having passed his lieutenant's examination, he was commissioned fifth lieutenant of the 'Arrogant', in which he served first in the channel and then in the Mediterranean. The 'Arrogant' was paid off at the peace, and in August 1763 Thompson joined the sloop 'Cygnet', in which he served on the North American station until July 1768 when the 'Cygnet' was sold out of the navy in South Carolina; Thompson, with the other officers, was left to find his own passage to England, for which he was later paid $39 0's'. 6died 
In May 1770 Thompson was appointed first lieutenant of the 'Salisbury', again on the North American station, and in February 1771 he was promoted by Commodore James Gambier to command the sloop 'Senegal'. Three months later he was appointed acting captain of the 'Mermaid', which he took to England in December 1771. The Admiralty refused to confirm this last commission, but promoted him to captain's rank on 7 March 1772, and appointed him to the 'Chatham', going out to the West Indies with the flag of Vice-Admiral William Parry. From the 'Chatham' he was moved into the frigate 'Crescent', before returning to England in 1774. He was appointed to the frigate 'Boreas' in 1775, and early in 1776 was sent to Jamaica, where he captured the French ship 'Le Compas' (20 guns). He returned to England with a convoy of merchant ships in October 1777, and was again sent out to the West Indies. There in 1780 he began a long-running feud with Sir John Laforey following Laforey's appointment as commissioner of Antigua yard. Thompson's refusal to recognize this authority led to animosity; this flared up again fifteen years later when Laforey was commander-in-chief at the Leeward Islands. The later confrontation provided Lord Spencer with a reason for sending Laforey home, an act which created alarm in the Admiralty and led to the resignation of Sir Charles Middleton. 
Towards the end of 1780 Thompson was moved by Sir George Rodney into the 'Alcide' (74 guns). He commanded the 'Alcide' in the action off the Chesapeake on 5 September 1781, with Sir Samuel Hood at St Kitts in January 1782, and in the battle of the Saints on 12 April 1782. At the end of the American War of Independence he brought the 'Alcide' to England, and later in 1783 he married Jane Selby, daughter and heir of Robert Selby of Bonington, near Edinburgh. They subsequently raised five children. In 1787 he commanded the 'Edgar' at Portsmouth, and during the crisis of the Spanish armament in 1790 he was given command of the 'Elephant'. 
In 1793 on the outbreak of the war with revolutionary France, Thompson was appointed to the 'Vengeance' and was attached to the expedition against French possessions in the West Indies led by Sir John Jervis and Lieutenant-General Sir Charles Grey. There, in 1794, as commodore, he took part in the capture of Martinique where he directed the boat attacks against Fort Royal, and Guadeloupe. On 12 April 1794 he was promoted rear-admiral of the blue; he returned to England in 1795 with his flag in the 'Vanguard', and on 1 June he was promoted vice-admiral. 
In 1796 Thompson was elected MP for Monmouth and, with his flag in the 'London', he was given command of a detached squadron blockading the French coast off Brest. Towards the close of the year he was sent out to the Mediterranean in the 'Britannia', and was second in command at the battle of Cape St Vincent in February 1797. Thompson's disregard of Jervis's signal to tack to counter a Spanish move to threaten the British nearly lost the battle. Jervis was angered by the failure to act but chose not to make it a public issue. Later in 1797 Thompson was made a baronet for his contribution to the battle. He continued with the fleet for some months, but again came into conflict with Jervis (now Lord St Vincent) when the latter insisted on hanging four mutineers on the Sabbath (Sunday 9 July 1797). St Vincent used the affair as a suitable pretext to write to the Admiralty insisting on Thompson's removal. 
Thompson was accordingly recalled, and was appointed to a command in the fleet off Brest. He held this during 1798, but his health had for some time been failing, and early in the following year he was obliged to strike his flag and go on shore. He died at Fareham on 17 March 1799. On 16 April St Vincent wrote of Thompson as a 'gallant man, but the most timid officer', and drew attention to his having 'the manner of a rough seaman' which Thompson cultivated by his habit of dressing casually in a sailor's frock and straw hat (Brenton, 2.7). 


@@@@@


doc= 27258


Charles Thompson (1791-1843), engraver, was born in London, the younger brother of John Thompson, and trained with Robert Branston and his brother John. In 1816 he visited Paris to investigate prospects for wood-engraving, and, encouraged by the printing firm Didot, stayed there, training French engravers and contributing to books illustrated by Grandville, Gigoux, Johannot, and others. He died at his home in Bourg-la-Reine, near Paris, on 19 May 1843. 


@@@@@


doc= 27259


Thompson, Charles Thurston (1816-1868), photographer, was born on 28 July 1816, the second son of the wood-engraver John Thompson (1785-1866) and his wife, Harriott Eaton. The outstanding feature of Thompson's career is that it was almost exclusively as an official photographer of works of art within the South Kensington Museum in London, the showcase of the Department of Science and Art. As such his career was inextricably linked with that of his friend Henry Cole, one of the key figures in the Victorian art world: Thompson was, in many respects, an acolyte to Cole's achievements. 
Evidence suggests that Thompson initially followed his father's profession, and he is known to have produced engravings, some based on the designs of the artist John Thurston, after whom he may well have been given his second name. By early 1844 Thompson and Cole were working together on the sale of casts of the wooden blocks of the woodcut entitled the 'Small Passion', then attributed to Albrecht Durer, which was housed in the print room of the British Museum. These casts may subsequently have been marketed by Cole's friend the art historian and publisher Joseph Cundall, who was a prominent figure in the promotion of photography in mid-Victorian England. 
Comparatively little is known about Thompson's photographic career, and when it began, though the Great Exhibition of 1851 was the defining moment. In addition to his role as superintendent of class XXVI, furniture, and class XVIII, animal manufactures, he was placed in charge of all the photographic arrangements. Through this position he met the Paris-domiciled English photographer Robert Bingham (1825-1870), who printed many of the photographs which appeared in the photographically illustrated special presentation copies of the 'Reports by the Juries'. Bingham subsequently taught Thompson and in 1855 the two worked together to document the Paris Universal Exhibition on behalf of the Department of Science and Art. 
Thompson was also intimately involved in the international exhibitions in London in 1862 and Paris in 1867. Commissioned to carry out both official and private photography and to record the construction of the 1862 building, he found himself criticized for having a conflict of interests in that he was not only a juror of class XIV photographs but also an exhibitor. For the Paris 1867 exhibition he helped select photographs for exhibition; his own exhibits, 'Reproductions and Views in Spain and Portugal', won him a silver medal. From 1853, and his first commission to photograph a loan exhibition of furniture at Gore House, London, until his death in 1868, he was the 'de facto' official photographer of the Department of Science and Art and the South Kensington Museum. In July 1856 he was appointed superintendent of photography, though his first annual retainer seems to have been agreed only in 1859. 
Thompson's photographic career within the Department of Science and Art was closely linked with the military through the Royal Engineers, with whom he had worked at the Great Exhibition of 1851. By 1853 sappers were being used at South Kensington as part of the unofficial yet permanent photographic facilities. This heavily subsidized photographic studio annoyed contemporary commercial photographers. Thompson gave photographic training to a stream of sappers and was paid 10 guineas when each soldier was granted a 'certificate of competency'. As a direct result of this connection with the Royal Engineers, he travelled in 1854 and 1856 to northern France to photograph the military encampments of the French army. He married on 13 January 1857 Charlotte Jane Bond, daughter of William Bond; the couple had one daughter. 
On his death it was estimated that Thompson had taken some 10,000 negatives of works of art. His photographs were widely disseminated and appeared in over twenty photographically illustrated publications, including catalogues of the South Kensington Museum. He documented the collections of the museum and temporary exhibitions held there; venturing further afield, he recorded works by Raphael for the project initiated by Prince Albert to document the artist's entire work. In 1858 he documented the Raphael cartoons at Hampton Court and copies of these photographs, available in five sizes, sold in significant numbers. In 1866 he undertook one of his most ambitious photographic projects when he travelled abroad for the Department of Science and Art and photographed in France, Spain, and Portugal. Selections of his Iberian images were published in 1868, on behalf of the Department of Science and Art, by the Arundel Society in volumes of the photographically illustrated series 'Examples of Art Workmanship of Various Ages and Countries'. 
Thompson carried out a limited amount of freelance commercial photography, selling photographs directly from a succession of private addresses in the Kensington area. In 1863 he was employed on several occasions by the Belgian art dealer Ernest Gambart to photograph paintings which Gambart was selling. In the following year he briefly collaborated with the amateur photographer Clementina, Viscountess Hawarden, in taking portraits. 
Described by contemporaries as having 'a varied art culture [and] possessing a most discriminating taste and judgement' ('Photographic News', 24 Jan 1868, 38), Thompson was 'modest and unassuming' ('Journal of the Society of Arts', 7 Feb 1868, 236) and did not actively court fame. He wrote neither books nor manuals on photography, and, although he exhibited photographs regularly in both national and international exhibitions, he was not a founder member of the Photographic Society of London; however, towards the end of his life he was elected a council member. Charles Thurston Thompson died on 20 January 1868 in the Hotel Meyerbeer, Paris, and was buried on 25 January at Kensal Green cemetery, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 27260


Thompson, Edward (1738?-1786), naval officer and author, was the son of a Hull merchant about whom further details are unknown. He was educated at Beverley and Hampstead, and made a voyage to Greenland in 1750. He journeyed to the East Indies in an Indiaman in 1754, and later claimed that he was pressed out of her and into the navy. On his return to England he joined the 'Stirling Castle' (64 guns, Captain Samuel Cornish), and was made a midshipman. He was promoted lieutenant on 16 November 1757 and joined the 'Jason', serving in the North Sea and the English Channel. In May 1758 he joined the 'Dorsetshire' (70 guns, Captain Peter Denis). The 'Dorsetshire' was employed on the Brest blockade and Thompson was present at the battle of Quiberon Bay (20 November 1759). In March 1760 he moved with Captain Denis to the new 'Bellona' (74 guns), attached to the western squadron, and was put on half pay at the end of the war in 1763. 
After the peace Thompson devoted his time to writing. During the remainder of his life he acquired a wide circle of political and literary acquaintances including John Wilkes, David Garrick, and Richard Brinsley Sheridan whom he apparently detested, describing him as a 'parliamentary impostor and swindler' ('Journal', 632). His satires 'The Demi-Rep' (1756) and 'The Meretriciad' (1763), published anonymously, proved very popular, the former recounting the attractions of London society and its corrupting moral influence. These and several other pieces were collected in 1770 under the title 'The Court of Cupid'. In 1767 'A Sailor's Letters' was published in two volumes. These described Thompson's voyages from 1754 to 1759 along with an account of the battle of Quiberon Bay and a vivid depiction of life in the navy. However, they also tend towards exaggeration and are not wholly reliable as illustrations of naval life (Rodger, 171, 181; Marcus, 183, 185). 
Thompson was promoted commander on 10 January 1771 and appointed to the 'Kingfisher' in the North Sea and, at the end of the year, to the 'Raven' in the Mediterranean. Here he was promoted captain of the 'Niger' by Rear-Admiral Sir Peter Denis, and his commission was confirmed by the Admiralty on 2 April 1772. He returned to England and the 'Niger' was paid off in July 1772. The following year Thompson produced an adaptation of Charles Shadwell's 'The Fair Quaker' at Drury Lane. Typically its naval characters, such as the macaroni Captain Mizen, were 'only fit to seduce their brother officers wives' (Langford, 577). Notwithstanding some popular success, much of Thompson's literary output and particularly his verse 'barely soared up to' mediocrity. He was fond of puns and doggerel and would frequently pen a few lines on the death of someone in the public eye ('Journal', 614, 619). Even so, on an occasion when one of his plays was being staged in Plymouth, fifty of his crew arrived at the door of the theatre and demanded admittance. As well as composing Thompson was engaged in editing the 'Westminster Magazine' and later the 'London Magazine'. He considered standing for parliament and in 1773 was proposed by John Wilkes as candidate for Westminster in opposition to Charles Fox, but Wilkes found no seconder. He later considered standing for Camelford but despite some encouragement never took up a political career. 
In January 1778 Thompson was appointed to the 'Hyaena' (24 guns), a new frigate building at Fisher's yard in Liverpool. He commissioned her on 17 April, and early the following year went out to Barbados. The 'Hyaena' was attached to John Byron's fleet and present at the inconclusive action with d'Estaing off Grenada on 6 July 1779. In August he was persuaded at the insistence of some merchants at Barbados to leave his station and return to England with a convoy. For this he was court martialled but acquitted. In December the 'Hyaena' was attached to the fleet under Sir George Rodney that was sent to the relief of Gibraltar. Thompson was present at the moonlight battle off Cape St Vincent (16-17 January 1780), when Rodney engaged a Spanish fleet. In a letter dated 24 March 1780 George Jackson, second secretary of the Admiralty, informed Rodney of Thompson's 'good Judgement', his reputation as 'an excellent Companion', and of his being 'unfortunate in his Marriage' (TNA: PRO, PRO 30/20/26/3, p. 17); further details of Thompson's wife are unknown though his journal also refers to another woman, Emma, with whom he spent much time towards the end of his life. 
The 'Hyaena' was afterwards sent home with dispatches following the moonlight battle. After refitting she was sent in August to New York with a convoy and then back to Barbados. In 1781, on the surrender of the Dutch territories of Berbice, Demerara, and Essequibo, Thompson was delegated to organize the establishment of the new colonies. By September he was under orders from Rodney to take a convoy to England with the admiral's dispatches but had received no written confirmation. Rodney had already returned to England leaving Hood in command. Thompson took it on his own responsibility to take the convoy to England and in his absence the Guiana colonies were recaptured by the French. On 1 April 1782 he was again court martialled, 'on the letter of Sir Samuel Hood', for deserting his station but was once more acquitted (Popham, 12; TNA: PRO, ADM 1/5319, fol. 555). 
Professionally Thompson was on very good terms with both admirals Augustus Keppel and Richard Howe; as both were successively at the head of the Admiralty after the American War of Independence, Thompson managed to find employment at sea. Although his scheme for a new signal code received nothing more than 'a polite reply' from Howe, his plans to survey the west coast of Africa obtained support ('Journal', 636). He planned to explore the coast between 20 degree S and 30 degree S and proposed a settlement where Indiamen might call to refit. Thompson was appointed to command the 'Grampus' (50 guns) and in January 1784 sailed with instructions to survey the trading forts on the Guinea coast. The 'Grampus' stopped at Madeira, where Thompson was inspired to write the poem 'Belle Monte'. Thompson also kept a painter by the name of Wilson on board to make a number of sketches of the island. 
Thompson conducted his surveys off the African coast, and gathered much information on commercial activities and the slave trade as well as settling trading disputes between the Europeans and the local leaders. He also reported on the depredations of pirate vessels, and an attempt by the Danes to build a fort on the River Volta to secure a large part of the British slave trade to themselves. Suffering from fever he returned to England in September 1784, but the following year he sailed again to the African coast. In company with the 'Nautilus' (16 guns), the 'Grampus' was ordered to survey the south-west coast of Africa. A further object of the voyage was to select a suitable site north of the Cape for a penal colony. Once it was established, Thompson expected to be appointed its governor. Before carrying out these instructions both ships returned to the Guinea coast to complete the work of the previous year. Thompson was again involved in settling disputes but fell ill during the negotiations. On this occasion the fever proved fatal and he died on board the 'Grampus' on 17 January 1786. The following day he was buried at sea in the Gulf of Guinea, the ceremony accompanied by minute guns from the 'Grampus' and 'Nautilus', and a volley of small arms. 
Thompson was very popular with his crew, and took great care in the nautical education of his young officers. Thomas Boulden Thompson and Home Riggs Popham served on the quarterdeck of the 'Grampus' and both became officers of some distinction. In character, he was described as 'an agreeable and gentlemanlike companion', and his reputation as a wit, as well as his writing and literary activities in London society, earned him the nickname Poet Thompson throughout the navy (Stirling, 20). 


@@@@@


doc= 27261


Thompson, George Donisthorpe (1804-1878), slavery abolitionist, born at Liverpool on 18 June 1804, was the third son of Thomas Thompson of Leicester and his wife, Elizabeth Donisthorpe. In 1831 he married Anne Erskine, daughter of Richard Spry, a minister in the Methodist Connexion of the countess of Huntingdon. They had six children. He first became widely known as a propagandist for the abolition of slavery in the British colonies. In October 1833 a series of lectures by him led to the formation of 'the Edinburgh Society for the abolition of slavery throughout the world'. He also lectured and took part in public discussions in Liverpool, Manchester, Glasgow, Bath, and elsewhere. In September 1834 he undertook a mission to the United States. He worked with William Lloyd Garrison, John Greenleaf Whittier, and the members of the American Anti-Slavery Society in the movement for the abolition of slavery, and was instrumental in forming more than 300 abolitionist branch associations. He is said to have caused by his speeches the failure of Thomas Jefferson Randolph's so-called 'post natal t' plan for slave emancipation in Virginia and he was denounced by General Andrew Jackson in a presidential message. 
Thompson's life was frequently in danger, and in December 1835 he was forced to escape from Boston in an open boat to a British vessel bound for New Brunswick, from where he sailed back to Britain. On his return he was enthusiastically received at Glasgow, Edinburgh, Newcastle upon Tyne, and other large towns. He revisited the United States in 1851, and again during the American Civil War, when a public reception was given to him in the house of representatives, in the presence of President Lincoln and the majority of the cabinet. He was made an honorary LLD by the Wesleyan University, Middletown, Connecticut, on 21 July 1864. 
Thompson was associated with Joseph Hume, Sir Joshua Walmsley, and other prominent Liberal radicals in the National Parliamentary Reform Association. He was also a member of the Anti-Corn Law League, and took part in forming the British India Association, visiting India to study its governance. In 1846 he was presented with the freedom of the city of Edinburgh. On 31 July 1847 he was returned to parliament for the Tower Hamlets constituency, a seat he retained until 1852, and about 1870 a testimonial was raised for him by his friends in Britain and the United States. He settled at Leeds and died there on 7 October 1878. 
Thompson was a brilliant speaker, and well regarded socially. John Bright 'always considered him the liberator of the slaves in the English colonies'. His second daughter, Amelia, married Frederick William Chesson, secretary to the Aborigines Protection Society. 


@@@@@


doc= 27262


Thompson, Gilbert (1728-1803), physician, was born in Lancashire, and for some years kept a well-attended school near Lancaster. He retired from the school and went to Edinburgh, graduating MD in 1753. 
Thompson then went to London, but had so little success as a practitioner that he worked first as writing-master in a boarding-school in Tottenham, Middlesex, and then became a dispensing assistant to Timothy Bevan, a druggist. About 1765 his uncle, Gilbert Thompson, of Penketh, Lancashire, died and left him $4000. He was able to set up as a physician in the city, and eventually attained a fair-sized practice. He was admitted a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians in 1770. 
Thompson was a Quaker, and a man of learning. He was described as being of great integrity, mild and unassuming, and professionally skilful. In 1782 he published a memoir of his good friend the physician John Fothergill. On the title-page he is described as secretary to the Medical Society of London, but there is no mention of this in the society's records, although he was a member, being present at the first meeting in May 1773. He also published translations from Homer and Horace, with original poems, in 1801. 
Thompson died at his house in Salters' Hall Court, Cannon Street, London, on 2 January 1803; he was seventy-four. 


@@@@@


doc= 27263


Thompson, Sir Harry Stephen Meysey, first baronet (1809-1874), agriculturist, was born at Newby Park, Yorkshire, on 11 August 1809, the eldest son of Richard John Thompson (1771-1853), an army officer, of an established aristocratic Yorkshire family, and Elizabeth (died 1840), daughter of John and Mary Turton of Sugnall Hall, Staffordshire. Mary Turton, the daughter and coheir of the Revd Thomas Meysey of Shakenhurst, Worcestershire, claimed descent from the De Meyseys who came to England from Meysey, Brittany, with William the Conqueror. Thompson was educated by private tutors, initially at home and then in London. He entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1829, and graduated in the mathematical tripos in 1832. During this period he studied entomology with Charles Darwin. As part of his grand tour he travelled extensively in Scotland and the south of France, and embarked upon a journey to Constantinople. The sickness of one of his companions, however, prevented him from reaching his destination. Following his return to Britain he intended to pursue a parliamentary or diplomatic career, but in response to pressure from his father, he settled down to the life of a country gentleman. On 26 August 1843 he married Elizabeth Anne (died 1910), second daughter of Sir John and Lady Croft. 
Thompson was very committed to promoting agricultural improvements on both his own estates and nationally. He accompanied John Evelyn Denison (afterwards Lord Ossington), John Lawes, and other leading figures on several practical agricultural tours in various parts of Britain. His views of the agricultural conditions in Ireland were published in 'Tait's Magazine' in April 1840. He was a key figure in establishing the Yorkshire Agricultural Society in 1837, becoming president in 1862. He was a co-founder of the Royal Agricultural Society of England in 1838. Following the death of Phillip Pusey, in 1855, Thompson became editor and then chairman of the journal committee. He perceived the society's role, however, as being primarily that of improving standards of crop and stock husbandry, rather than a vehicle for dealing with wider issues such as land tenure. His narrow interpretation tended to undermine the standing of the journal during the period of his editorship. He continued to take an active part in the organization of the society as a member of council until 1858 and then as a trustee until his death. 
Thompson's interest in practical agricultural problems led him to carry out a number of experiments in conjunction with Joseph Spence, a chemist of York, relating to the ability of the soil to absorb and retain nitrogen (in, as yet, an undetermined form). In 1848 a summary of their findings was sent to Professor J. Thomas Way, who continued with the research and published his results in the 'Journal of the Royal Agricultural Society' in 1850. In the same year Thompson's unfinished 'Investigations on the absorbent power of soils' was also published (vol. 11, 1850, 68-74) in the journal. Collectively their research showed that fertilizers, and nitrogen in particular, were absorbed in the soil by a complex series of chemical reactions. These preliminary investigations foreshadowed the significant discoveries in the 1850s made by John Lawes and J. H. Gilbert at the Rothamsted Experimental Station, which showed that the majority of agricultural crops, especially cereals, required additional nitrogen inputs for high yields. Thompson's research drew attention to the value of covered cattle yards for protecting animals and also for improving the quality of manure. The construction of a covered yard for pigs at Kirby Hall estate attracted widespread interest at the time. 
From 1849 Thompson developed a consuming interest in railways. He was instrumental in promoting a meeting of the York, Newcastle, and Berwick shareholders at York, which secured the deposition of George Hudson and the election of a new board of directors. Initially he declined a seat on this reconvened board, but shortly afterwards became chairman of the North Midland Railway Company. In 1854, when the two companies were amalgamated as the North Eastern Railway, he continued as chairman, a position he retained until a few months before his death. He was chairman of the United Railways Company Association from 1867 to 1873. He was an energetic and efficient organizer, whose efforts helped to revitalize the railway companies. In 1853, following his father's death, he inherited the family estates, becoming a justice of the peace, deputy lieutenant, and high sheriff of Yorkshire in 1856. His interest in politics led to his election as Liberal MP for Whitby in 1859. He played a key part in legislation relating to agriculture, the management of railways, and church rating. Following his defeat in 1865 he stood for the eastern division of the West Riding of Yorkshire but was unsuccessful. 
Thompson was a dynamic, if somewhat controversial figure. He was, for example, an ardent critic of agricultural colleges and suggested that institutions of this type would be likely to fail. In the late 1840s he claimed that students at Cirencester Agricultural College either idled away their time or waited until they received commissions in the army. He was criticized during his tenureship of the selection committee of the Royal Agricultural Society journal for not wanting an editor but merely a sub-editor who would promote his own views. Nevertheless, he played a significant role in enhancing the professionalism and scientific content of the Royal Agricultural Society's journal, and was a prolific writer in his own right, compiling eighteen articles dealing mainly with agricultural implements. His contributions improved the managerial performance and profitability of the railway companies he chaired. 
Thompson was a committed family man, with five sons and five daughters. On 26 March 1874 he was created a baronet, which was accompanied by his assuming the surname of Meysey-Thompson in recognition of his mother's family. He died on 17 May 1874 at Kirby Hall in Yorkshire. He was succeeded in the baronetcy by his eldest son Sir Henry Meysey-Thompson (1845-1929), who in 1905 was created Baron Knaresborough. 


@@@@@


doc= 27264


Thompson, Henry (1797-1878), writer, was born in Surrey. He was admitted to St John's College, Cambridge, as a pensioner in 1818, graduating BA in 1822 and proceeding MA in 1825. In 1820 he competed for Sir William Browne's medal, receiving an extra prize for a Latin ode, and in 1824 he obtained the first members' prize for a Latin essay. He married on 30 June 1823 Anne Harrison, daughter of the Revd James Bell, vicar of Lympne, Kent. In December 1823 he was ordained deacon, and priest in December 1827. After being successively curate of St George's, Camberwell, Surrey (1824-7), St Mary's, Salehurst, Sussex (1827-8), and Wrington, Somerset (1828-53), he was appointed by George Henry Law, bishop of Bath and Wells, to the vicarage of Chard, Somerset, on 14 September 1853, where he resided until his death on 29 November 1878. He left two sons -- Christopher, and Henry Bell (died 1887), who had served as his curate at Chard and whom he presented to the vicarage of Tatworth, Somerset. 
Thompson was a man of very conservative instincts. In the words of his friend Edward Augustus Freeman, whom he first met at Hannah More's house at Barley Wood, he 'seemed to look at everything in 1878 with exactly the same eyes with which he looked on things in 1839'. At the same time, Freeman adds, 'he showed us that past generation in its best colours'. He was a good classical scholar and knew Hebrew and German. 
Thompson was the author of 'Davidica: Twelve Practical Sermons on the Life of David' (1827), 'Pastoralia: a Manual of Helps for the Parochial Clergy' (1830), which is of interest for its recommendation that the sick should be encouraged to make special confession, 'The Life of Hannah More' (1838), which has been found useful by later biographers, and 'Concionalia: Outlines of Sermons for the Christian Year' (1853; 2nd ser., 1871). He published editions of Horace (1853) and Virgil (1854; 3rd edn, 1862), and also contributed most of the classical articles to the 'Encyclopaedia metropolitana' (1824), several of which he afterwards published separately. In 1845 he translated Schiller's 'Maid of Orleans' and 'William Tell', and in 1850 edited a volume of 'Original Ballads by Living Authors', to which E. A. Freeman was a contributor of nine poems. Thompson also contributed to the anthologies of religious verse 'Lyra sanctorum' and 'Lyra eucharistica', and to the 'Churchman's Companion'. 


@@@@@


doc= 27265


Thompson, Henry Langhorne (1829-1856), army officer, was born on 21 September 1829 at the cottage, Clumber Park, in Nottinghamshire, the son of Jonathan Thompson of Sherwood Hall, Nottinghamshire, receiver-general of crown rents for the northern counties, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Ralph Smyth, colonel in the Royal Artillery. After education at Eton College, on 20 December 1845 he was commissioned ensign, and on 20 August 1846 appointed to the 68th Bengal native infantry; on 12 February 1850 he was promoted lieutenant. He served in the Second Anglo-Burmese War (1852-3), receiving a wound which necessitated his return to England. In 1854 he volunteered for the Turkish army, received the rank of major, and reached Kars in March 1855. Under the command of Colonel W. F. Williams, he helped strengthen the fortifications, and he distinguished himself in repelling the Russian assault on 29 September, crushing the Russian columns by his fire from Arab Tabia. His bravery won Russian admiration and, on the surrender of Kars in November, Muravyov, the Russian commander, returned him his sword. On 9 November he was appointed captain unattached in the British army; on 7 February 1856 he received the Mejidiye (third class) and on 10 May was nominated an honorary CB. Shortly after his return from Russia, where he had been a prisoner of war, he died, unmarried, at 70 Gloucester Street, Belgrave Road, London, on 13 June 1856. He was buried in Brompton cemetery. His letters on the siege of Kars were published in H. Atwell Lake's 'Kars and our Captivity in Russia' (2nd edn, 1856). 


@@@@@


doc= 27266


Thompson, Jacob (1806-1879), landscape painter, was born in Lanton Street, Penrith, Cumberland, on 28 August 1806, the eldest son of Merrick Thompson (died 1833), a manufacturer of linen check and a well-known member of the Society of Friends and his wife Mary (died 1837), daughter of Thomas Roper of Penrith. Thompson attended the free grammar school there and drew from an early age, but grew up in relative poverty after the ruin of his father's business during the trade depression of 1812. His aspirations to become an artist met with little sympathy from his family, and he was apprenticed first to a grocer and then to a house-painter. However, he devoted all his leisure time to his favourite pursuit. 
While sketching a bridge crossing the River Lowther one autumn day, Thompson met William Lowther, second earl of Lonsdale, who stopped to comment on his work. The earl invited him to Lowther Castle to sketch and copy as he pleased, and he later sent one of Thompson's paintings to Sir Thomas Lawrence. As a result Thompson was summoned to London in 1829 and admitted as a student at the British Museum and later the Royal Academy Schools. At Lonsdale's instigation he studied at the academy under Robert Smirke. After some time Smirke advised him to 'go to nature' for his studies, arguing that if he stayed at the academy 'all originality of thought and invention would be lost' in him (Jewitt, 15). 
Thompson first exhibited in 1824, at the first exhibition of the Society of British Artists, sending a 'View in Cumberland', but he did not exhibit at the Royal Academy until 1832, in which year appeared 'The Druids Cutting Down the Mistletoe'. This was followed in 1833 by a picture containing full-length portraits of the daughters of the Hon. Colonel Lowther. On 14 August 1834 he married, at St Saviour's in Southwark, Ann Parker Bidder (died 1844), sister of George Parker Bidder, the celebrated engineer; they had one son. She was herself 'a clever painter in water colours' (Jewitt, 23) and they lived briefly at Luton before moving to Hitchin, in Hertfordshire. Thompson's next exhibit was 'Harvest Home in the Fourteenth Century', which appeared at the British Institution in 1837, and was presented by the artist to his patron, the earl of Lonsdale. 
Ten years elapsed before Thompson next exhibited, during which time he took commissions to paint the mansions of landed proprietors. Having access also to their collections, he spent time copying. In 1841 he settled with his family in a house belonging to his patron in Lowther New Town, Westmorland. There, in January 1844, Ann Parker Thompson died, and the following year Thompson moved into The Hermitage at Hackthorpe, a cottage given to him as a permanent residence by Lord Lonsdale. On 14 March 1850 he married Elizabeth, daughter of Jonathan Varty of Stagstones, near Penrith, a woman 'strongly imbued with artistic feeling' who painted with 'more than average merit' (Jewitt, 23); there were no children. 
In 1847 Thompson sent to the Westminster Hall competition 'The Highland Ferry-Boat', which was engraved by James Tibbits Willmore and which proved a success, selling several thousand copies. 'The Proposal' appeared at the Royal Academy in 1848; his annual academy exhibits included 'The Highland Bride', likewise engraved by Willmore, in 1851, another success on a large scale, though its composition was later criticized in the 'Art Journal'; 'The Course of True Love Never did Run Smooth', in 1854; and 'Looking out for the Homeward Bound', in 1856. He painted in 1858 'Crossing a Highland Loch', which was engraved by Charles Mottram; but he did not exhibit again until 1860, when he sent to the Royal Academy 'The Signal', which was engraved by Charles Cousen for the 'Art Journal' of 1862. In 1864 he had at the academy 'The Height of Ambition', which was also engraved by Cousen for the 'Art Journal'. Among his best works are 'Rush Bearing' and a view of Rydal Mount. 
In his later years Thompson devoted himself chiefly to landscape subjects with figures, the themes of which were for the most part drawn from the mountains and lakes of Cumberland and Westmorland, but occasionally from Scotland. His range, however, was limited, and his work was lacking in poetic sympathy. His attempts at classical and scriptural subjects, such as 'Acis and Galatea', exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1849, and 'Proserpine', were not a success. Thompson also painted two altarpieces for the church of St Andrew's, Penrith, and a number of hunting scenes. 
Thompson died at his home, The Hermitage, on 27 December 1879, and was buried in Lowther churchyard on 31 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 27267


Thompson, James (1817-1877), county historian and newspaper editor, was born on 6 December 1817 at Leicester, the son of Thomas Thompson (1788-1871), proprietor and editor of the 'Leicester Chronicle' from 1813, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Garton. He was educated first at W. H. Creaton's Classical and Commercial Academy in Billesdon and afterwards under the Revd Charles Berry, minister of the Great Meeting Unitarian Chapel, Leicester. 
Thompson began as an editor on his father's newspaper in 1838, with a brief phase as editor of the radical Owenite paper the 'Working Bee' in 1839 and as a sub-editor on O'Connor's 'Northern Star' in 1841 to gain experience. He soon became an able leader writer, and for more than thirty years wrote nearly all the leading articles in the 'Chronicle'. In the major local dispute over town improvement in the 1840s he took the side of the 'economists' in bitter opposition to William Biggs, urging new sewers before 'Brummagen Town Halls', especially after the 1846 typhus epidemic. His involvement in politics increased after the reformers became divided and the 1852 and 1857 general elections were fought between opposing reform candidates. The 'Chronicle' supported the moderate faction, and its rival, the 'Leicestershire Mercury', the radicals. In 1852 Thompson organized the search from the 'Chronicle' offices for evidence of corruption for the unsuccessful election petition, and in 1857, with his father, signed the requisition for a rival Liberal candidate. After the Conservative candidate won a crushing by-election victory in 1861 Thompson campaigned effectively for Liberal reunion. He became joint proprietor of the 'Chronicle' with his father in 1841 and sole proprietor in 1864, when he bought the 'Mercury', uniting the two rival Liberal papers. He began the 'Leicester Daily Mercury' in connection with the 1874 general election. He was briefly elected to the town council in 1867, losing by one vote in 1870. 
Thompson was the leading Victorian authority on the history of Leicester. For over thirty years he was responsible for the interpretation and preservation of the town's historic past: lecturing, writing, and recording archaeological discoveries, and opposing the destruction of the town's surviving medieval buildings, most notably the fourteenth-century Guildhall. In 1843 he began to print extracts from the works of local historians in the 'Chronicle' as 'Passages from the history of Leicester'. The next year he published his 'Handbook of Leicester' (3rd edn, 1860). He was soon led to examine the original records for himself, and his efforts with William Kelly in 1847 to rearrange the borough records, then poorly kept and in considerable disorder, undoubtedly helped to preserve one of the most detailed and complete municipal archives. His major study, 'The History of Leicester from the Time of the Romans to the End of the Seventeenth Century' (1849), used this material extensively and revealed his interest in archaeology. The second volume, 'The History of Leicester in the Eighteenth Century', was published in 1871, and a popular account, his 'Pocket History', in 1876 (2nd edn, 1879). His 'Essay on English Municipal History' (1867) examined the general history of the origin and development of boroughs. Among his projects was a history of Leicestershire, and shortly before his death he was preparing an account of the kingdom of Mercia. He was one of the founders of the Leicestershire Architectural and Archaeological Society (1855), a fellow of the Royal Historical Society, and a member of the British Archaeological Association and the Society of Antiquaries. He was also one of the founders of the Leicester Mechanics' Institute and honorary curator of the town museum. 
A man of singularly independent character in both religion and politics, Thompson was 'conservative in his tastes... [and] Liberal in his convictions' ('Memoir', 6). He married, on 24 June 1847, Janet Bissett ('c'.1823-1879), daughter of John McAlpin of Leicester. They had no children. He died at Dannett House, Fosse Road, Leicester, on 20 May 1877, and was buried four days later in Welford Road cemetery. His newspaper interests were purchased by Francis Hewitt in July 1877. 


@@@@@


doc= 27268


Tompson, John (fl. 1382), Carmelite theologian, was born, it is claimed, in the village of Thompson in Norfolk and joined the order at Blakeney. He is probably to be identified with the 'Johannes Tempsthone'', informator' who signed the cartulary at Bishop's Lynn on 30 April 1378. The title 'informator' indicates that he was teaching Latin to the younger students there. He pursued his studies at Oxford, and was BTh by 1382, when he attended the council convened at Blackfriars, London, on 17 May and 27 June to condemn the theological teaching of John Wyclif. He continued lecturing at Oxford where he incepted as DTh, but his later career is unclear. He seems to have returned to lecture for some years in the studium for Carmelite students at Norwich and possibly ended his days at Blakeney, for Bale does not list him among those buried in Norwich. 
Tompson appears to have been a notable teacher, especially on the scriptures, as well as a successful preacher. In view of his presence at the Council of Blackfriars he was probably one of the group of Carmelite theologians at Oxford who vigorously opposed Wyclif's theology. Bale, who saw many of his works in the library at Norwich, listed his lectures on 'Ecclesiastes', 'St John's gospel', and the moral teaching of the 'Bible', all of which he recorded with their incipits and noted that each was accompanied by an index. Tompson also composed four books of sermons, and collections of extracts from 'De mirabilibus mundi' and John Ridevall's work on Fulgentius. The only work by Tompson that possibly survives is a collection of extracts from Nicholas Trevet on Ovid's 'Metamorphoses', recorded with the same incipit as a similar work preserved in Merton College, Oxford (MS 85, fols. 111-123'v'). 
Giovanni Grossi, in his 'Viridarium' ('c'.1400), mistakenly called John Tompson 'John Campston', and this confused later historians (Pits, Villiers, and others), who have called him Campsen or Campscon, or who have created two separate individuals. 


@@@@@


doc= 27269


Thompson, John, first Baron Haversham (1648-1710), politician, was born in October 1648 at Worcester House, Mile End Green, London, and baptized at William Greenhill's Independent Church in Stepney on the 31st, the second (but first surviving) son of Maurice Thomson (1604-1676), merchant, and his second wife, Dorothy (died before 1674), daughter of John Vaux of Pembroke. He was educated by Mr Watkins at Lee, Kent, entered Lincoln's Inn in 1663, and was admitted to Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, on 2 July 1664, the year his father purchased the Haversham estate in Buckinghamshire. He married, on 14 July 1668 at St James's, Clerkenwell, Lady Frances ('c'.1648-1705), the widow of Sir John Windham of Felbrigg, Norfolk, and daughter of Arthur Annesley, first earl of Anglesey. They had five sons, only one of whom, Maurice, survived. Of their eight daughters, Mary married her cousin Arthur, fifth earl of Anglesey, and her sister Martha married Sir John Every, baronet. Sheriff of Buckinghamshire in 1669-70, Thompson travelled abroad about this time to further his education. On his father's death in 1676 he inherited Haversham and property in London, Ireland, the Americas, and the Caribbean. Created a baronet in 1673, he was admitted to the East India Company in 1676. 
Thompson was short, stocky, and red-faced, and his actions and speeches were often controversial. He inherited radical whig principles from his father and in the first elections of 1679 may have unsuccessfully stood as MP for Upper Gatton in Surrey, which he had inherited from his Oldfield cousins. He purchased a house at Richmond, and was regarded by Sir Adam Browne MP as a dangerous neighbour during the Rye House plot of 1683. Although successful at Gatton in the general elections of 1685, Thompson went to the Netherlands in the recess, reportedly carrying jewels worth thousands of pounds. His chaplain, Walter Cross, spoke derogatorily of James II, and Thompson's house in Utrecht was described as 'a private receptacle to the devout brethren' (Greaves, 300) to which he brought those involved in both Monmouth's rebellion and the Argyll expedition. He went to Cleves to see the whig politician Thomas Wharton, his wife liaising with a member of the princess of Orange's entourage. On eighteen committees in the Convention, he made sixteen recorded speeches. He complained that the clergy continued to pray for King James, wanted equality on the 'Indemnity Bill', voted for the Sacheverell clause, defending the nonconformist clergy against charges of disaffection, and supported the disabling clause in the 'Corporations' Bill'. 
Thompson's gift for controversy continued. In 1690 he moved that all those who had advised the king to dissolve the previous parliament should be dismissed. He attacked corruption, defended William III as 'the best of Kings', but lambasted those ministers 'who do not understand their business' ('Parliamentary Diary of Narcissus Luttrell', 58). He was against increasing the land forces for a French war, seeing it as a mere 'colour' to allow a standing army. Critical of all place-holders and antagonistic to 'junto whigs', he was one of the 'Buff friends' in the country party, who, when new men joined a mixed ministry in 1693, hoped they would not be 'so mollified with place as to betray their country' (Rubini, 49). In 1694 he was listed as a member of the opposition, and re-edited his father-in-law's 1682 political pamphlet. This defended Anglesey against bogus memoirs and also attacked 'the folly or design of false or weak ministers' ('The Earl of Anglesey's State of the Government of the Kingdom', 1694, 1). 
In 1695 Thompson changed sides, his heir, Maurice, having been badly wounded at the siege of Namur. Elected a public accounts commissioner to investigate bribery and corruption, on the other hand he supported the government estimates for the 1696 campaign and, following a royal assassination attempt, he moved that all those MPs who did not subscribe to a loyal association should be expelled and that the captured plotters be examined. Such support for the government probably led to his elevation to the peerage as first Baron Haversham on 2 May 1696. On the reduction of the size of the Admiralty board in 1699 to five, Haversham became a member of the commission of 'his Majesty's own framing'. He then actively promoted measures to prohibit the export of wool, supply the victuallers of ships with sufficient cash, and analyse the state of the fleet. He also, through private bills, defended the interests of his relations when Katherine, countess of Anglesey, sought a separation from her wife-beating husband, the third earl. He was described as 'very eloquent, but very passionate and fiery, a Dissenter by principle, and always turbulent' (S. Macky, 'Memoirs of the Secret Services of John Macky Esq.', 1733, 78). 
Haversham's support for the government continued for some time. He strongly opposed the French over the Spanish succession, and during the impeachment in 1701 of lords Somers and Orford, he made reflections on the Commons' conduct to the managers at a free conference. He supported Somers and claimed the Commons acted partially by accusing only some of those involved in the partition treaties. Subsequently his son Maurice moved the impeachment of the earl of Jersey, the lord chamberlain, in the Commons, where an attempt to have Haversham censured created a constitutional precedent over relationships between the houses. He said he had no desire to dishonour the Commons, and he and the impeached lords eventually escaped punishment. He resigned, or was removed, from the Admiralty board and the following year was ridiculed in a cartoon depicting Anglesey's death. He and Thomas Wharton introduced a bill to secure the king against the Pretender, who had recently been recognized as James III by the French. He opposed the 'Occasional Conformity Bill' in 1703, using the occasion to attack the vast expense of the navy and the favouritism involved in appointments. 
In 1703-4, as chairman of a committee investigating the naval victualling department, Haversham exposed corruption and criticized the government over its failure to use the navy effectively the previous summer. Moving towards the tories, he stirred them up to attack Godolphin over the 'Act of Union' with Scotland. From 1704 he gave an annual state of the nation speech, which in 1705 called for the Electress Sophia to be invited to England, ostensibly to strengthen the succession, but in fact to embarrass the government. Godolphin, however, was well prepared and defeated 'Lord Haversham's great guns' ('Portland MSS', 2.191) through delays and the 'Regency Bill'. His change of allegiance created enemies and whig criticism, while his speech-making and alleged whoring were satirized in a poem, 'The Dog in the Wheel' (1705). He printed his speech attacking the government for its conduct of the war, but was criticized by Defoe in his 'Review'. Hinting that the attack had been inspired by Robert Harley, and justifying his noble status in pompous language, Haversham referred to Defoe as 'a mean and mercenary prostitute' ('Some Memoirs', xi). In reply Defoe assaulted his recent ennoblement, commenting that some were 'advanced without honour' and others 'raised without merit' (J. Sutherland, 'Defoe', 2nd edn, 1950, 118). Haversham, in vindication, issued a further pamphlet that appeared to attack the king. Defoe then compared Haversham to a dog that bayed at the moon, commenting that he knew no more of William than those who had insulted him knew of his horse. The warfare between Defoe and Haversham, now identified with the high tories, continued, the former writing to Harley that 'My Lord Haversham's speech is laught at by everybody' ('The Letters of Daniel Defoe', ed. G. H. Healey, 1955, 247-8). However, Haversham's justification was 'The best way of preserving liberty of speech in parliament is to make use of it' ('Some Memoirs', 12). 
Although seen as a tory, Haversham remained a maverick MP. In the debates on the union with Scotland, he argued against an 'incorporating Union' and for 'a federal union, an union of interests an union of succession' ('Some Memoirs', 20) and the maintenance of the constitutional balance of power. Opposed to over-powerful politicians, in July 1708 he had an audience with the queen, against whom he suggested the whigs were plotting. In 1709 he stated that 'one of the greatest ends and uses of Parliament, [is] the redressing of grievances and keeping great men in awe' (ibid., 34). An occasional conformist, he resolved from 1707 to regularly attend the Anglican church, though later opposed 'a pretended divine right of the church' (ibid., 50). 
Haversham became more controversial with age and remained an inveterate speech-maker. On 10 May 1709 he married his housekeeper, Martha Graham (1647-1724), and was scurrilously identified as the 'old-out-of fashion-lord', father to the incestuous siblings in Mary Manley's 'New Atlantis'. When 10,000 refugees arrived from the Palatinate, he proposed the erection of government subsidized workhouses, which would have competed with ordinary industry. During Dr Sacheverell's impeachment in 1710, he argued that the strength of the queen's constitutional position was through her hereditary title rather than the consent of parliament. He often turned a piece of political infighting into a personal confrontation, though the printing of his speeches opened the door to official publication of parliamentary proceedings. By late 1709 he was weary of debate, writing to Harley that he was 'contented after so long being in Parliament to come there very little' ('Portland MSS', 6.524). However, he promised another speech on the state of the nation in 1710, but Lord Rochester reported he had had a fit of spitting blood. He sent a copy of another proposed speech to Harley in August, but died at Richmond on 1 November and was buried there on the 13th. His wife was buried on 13 March 1724. 


@@@@@


doc= 27270


Thompson, John (1775?-1864), naval officer, entered the navy in December 1787 and, having been on the books of various ships on the home station, joined the 'Lion' in June 1792 with Captain Erasmus Gower and made the voyage to China. On his return he was promoted, on 18 December 1794, a lieutenant of the 'Bombay Castle' in the Mediterranean, which was one of the fleet with Hotham in the action off the Hyeres Islands on 13 July 1795; the ship was with Jervis during the blockade of Toulon in 1796 but was wrecked in the Tagus in December 1796. For his exertions then in saving life he was commended by Vice-Admiral Charles Thompson, president of the court martial on the loss of the ship. He was afterwards in the 'Acasta' in the West Indies and, having distinguished himself in several boat expeditions, was appointed to his flagship, the 'Sans Pareil', by Lord Hugh Seymour. After Seymour's death he was promoted by his successor, Rear-Admiral Robert Montagu, on 28 April 1802 to command the sloop 'Tisiphone'. He returned to England in January 1803 and commanded a division of sea fencibles for a year. He married in 1805 a sister of Dr Pickering of the Royal Military College, Marlow. They had a large family; one son, Thomas Pickering Thompson, died an admiral, aged eighty-one, in 1892. 
In January 1806 Thompson was appointed to the sloop 'Fly', in which he was in the West Indies, at the Cape of Good Hope, and in the River Plate, where he commanded the flotilla intended to co-operate in the attack on Buenos Aires and assisted in landing and re-embarking the army. He was then appointed acting captain of the prize-frigate 'Fuerte' and went home in charge of convoy; but the Admiralty refused to confirm the promotion and Thompson was sent back to the 'Fly', which he commanded off the French coast during 1808. In 1809 he commanded a division of the flotilla in the Scheldt, and was advanced to post rank on 21 October 1810. He had no further service, but on 1 October 1846 accepted the rank of rear-admiral on the retired list, on which he became vice-admiral on 27 May 1854 and admiral on 9 June 1860. He died at his home at Longparish, Hampshire, on 30 January 1864, aged eighty-eight. 


@@@@@


doc= 27271


Thompson, John (1785-1866), engraver, was born in Manchester on 25 May 1785, the son of Richard Thompson, a London merchant, and his wife, Sarah. He was baptized at the collegiate church, Manchester, on 12 June 1785. Skilled in several media, he ranked at the head of British wood-engravers for fifty years. Wood-engraving was developed into a significant art in Newcastle by Thomas Bewick and in London by Robert Branston, whose pupils Thompson joined at the age of fourteen. These engravers devised a 'white line' technique which achieved effects peculiar to wood-engraving, epitomized in Bewick's 'British Birds' (2 vols., 1797-1804). Comparison of these with Thompson's illustrations for W. Yarrell's 'British Birds' (1843) shows Thompson's technique to be more exquisitely finished but not more vivid. Thompson's most individual work was in engraving over 900 illustrations by John Thurston, who, having been a wood-engraver, drew to suit the wood-engravers' technique; examples may be found in J. Puckle, 'The Club' (1817), Tasso's 'Jerusalem Delivered' (1817), and Thomas Dibdin's 'London Theatre' (1814-18). The minute skill of Thompson's engravings was sometimes praised as rivalling copper-engraving, for example, the portrait frontispiece to Samuel Butler's 'Poetical Remains' (1827), but this was not the way forward for wood-engraving. The new possibilities which it offered included cheap pictorial journalism, but Thompson contributed little here; rather, he worked closely with the fine Chiswick Press, which catered for connoisseurs of illustrated books. Another virtue of wood-engraving was that it permitted exact reproduction of line drawings, though this meant sacrificing the 'white line' technique. Thompson's skill in facsimile engraving was shown in his rendering of the sprightly line of caricaturists such as George Cruikshank ('Mornings at Bow Street', 1824) and (for French publishers) Grandville and Johannot. Facsimile wood-engraving made possible the celebrated illustrated books of the 1860s, inaugurated by the Moxon edition of Tennyson's 'Poems' (1857), to which Thompson contributed. Thompson signed his engravings with his full name in capital letters, and with a monogram of his initials, T superimposed on I (for J), which produced a Latin cross with serifs. 
Thompson's address in the 1820s was Barden Place, Peckham; from the 1830s, 3 (later 5) Bedford Place, Kensington, convenient for business with the Chiswick Press and convivial evenings with its owner, Charles Whittingham the younger; and from 'c'.1847 to 1859, 1 Campden Hill Terrace, Kensington. In 1819-21 he assisted in Applegath and Cowper's attempts to produce forgery-proof banknotes, and in the 1850s he engraved in relief on steel Maclise's vignette of Britannia, which appeared on English banknotes from 1855 for more than a hundred years. In 1838 he got to know Henry Cole, then writing an article on wood-engraving. When Cole worked on the penny post in 1839-40, he commissioned Thompson to engrave on brass a postage cover design by Mulready. The Cole and Thompson families, neighbours in Kensington, became friendly. Cole's wife's sister married Thompson's son Charles Thurston Thompson, who, with his brother Richard ['see below'], worked under Cole at the South Kensington Museum. In 1843-4 Thompson led the wood-engravers of London (with Cole's support) in opposition to the teaching of wood-engraving to women in the Government School of Design, but, when Cole took over the school in 1852, Thompson became director of a revived female wood-engraving class until its abolition in June 1859. He lectured on wood-engraving and formed a collection of historic and modern examples, which he used as teaching aids and donated in 1857 to the new South Kensington Museum, where they were on display during the museum's early years. Thompson's siblings Charles ['see below'] and Eliza and his daughters Isabel and Augusta were wood-engravers. He married Harriott Eaton in 1807; five of their eight children survived to adulthood. He died a widower at 9 Vicarage Gardens, Kensington, on 20 February 1866, and was buried on 27 February at Kensal Green cemetery. 






@@@@@


doc= 27272


Thompson, Sir John Sparrow David (1845-1894), lawyer and prime minister of Canada, was born at 5 Argyle Street, Halifax, Nova Scotia, on 10 November 1845, the seventh and last child of John Sparrow Thompson and Charlotte Pottinger. His father was an Irish Methodist who went to Nova Scotia from Waterford in 1827 and became printer to the crown. He taught his shy, quiet son shorthand, and in the 1860s the two became reporters of the assembly debates. The younger Thompson attended the Royal Acadian School and then the Free Church Academy until 1860, and was admitted to the bar in 1865 and began law practice. His father died in 1867 and he became the sole support of his mother and an unmarried sister. On 5 July 1870 he married Annie Emma Affleck (1845-1913), a Roman Catholic; but it was only when she was pregnant with their first child that Thompson was baptized a Roman Catholic. That baptism was the conclusion of his intense search for theological certainties. 
In 1871 Thompson was elected alderman in Ward 5, the largest of Halifax's six wards, and remained on the city council until 1877, when he was elected to the provincial assembly for Antigonish, a Roman Catholic county, as a Conservative. With the victory of his party in the general election of 1878 he was made attorney-general. He was premier by 1882, when he resigned to become a judge on the supreme court of Nova Scotia, at thirty-six years of age the youngest on that bench and usually the youngest in the courtroom. 
Thompson was a good judge, liking the metier, and his decisions were liberal; in criminal cases he was charitable where evidence was not clear, but firm, even unforgiving, when it was, especially in cases of cruelty to women or children. He loved justice as he hated iniquity; it was a fire that burnt inside him. 
In 1885 the federal government of Sir John A. Macdonald desperately needed new strength. Too many ministers were sick or worn out. That ineffectiveness led to the north-west rebellion in March 1885. The Nova Scotia MPs urged Macdonald to appoint Thompson to the cabinet, but Thompson did not want to go; he liked his life as a legal monk. His wife, Annie, however, thought her young and talented husband needed sterner challenges than sitting with the 'sere old crows', as she called them, on the supreme court of Nova Scotia (National Archives of Canada, J. S. D. Thompson MSS, vol. 283, Annie Thompson to Thompson, 5 Nov 1885). She pushed him out of the house on the long way to Ottawa. In 1885 he resigned his judgeship, was sworn in as minister of justice, and was elected, with some difficulty, as MP for Antigonish. 
The main burden of the defence of the government after the crisis over the hanging of Louis Riel in November 1885 fell upon the new minister of justice. Thompson had not been involved in that decision, but he took on the responsibility for dealing with its political consequences in parliament. His maiden speech was the first ringing defence of the government that the party had heard in the whole anguished Riel debate. He did not seek to convince by sounding phrases but by force of argument, by sheer good sense, and by his transparent fairness. It was a splendid success. Within two years he had become indispensable to Macdonald. In deciding the difficult questions of Canadian copyright, North American fisheries, and Bering Sea sealing, all of which arose between 1885 and 1894, Thompson could be counted on to produce an elegant, comprehensive, and luminous state paper. Macdonald had never had a minister like him. Thompson's work in the 1887-8 fisheries negotiations with the United States won him a KCMG. 
By this time Thompson's family was established in Ottawa, greatly to his relief. He was a passionate family man: an uxorious husband, a solicitous, devoted father of the five of nine children who lived to maturity, he revelled in their company and that of his wife. Macdonald was quite wistful when he saw Thompson with his children. 
After Macdonald's death on 6 June 1891 there was a cabinet crisis over his successor. A section of the Conservative Party from Ontario baulked at a Roman Catholic prime minister, and a compromise candidate, Senator J. J. C. Abbott, was selected, with the consequence that Thompson led in the House of Commons, Abbott in the senate. 
The biggest problem facing the government in 1891 was the Langevin scandal, alleged corruption in Hector Louis Langevin's department of public works. The government had won the general election of 1891 only narrowly, with a 27-seat majority in a 215-seat house. The scandal was made to order for the Liberal opposition; fourteen defections from the government side would put them into power. With the Langevin scandal hot and ready to serve, the Liberals protested over fifty individual elections, aiming to unseat the government. It was a disaster for the Liberals. The result of Thompson's bringing facts into the open, and forcing the offending minister out, was to defeat that strategy. It gave the government in 1892 a new majority of something like sixty-five seats, a majority it had not enjoyed for a decade. 
That big majority ensured passage of Thompson's new Canadian criminal code of 1892. It was based on Fitzjames Stephen's proposed criminal code of 1879, redrafted to suit Canadian conditions. The rest of Thompson's domestic agenda lay mainly in the difficult Manitoba school question. He counted on the courts to settle it, but the privy council unhinged that; it needed political solutions, and lay on his desk as he became prime minister on Abbott's resignation late in 1892. 
In March 1893 Thompson went to Paris as one of two British judges in an international tribunal to settle the Canadian-American dispute over sealing in the Bering Sea. The tribunal decided in favour of Canada. In June 1894 Thompson held in Ottawa the first intercolonial conference convened outside England. That autumn he went to London to be sworn in as member of the privy council, and to see doctors about his health. The doctors were optimistic. On Wednesday 12 December he went down to Windsor to be sworn in; the ceremony was brief, but at lunch he felt faint, then suddenly collapsed. He was dead of a massive heart attack, aged forty-nine. His body was sent back to Canada in HMS 'Blenheim', a mark of the British government's esteem; he was buried in Holy Cross cemetery, Halifax, in a state funeral on 3 January 1895. 
Thompson was a considerable lawyer. If not widely read, he had an incisive, rapid, and systematic mind which grasped facts quickly; that was joined to a vast capacity for work. The result was an extraordinary intelligence. He wore it all quietly. His was a mind unclouded by prejudice; Canada lost a prime minister with rare gifts, most of all the 'onward look of that untrammelled mind' (St John, 'Daily Sun', 4 Jan 1895). 


@@@@@


doc= 27273


Thompson, John Vaughan (1779-1847), surgeon and naturalist, was born on 19 November 1779, in Berwick, the son of John Thompson and his wife, Jane Hall, both of Berwick. That he had an early interest in the natural history of the area is demonstrated by the preparation, before he left Berwick and England, of his 'Catalogue of Plants Growing in the Vicinity of Berwick upon Tweed' (1807). His skill as a botanist is revealed in this work, which, according to Britten (1912), exhibited 'a very complete knowledge of the plants of that region and of the literature of the period' and the talent of 'a capable artist'. The 'Catalogue' also refers to the botanical guidance given to Thompson by William Percival Pickford of Edinburgh, presumably when he was a medical student in that city in 1797 and 1798. In addition to botany Thompson studied chemistry, anatomy, midwifery, and surgery, presumably with some distinction, as at the age of twenty he was appointed as assistant surgeon to the Prince of Wales's fencibles. 
In December 1799 Thompson sailed with the 37th regiment for Gibraltar, and three months later accompanied it to the West Indies and Guiana where British troops were engaged in fierce fighting against the Dutch. Thompson was in the Caribbean for nine years, rising in rank to full surgeon in 1803. While there he continued his interests in natural history, describing a new species of pouched rat from Jamaica, and observing the spawning behaviour of land crabs. Towards the end of 1809 Thompson returned to England and was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society on 6 February 1810. In 1812 he sailed for the Indian Ocean, where he spent four years attached to the garrisons of Madagascar and Mauritius. Given the title of government agent for Madagascar, he undertook important political duties in addition to his medical practice. He also spent considerable time exploring the natural history of the two islands. He discovered in Madagascar a plant for which Robert Brown erected the genus 'Thompsonia' (now 'Deidamia') and researched the island's extinct birds, eventually writing an article on the dodo for the 'Magazine of Natural History' (1829). Thompson also produced 'A Catalogue of the Exotic Plants Cultivated in the Mauritius' (1816), the first list of the island's plants. 
Thompson returned to Britain in 1816 and was posted to Cork in southern Ireland as surgeon to the forces. By 1830 he had attained the senior rank of deputy inspector-general of hospitals, an appointment he held at Cork until 1835. In that year he was posted as medical officer in charge of the convict settlements of New South Wales, and never returned to Europe. 
Although his publications reveal an early interest in marine bioluminescence (he later wrote vividly about the phenomenon he witnessed first off Gibraltar about 1810) it was on the voyage home from the Mascarene Islands in 1816 that Thompson first used a fine-meshed net to try and capture the organisms that caused it. Writing about the experience he stated 'Individually I feel under great obligations to this beautiful little animal, which by its splendid appearance in the water induced me to commence the use of a muslin hoop-net, which when it failed to procure me a specimen, brought up such a profusion of other marine animals altogether invisible while in the sea, as to induce a continued use of it on every favourable opportunity.' The 'beautiful animal' (J. V. Thompson, 'Zoological Researches and Illustrations, 1828-1834', 1968, 47) was a copepod (Crustacea) that he later named 'Sapphirina indicator'. Thompson not only mastered the use of a fine-meshed net from a moving vessel, but also developed the ingenious method of fastening the net over the spout of the ship's sea water pumps -- arguably the first use of a continuous plankton sampler. 
In terms of his scientific work, Thompson's years at Cork were those of his most productive research, through which he: 'secured a permanent place in zoological literature through his discoveries of the nature and life histories of the feather star..., the polyzoa, the cirripedes (or barnacles) and several divisions of the crustacea. Our present conceptions of the structure of these forms, of their zoological position, and of the metamorphoses which they undergo, date from Thompson's papers. ('DNB')' Thompson's privately printed series of memoirs on marine biology, his 'Zoological researches and illustrations, or, Natural history of nondescript or imperfectly known animals' was conceived either in 1826 or early in 1827. This series of six memoirs (in five numbers) appeared between 1828 and 1834. 
Thompson published his 'Memoir on the Pentacrinus europeaus' in 1827 and an erratum slip for this paper issued in May 1827 announced his intention to publish 'Zoological Researches'. This paper was more fully developed in the 'Edinburgh New Philosophical Transactions' in 1836, and its startling conclusions -- that crinoids were echinoderms and that the 'Pentacrinus' was a young stage of the feather star 'Antedon' -- attracted the notice of zoologists throughout Europe. However, the 'Zoological Researches' became the principal vehicle for Thompson's discoveries. His skill with the plankton net -- developed on the voyage from Mauritius -- was used to good effect in the waters off Cork, and the majority of the papers published in the 'Researches' relate to the metamorphosis of marine animals (mainly Crustacea) that he found in the plankton. These were remarkable and original discoveries. Thompson's observation of the metamorphosis of the 'Zoea' larva of the edible crab (then regarded as a species in its own right) into an adult led to his suggestion that larval stages and metamorphosis were universal in decapod Crustacea. This view was criticized by N. A. Vigors, editor of the 'Zoological Journal', who felt that this was a sweeping conclusion, and Thompson's opinions remained controversial. 
Thompson's discoveries of metamorphosis in barnacles enabled him to place the cirripedes within the Crustacea, rather than one of the classes of Mollusca, a major zoological achievement. It was in light of Thompson's major re-evaluation of barnacles as Crustacea -- not molluscs as had previously been thought -- that Darwin was able definitively to monograph the group in the early 1850s. More controversially, Thompson erected the name Polyzoa at the same time as Ehrenberg proposed the name Bryozoa for the same group of small colonial invertebrates. This caused confusion and controversy for many years, resolved only as late as 1947. However, Thompson's work on this group of animals was as meticulous as all his previous research, and his dissections and figures of them were a major contribution to understanding their structure, classification, and relationships. Thompson died in Sydney on 21 January 1847. 
Thompson's studies in marine biology, published in a relatively short period between 1823 and 1836, revolutionized some aspects of zoological thought. His name is unfamiliar however, even to marine zoologists, partly because of the general absorption of his discoveries and the waning of the controversies his research caused. He has not escaped recognition entirely, however, with distinguished naturalists including Charles Darwin, E. R. Lankester, T. R. R. Stebbing, C. M. Yonge, and Sir Sidney Harmer recognizing and paying tribute to his genius. The reproduction of a facsimile of the 'Zoological Researches' in 1968 has also enabled his contribution to science to be better appreciated. 


@@@@@


doc= 27274


Thompson, Sir Matthew William, first baronet (1820-1891), railway administrator, born at Manningham in the West Riding of Yorkshire on 1 February 1820, was the son of Matthew Thompson of Manningham Lodge, Bradford, and his wife, Elizabeth Sarah, daughter of the Revd William Atkinson of Thorparch. He was educated at private schools and in 1840 entered Trinity College, Cambridge, graduating BA in 1843 and MA in 1846. He was called to the bar at the Inner Temple in 1847, and for ten years practised as a conveyancing counsel. Having married on 10 May 1843 Mary Anne, daughter of his uncle, Benjamin Thompson of Park Gate, Guiseley, who possessed the controlling influence in the old brewery, Bradford, he retired from the bar in 1857 and went to Bradford to take a part in the management and development of the brewery. Almost immediately he began to be actively involved in municipal affairs, becoming a town councillor in 1858, an alderman in 1860, and mayor of Bradford in 1862. In 1865 he was elected a director of the Midland Railway, and in 1867 was returned as a Liberal-Conservative borough member for Bradford, with William Edward Forster as his colleague. He was not a committed politician, and did not stand at the general election in 1868; but he did unsuccessfully contest the constituency again in March 1869 after the unseating of the Conservative member, Henry William Ripley. In 1871 and 1872 he was re-elected mayor of Bradford, and in October 1873 he was publicly entertained and a presentation of plate was made to him in recognition of his services. 
In 1879 Thompson became chairman of the Midland Railway, and he immediately began to make felt the effects of his rigorous and energetic management. He was also chairman of the Glasgow and South Western Railway, and a director and sometime chairman of the Forth Bridge Railway Company. Parliamentary sanction for the building of the Forth Bridge had been obtained in 1873, but the work was not begun until 1882, when the Midland Railway's policy towards the financing of the bridge was greatly influenced by Thompson. The shareholders of the Forth Bridge Railway Company were guaranteed 4 per cent on their capital by the North British, Midland, Great Northern, and North Eastern railway companies, the Midland Railway under Thompson putting forward the largest single contribution to the bridge's $3 million cost. The bridge was completed in January 1890, and formally opened by the prince of Wales on 4 March 1890. On this occasion a baronetcy was conferred upon Thompson, in recognition of the ability with which he had helped forward the undertaking. 
Thompson resigned the chairmanship of the Midland Railway in 1890, because of failing health. He died at Park Gate, Guiseley on 1 December 1891, and was buried on 5 December in the churchyard there. He was survived by his wife, three sons, and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 27275


Thompson, Pishey (1785-1862), antiquary, was born on 18 June 1785 at Peachy Hall, Freiston, near Boston, Lincolnshire, the eldest child and only son of John Thompson (1756-1792), grazier and butcher of nearby Benington, and his second wife, Mary Evison ('c'.1762-1789). A 'forward' boy, Pishey first attended a dame-school, probably at Benington, the village where he was brought up by his grandmother Bridget Thompson, 'nee' Pishey (1731-1815), who maintained the family farm after her husband, John, died in 1772. From the age of six Pishey appears to have spent two years at Boston grammar school, where he excelled at Latin and mathematics, then four years at Wragby grammar school, followed by schools at Freiston and Skirbeck, near Boston. At sixteen years of age he returned for some time to the Freiston School as usher, and three years later he became a clerk, firstly in Sheath's Banks and then (in 1814) in Garfit's Bank in Boston; he also ran a bookselling business in the town. 
Throughout life Thompson adhered to the Unitarian faith, and in politics was a radical. A keen antiquary, and of literary bent, he collected materials for a history of the town and its neighbouring villages, and his intention to publish such a work was announced in 1807. However, in 1819 he emigrated to Washington, DC, where many relations and friends were already settled. His historical materials were arranged and published in 1820 in Boston by John Noble as 'Collections for a topographical and historical account of Boston and the hundred of Skirbeck in the county of Lincoln'. 
Granted American citizenship, Thompson set up as a high-class bookseller and publisher in Pennsylvania Avenue, Washington, and became closely acquainted with leading citizens and presidents. He was founder member of All Souls Church Unitarian, and of the National Institute (the later Smithsonian Institution). He was a founder member of the George Washington memorial committee, and president of the first national theatre. He supported George Flower's slave-free settlement at Albion, Illinois, and worked for the national scheme for settling freed slaves in Liberia. These activities, together with a prolonged holiday back in Boston in 1827 at a time of financial crisis in Colombia, rendered him complacent about the interests of his business. Bankrupt and in great debt, he returned to Britain in November 1841 but failed to find adequate employment. In August 1843 he went again to America, having learned of a vacancy on the 'New York Herald'. This did not materialize and he returned to Washington, where he reported senate proceedings for 'The Globe' and was appointed reporter for the 'National Intelligencer' -- a position he held almost until his death -- and supplemented his income by freelance accountancy. Thompson's most significant activity in America was as initial campaigner for a national bureau of statistics. His scheme was presented to congress, and an office was set up. President Tyler practically promised to appoint Thompson to run the bureau, but, apparently because their political views differed, Tyler gave the post to a clerk transferred from another state department. 
On 6 November 1807 Thompson married Jane Tonge (1786-1851) of Boston, but there were no children of the marriage. He nevertheless fathered a son born on 23 April 1824; the mother was Mary Wright, the eldest daughter of the Revd Richard Wright of Blakeney, Norfolk, the first missionary of the Unitarian church. The boy, named John Wright, was probably born in Washington (his mother had emigrated there with the Thompsons), but was brought up by his maternal relatives in Kirkstead, Lincolnshire. Despite the circumstances, an affectionate relationship, without rancour, subsisted between all concerned, and the illegitimacy remained a secret for many years to all but the immediate family. In due course John Wright became a leading Unitarian minister in Lancashire, renowned for his introduction of Sunday schools. Thompson returned to Britain in 1846, and settled in Stoke Newington, London. After the death of his wife on 16 July 1851 he finally put together his monumental 'History of Boston', published on 23 October 1856: it remained the only history of the town for 130 years. Thompson's income was meagre and uncertain, but occasionally friends, particularly the Flower family in Stratford upon Avon, found tactful ways of employing his services. Though living thus in considerable poverty, he could say before his death at his lodgings, 44 Church Street, Stoke Newington, London, on 25 September 1862, that he had repaid almost the whole of his debts. He was buried in New Gravel Pit churchyard, Paradise Place, Hackney. In memory of Thompson, a plaque on the south wall of Boston's parish church was later subscribed to by many of his friends. 


@@@@@


doc= 27276


Thompson, Samuel (1766-1837), a founder of the Freethinking Christians, born in Aldgate, London, on 7 June 1766, was the son of Samuel King Thompson, victualler, of the Bell, Church Row, Houndsditch, and his wife, Catherine. He was educated at Christ's Hospital (1774-80), after which he was apprenticed to a watchmaker in Whitechapel. Before he was twenty he married, on 27 May 1786, Ann Kilbinton, and set up in business for himself. Their two children died in infancy. He was fond of society and a good singer, and his business did not prosper. He left the watch trade for a wine and spirit business in East Smithfield. His wife's death in 1789 turned him to religion; on 25 December 1793 he married Mary Fletcher (1777-1850), took seriously to business, became eminent as a distiller and dealer in spirits, and regulated his trade by strict measures against drunkenness and loose language. Up to this point he was an Anglican; a casual hearing of Elhanan Winchester, the universalist, led him to become a member of his congregation in Parliament Court, Bishopsgate, in 1794. He was made deacon on 16 August 1795, and 'set apart' with three others for 'public service' on 8 January 1796. He was afternoon preacher, and distinguished himself by arguing against deists at open-air meetings, but soon quarrelled with William Vidler, Winchester's successor, on a point of pastoral authority. With twenty-one others he seceded on 19 November 1798, the schism being primarily a protest against a one-man ministry and the payment of preachers. 
On Christmas day 1798 the seceders opened a meeting-room at 38 Old Change, London, and at once announced their rejection of the doctrine of the Trinity, retaining, however, for some time, the doctrine of Christ's pre-existence. They also rejected baptism and the eucharist, as well as public singing and prayer. Their rules of membership and exclusion were strict, and strictly enforced. They took the name of the Church of God, and Thompson was elected an elder in March 1799. In March 1804 large audiences were attracted to their meetings by their public replies to Paine's 'Age of Reason'. They were popularly known as the Freethinking Christians. 
Thompson left business in April 1806, retiring with about $300 a year to Kingsthorpe, Northamptonshire, for the education of his four sons and eight daughters. Contention in his church brought him back to London; he resumed the spirit business on Holborn Hill at midsummer 1807. In December his followers advertised that they were going to 'inquire' into the existence of 'a being called the Devil'. Beilby Porteus, bishop of London, called the attention of the authorities to these proceedings in an unlicensed conventicle. Thompson and four others were cited (5 February 1808) by the city marshal. They applied for a licence as protestant dissenters, and obtained it with some difficulty. In 1810 they built a meeting-house, on a short lease, in Jewin Crescent, London, soon started a magazine, and made attacks on the Unitarian leaders Thomas Belsham and Robert Aspland. In December 1813 Thompson, regarding marriage as purely a civil act and the Anglican marriage service as 'idolatrous', suggested that, on occasions of marriage, a protest should be delivered to the officiating clergyman and advertised in the newspapers. This policy was carried out (10 June 1814) on the marriage of Thompson's eldest daughter, Mary Ann, herself active among the Freethinking Christians, to William Coates; it was persistently continued, occasionally causing scandalous scenes, as at the marriage of a younger daughter, Julietta, to John Dobell in 1823, until the grievance was remedied by the marriage act of 1836. 
In 1821 there was a small secession, led by William Stevens, of members dissatisfied with Thompson's personal rule and dictatorial manner, meeting in Moorfields and claiming to be the true 'church of God'. In 1831 Thompson's friends built a meeting-house on freehold property in St John's Square, Clerkenwell. William Coates was their leader; Thompson, who was now living at Plaistow, Essex, being reduced to inactivity by ill health. He finally retired from business in 1831 (his son-in-law had long been the managing partner), and, at his own request, was released from 'public service' by his church. He was still, however, involved in its disputes. In 1834, having made up his old quarrel with Robert Aspland, he published a series of papers in Aspland's magazine, the 'Christian Reformer', on the 'unity and exclusiveness of the church of God'. This was done 'without the previous consent of the church, as required by their laws'. He asked and obtained indemnity; but the dispute continued, and Thompson, though claiming to be 'the founder of the church, God's agent', was served with notice of expulsion. He was, in fact, expelled in December, but not before he had rallied his immediate following and been elected elder of another, and the only 'real', 'church of God'. The revolt against Thompson had no continuance. The original society became extinct in 1851, having survived its several provincial branches. 
Thompson died at Reigate, Surrey, on 20 November 1837, and was buried in the graveyard of the General Baptist chapel at Ditchling, Sussex. An epitaph, his own composition, gives the articles of his creed, and adds 'The good loved him, and the base hated, because they feared'. The most significant of his publications was 'Evidences of Revealed Religion' (1812), which reached its fourth edition in 1842. 


@@@@@


doc= 27277


Thompson, Theophilus (1807-1860), physician, son of Nathaniel Thompson, was born in Islington, London, on 20 September 1807. His early medical education took place at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, and at Edinburgh University, where he took his MD in 1830, his inaugural dissertation being 'De effectibus aliquando perniciosis missionis sanguinis'. He also studied in Dublin and then in Paris with Louis, G. Andral, and G. Dupuytren, and he attended the lectures of Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire at the Jardin des Plantes. 
Soon after settling down to practise in London, Thompson was appointed physician to the Northern Dispensary, a position he held for fourteen years. He was also one of the lecturers at the Grosvenor Place school of medicine. In 1847 he was elected physician to the Hospital for Consumption, then situated in Marlborough Street; it was here that he began to take an interest in consumption. He gave several lectures on the disease, which were later published in 'The Lancet'. He is credited with being the person who introduced cod-liver oil into England, and was the first to give bismuth to arrest the diarrhoea of phthisis, and to treat night sweats with oxide of zinc. 
Thompson was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1846, and he published two papers in the society's 'Proceedings' on the changes produced in the blood by the administration of cod-liver oil and coconut oil. He filled the presidential chairs of the Medical and Harveian societies, and contributed five papers to the 'Transactions' of the Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society. He married Elizabeth Anna Maria, the second daughter of Nathaniel Watkin of Stroud, Gloucestershire. They had at least two sons, one of whom, Edmund Symes-Thompson (1837-1906) was also a physician. 
Thompson was the author of: 'On the Improvement of Medicine' (1838), an oration; 'History of the Epidemics of Influenza in Great Britain from 1510 to 1837' (Sydenham Society, 1852); 'Clinical Lectures on Pulmonary Consumption' (1854); and 'Lettsomian Lectures on Pulmonary Consumption'. He also contributed the articles 'Chorea', 'Hysteria', 'Neuralgia', and 'Influenza' to Alexander Tweedie's 'Library of Medicine' (1840-42). 
Thompson died on 11 August 1860 at Vale Lodge, Sutton, Surrey. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 27278


Thompson, Thomas (1708/9-1773), missionary and apologist for the African slave trade, was born at Gilling, Yorkshire, the son of William Thompson, possibly the same William Thompson who was curate and schoolmaster at Kirkby Stephen, Westmorland, from 1697. He was educated at Richmond School and matriculated at Christ's College, Cambridge, on 19 February 1728, aged nineteen. He became a scholar of the college that year, proceeded BA in 1732 and MA in 1735, and was elected a fellow in 1738. Having been appointed to a college curacy at Fen Drayton near Cambridge on 5 May 1744, he resigned after a few months to serve as a missionary for the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel (SPG) and in 1745 was given charge of the churches in Monmouth county, New Jersey. He found them unsettled, many of the members lapsed or become dissenters, and over the next five years worked to revive the scattered congregations, baptizing, and getting derelict churches rebuilt. Sometimes, with the consent of their owners, he baptized household slaves, and admitted them to communion. He also occasionally encountered the indigenous people in their 'native Heathenism' (Thompson, 'An Account', 19). 
Feeling that he had fulfilled his mission in America, he asked the SPG to send him as a missionary to west Africa, 'that I might go to make a Trial with the Natives, and see what Hopes there would be of introducing among them the Christian Religion' (Thompson, 'An Account', 23). With the society's approval, granted on 15 February 1751, he crossed the Atlantic to Cape Coast Castle on the Gold Coast, the headquarters of the Royal African Company, as the first Church of England missionary to Africa. 
Thompson also officiated as the company's chaplain, lived in the fort, and preached to the surrounding townspeople. But though he found them friendly, and at first attentive to his message, which had to be conveyed through uninstructed interpreters, they soon lost interest. None were ever converted. So instead he chose three boys to be sent to England for education, one of whom, Philip Quaque, was eventually to return as a missionary. In 1756 he resigned on health grounds and returned to parish work. He became vicar of Reculver in Kent in 1757, of Darenth in 1758, of Hoo St Werburgh in 1759, and moved to the living of Eleham, also in Kent, in 1761. 
Thompson published in 1758 'An Account of Two Missionary Voyages', a lively narrative of his experiences. Then, when the abolition campaign began, he seems to have been asked by his former employers to write in their defence. As he had been for five years the employee of a company which was principally concerned with trading in slaves, and had associated in an always perfectly amicable way with their African suppliers and customers, it need be no surprise that he was ready to publish, in 1772, a thirty-one page pamphlet, 'The African trade for negro slaves shown to be consistent with principles of humanity and with the laws of revealed religion'. He drew on the 'Bible' to justify slavery, and also on African practice, remarking that: 'The customs of the blacks are many of them good rules of policy, such as would not disgrace a more regular constitution' (Thompson, 'The African Trade', 25). His pamphlet elicited a few pages of angry retort from Granville Sharp, beginning: 'For shame, Mr Thompson!' (Sharp, 29), incorporated in his 'The Just Limitation of Slavery' (1776). 
Thompson, who had been elected a member of the SPG in 1770, died at Eleham, Kent, on 5 June 1773. 


@@@@@


doc= 27279


Thompson, Sir Thomas Boulden, first baronet (1766-1828), naval officer, was born at Barham, Kent on 28 February 1766. His parentage is uncertain. He was the heir of Captain Edward Thompson RN (died 17 Jan 1786) of Epsom, his patron in his early naval career. According to one account Edward Thompson was his father, and his mother was Sarah, 'nee' Boulden, of Kent; by another he was the son of an impecunious man named Boulden and his wife, Sarah, daughter of Richard Thompson and sister of Edward Thompson. Known in his youth as Boulden, in Edward Thompson's will he was referred to as Boulden alias Thompson. He assumed the name Thompson presumably as a compliment to his uncle and patron, or because Edward Thompson was his father. Borne on the books of different ships, he first went to sea in 1778 in the 'Hyaena' with Captain Edward Thompson, who was principally responsible for his early education. He was promoted to lieutenant on 14 January 1782 and in 1783 appointed to the 'Grampus', in which Edward Thompson was commodore, on the west coast of Africa. On Edward Thompson's death in January 1786 he was promoted to command the sloop 'Nautilus', a promotion confirmed on 27 March 1786. He brought the 'Nautilus' home in 1787 when he went on half-pay and, though advanced to post rank on 22 November 1790, had no employment until autumn 1796. He was then appointed to the 50-gun ship 'Leander', in which during spring 1797 he joined Lord St Vincent off Cadiz, to be shortly afterwards detached with the squadron under Nelson, against Tenerife, where he was wounded in the attack on Santa Cruz. The following summer, he was again detached with the squadron sent into the Mediterranean to reinforce Nelson, and eventually to fight the battle of the Nile on 1-2 August 1798 ['see 'Nelson's band of brothers]. Although not a ship of the line, by taking up a position between two of the French ships, the 'Leander' was able to rake these French ships and the ships beyond them with terrible effect, while remaining herself in comparative safety. Thompson was afterwards ordered by Nelson to carry home Captain Edward Berry with his dispatches; but encountering the French 74-gun ship 'Genereux', near the west end of Crete on 18 August the 'Leander', after a defence of six-and-a-half hours, was captured and taken to Corfu. Both Thompson and Berry were severely wounded and were allowed to return overland to England. Thompson was tried by court martial for the loss of his ship but acquitted and praised for the length and determination of 'Leander's' resistance to so superior a force. He was knighted in 1799 and awarded a pension of $200 per annum. 
On 25 February 1799 Thompson married Anne (died 9 Sept 1846), eldest daughter of Robert Raikes of Gloucester; they had three sons and three daughters. In spring 1799 he was appointed to the 74-gun ship 'Bellona', one of the fleet off Brest under Lord Bridport. In March 1801 the 'Bellona' was one of the ships attached to the fleet for the Baltic under Sir Hyde Parker, and was selected for the attack on the Danish fleet and the defences of Copenhagen, but in entering the channel on the morning of 2 April she stuck fast on the edge of the shoal within long range of the Danish guns. She had eleven killed and sixty-three wounded, among whom was Thompson, who lost a leg. His pension was raised to $500 ($700 from 27 November 1815), and he was appointed to the command of the yacht 'Mary'. On 20 June 1806 he was appointed comptroller of the navy, an office which he held until 24 February 1816, when he was appointed treasurer of Greenwich Hospital and director of the Chatham Chest. He was created a baronet on 11 November 1806, became a rear-admiral on 25 October 1809, vice-admiral on 4 June 1814, KCB on 2 January 1815, and GCB on 14 September 1822. From May 1807 to June 1816 he was a tory MP for the freeman-franchise borough of Rochester, Kent, on the Admiralty interest. He supported the government, voted against criminal-law and parliamentary reform, and Roman Catholic relief, and supported Christian missions to India. He died at his residence, Hartsbourne Manor Place, Hertfordshire, on 3 March 1828. He was succeeded by his son Thomas Raikes Trigge Thompson (1804-1865). 


@@@@@


doc= 27280


Thompson, Thomas Perronet (1783-1869), army officer and politician, was born on 15 March 1783 at 17 Lowgate, Hull, eldest of the four children of Thomas Thompson (1754-1828) and his wife, Philothea Perronet Thompson, 'nee' Briggs (1753-1823). His father was a banker and merchant, MP for Midhurst 1807-18, and a prominent Wesleyan preacher and friend of William Wilberforce. His mother was the granddaughter of Vincent Perronet, vicar of Shoreham and associate of John Wesley. Thompson was educated at Hull grammar school, then under the headmastership of Joseph Milner, the church historian. In 1798 he went up to Queens' College, Cambridge, and began a long friendship with its president, Isaac Milner, brother of Joseph and later dean of Carlisle. Thompson gained the BA degree as seventh wrangler in 1802, and was elected to a fellowship of his college in 1804. In 1803 he joined the navy as midshipman on HMS 'Isis', flagship of Vice-Admiral (later Lord) Gambier, but transferred to the army three years later. He was commissioned as second lieutenant in 1806, lieutenant in 1808, captain in 1814, major in 1825, and lieutenant-colonel (unattached) in 1829, at which time he retired from military service. His subsequent promotions were made by brevet: to colonel (1846), major-general (1854), lieutenant-general (1860), and general (1868). Thompson was involved in several important battles. He was captured by the Spaniards after General John Whitelock's ill-fated expedition against Buenos Aires in July 1807. In 1813-14 he saw action against the French at Nivelles, Nive, Orthez, and Toulouse, and was later awarded the Peninsula medal with four clasps. By this time he was a husband and father. In 1811 he had married Anne Elizabeth Barker (1793-1871) of York. They had three sons and three daughters. 
In 1808, after returning from captivity in South America, Thompson became the first crown-appointed governor of Sierra Leone. Wilberforce and the Saints had established the colony in 1787 as a place where free black people would cultivate the land, carry on profitable trade, and demonstrate to the world that they were not peculiarly suited to slavery, despite the claims of slave traders. But the Sierra Leone Company had never provided effective administration. There were civil disorders and food shortages, and relations with surrounding native peoples were far from cordial. Firmly opposed to slavery, and enjoying Wilberforce's patronage, Thompson was keenly interested in the fate of the colony and, when the Saints transferred Sierra Leone to the crown, the British government accepted their suggestion that he would be a suitable governor. When he discovered undisguised slavery in Sierra Leone, however, and realized that the Saints and the British government had been misled about the colony's social and economic conditions, Thompson introduced an extensive range of reforms and made serious allegations against the colony's former administrators. Embarrassed by his revelations, the Saints advised the government to recall him and he returned to Britain in 1810. Thompson was convinced that the Saints sacrificed him in order to save face. They feared that Thompson's claims about Sierra Leone would threaten their reputations and achievements, particularly the 1807 abolition act. Thompson was deprived of opportunities publicly to vindicate his policies in Africa, and deeply disappointed by removal from the governorship. He also blamed the British government for failing to respond to his call for an inquiry. 
In 1815 Thompson went to Bombay as interpreter and political adviser attached to the 17th light dragoons. After several military engagements in India, where he served under Francis Rawdon Hastings and Sir John Malcolm, he inserted an anti-slave-trade clause in a treaty concluded between the British crown and peoples of the Persian Gulf. But this success was followed by a serious disappointment for Thompson. In November 1820 he led an ill-conceived expedition against Arab pirates, which led to a court martial. Though acquitted, he was also reprimanded for undertaking an important mission with inadequate forces. Thompson blamed his Sepoy troops for failing to stand and face an enemy charge. The Bombay authorities could not risk trouble with their Sepoys, however, and forced Thompson to take the blame. He often referred to this disappointment, and to the Sierra Leone controversy, in later years. These were significant opinion-shaping experiences. 
Thompson engaged in political and literary activities after returning from the east in 1822. With much of Europe in turmoil, he joined London committees for the support of political refugees and interested himself in the cause of Greek and Spanish liberals. He became a close friend of John Bowring, who introduced Thompson to Jeremy Bentham and his circle of philosophical radicals. Thompson later accepted an invitation to translate part of Bentham's 'Constitutional Code' into Arabic. Developing an ever keener interest in political economy, Thompson contributed an article 'On the instruments of exchange' to the first issue of the 'Westminster Review' (January 1824). In 1826 he published his 'True Theory of Rent'. This supported Adam Smith's idea that rent levels were determined by demand for agricultural products, and rejected the principle advanced by David Ricardo and James Mill that rent was dependent on production costs. Thompson's arguments were favourably received by Jean-Baptiste Say, and also influenced later commentators such as J. M. Keynes and J. A. Schumpeter. Thompson believed that the Ricardian idea of rent was a weak link in the case against the corn laws, and followed the 'True Theory of Rent' with his most famous pamphlet, the 'Catechism on the Corn Laws' (1827). This persuasive argument for repeal proved extremely influential, went into eighteen editions by 1834, and prompted Thompson's election as fellow of the Royal Society in 1828. As well as his political and economic writing in subsequent years, he published works on enharmonic principles, just intonation, geometry, and the theory of parallels. His enharmonic organ was displayed at the Great Exhibition in 1851, and one of his mathematical pamphlets was extremely popular in France after its translation by Professor M. van Tenac of the royal establishment at Rochefort. During the 1830s Thompson joined the Foreign Learned Society and the Societe Francaise de la Statistique Universelle, and was a corresponding member of several other such bodies. 
But it was mainly as a politician that Thompson now made his mark. The death of his father in 1828 brought him a modest fortune, and he began to devote himself to radical causes. The financial difficulties of the 'Westminster Review' prompted him to become its part owner and co-editor from 1829 until he sold up to Sir William Molesworth in 1836. He was a prolific contributor to the review, and his articles on parliamentary reform, Catholic emancipation, and free trade were particularly influential (40,000 copies of the piece on Catholic emancipation were issued as 'The Catholic State Waggon' in 1829). He also wrote the articles of 1829-30 which defended utilitarianism against the assault published by T. B. Macaulay in the 'Edinburgh Review'. An unsuccessful parliamentary candidate at Preston in January 1835, Thompson narrowly won in Hull the following June, but the tories petitioned against his return. Though this petition was dismissed after an inquiry, Thompson lost $4000 in costs, which he considered an outrage. He did not contest Hull at the 1837 general election, but stood instead at Maidstone, where he came bottom of the poll. He was then an unsuccessful candidate in Marylebone (1838), Manchester (1839), Hull, and Cheltenham (both 1841), and Sunderland (1845), before his victory in Bradford at the 1847 general election. He lost this seat in 1852, but served again as MP for Bradford from 1857 to 1859. In the Commons, Thompson was a consistent supporter of radical reform and free trade, but his political alliances could and did change because he placed principle above party. He was not reluctant to vote against usual allies when he thought they were in the wrong. One such occasion came in 1851, when Thompson supported the 'Ecclesiastical Titles Bill'. As an MP, he wrote reports about political affairs to his constituents, and these were regularly published in the Liberal press. He continued to send letters and articles to London and provincial newspapers throughout his career. Contributions on military affairs in the Crimea appeared in the 'Daily News' in 1854. Much of his work was published in two collections, 'Exercises, Political and Others' (6 vols., 1842) and 'Audi alteram partem' (3 vols., 1858-61). The latter collection included Thompson's criticism of the policies pursued in India at the time of the mutiny. He always retained his early fascination with the customs and religions of the east. 
Thompson knew and co-operated to varying degrees with most of the leading radicals of his era. His most active period outside parliament came in the late 1830s and early 1840s, when he was a tireless spokesman and fund-raiser for the Anti-Corn Law League (which republished some of his writings), a promoter of 'sensible' Chartism, and the advocate of broad liberal alliances in towns where co-operative effort drawing in whigs, moderate reformers, and radicals seemed to be most viable. Among his later writings were the 'Catechism on the Currency' (1848), which stressed the advantages of a paper currency, unconvertible but limited, and an exposure of 'Fallacies Against the Ballot' (1855), later reissued as 'A Catechism' (1859). He also involved himself in the agitation of the National Parliamentary Reform Association (1848-52). 
Thompson was a short man, stout and physically strong, with a large nose and high forehead. His hair turned grey relatively early, and he lost teeth as a result of illness in Sierra Leone. Known for simple and abstemious habits, he never seemed concerned about physical comforts and preferred to devote money and attention to politics. For much of his adult life he was vegetarian and teetotal, which suited his austere disposition and, he believed, prolonged good health. Thompson spoke with a slight northern accent and habitual solecisms. He enjoyed relating stories for the amusement of himself and others, but was also prone to bouts of depression, particularly when disappointed in his public career. In particular, the delay in brevet promotions to which he was entitled was a source of much anguish in the 1840s and 1850s. He was slow to forgive a slight, and in his public activity proved not to be effective as part of a team. Headstrong and independent, he was sometimes too abrasive and blunt even for close associates. With advancing years he was dismissive of those he regarded as his juniors in terms of intellectual accomplishments and public service. 
Though born in the Church of England and reared a Methodist, Thompson rejected the faith of his parents. He described himself as a Sabellian, though he later drifted back towards orthodoxy. He had no narrow denominational ties and remained firmly committed to religious toleration, but was staunchly protestant and in his final years expressed deep respect for the church, regarding it as an indispensable institution in spite of its shortcomings. 
Thompson was never fond of Cottingham Castle, the country house to which the Thompsons moved from nearby Hull in 1797, and when his father died it was let to tenants. After retiring from the army in 1829 he settled with his own family in London. During the 1830s they resided at 13 Hanover Terrace, Regent's Park, and in 1841 moved to Eliot Vale, Blackheath. Thompson died there on 6 September 1869. He was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 27281


Thomson, Sir William (1678-1739), judge, born in London, was the second son of Sir William Thompson (died 1695), king's serjeant-at-law, and his wife, Mary Stephens. He received his early education at Brentwood grammar school before matriculating at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1691, where he took a BA in 1695. Both William and his elder brother, Stephen (later attorney-general of Virginia), had already been entered at the Middle Temple in 1688, and he was called to the bar there in 1698. On 16 February 1701 he was married to Joyce Brent, a widow, of St Clement Danes, Middlesex. He became recorder of Ipswich in 1707, and was returned to parliament for Orford, another Suffolk borough, on 29 January 1709. 
Although a relative newcomer to parliament, in March 1710 Thomson took a prominent part in the whig-inspired impeachment of Dr Henry Sacheverell, being principally responsible for the Commons' case on the third article (that Sacheverell had declared the Church of England was in danger under the present administration). He clearly gave satisfaction, because immediately afterwards he was also retained as junior counsel in the proceedings against some ringleaders of the riots inspired by Sacheverell's cause. While such a high profile resulted in the loss of his parliamentary seat at the general election which followed, Thomson capped the year by marrying on 4 November an heiress -- Julia, daughter of Sir Christopher Conyers, baronet, of Horden Durham, and widow of Sir William Blackett, baronet, of Newcastle upon Tyne, and said to have a fortune 'upwards of $20,000' (Luttrell, 6.651). He was returned again for Ipswich in September 1713, and although unseated on petition, 1 April 1714, regained the seat at the first election after the accession of George I, and continued to hold it until he became a judge. 
As a reliable whig lawyer and parliamentarian Thomson was useful to the new Hanoverian regime, and in March 1716 he acted as one of the Commons' managers at the trial of the Jacobite earl of Wintoun. In the preceding year (3 March 1715) he had succeeded Sir Peter King as recorder of London, a position of considerable political and professional importance, which involved regular attendance on the Old Bailey bench and reports to the king in cabinet about the eligibility of condemned criminals for pardons. Shortly afterwards he was knighted, and in February 1717 he also became solicitor-general. By his unique combination of these offices he appears to have had a major impact on the administration of criminal law in the capital, for he introduced into parliament the 'Transportation Act' of 1718 (4 Geo. I c. 11), a measure which created an effective form of secondary punishment by providing for the transportation of non-capital and pardoned convicts to the colonies, and also included provisions against the kind of trade in organized property crime which was then being carried on by Jonathan Wild. Two years later he promoted another statute (6 Geo.I c. 23), which established arrangements for financing the carriage of the convicts across the Atlantic. 
Despite these successes, in 1720 Thomson overreached himself in the House of Commons by accusing the attorney-general, Nicholas Lechmere, who was a privy councillor, of benefiting corruptly from fees for matters referred to the attorney by the council. After some witnesses had been heard the charges were voted 'malicious, false, and scandalous' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 7.644), and on the following day Thomson's patent as solicitor-general was revoked. In fact the main reason for his dismissal seems to have been his association with the ousted Walpole-Townshend group of whigs, which he had signalled in 1719 by voting against the ministry's 'Peerage Bill' in the House of Commons. He continued as recorder of London, however, and in 1724, after the return of Walpole and Townshend to office, he received a patent giving him precedence in court after the law officers of the crown, with a pension of $1200 a year. This may have been reward for services rendered at the Old Bailey, where he remained an important member of the bench, playing a significant role in the final conviction of Wild in 1725. Further promotion followed, first in the shape of the administrative place of cursitor baron of the exchequer (1726), and finally in November 1729, when he became one of the judicial barons of the exchequer. Remarkably he continued to hold the recordership at the Old Bailey, and died in possession of both offices on 27 October 1739, at Bath. Both his marriages were childless. 


@@@@@


doc= 27282


Thompson, William (bap. 1712, d. c.1766), poet, baptized at Brough in Westmorland on 1 January 1712, was the second son of Francis Thompson (1665-1735), vicar of Brough, and his wife, Isabel (died 1737), the widow of Joseph Fisher, archdeacon of Carlisle. William was educated at Appleby and then matriculated from Queen's College, Oxford, on 26 March 1731, graduating BA in 1735 and MA on 26 February 1739. He was elected a fellow of his college, and succeeded to the rectory of Hampton Poyle with South Weston in Oxfordshire. 
While still an undergraduate, in 1734, Thompson wrote 'Stella, sive, Amores, tres libri' and two years later 'Six Pastorals', but considered neither production worthy of publication. In 1745, while at Hampton Poyle, he published 'Sickness, a Poem', in which he paid a tribute to the memory of Pope and Swift, both recently dead. 
In 1751 Thompson was an unsuccessful candidate for the Oxford professorship of poetry against William Hawkins (1722-1801), and in the same year published 'Gondibert and Bertha', a tragedy, the subject of which was taken from Davenant's poem 'Gondibert'. On the presentation to the University of the Pomfret statues, in 1756, he wrote 'Gratitude', a poem in honour of the donor, Henrietta Louisa Fermor, countess dowager of Pomfret. 
In 1758 Thompson published 'Poems on Several Occasions' in which he demonstrated his enthusiasm for the 'ancient English poets, in whose history and writings he was critically skilled' (Chalmers, 5). A noted imitator of Spenser, his poems 'Hymn to May', 'Nativity', and 'Sickness' were once highly esteemed. He died about 1766, probably at South Weston, and his library was sold by Thomas Davies (1712?-1785) in 1768. 
Thompson also superintended an edition of Joseph Hall's 'Virgidemiarum' (1753), and at his death he left manuscript notes and observations on William Browne's 'Works', which were revised and published by Thomas Davies in his edition of Browne's 'Works' (1772). Earlier biographical studies have confused William Thompson with Anthony Thompson, dean of Raphoe, who died on 9 October 1756 (H. Cotton, 'Fasti ecclesiae Hibernicae', 1860, 5.265). 


@@@@@


doc= 27283


Thompson, William (c.1730-1800), portrait painter, sometimes referred to as Blarney Thompson, was born in Dublin. He received his artistic education in London, and does not seem to have exhibited his works elsewhere. He lived for several years at Warwick Court, Holborn, and subsequently at Half Moon Street, Piccadilly. Between 1760 and 1782 he exhibited forty-three pictures at the Society of Artists, of which he was for some time secretary, and one at the Free Society of Artists. The majority of these were portraits, but he also showed pictures of historical and classical subject matter, for example, 'A Wounded Officer Supported from the Field of Battle at Minden' (exh. Society of Artists, 1762) and 'Jupiter and Leda' (exh. Society of Artists, 1764). Though acknowledged as good likenesses, his portraits, now known chiefly in print form, were generally considered to have been of limited artistic merit. Thompson's portraits include 'Cadwallader, 9th Baron Blayney, Lord Lieutenant of Co. Monaghan and Grand Master of the Masons'; 'Anna Swan'; 'Sir Edward Hamilton, 1st Bart. of Trebinshun', and 'Henry Baker', a portrait of the naturalist and author. All of these were engraved in mezzotint, stipple, or lithograph. His marriage to a wealthy woman allowed him temporarily to relinquish his profession, but he fell into debt and was incarcerated in the king's bench prison. His noisy protests against his imprisonment earned for him considerable notoriety; Thompson produced a portrait of James Stephen, author of 'Considerations on Imprisonment for Debt', who had been a fellow prisoner in the king's bench. After the death of his first wife Thompson married Mary, another rich woman in whose boarding-school he had taught drawing, which enabled him to retire for good from active work. He joined the notorious circle associated with Mrs Theresa Cornely's house in Soho Square, where he founded and ran a school of oratory. He died suddenly in London early in 1800, his will being proved on 4 February; his wife survived him. 
Thompson published 'An Enquiry into the Elementary Principles of Beauty in the Works of Nature and Art', and also, anonymously, in 1771, 'The Conduct of the Royal Academicians while Members of the Society of Arts, from 1760 to their Expulsion in 1769'. He was, according to Strickland, given the nickname Blarney because of his 'specious address and love of talking' (Strickland, 447). 


@@@@@


doc= 27284


Thompson, William (1775-1833), socialist and economist, was born into an ascendancy family at Cork. His grandfather was a protestant clergyman and his father, John Thompson, a wealthy Cork merchant who became speaker and mayor of the municipality and later high sheriff of the county. Thompson displayed an early interest in ideas of social improvement. He read the works of Godwin and Bentham and was exposed to the influence of continental writers such as Sismondi and St Simon during a period spent in France and the Low Countries. It was, no doubt, the articulation of the views of these writers in milieux such as the Cork Philosophical and Literary Society, of which Thompson was a prominent member, that led to his being branded locally as a 'red republican', and brought about an estrangement from his family. This radical reputation was further enhanced by his support for Christopher Hely Hutchinson, a candidate favouring Catholic emancipation, in the Cork elections of 1812 and 1826 and his championing of popular education in a pamphlet entitled 'Practical Education for the South of Ireland', which was published in 1818. 
Thompson's concern with the iniquities of existing economic and social arrangements was also made apparent, although in a more practical manner, when, after the death of his father in 1814, he took over the management of the family's mercantile interests and in addition inherited an estate of some 1400 acres near Glandore in co. Cork. In Ireland these arrangements were characterized by absentee landlords, rapacious rack-renting agents, evictions, and, as a result, a poverty-stricken and disaffected peasantry. In contrast to contemporary practice, Thompson took an interest in his estate, giving his tenants long leases on favourable terms, encouraging the introduction of improved agricultural techniques, and establishing a model farm to illustrate best practice. Such actions established among the Catholic population of the area a long-lived reputation for kindness and fair dealing which persisted despite his professed atheism. 
In 1819 Thompson was invited by Bentham, with whom he had corresponded on educational questions, to visit him at his home in Queen Square Place, Westminster, an invitation which he accepted in 1822, staying from 10 October until 22 February 1823. Here he met some of the leading utilitarians and political economists of the period, such as Robert Torrens, James Mill, John Black (editor of the 'Morning Chronicle'), and John Bowring (editor of the 'Westminster Review'). Such figures undoubtedly had a profound impact on a mind which, on educational theory, had already proved susceptible to Benthamite ideas. Indeed Thompson wrote of Bentham in 1824 that he 'had done more for moral science than Bacon did for physical science' ('Inquiry into the Principles of the Distribution of Wealth', 1824, x). 
Yet at this time the socialist ideas of Robert Owen were also leaving their mark upon Thompson's thought. They led him to consider in a different light the material evils inflicted by the existing economic and social order and, specifically, the reasons for the inequitable distribution of wealth which it produced. Such thoughts were to be expressed at some length in a work which was to establish Thompson as the leading thinker of the early nineteenth-century co-operative movement, 'An Inquiry into the Principles of the Distribution of Wealth' (1824). 
In this, the 'magnum opus' of nineteenth-century co-operative political economy, Thompson considered the distribution of wealth which resulted first under existing arrangements, secondly where there existed 'truly free' competition, and thirdly where a system of mutual co-operation prevailed. The existing order was characterized by 'absolute violence, fraud... [and] the operation of unequal laws interfering with the freedom of labour... and the perfect freedom of voluntary exchange' ('Inquiry', 160). What resulted was the appropriation of rent, profits, and taxes from the product of labour by 'a class of capitalists, a class of rent or landowners, sometimes a class of farmers... sometimes a class of fundholders and an always imperious class of idlers' (ibid., 581). A system of truly free competition would, however, tend to raise the remuneration and eliminate extremes of wealth and poverty producing 'blessings of equality comparable to those enjoyed under Mr. Owen's system of mutual co-operation by common labour' (ibid., 150). 
Yet such an economic regime would still be characterized by the deleterious social, moral, and psychological consequences which necessarily resulted from the conflict of interests intrinsic to competition. For that reason Thompson advocated the creation of a system of mutual co-operation with the establishment of communities whose product would be distributed on the basis of need rather than individual exertion. Such a move in the direction of equality would, Thompson accepted, contravene the notion of the labourer's right to his/her whole product and thence the Benthamite notion that, when in conflict, the principle of security must prevail over any move to greater equality. However, Thompson believed that such a conflict could be rendered nugatory where, 'pari passu' with the formation of communities, communitarians voluntarily relinquished their property rights. They would then enjoy greater equality and also increased security against the vicissitudes of contemporary economic life. Further, the absence of competition would eliminate those existing pressures which made for morally repugnant and socially corrosive behaviour. The nuts and bolts of establishing these communities were elucidated in 'Practical Directions for the Speedy and Economical Establishment of Communities' (1830). 
Some of these ideas were to be developed in a subsequent work, 'Labour Rewarded: the Claims of Labour and Capital Conciliated' (1827), written to rebut Thomas Hodgskin's view ('Labour Defended Against the Claims of Capital', 1825) that a truly effective competitive economic system would bestow upon labour its full product. In 'Labour Rewarded' Thompson was now clear that 'free competition' was a chimera requiring at the outset of the competitive struggle that all should be in possession of equal means of knowledge and skill, equal freedom of action, equal materials for production and accumulation, equal rights and duties, and equal fortunes. The impossibility of this meant that competition must, in reality, involve coercion and exploitation by the favoured few of the disadvantaged many. 
In both the 'Inquiry' and 'Labour Rewarded' Thompson also attacked the subjugation of women which the existing system of private property entailed. This theme was to be developed more fully in 'An Appeal of one Half the Human Race' (1830), one of the classics of early nineteenth-century feminist literature; described by one commentator as 'the most significant work in the seventy odd years between the publication of Mary Wollstonecraft's 'Vindication of the Rights of Woman' (1792) and John Stuart Mill's 'Subjection of Women' (1869)' (Pankhurst, 67). The work was the fruit of his collaboration with Anna Doyle Wheeler, whom he probably met at Bentham's gatherings in Queen Square Place. She penned part of the finished work, which was written to refute James Mill's article 'On government' (published in the 1824 supplement to the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'), which had argued that as women's interests were subsumed in those of men there was no need to extend the franchise to the female of the species. 
Thompson's works made him the foremost theoretician of the co-operative movement. At a practical level too he was deeply involved, helping to establish the 'Co-Operative Magazine', participating in the co-operative congresses of the 1830s, and taking part in the formation of labour exchanges in Birmingham and London, where goods were exchanged according to the labour time which they embodied. 
Thompson, who remained unmarried, lived frugally and became a non-smoker, a vegetarian, and a teetotaller. He habitually lunched on potatoes and turnips, but had a weakness for honey, which was produced in abundance on his estate. At the height of his involvement in the co-operative movement he died of inflammation of the chest, on 28 March 1833, at Clounksen, Ross Carbery, co. Cork. He was, despite his atheism, and against his wishes, buried according to Anglican rites in the churchyard of Dromberg, near Glandore. However, when the reading of his will (dated 27 October 1830) made his wishes clear, his body was exhumed and dissected in the cause of medical science. 
The will itself precipitated a lengthy legal battle. After bestowing an annuity of $100 on Anna Doyle Wheeler and setting aside $4000 to cover any claims which might be advanced by the trustees of his father's estate, the rest of Thompson's property (valued at between $15,000 and $16,000) was left to the co-operative movement. But relatives contested the will in the Irish court of chancery and, after a prolonged legal battle of some twenty-five years, judgment was given in their favour, a pyrrhic victory for by that time the greater part of the estate had been absorbed in legal costs. 
The influence of Thompsonian political economy within co-operative ranks was considerable. In addition his critical ideas came to form part of the ideological baggage of some of the political radicals of the National Union of the Working-Classes in the early 1830s; many of whom were to provide leadership for the Chartist movement in the 1840s. The nature and extent of his influence on Marx is problematic, but a continuing interest in his work in its own right has assured Thompson an honoured place in the pantheon of socialist political economy. 


@@@@@


doc= 27285


Thompson, William (1805-1852), naturalist, was born on 2 November 1805 at a house in Wellington Place, Belfast, the eldest son and third child of William Thompson (died 'c'.1830), linen merchant, and his wife, Elizabeth Calwell 
(or Callwell; died 1853)
. He received a commercial education in Belfast, intended to enable him to follow his father in the linen trade (an occupation which held little interest for him). After his father's death, Thompson devoted his time to his interests in natural history. A quiet person of gentle and fastidious demeanour, he was never comfortable with the details required to dissect animals and prepare them for study. Instead he concentrated on the observation of birds, plants, algae, and Cirripedia (barnacles). 
Thompson travelled to the eastern Mediterranean (with the naturalist Edward Forbes) as a guest on the surveying ship 'Beacon'. He also travelled to many locations in Ireland and Scotland to observe and make detailed notes of the appearance and behaviour of birds, both rare and common. Except when travelling for scientific purposes, he lived at his house in Donegall Square, Belfast, from which he conducted an extensive scientific correspondence. Active in the Belfast Natural History Society from the age of twenty-one, Thompson was elected president in 1843; he retained the office until his death. He was also a corresponding member of the Natural History Society of Boston and of the Academy of Natural Sciences in Philadelphia, USA. 
Thompson's major work is 'The Natural History of Ireland'. The first three volumes appeared between 1849 and 1851; the fourth was published posthumously in 1856, under the combined editorship of Robert Patterson, George Dickie, and Robert Ball. The work is a detailed account of Thompson's observations of birds in Ireland and Scotland, many of which later became rare. It was the first comprehensive and detailed book on Irish birds and was planned to be part of a complete Irish natural history. Thompson also published about seventy-five minor papers on subjects of natural history. 
Thompson was highly regarded by his contemporaries, including Forbes and Charles Darwin (who wrote of him as a 'most accurate observer'), and he has been described as the foremost Irish zoologist of his day. Darwin's copy of 'The Natural History of Ireland' survives with hundreds of handwritten annotations; when read together, these show that Darwin paid close attention to Thompson's meticulous observations of wild and domesticated birds and the changes in their habitat or behaviour that may have contributed to their survival or extinction. Darwin cites Thompson in his works as a source of information, and the two men corresponded. Thompson was aware of several of Darwin's works, including his narrative of the 'Beagle' voyage. 
Little of Thompson's own scientific correspondence survives but, in a letter to him from Darwin (1 March 1849), Darwin praises Thompson for having provided much of interest in his natural history, and comments that Thompson's extensive collection of British and North American barnacles and other Cirripedia 'will be 'invaluably' useful to me' ('Correspondence', vol. 4). 
Thompson died on 17 February 1852 at his lodgings in Jermyn Street, London, apparently after a heart attack while on a visit to give a scientific lecture. He was buried soon after in the Clifton Street graveyard, Belfast. He never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 27286


Thompson, William (1811-1880), pugilist, was born at Nottingham on 11 October 1811, the youngest of the twenty-one children (according to some accounts) of Benjamin Thompson (died 'c'.1826), a mechanic in the lace industry, and his wife, Mary (1769-1851). He later said that he was born one of three sons at a birth and that these boys became popularly known as Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. The record of his baptism at St Mary's, Nottingham, on 16 October 1811, however, records him as the younger of twins. He learned the trade of iron turning from an elder brother, but as a youth became a formidable pugilist. In 1832 he beat Bill Faulker, a Nottingham notoriety, and in the following year defeated Charles Martin. In his first challenge reported in 'Bell's Life in London' in 1835 he styled himself Abednego of Nottingham, and from that date he was spoken of in the sporting press as Bendigo. Rather improbably, Dowling ascribed the nickname instead to his evasive tactics in the ring (Dowling, 'Fights', 140). 
Bendigo's first important fight was on 21 July 1835, near Appleby House, about 30 miles from Nottingham, when he met Benjamin Caunt. In the twenty-third round Caunt, wearied with Bendigo's shifty conduct in continually hitting him and then dropping to render retaliation 'foul', struck him a blow while he was on his second's knee; by this foul blow he lost the fight. On 24 May 1836, 9 miles from Sheffield, he defeated John Leechman, known as Brassey, in fifty-two rounds after a severe contest. 
Again facing Caunt on 3 April 1838, Bendigo was this time unsuccessful; his 'dropping without a blow' was deemed foul. In the presence of 15,000 people, including many aristocratic spectators, he fought Deaf Burke at Heather, Leicestershire, on 12 February 1839 (the first fight under the new London rules), when in the tenth round Burke butted him twice, and the referee gave a decision that the blows were 'foul'. During the same year James Ward presented 'a champion's belt' to Bendigo at the Queen's Theatre, Liverpool. 
On 23 March 1840, while throwing a somersault at Nottingham, Bendigo so hurt his kneecap that he was laid up for two years. He was taken into custody by the police on 28 June 1842 and bound over to keep the peace to prevent his fighting Hazard Parker. A fight for $200 a side and the belt came off with his old opponent Caunt on 9 September 1845, when a decision was given in his favour -- rather an arbitrary one after a fight in which 'both men committed every known foul and invented a good deal more' (Johnson, 98). Bendigo's backing by the so-called 'Nottingham lambs', armed with bludgeons, may have influenced the referee. His last appearance in the ring took place on 15 June 1850 at Mildenhall, Suffolk, when, for $200 a side, he fought Tom Paddock. His 82-year-old mother, who had always encouraged his pugnacity, is said to have threatened to fight Paddock herself if he did not answer the challenge. He would probably have been defeated, as his age told against him, had he not incited Paddock to a foul blow. 
Bendigo was 5 feet 93/4 inches tall, and his fighting weight was 11 stone 12 lb. Fighting men such as Caunt, at least 3 stone heavier, encouraged him to 'shiftiness', but his unprecedented leading with the right was also a factor in his success. After his retirement from the ring, Bendigo took to drink, and was incarcerated in the Nottingham house of correction on twenty-eight occasions. But after attending a revivalist meeting in 1872, addressed by Richard Weaver (1827-1892), the collier evangelist, he 'saw the light': 'Jesus came to me and had a bout with me, and I can tell you He licked me in the first round' (Cieszkowski, 29). He took the teetotal pledge, joined the Good Templars, and became an evangelist preacher in Nottingham and elsewhere. His new career still entailed some bouts with hecklers. When he told Lord Longford that now he fought Beelzebub, that gentleman is said to have replied, 'I hope you fight him more fairly than you did Ben Caunt, or my sympathies will be all with the devil' (Johnson, 98). While on a visit to London he was a preacher and a leader of revivalist services at the Cabmen's Mission Hall, King's Cross Circus, and also a preacher in the Holborn Circus. Bendigo died at Beeston, near Nottingham, on 23 August 1880, broken ribs having punctured a lung after a fall downstairs. He was buried in St Mary's cemetery, St Ann's Well Road, Nottingham. The goldfield and city in Australia took the name Bendigo from him, horse races were named after him, and he was the subject of numerous popular ballads. 


@@@@@


doc= 27287


Thompson, William Hepworth (1810-1886), college head, was born at York on 27 March 1810, the eldest of eleven children of William Thompson, a solicitor. He was educated first at a school in York kept by a Mr Richardson, and thereafter by a succession of private tutors, the last of whom was the Revd Thomas Scott, perpetual curate of Gawcott, Buckinghamshire, and father of Sir George Gilbert Scott. Thompson entered Trinity College, Cambridge, as a pensioner in 1828, with the Revd George Peacock as his tutor. He developed a lifelong friendship with Peacock whom he described as 'the best and wisest of tutors'. Julius Charles Hare was one of the assistant tutors and Connop Thirlwall junior dean. Thompson derived great benefit from Thirlwall's lectures, and in 1830 was elected a scholar of his college. In 1831 he obtained one of the members' prizes for a Latin essay. He proceeded to the BA degree in 1832, being placed tenth senior optime in the mathematical tripos. He was subsequently fourth in the first class of the classical tripos, and obtained the second chancellor's medal for classical learning. In 1834 he was elected fellow of his college, and in the following year proceeded to the MA degree. 
Thompson's classical attainments marked him out for work in college, but, as there was no immediate prospect of a vacancy among the assistant tutors, in 1836 he accepted the headmastership of an experimental school at Leicester, called the collegiate school. In 1837, on the appointment of E. L. Lushington to the Greek chair at Glasgow, he was recalled to Trinity College and became one of the assistant tutors. He was ordained deacon on 4 June 1837 and priest on 27 May the following year. In 1844 he was appointed a tutor. In his approach to this office Thompson followed the lead of his predecessor, George Peacock. At a time when undergraduates were kept at a distance by their seniors, he made his pupils feel that he really stood to them 'in loco parentis'. He could be severe when discipline required it, but he was always inflexibly just and untrammelled by pedantic adherence to tradition. 
Thompson remained tutor of Trinity until 1853, when he was elected regius professor of Greek, and was appointed to a canonry at Ely, at that time annexed to the professorship. After his election as Greek professor, he was nominated one of the eight senior fellows of his college, under the belief that the statutes, as revised in 1844, permitted the Greek professor to remain a fellow. A chancery suit was instituted against him, however, by the Revd Joseph Edleston, the fellow next below him on the list, and, judgment having been given against Thompson by the lord chancellor on 4 March 1854, he became a nominal fellow only, retaining his rooms in college and residing there when not at Ely. In the spring of 1856, in company with William George Clark, he visited Greece, and spent some months in studying Athens and the Peloponnese. 
Thompson's lectures were modelled upon those of his early teachers, Hare and Thirlwall, while containing characteristics of his own. He was particularly remembered for his own translations of the books he was teaching, which were delivered without notes during his lectures. J. E. Sandys commented that 'By his published writings and by his personal influence he did much towards widening the range of classical studies in Cambridge, and preventing their being unduly limited to verbal scholarship' (Sandys, 3.401). Most of Thompson's published work was on Plato, although he never produced the complete edition or translation he is said to have contemplated. He published editions of the 'Phaedrus' (1868) and the 'Gorgias' (1871), and a paper on the 'Sophist' ('Transactions of the Cambridge Philological Society', 10.146), in which he supported the genuineness of the dialogue and discussed the influence of the Eleatics on later Greek philosophy. 
In March 1866, on the death of Dr William Whewell, Thompson was appointed master of Trinity College. Soon afterwards he married Frances Elizabeth, 'nee' Selwyn, the widow of George Peacock. He resigned the professorship of Greek in December of the same year. In 1867-8 he was vice-chancellor of the university. The twenty years of his mastership were years of activity and progress. Although he disliked the routine of ordinary business, he had a strong sense of the responsibilities of his office, and shrank from no effort where the good of his college was concerned. He was alert to the necessity for reform, and the statutes framed in 1872, as well as those which received the royal assent in 1882, owed much to his criticism and support. He died at the master's lodge at Trinity on 1 October 1886. 
Thompson was tall, and bore himself with a stately dignity which was enhanced by singularly handsome features and, during the last years of his life, by silvery hair. His portrait by Sir Hubert von Herkomer (1881) gives a lifelike idea of him at that time, though the deep lines on the face and the sarcastic expression of the mouth are slightly exaggerated. When Thompson first saw the picture he is said to have exclaimed, 'Is it possible that I regard all mankind with such contempt?' Those who knew him superficially thought him cold, haughty, and sarcastic. In reality he was shy, diffident, and slightly nervous in society. But he had a quick appreciation of the weak points in an argument or a conversation, together with a keen literary faculty, so that he would rapidly gather up the results of a discussion into a sentence which fell, as though of itself, into an epigram. One of Thompson's sayings, 'We are none of us infallible, not even the youngest among us' (Clark, 275), has become proverbial. It was a reply made incidentally, on 30 March 1878, at one of the college meetings held for the alteration of statutes, to a junior fellow who had proposed to throw upon the senior members of the society a new and somewhat onerous responsibility. Thompson had a wide knowledge of English and foreign literature; he travelled a good deal, and spoke French and German fluently; he was fond of art, and a good judge of pictures and sculpture. 


@@@@@


doc= 27288


Thoms, William John (1803-1885), antiquary, was born in Westminster, London, on 16 November 1803, the son of Nathaniel Thoms, a clerk in the Treasury and acting secretary of the first commission of revenue inquiry, and his wife, Ruth Ann. Thoms began his working life as a clerk in the secretary's office at Chelsea Hospital, a position he held until 1844. His principal interests, early conceived, were in literature and bibliography, especially the latter. In bibliography he received much help from Thomas Amyot, the antiquary, through whom he became acquainted with Francis Douce. Douce encouraged Thoms in his studies, lent him books and manuscripts from his great library in Gower Street, and gave him much assistance in editing his first publication, 'Early Prose Romances'. This was composed of eleven tales, divided into three volumes published in 1827 and 1828. Henry Morley edited the collection in 1907, adding three tales. In 1828 Thoms married Laura ('b'. 1807/8), the youngest daughter of John Bernard Sale ['see under 'Sale, John], singer and composer; they had three sons and six daughters. Thoms's next publications were 'Lays and Legends of France, Spain, Tartary, and Ireland' and 'Lays and Legends of Germany', in which he was assisted by Douce; both appeared in 1834. In 1832 he had tried his hand at periodical literature as the editor of 'The Original', a 'miscellany of humour, literature, and the fine arts'. It lasted a little over four months, running to twenty-two numbers. 
In 1838 Thoms was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, and in the same year was appointed the first secretary of the Camden Society, a post he held until 1873. His 'Book of the Court' (1838; 2nd edn 1844) gave an account of the nature, origin, duties, and privileges of the several ranks of the nobility, of the great offices of state, and the members of the royal household. He illustrated this treatise with anecdotes and quotations drawn from sources often inaccessible to the ordinary student. In 1839 he compiled for the Camden Society 'Anecdotes and traditions illustrative of English history and literature from manuscript sources', made up largely of Sir Nicholas L'Estrange's 'Merry Passages and Jests'. In 1842 his edition of John Stow's 'Survey of London' was published (it was reissued in 1876 without his sanction). In 1844 he prepared for the 'Early English Poetry' series of the Percy Society an edition of 'The history of Reynard the fox, with notes and an introductory sketch of the literary history of the romance' from the edition by William Caxton in 1481. There were twenty-five pages of appended notes, largely of a philological nature, and the dedication reads to 'Thomas Amyot by his Faithful and Attached Friend'. 
Thoms was appointed a clerk of the House of Lords on 19 July 1845. Soon his reputation as an antiquary, coupled with his conversational charm, drew to his room a number of the more literate members of the house, and among those who came to enjoy learned conversations were Brougham, Lyndhurst, Macaulay, and Stanhope. The duties of his new position enabled Thoms to continue his literary endeavours, so that in 1846, under the pseudonym Ambrose Merton, he published two volumes of tales and ballads (reprinted in 1969). He went on to publish 'Primeval Antiquities of Denmark' (1849), a translation of the work by Jens Jacob Asmussen Worsaae. 
Shortly after this, Thoms turned his attention to another form of literary enterprise. As early as 1841 he had strongly felt the need for a periodical which would give antiquaries and bibliographers some avenue for making known to one another points on which they needed information. Hence, in that year, with the co-operation of his friend John Bruce (1802-1869), he projected such a periodical. It was entitled 'The Medium', and some specimen pages were actually set up in type. But Bruce was compelled for domestic reasons to move to the country, and the project was abandoned. In 1846, however, Thoms persuaded Charles Wentworth Dilke, proprietor of 'The Athenaeum', to open its columns 'to notices of old-world manners, customs, and popular superstitions'. He introduced the subject on 26 August in an article titled 'Folk lore', a term which he introduced into the English language. In the article he wrote that what in English would be designated 'Popular Antiquities, or Popular Literature' would be 'most aptly described by a good Saxon compound, Folk-Lore -- the Lore of the People' ('The Athenaeum'). 
The items submitted to 'The Athenaeum' soon became so numerous, however, that they began to demand more space than was available, and so Thoms established a separate periodical: 'Notes and Queries: a Medium of Inter-Communication for Literary Men, Artists, Antiquaries, Genealogists, etc.', priced at 3died with a stamped edition for four pence. The first number bore the date 10 November 1849 and included, among other notes, J. P. Collier on Shakespeare and deer stealing, and contributions by other members of the Camden Society, notably Thoms's friend John Bruce. Thoms's own contribution was entitled ''Pray remember the grotto!' on St James's Day'. The periodical proved popular, with a circulation of 600 copies after a few weeks. Thoms resigned as editor in September 1872, and was succeeded by John Doran. The periodical continued into the twenty-first century, and in establishing it Thoms had provided a valuable service to literary and historical scholarship, 'joining the efforts of amateur collectors with the disciplined researches of the anthropologists' (Spurgeon, 282). 'Notes and Queries' played an important role in the founding of the English Dialect Society, and in the preparation of the 'English Dialect Dictionary', the 'Dictionary of National Biography', and the 'Oxford English Dictionary'. 
Charles Dickens admitted to being a 'diligent reader of... N and Q' ('Letters of Charles Dickens', 10.461), and also told Thoms at the periodical's inception that 'It has given me, I assure you, great pleasure to see my good friend Captain Cuttle's name (and sentiment) appended to your very curious and interesting publication', referring to the motto of 'Notes and Queries', taken from 'Dombey and Son': 'When found, make a note of' ('Letters of Charles Dickens', 6.108). Dickens was at this time answering Thoms's request for a donation towards the repair of Chaucer's tomb in Westminster Abbey (Thoms was secretary of the committee formed for this project, and among its other members were John Payne Collier, Peter Cunningham, and Sir Frederick Madden). The two men went on to become better acquainted, with Dickens visiting Thoms for a holiday in the summer of 1862 ('Letters of Charles Dickens', 9.551, n. 4), and later thanking Thoms for a pre-publication copy of his 'Three Notelets on Shakespeare' (1865). 
This latter work was produced during Thoms's tenure as assistant librarian of the House of Lords -- he had been appointed in 1862, and held the post until three years before his death. The 'Three Notelets' consisted of 'Shakespeare in Germany', 'Folk-lore of Shakespeare', and 'Was Shakespeare ever a soldier?', copiously annotated essays originally published in 1840, 1847, and 1859. Thoms dedicated the 'Three Notelets' to his wife, 'Who in Herself Realizes Many of Shakespeare's Types of Womanly Excellence'. He reprinted in 1867 in book form four articles from 'Notes and Queries' with some additions, followed in 1872 by a reprint from 'Notes and Queries' of 'The death warrant of Charles I, another historic doubt', demonstrating the difficulty in obtaining the necessary signatures for Charles I's death warrant, and the irregularity of the expedients to which army leaders were reduced. His iconoclastic treatise entitled 'Human Longevity, its Facts and its Fictions' (1873) raised a storm of protest by its contention that the authentic cases in which human life had been prolonged to a hundred years and upwards were extremely rare. 
William John Thoms died in London at his house at 40 St George's Square, Belgrave Road, on 15 August 1885, and was buried in Brompton cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 27289


Thomson, Alexander (1763-1803), poet, was born on 7 August 1763. He resided in Edinburgh and was a close friend of Robert Anderson (1750-1830). Thomson wrote 'The Choice' (1788), and (his two best-known works) 'Whist' (1791) and 'An Essay on Novels' (1793). His other publications included 'The Paradise of Taste' (1796) and 'The British Parnassus at the Close of the Eighteenth Century' (1801). He also published 'The German Miscellany' (1796), consisting of translations from Kotzebue and Meissner, and translated Kotzebue's comedy, 'The East Indian' (1799). Anderson was with Thomson at his house in Buccleuch Street, Edinburgh, when he suffered a stroke from which he died on 7 November 1803, leaving a widow and six daughters. At the time of his death he had been working on a history of Scottish poetry which remained unpublished. 


@@@@@


doc= 27290


Thomson, Alexander (1817-1875), architect, was born on 9 April 1817 at Endrick Cottage, Balfron, Stirlingshire, the seventeenth of the twenty children of John Thomson (1757/8-1824), bookkeeper at Kirkman and Findlay's cotton spinning mill at Balfron, and the ninth of his second wife, Elizabeth Cooper (died 1830), whose father, George Cooper, was a schoolmaster in Aberdeen and whose brother became the Burgher minister in Balfron. John Thomson's widow moved to Glasgow with her younger children in 1825 and Alexander eventually began work in a writer's office before his talent as a draughtsman was noticed by the Glasgow architect Robert Foote, who took him as an apprentice. Thomson then worked in the office of the architect John Baird I (1798-1859), with whom he stayed for about ten years, becoming his chief draughtsman. In 1847, in a joint ceremony, Thomson and the unrelated John Baird II (1816-1893) married Jane Nicholson (1825-1899) and Jessie Nicholson (1827-1866), daughters of the London architect Michael Angelo Nicholson (1794-1841) ['see under 'Nicholson, Peter (1765-1844)]. 
Thomson set up in independent practice in Glasgow in 1848, when he entered into partnership with his brother-in-law John Baird II. This partnership was amicably terminated in 1857, when Thomson was joined by his younger brother George (1819-1878), who was an architect who had also worked in the office of John Baird I. In 1871 George left Glasgow to work as a missionary in the Cameroons, and in 1873 Thomson took Robert Turnbull (1839-1905) as a partner; the firm became known as A. and G. Thomson and Turnbull. 
Baird and Thomson began by building villas in the new suburbs of Glasgow and along the Clyde estuary; these were designed in a variety of styles, including the Gothic and Romanesque. However, by the mid-1850s Thomson had developed the refined and abstracted Grecian manner with which he would become associated. This was employed for his unique double villa in Langside, Glasgow (1856-7), in which two identical semi-detached houses faced in opposite directions, and in Holmwood House in Cathcart, near Glasgow (1857-8), his finest villa, built for the paper manufacturer James Couper. Thomson's first biographer, the Glasgow architect Thomas Gildard, wrote of Holmwood that, 'If architecture be poetry in stone-and-lime -- a great temple an epic -- this exquisite little gem, at once classic and picturesque, is as complete, self-contained, and polished as a sonnet', recognizing that he had done something unprecedented (Gildard). Although he was influenced by the neo-classical work of the Prussian state architect Karl Friedrich Schinkel, Thomson would seem to have been the first to apply picturesque principles of composition to the Greek style in his villas. Holmwood was also remarkable for its scheme of interior painted decoration, all designed by the architect along with furniture, carpets, and other furnishings. 
Thomson came to reject the use of the arch, whether pointed or round, and held that the trabeated language of the Greeks could be the basis of a modern architecture which incorporated iron construction, arguing that 'Stonehenge is really more scientifically constructed than York Minster' ('An inquiry as to the appropriateness of the Gothic style for the proposed buildings for the University of Glasgow', 'Proceedings of the Glasgow Architectural Society', 6-7, 1865-7, 47; repr. in Stamp, 'Lectures', 67). He was never, however, a conventional Greek revivalist, and his work was conspicuous for the originality with which he adapted and combined precedents from Greece, Egypt, and elsewhere. For all his admiration of such buildings as Thomas Hamilton's Royal High School in Edinburgh, he argued that the promoters of the Greek revival had failed, 'because they could not see through the material into the laws upon which that architecture rested. They failed to master their style, and so became its slaves' ('Art and Architecture', 1874, 8; repr. in Stamp, 'Lectures', 147). He was insistent that 'architecture in its highest forms does not bear the least resemblance to anything in nature, that it is peculiarly and exclusively a human work; and yet, long before man came to need it, long before the foundation of the world, at the very beginning, in the councils of eternity, the laws which regulate this art were framed.('Presidential address to the Glasgow Institute of Architects', 'The Architect', 15 April 1871, 198; repr. in Stamp, 'Lectures', 101)' In this insistence upon eternal laws Thomson's approach to architecture verged on the mystical, and, as a devout Presbyterian, he was strongly influenced by the paintings and engravings of John Martin, which depicted the exotic architecture of the cities of the 'Old Testament' with a remorseless horizontality receding towards infinity. Yet, from such images, he evolved a successful modern commercial architecture for Glasgow. More than any other architect, Thomson gave a distinct character to the second city of the British empire in his designs for warehouses and commercial buildings, and for terraces of houses and tenements. In all these he arrived at novel treatments for urban facades, in which depth and variety were achieved by the unusual arrangements of trabeated masonry combined with large windows of plate glass. The tragedy, however, is that for all his admiration of the 'imperishable thought' of the Egyptians, Thomson's achievement was constructed of weak and friable Giffnock sandstone. 
Thomson's commercial designs included Grecian Buildings in Sauchiehall Street (1867-8), the Cairney Building in Bath Street (1860-61; dem.), the block in Gordon Street which he owned with his brother (1859; altered), and Egyptian Halls in Union Street (1870-72), which the London-based 'Architect' noted was 'in Mr Thomson's well-known 'Egyptian-Greek' style -- a style which he has made his own, and in which he has no rival' ('The Architect', 13 July 1872). Thomson's domestic work included Moray Place in Strathbungo (1859-61), where the architect himself lived from 1861 until his death, Eton Terrace in Oakfield Avenue (1862-4), and Great Western Terrace (1867-77), arguably the finest in the city in its grandeur and austerity. Gildard said of it that 'the windows have no dressings, but Greek goddesses could afford to appear undressed' (Gildard). Queen's Park Terrace in Eglinton Street (1856-60; dem.) was highly influential on the design of Glasgow's many tenements. 
In addition, Thomson designed monumental urban churches for United Presbyterian congregations, which the American historian Henry Russell Hitchcock considered were 'three of the finest Romantic Classical churches in the world' (Hitchcock, 63). Of these, the only intact survivor is the St Vincent Street Church (1857-9), with its tall and exotic steeple. In this building, stone construction was combined with cast-iron columns and large sheets of glazing were applied directly to the masonry. Thomson's first church, the Caledonia Road Church (1855-7), was gutted by fire in 1965. His most extraordinary and innovative ecclesiastical building, the Queen's Park Church (1868-9), was Scotland's worst architectural loss of the Second World War; its richly decorated interior moved the painter Ford Madox Brown to exclaim 'Well done Glasgow!' and to put it 'above everything I have seen in modern Europe' ('Glasgow Evening Times', 9 Oct 1893). 
Owing to the loss of most of his drawings (a few remain in the Mitchell Library in Glasgow) and all of his professional papers, it is not possible to catalogue the whole range of Thomson's artistic activity. What is clear is that his career was to some extent paradoxical as, for all his intense idealism, Thomson was a successful commercial architect willing, on occasion, to employ the styles of which he theoretically disapproved. It also must be admitted that his insistence on such features as low-pitched roofs was not always wholly practical in the climate of the west of Scotland. It is clear, however, that contemporaries regretted that he was never awarded a commission for a public building commensurate with his talents. Thomson's designs for the Albert Memorial in London and for the South Kensington Museum must have seemed unfashionable in England to the point of perversity in the 1860s and only Glasgow, perhaps, could allow his idiosyncratic approach to flourish. Yet he was denied the opportunity of submitting a design for the new buildings on Gilmorehill for the University of Glasgow when the commission was awarded, without competition, to the London architect George Gilbert Scott. Thomson ridiculed the universalist claims of the Gothic revival in general and Scott's design in particular in his published lecture of 1866. 
Thomson was much involved in the affairs of the Glasgow Architectural Society and the Glasgow Institute of Architects, and served as president of both. In 1874 he delivered four lectures on art and architecture to the Glasgow School of Art and Haldane Academy; these covered the creations of the Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans and essentially constituted his architectural testament. Further lectures on medieval architecture were planned but never delivered owing to Thomson's death, from asthma and heart failure, at his home at 1 Moray Place, Strathbungo, on 22 March 1875. He had been ill for some years and increasingly delegated his professional practice to Turnbull. Had he survived the severe winter of 1874-5, Thomson planned to make his first ever trip abroad, to Italy, to recover his health. 
Thomson's achievement was widely recognized at the time of his death and a memorial fund was established. This was used to present a marble bust of the architect, carved by his friend the sculptor John Mossman, to the Glasgow corporation galleries in 1877, and to endow a travelling studentship, awarded first in 1887, to the architect and historian William J. Anderson, and second, three years later, to Charles Rennie Mackintosh. 
His pupil (William?) Clunas later recorded that 'Alexander Thomson was, in appearance, a distinguished-looking man, of a good average height, stout, well and proportionally made, a fine manly countenance with a profuse head of hair... for the strictly professional side of his business he had but little capacity -- punctual, he was not, neither was he persevering. You could not say he was indolent, but there was a dreamy unrest about him even when engaged on important work which caused matter-of-fact people who were waiting for further details some annoyance. But when he did plunge into a piece of work his attitude was that of a real devotee -- patient, forceful, and painstaking. (Clunas, 'My impressions')' Despite this, his estate was valued for Scottish inventory duty at $15,395 5's'. 3died He was buried in the Southern Necropolis in Glasgow; the plot is now unmarked. Of the twelve children he had with Jane Nicholson, seven survived infancy. 


@@@@@


doc= 27291


Thomson, Allen (1809-1884), anatomist and embryologist, was born on 2 April 1809 in Edinburgh, the only surviving son of John Thomson (1765-1846), surgeon, and his second wife, Margaret, daughter of John Millar (1735-1801), professor of jurisprudence at Glasgow University. William Thomson (1802-1852) was his half-brother. 
Allen Thomson's schooling took place at the high school of Edinburgh, after which, at his father's behest, he attended Edinburgh University from 1824 to study medicine. He also attended classes at the Edinburgh extramural medical school. He graduated MD from Edinburgh University in 1830. His graduation thesis was entitled 'De evolutione cordis in animalibus vertebratis', revealing his early interest in what was to become his life's work. As an undergraduate he was president of the Royal Medical Society. His father had a profound influence in Thomson's choice of career, and as it was Thomson senior's 'great desire that he should become a teacher of anatomy, and devote himself to anatomical and physiological pursuits' (Aitken, xiii), Thomson travelled to Europe to undertake further anatomical and physiological study, visiting anatomical and pathological collections in Amsterdam, Strasbourg, and Berlin. 
Thomson returned to Edinburgh in 1831 and immediately took up teaching. He entered into partnership with William Sharpey, the two offering a course in anatomy and physiology. Sharpey taught the anatomical portion of the course, Thomson the physiological. Thomson became a fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh in 1832. His partnership with Sharpey lasted until 1836, being interrupted in 1833 by a trip Thomson undertook with his father to London and Europe for further anatomical study. In London, some indication of the direction Allen Thomson was expected to take surfaced when he was introduced to Lord Melbourne by Lady Holland with the words 'Melbourne, allow me to introduce to you the future Professor of Anatomy in the University of Glasgow' (Aitken, xvi). 
In 1836 the Sharpey-Thomson partnership was dissolved because Sharpey had been appointed professor of anatomy at University College, London. Thomson gave up teaching temporarily at this time because of ill health. He entered the service of the duke of Bedford as physician to his family in that year, and remained in post until 1837, travelling with the family to the highlands in 1836 and 1837, and accompanying the duke on his European tour. Correspondence between Thomson and Sharpey during this period shows that Thomson had no intention of making ducal service his long-term career, and that he wished to resume teaching when he was able. 
In session 1837-8 Thomson began to teach again in Edinburgh, and was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of that city in 1838. On 4 September that year he married Nina Jane Hill (1810-1893), daughter of Ninian Hill, writer to the signet, of Edinburgh, and sister of Thomson's half-brother William's wife, Eliza. They had one son. In 1839 Thomson was appointed professor of anatomy at Marischal College in Aberdeen. He remained at Marischal College until 1841, when he returned to Edinburgh as extramural lecturer in anatomy. His reasons for leaving Aberdeen are unclear, but he may not have been earning enough from his anatomy classes, which were small, and there has also been conjecture that he wished to return to Edinburgh to await the post of professor of the institutes of medicine (physiology) at the university becoming vacant. This it did in 1842, with the resignation of William Pulteney Alison, and Thomson was appointed to the post. One of the innovations he introduced on his return to Edinburgh was to use the microscope in the teaching of anatomy. He commenced a course of weekly lectures on microscopic anatomy in the summer of 1842. 
Throughout his career Thomson was regarded as a great teacher, who utilized fully contemporary scientific advances in his lectures. Professor John Struthers of Aberdeen remarked that, 'his abilities as a teacher and observer were fully recognised by the medical profession of Edinburgh' (Struthers, 1154). Thomson was also possessed of great artistic talent, and his lectures were well illustrated by chalk drawings. His approach to lecturing was systematic and methodical, with perhaps his main fault being that he gave no clear lead to the students as to his own views when lecturing on areas which were the subject of much scientific debate. He was, however, very highly regarded by his students, in whom he had a great interest. 
Thomson remained at Edinburgh until 1848, in which year he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. In that same year, after much intense politicking, he was appointed regius professor of anatomy at the University of Glasgow in succession to Professor James Jeffray, who had held that chair since 1790. Under Jeffray the teaching of anatomy in the University of Glasgow had fallen into disrepute, but the arrival of Thomson reinvigorated the subject, and he introduced a more up-to-date view of anatomy, and of its teaching. Thomson's appointment did not meet with the complete approval of his fellow professors, who have been described as a 'notoriously conservative, self-perpetuating clique' (Jacyna, xxiv). Indeed Thomson was antipathetic to any suggestion of nepotism or favouritism in the appointment of chairs in Glasgow University and fought strongly against such means being used to fill the chair of chemistry, in 1852, and the regius chair of surgery, in 1859. 
Thomson, as well as teaching, was much involved in the administration of Glasgow University during his time there. His greatest contribution to the university's welfare was made during its move from the High Street in the 1860s to Gilmorehill. In 1864 he was appointed convenor of the removal committee, charged with overseeing the move. On 6 June 1866 he cut the first sod at the new site in Gilmorehill. He was also one of the main planners in the construction of the Western Infirmary in Glasgow, opened in 1874. He represented Glasgow University on the General Medical Council from 1859 until 1877. In 1871 the University of Edinburgh conferred upon him the degree of LLD, as did Glasgow University in 1877. He was awarded the degree of DCL by Oxford University in 1882. 
Anatomical and embryological research featured heavily in Thomson's life, and he made a number of original contributions to the scientific literature, although he made no one great eponymous discovery. He edited a number of textbooks, including the seventh, eighth, and ninth editions of Quain's 'System of Human Anatomy'. In 1859 he also published a second edition of his father's 'Life of William Cullen'. 
Having held his professorship for twenty-nine years Thomson retired from Glasgow University in 1877 with the reputation 'throughout the scientific world as one of the most careful, judicious, accurate, and learned of investigators and teachers of his favourite subjects' (Aitken, xxii). He and his wife went to London to live with their son, John Millar Thomson. He remained in London until his death. Late in 1883 he suffered a short episode of glaucoma in his left eye for which an iridectomy was performed. Shortly after this, however, he lost the sight in his right eye. He began to suffer from local paralyses, which became more generalized. His breathing finally became obstructed, and he died on 21 March 1884 at his address, 66 Palace Terrace Gardens, Kensington, London, leaving a widow. 


@@@@@


doc= 27292


Thomson, Andrew Mitchell (1779-1831), Church of Scotland minister and journalist, was born on 11 July 1779 in the manse at Sanquhar, Dumfriesshire, the third of four children of John Thomson (1741-1822), Church of Scotland minister, and his first wife, Helen Forrest (died 1801). His father, a devout evangelical, was translated to Markinch, Fife, in 1785 and to New Greyfriars, Edinburgh, in 1800. Thomson was educated at the Markinch parish school (from 1785), and at the University of Edinburgh (1796-9, and later, 1810-11, to complete the MA). He was licensed to preach in the Church of Scotland by the presbytery of Kelso on 7 October 1800, served briefly as a private tutor and school teacher, and was ordained to the ministry of the rural parish of Sprouston, in Roxburghshire, on 11 March 1802. In that year, on 26 April, he married Jane Carmichael (died 1840), of Greenock; they had ten children (seven of whom survived Thomson). Their eldest son was the composer John Thomson. In 1808, Thomson was translated to the East Church, Perth; two years later, he was presented by the magistrates and town council to succeed his father as minister of the Edinburgh parish of New Greyfriars. 
From the beginning of his ministry, Thomson was active in ecclesiastical politics, and joined with the evangelical, or popular, party in the church courts, in opposition to the ascendant moderate party. He combined his evangelicalism with whig political commitments. In 1805, he championed John Leslie, the whig natural philosopher, in a successful contest against the moderate party candidate, Thomas MacKnight, for the Edinburgh chair of mathematics. Two years later, Thomson joined with David Brewster and several young whig evangelicals in commencing the multi-volume 'Edinburgh Encyclopedia', for which Thomson eventually wrote forty-three articles. In 1810, together with several whig evangelicals, Thomson founded the 'Edinburgh Christian Instructor', a monthly magazine intended to do in the religious world what the whig 'Edinburgh Review' was doing in the political world -- that is, offer a lively critique of the established order in church and state, and press for the reform of abuses and an increased recognition of the popular voice. Thomson edited the 'Christian Instructor' for twenty years, making it an organ for the rising evangelical party. 
In 1814 Thomson was translated by the Edinburgh magistrates and town council to the splendid St George's Church, recently completed in the prosperous New Town. It was a controversial appointment, as many of the wealthy parishioners were cool toward evangelicalism, which they associated with enthusiasm. In the event, Thomson soon attracted a large and influential congregation. He delivered carefully composed sermons, employing a refined language and emphasizing practical Christian virtues, which appealed to the Edinburgh elite. He also won favour through his regular pastoral visiting. Thomson was a cultivated man, with a particular love and talent for music, and he insisted on a high quality of singing in worship. In 1820 he published a collection of psalm tunes, 'Sacred Harmony', which contained thirteen original compositions of his own, including the popular 'Redemption' and 'St George's, Edinburgh'. His keen interest in furthering popular education led him in 1823 to establish a parish day school, St George's Institution: he taught occasionally in the school and prepared school textbooks. He also became a zealous campaigner for the extension of parish schools in Scotland. In 1823, he was granted the degree of DD by Marischal College of Aberdeen. 
A man of strong evangelical and reforming convictions, Thomson did not shrink from controversy. A zealous backer of the British and Foreign Bible Society, he became indignant in the early 1820s over the society's decision to include the 'Apocrypha' in some of the 'Bibles' it distributed. Thomson's uncompromising condemnations of the 'Apocrypha' contributed to a violent controversy. In 1825 he and his supporters broke with the parent Bible Society, and established an independent Edinburgh Bible Society. Thousands in Scotland and England followed their lead. A champion of popular rights in the Church of Scotland, Thomson helped to found in 1825 the Society for the Improvement of Church Patronage, which worked to restore the right of parishioners to select their own ministers. Following the death of Sir Henry Moncrieff-Wellwood in 1827, Thomson was generally acknowledged as the leader of the evangelical party in the Church of Scotland. A long-time advocate of Catholic emancipation, he took a leading part in the final campaign in 1829. He also threw himself into the campaign for the abolition of slavery, insisting upon the immediate liberation of the slaves and opposing those who argued for a gradualist programme. At a great public meeting in October 1830 his stand divided the Edinburgh abolitionists, but Thomson refused to modify his demand for an immediate end to what he viewed as an unspeakable evil. 
Thomson died suddenly, of heart failure, in the street outside his Edinburgh home, 29 Melville Street, on 9 February 1831. He was buried, after a great public funeral, in St Cuthbert's churchyard. A man of considerable gifts, his early death was a blow to the evangelical party, which was then gaining an ascendancy within the Church of Scotland. In religion, Thomson was a strict Calvinist and Presbyterian, with his roots in Scotland's covenanting past. In politics, he was a liberal whig, committed to reforms aimed at increasing liberty and popular rights. A genial and generous man in his private life, he was in public life a man of intense convictions and stormy moods, who could direct fierce invective and cutting sarcasm at his opponents. 'No man', wrote his lifelong friend Thomas McCrie, 'ever loved or hated him moderately' (T. McCrie, 137). 


@@@@@


doc= 27293


Thomson, Anthony Todd (1778-1849), physician, was born on 7 January 1778 in Edinburgh, where his parents were temporarily resident, the younger son of Alexander Thomson (died 'c'.1800), a Scot who held British government appointments in America as postmaster-general for Georgia and as collector of customs for the town of Savannah, and his wife (died 1779?), the daughter of an American called Spencer. He was named after Anthony Todd, the postmaster of Edinburgh, who was his godfather. Thomson accompanied his parents when they returned to America. When he was about one year of age his mother died, and he was brought up by a relative, Mrs Rennie (or Rainie), whom his father later married. When the American republic was established Alexander Thomson refused to swear allegiance to the new government, and he returned to settle in Edinburgh, where he lived on a pension 'in humble circumstances' (Parkes, xii-xiii). 
During his childhood Anthony Thomson acquired an enduring love of nature and the countryside while roaming the hills and fields around Edinburgh. He was educated at Edinburgh high school and, from 1795 to 1797, at Edinburgh University, where his circle of friends included Henry Brougham, Henry Cockburn, and Francis Jeffrey. At the university he helped to finance his studies by working as a Post Office clerk; contrary to most accounts of his life he never graduated. He joined the Speculative Society in 1798 and the Royal Medical Society in 1799. 
Thomson considered joining the East India Company but, following the death of his father, he decided upon a medical career. He moved to London, where he became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1800, and, with the help of money loaned by his two sisters, he set up a general practice in Sloane Street, Chelsea. His resuscitation of a man dragged from a river seemingly drowned, for which he was awarded a medal by the Humane Society, helped him to transform his struggling practice into a successful one. He also gained a reputation for the care and attention he bestowed on patients. When he retired as a general practitioner in 1826, his practice was worth around $3000 per annum; soon after his death 'The Lancet' described it as having been 'one of the largest and most profitable in London' ('Lancet', 14 July 1849, 46). 
Thomson was tall and slim, yet powerful; 'even at 70 his figure was as erect and as agile as that of a healthy man at 30'. He had great conversational powers and was 'full of information and of racy anecdote'. He eschewed dissemblance and 'always expressed his sentiments in strong and vigorous language' (Clarke, 307). Thomson was twice married. His first marriage, in 1801, was to Christiana 'nee' Maxwell (died 1815), from Dumfriesshire; they had one son, Alexander (died 1838), who entered the medical profession, and two daughters. His second marriage, in 1820, was to Katherine, the seventh daughter of Thomas Byerley of Etruria, Staffordshire, who was related by marriage to the Wedgwood family ['see 'Thomson, Katherine (1797-1862)]. She drew some of the illustrations for Thomson's books. At his prompting she herself took up writing and achieved success as a biographer and historical novelist; in later life she worked in collaboration with two of her three sons, Henry William Byerley Thomson (1822-1867), the jurist, and John, who took holy orders. Their father had advised all three against following medical careers. The marriage also produced five daughters. 
While in general practice Thomson helped found the Chelsea, Brompton, and Belgrave Dispensary (in 1812), and an infant school in Chelsea. He lobbied for the passing of the 'Apothecaries Act' of 1815 and was active in several professional and learned societies. These included the Association of Apothecaries and Surgeon-Apothecaries, the Linnean and Ethnological societies, in both of which he held fellowships, the Medico-Chirurgical Society, the Westminster Medical Society, and the Harveian Medical Society; he also helped to found the Pathological Society of London. Thomson lectured extensively on botanical and medical subjects, at the Pharmaceutical Society, where he held the title of professor of botany, and elsewhere. 
Thomson was a prolific author from an early age. He published an essay on philosophy and chemistry in 1800, and 'Ode to the Memory of Sir Ralph Abercrombie' in the following year. Between 1814 and 1817 he was joint editor, with George Burrows and William Royston, of the 'London Medical Repository', to which he contributed many articles. He also published papers in the 'Cyclopaedia of Medicine', 'Medico-Chirurgical Transactions', 'The Lancet', which published his 'Lectures on medical jurisprudence' (1836-7), and other professional journals. His main books were 'A Conspectus of Pharmacopoeias' (1810), the 'London Dispensatory' (1811), both of which went into many editions and were translated into foreign languages, 'Medical Statement of the Case of the Princess Charlotte of Wales' (1817), 'Lectures on the Elements of Botany' (1822), 'Elements of Materia medica and Therapeutics' (1832), which James Fernandez Clarke deemed to be the 'best work' on the subject (Clarke, 305-10), and 'The Domestic Management of the Sick-Room' (1841). At the time of his death he was writing 'A Practical Treatise on Diseases Affecting the Skin', which was completed and edited by E. A. Parkes and published in 1850. Thomson's edited works included the seventh edition of Thomas Bateman's 'Practical Synopsis of Cutaneous Diseases' (1829), an edition of James Thomson's 'The Seasons' (1847), and a translation of A. J. Salvarte, 'The Philosophy of Magic, Prodigies, and Apparent Miracles' (1846). 
On 1 May 1824 Thomson was admitted doctor of physic at St Andrews University. In London he moved from Chelsea to 3 Hinde Street, Manchester Square, in 1826; he later resided at 30 Welbeck Street, Cavendish Square, and at a rented cottage in Kingston upon Thames in Surrey. In 1828 he was appointed the first professor of materia medica and therapeutics at the newly founded London University. In the same year he was awarded the licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians. Around this time he became involved in Lord Brougham's Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge. In 1832 he was appointed joint professor of medical jurisprudence, a position he had to himself from 1837 to 1849, following the resignation of his fellow postholder, Andrew Amos. 
Thomson was also physician to the North London (later University College) Hospital. His time at the hospital was a period of much quarrelling among the medical staff. Thomson, closely allied with Robert Liston, had a particularly poor relationship with John Elliotson. His achievements as a professor included experimental work on the properties of alkaloids and iodides, and he may have invented an important device which became known as the 'Gibson spoon', for administering medicines to unco-operative patients. In 1835 Thomson's health broke down as a result of overwork. It was further impaired by his inhaling chlorine gas while giving a demonstration in the course of a lecture. Up to this point his 'industry and energy were truly marvellous' (Clarke, 307), but for several years afterwards he was obliged greatly to reduce his workload, though he continued to lecture, write, and practise medicine, giving great attention to skin diseases, in which he became a specialist. In 1842, 'rather late in life' (Clarke, 307), he became a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians. 
James Fernandez Clarke had a grudging respect for Thomson's erudition and his ability to lecture on materia medica. However, he was scathing about his clinical and pedagogical capabilities. Clarke recalled him as having been 'deficient in the faculty of perception', as well as indecisive in the diagnosis and treatment of cases in his care. An unoriginal lecturer on medical jurisprudence, Thomson's clinical lectures were 'heavy and elaborate'. Clarke also maintained that Thomson's 'knowledge of physiology and pathology was scarcely up to the level which should have been possessed by a physician in an important hospital' (Clarke, 305-10). 
From autumn 1848 Thomson's health began to decline, and in early 1849 he suffered an attack of bronchitis from which he never fully recovered; he died at Ealing, Middlesex, on 3 July 1849. He had expressed a wish to be buried in a rural location and was interred in the nearby Perivale churchyard on 10 July. The government purchased his materia medica collection for Queen's College, Cork. 


@@@@@


doc= 27294


Thomson, Charles Poulett, Baron Sydenham (1799-1841), politician and governor-in-chief of British North America, was born on 13 September 1799 at Waverley Abbey, Wimbledon, Surrey, the third son and youngest of the nine children of John Thomson (after 1820 John Poulett Thomson), a London merchant engaged in trade with Russia and the Baltic, and his wife, Charlotte, the daughter of John Jacob, a Salisbury physician. Educated privately, at the age of sixteen Thomson entered the family firm in St Petersburg. In 1817 he left Russia because of poor health, but embarked on several lengthy continental tours before joining the firm's London office. He returned to Russia from 1821 until 1824, when he settled permanently in London. Thomson was not particularly interested in business, travelled frequently on the continent, and was an early advocate of free trade, despite his family's support for protection. As an advocate of parliamentary reform and the ballot, he was a member of the Political Economy Club. 
With the support of Jeremy Bentham and Joseph Hume, and at great financial cost, Thomson was elected as MP for Dover in May 1826. In the whig administration formed in November 1830 he became vice-president of the Board of Trade and treasurer of the navy. Since his superior, Lord Auckland, was a nonentity, Thomson conducted the real business of the board and helped to draft the abortive free-trade budget of 1831, thus incurring the undying enmity of the protectionists and completely alienating his family. He was re-elected for Dover in 1830 and 1831. In 1832 he was elected for both Dover and Manchester but chose to sit for the important industrial centre of Manchester, where he was re-elected in 1834 and 1837. From June until November 1834 and again after April 1835 he served as president of the Board of Trade, filling the department with free-traders, making numerous minor reductions in customs regulations, and negotiating free-trade agreements with several European countries. He dramatically expanded the responsibilities of the board by exercising more effective control over railway bills and bank charters and attempting to extend greater superintendence over colonial legislation. But Thomson, whom Charles Greville described as 'the greatest coxcomb I ever saw, and the vainest dog' ('Greville Memoirs', 3.230), was not particularly effective in the Commons or popular with his aristocratic whig colleagues. Early in 1839 he was passed over for the post of chancellor of the exchequer, and he was increasingly disillusioned by the cabinet's failure to adopt a major change in economic policy and embrace free trade. Suffering from declining health and aware of the growing unpopularity of the whig government, he declined the post of chancellor in the summer of 1839; on 6 September, however, he became governor-in-chief of British North America, and received an unusually high salary and the pledge of a peerage. 
Thomson had played only a minor part in formulating the cabinet's response to the rebellions of 1837 in Upper and Lower Canada, but he supported the recommendation made in the 1839 Durham report for an immediate union of the two Canadas, and before departing he met with Durham, once his friend, and received the latter's blessing. He arrived at Quebec city and assumed control of the administration of Lower Canada on 19 October 1839. His priority was to secure legislative support for union. In Lower Canada he faced few difficulties, since the assembly had been replaced by an appointed council dominated by the British minority. Although Thomson admired French culture (and French cuisine, which he introduced into the colony) and spoke French fluently, like Durham he believed it was undesirable -- and ultimately impossible -- for French Canadians to preserve their separate nationality on the North American continent. He saw the gradual assimilation of the French Canadians as essential to maintain imperial control, and he pushed through the council after two days' debate a union on terms which were clearly unfair to Lower Canada. He was castigated by the French-Canadian press, which satirically referred to him as 'notre poulet' (Monet, 37). 
Thomson then travelled to Toronto, and assumed control of the government of Upper Canada on 23 November 1839 in order to persuade the Upper Canadian legislature to vote itself out of existence. Although he rejected the more extreme demands of the conservative-dominated assembly, he promised an imperial loan to pay the huge public debt of the colony and equal representation for both Canadas within the union. He managed to win the support of the Upper Canadian reformers by appointing Robert Baldwin as solicitor-general. After securing the support of the Upper Canadian legislature early in 1840, he sent home the draft of a union bill. He also sent home a bill which, although modified in London, resolved the controversial issue of the clergy reserves. Having prorogued the Upper Canadian legislature he returned to Lower Canada, where he shoved through the special council a series of ordinances designed to pave the way for union. Particularly important were those incorporating the cities of Quebec and Montreal, reorganizing the system of justice, and establishing an efficient police force. Although he failed to persuade any prominent French-Canadian politician to join his administration, he refused to accede to the more extreme demands of the British minority, and his actions helped convince French-Canadian reformers such as Louis-Hippolyte LaFontaine to moderate their opposition to the union. To Thomson's disappointment the whig government, in order to get the consent of Sir Robert Peel and the Conservatives, dropped his arrangements for the creation of municipal institutions and inflated the number of constituencies dominated by the British minority in Lower Canada. None the less, the 'Union Act' of 1840 was largely Thomson's work, and he arranged for the union to come into effect on 10 February 1841. On 19 August 1840 he was raised to the peerage as Baron Sydenham and on 19 August 1841 was further rewarded with a GCB (civil division). 
At the request of the secretary of state for the colonies, Lord John Russell, Thomson, although suffering from gout, travelled to Nova Scotia in July 1840 to try to resolve the dispute between Lieutenant-Governor Sir Colin Campbell and the Nova Scotian assembly. On his return he persuaded Russell to dismiss Campbell and appoint a more conciliatory governor. During the trip he also visited Prince Edward Island and New Brunswick, where he was particularly impressed by Lieutenant-Governor Sir John Harvey's success in working with the New Brunswick assembly. Ironically, when Harvey failed to take aggressive measures to prevent American encroachments in the disputed territory between Maine and New Brunswick in 1840, Thomson complained to Russell, who dismissed Harvey. 
The first elections to the assembly of the united province of Canada were held in March and early April 1841. Lord Sydenham, in effect acting as his own prime minister, interfered flagrantly in the elections and managed to get the support of a majority in the assembly, but the moderate Upper Canadian reformers led by Robert Baldwin had become disenchanted and they constructed an alliance with the French-Canadian reformers led by LaFontaine. On 12 June, when Baldwin demanded that Sydenham reorganize his executive council and give all the seats to the Baldwin-LaFontaine reform alliance, Sydenham dismissed him as solicitor-general. Although Sydenham was able to push a number of important measures through the first session of the legislature, which he convened on 15 June, his majority was increasingly precarious. On 3 September the reformers sought to embarrass him by demanding that he accept that the executive council would be reconstructed if it lost the confidence of the assembly, thus in effect conceding the principle of responsible government. Sydenham refused to make an absolute commitment. He continued to act as his own prime minister and to dictate the policies of the government, but his ministers increasingly functioned like a cabinet and indicated they would resign if they lost the confidence of the assembly. In fact, Sydenham's ability to command the support of the assembly was already breaking down when he had a riding accident and contracted lockjaw. On 19 September 1841 he died, in agony, in Kingston, Canada West. He was buried in St George's Church, Kingston, on 24 September. Although he was known as a 'sensualist' whose affairs with married women caused a scandal in Canada (Richardson, 186), he had never married and left no heirs. 
From an imperial perspective Thomson was probably the most successful governor ever sent to Canada. He made union possible and established a workable form of responsible government, although in line with imperial policy he did not concede the principle itself. French Canadians did not view his regime sympathetically, and the measures he introduced to promote assimilation were quickly abandoned after his death. The union of the Canadas, however, endured until 1867 and laid the foundation for confederation. Irving Abella has described Thomson as 'a ruthless Machiavellian, unprincipled and cunning, selfish and egotistic, autocratic, narrow-minded, and unbelievably vain' (Abella, 326-7). All of this is true, if overstated, but no governor had greater influence on the future development of British North America -- not even Lord Durham. 


@@@@@


doc= 27295


Thomson, Sir Charles Wyville (1830-1882), naturalist, was born on 5 March 1830 at Bonsyde, near Linlithgow, the son of Andrew Thomson, surgeon in the East India Company, and his wife, Sarah Ann Drummond Smith, daughter of Dr Wyville Smith, inspector of military hospitals. He was christened Wyville Thomas Charles, but appears to have used the forenames Charles Wyville throughout his adult life, adopting this form formally when he was knighted in 1876. His early education was at Merchiston Castle School and then at the University of Edinburgh where he became a medical student in 1845. However, he was more interested in biology and geology and, after three years of formal medical study, he devoted his efforts entirely to natural history, mainly under Robert Jameson. 
In 1850, despite his lack of formal qualification, Thomson was appointed to a lectureship in botany at King's College, Aberdeen. In 1853 he became professor of natural history at Queen's College, Cork, and the same year married Jane Ramage Dawson, elder daughter of Adam Dawson, deputy lieutenant of the county of Linlithgow; their only son, Frank Wyville Thomson, was born about 1860. In 1854 Thomson was transferred to Queen's College, Belfast, as professor of mineralogy and geology, being appointed professor of natural history in 1862. To this post was added that of professor of botany at the Royal College of Science, Dublin, in 1868. Finally, having been elected to the fellowship of the Royal Society in 1869, he obtained the chair of natural history at the University of Edinburgh in 1870 and held this post until his death. 
Thomson had broad interests and knowledge, not only in natural history but also in other sciences and in art and literature. His zoological interests were mainly with the invertebrates, initially the coelenterates and polyzoans, and subsequently the sponges and particularly the echinoderms. By the mid-1860s he was collaborating with the physiologist William Benjamin Carpenter on the structure and development of the sea lilies or crinoids, an echinoderm group well represented in the fossil record. Both men were also intrigued by the recent results counteracting Edward Forbes's azoic theory, according to which the deep ocean was totally devoid of life. The two interests came together when Thomson visited Michael Sars in Norway in 1867 and saw a variety of organisms dredged from deep water off the Lofoten islands, including a crinoid which resembled a form otherwise known only as a fossil. A request to the Royal Society, and thence to the Admiralty, for support for deep-ocean research resulted in a series of short cruises around the British Isles and into the Mediterranean, in the small paddle gun vessels HMS 'Lightning' in 1868 and HMS 'Porcupine' in 1869 and 1870. Thomson took part in most of these cruises and wrote a general account of the results in 'The Depths of the Sea' (1873), a classic summary of oceanographic knowledge at the time. 
These cruises finally dispelled the azoic theory, obtaining a variety of bottom-living animals in dredge hauls at depths down to 4289 metres in the Bay of Biscay, far deeper than any previous hauls. They also produced interesting physical results, particularly in the region to the south of the Faeroes where very different deep temperature measurements were obtained only a few miles apart. The 'warm' and 'cold' regions proved subsequently to be separated by a submarine ridge, named the Wyville Thomson Ridge in Thomson's honour. 
The 'Lightning' and 'Porcupine' results were so impressive that Carpenter proposed a much larger undertaking, a properly equipped and staffed circumnavigation to investigate the physics, chemistry, geology, and biology of all the world's oceans. This time the Admiralty provided the 226 foot long steam-assisted screw corvette HMS 'Challenger' under the command of Captain (later Sir) George Strong Nares. Since Carpenter was too old to take part in the voyage, the 41-year-old Thomson was appointed scientific director with a civilian staff of five including the naturalists John Murray and Henry Nottidge Moseley and the chemist John Young Buchanan. 
The 'Challenger' sailed from Portsmouth on 21 December 1872, returning to Spithead on 24 May 1876. In the meantime she had spent 713 days at sea and had covered 68,890 nautical miles through all the major oceans except the Indian. A total of 362 official 'stations' had been occupied, more or less equally spaced along her track, obtaining soundings and samples of the bottom sediment, and taking serial measurements of the temperature and collecting water samples between the surface and the bottom. But above all the expedition collected biological specimens; mid-water nets were used to about 3000m deep, and bottom dredges and trawls were fished successfully twenty-five times at depths greater than about 4.5 km, the deepest from 5.7 km on the edge of the Japan trench in the western Pacific. 
In recognition of the expedition's achievements, acknowledged as marking the beginning of the modern science of oceanography, Thomson was knighted and received a royal medal on the ship's return. He was also given responsibility for overseeing the working up of the specimens and the publication of the results in the official expedition 'Reports'. In the face of considerable opposition, particularly from the authorities of the British Museum in London, he set up a Challenger office in Edinburgh where he resumed his university duties and in 1877 published an excellent account of the expedition's work as 'The Voyage of the Challenger: the Atlantic' (2 vols.). 
Thomson represented the University of Edinburgh at the tercentenary of the University of Uppsala in 1877 and was created a knight of the order of the Polar Star (Sweden). As president of the geography section of the British Association at its 1878 meeting in Dublin he was awarded an honorary LLD degree by Trinity College (having already received an honorary LLD in 1853 from Aberdeen, an LLD in 1860 and DSc in 1871 from Queen's University, Belfast, and a PhD from Jena). 
In the meantime, the 'Challenger''s biological specimens had been sent out to an international galaxy of specialists to prepare the official 'Reports'. Thomson published the introduction to the zoological series in 1880, and expected to see the remaining ten or twelve volumes through the press within five to ten years. In fact, the 'Reports' ran to fifty volumes, the last not appearing until 1895. Although they all carry Thomson's name, they were edited mainly by his successor John Murray. For the strain of the 'Challenger' expedition, the administration of the Challenger office, and Thomson's professorial duties, had taken their toll and he suffered recurring bouts of increasingly serious illness, particularly from the summer of 1879. He died at Bonsyde on 10 March 1882 and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 27296


David Thomson (d. 1815), landscape painter and musician, provided illustrations and some songs for George's collections of national airs. With Muzio Clementi of London he published his own collection, 'The melodies of different nations', and a collection of Mozart songs with his own lyrics. In 1806 he made a tour to Wales to create some illustrations for George's collection of Welsh airs, and by 1813 he was based in London. Joanna Baillie wrote fondly of him in a letter to George Thomson of 17 June 1815 (BL, Add. MS 35264, fols. 218-20), the year of David's death. 


@@@@@


doc= 27297


Thomson, David (1817-1880), physicist and university teacher, was born on 17 November 1817 in the Italian city state of Leghorn, the eldest son of David Thomson, a Scottish merchant based in that city. Thomson received a multilingual education and attended a M. Godin's boarding-school at Lausanne, Switzerland, from the age of eleven. At the age of fifteen he entered the University of Glasgow, where he was a student of James Thomson (1786-1849), the professor of mathematics, and after four years there he continued his mathematical studies at Trinity College, Cambridge. He was considered a promising mathematician but, according to his biographer, his health prevented him from becoming a candidate for wrangler status. In the context of the strenuous preparation required for the higher divisions of the tripos, this was not an unusual decision even for promising students, and it does not imply that he was in particularly bad health. After graduating Cambridge in the 'ordo senioritatis' he became private tutor to a family of the Irish aristocracy for a brief period. In 1840 he returned to Glasgow University as assistant to the professor of natural philosophy, William Meikleham; one of his students there was William Thomson, later Lord Kelvin, the son of his former professor. 
On 14 September 1843 Thomson married Helen Stuart; they had nine children. His career took off in earnest in 1845, when he was appointed professor of natural philosophy at King's College, Aberdeen, where he also occupied a series of senior administrative positions. A rigorous teacher, tenacious and aggressive administrator, and strict disciplinarian, his activities were central to the reform and restructuring of the University of Aberdeen in the middle years of the nineteenth century. His manner was revealed early in his tenure. In dispute with his class over the conduct of examinations after his first session as professor, he suspended their April bursaries until the following October. His teaching was largely mathematical, experiments generally being used for illustration only. Much given to the public humiliation of students who attended lectures without adequate preparation, his oral examinations were known as 'the pillory'. There is no evidence that he engaged in research or encouraged it in others. His only publication in his field is the article on acoustics in the ninth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (1875). This article is strongly pedagogical in tone, combining a graduated introduction to the relevant mathematics with many interesting practical examples. It is, however, weak on physical theory. 
Thomson's administrative energies were directed to establishing the superiority of King's, a pre-Reformation foundation situated in the Old Town, over Marischal's College (founded 1593), which was situated in the New Town. The latter had gained the lead in the sciences and in professional education in the course of the eighteenth century, and was strongly identified with the values of the Scottish Enlightenment. It also had the affections of the local citizenry. Thomson's particular involvement in the cause of King's came during the debates over the union of the colleges into one university. It was common ground that the faculties of law and medicine would remain at Marischal's, and the faculty of divinity at King's, but the fate of the faculty of arts, the centre of the traditional university, was in dispute. Thomson was instrumental in maintaining and pushing through the proposition that there could only be one faculty of arts, and that it would be situated at King's. His leading opponent in academic circles was the psychologist Alexander Bain, a Benthamite active in 'Westminster Review' circles; and he also faced vigorous opposition from local people. Lay government of universities was well established in Scottish academic culture, and Thomson gained considerable notoriety when he questioned the credentials of his auditors at a public meeting set up by the town council. He was, however, successful and the union of the colleges was passed by parliament along the lines of his plan in 1860. As a result of this success, his opposite number at Marischal's, James Clerk Maxwell, left Aberdeen to take up a position in London. 
Thomson continued as the leading teacher of physical sciences at the unified University of Aberdeen until the Michaelmas term of 1879, with only occasional absences due to illness. He died at the university in the Old Town on 31 January 1880, shortly after suffering a stroke. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 27298


Thomson, Sir Edward Deas (1800-1879), administrator and politician in Australia, the third son and fourth child to survive infancy of Sir John Deas Thomson ('c'.1764-1839), commissioner for the navy, and his wife, Rebecca (died 1825), the daughter of John Freer, a South Carolina planter, was born at Edinburgh on 1 June 1800. He was educated at Edinburgh high school and at Harrow School, before spending two years in private tuition at Caen. On his return to London he prepared for a mercantile career, and in the meantime assisted his father with the public accounts in a semi-official capacity. 
In 1826 Thomson made a journey to the United States to wind up his father's affairs, and afterwards travelled through the eastern states and Canada, recording his impressions in letters to his father. These helped win him the patronage of William Huskisson, who appointed him clerk of the council of New South Wales. Thomson arrived in Sydney in December 1828 and soon won the favour of the tory governor, Ralph Darling, and his whig successor, Sir Richard Bourke, whose second daughter, Anne Maria, Thomson married in 1833. In 1837 Bourke appointed him to be colonial secretary and registrar of deeds and a member of the executive and legislative councils. The appointment was denounced then and later as a job, but Thomson proved himself a capable administrator. 
With the introduction of an experimental, partially representative form of government in 1843, Thomson was thrust into the centre of a conflict between the energetic but sometimes impetuous governor Sir George Gipps and talented colonists, including William Charles Wentworth and John Dunmore Lang, who were eager to assert their power. As leader and senior member of the government in the legislative council, Thomson won respect for his tact and political acumen. Under Gipps's successor, the more languid Sir Charles FitzRoy, he was widely regarded as the most powerful man in the colony. He was instrumental in introducing uniform postage arrangements, a fiscal system based on the principles of free trade, and electoral legislation based on town, rural, and pastoral interests. When the gold rushes began in 1851, he was responsible for a licence system that allowed ready access to the diggings and helped maintain social order during a period of tumultuous change. 
Early in 1854 Thomson was granted two years' leave on the grounds of ill health, and he travelled with his family to London, where he was often consulted by members of the Colonial Office. In 1855 he acted as commissioner for New South Wales at the Paris Universal Exhibition. 
After returning to Sydney in 1856, Thomson found it hard to come to terms with the new political order that followed the introduction of responsible government. Invited to form a ministry, he made political miscalculations and failed to win sufficient support. He did, however, remain briefly as caretaker colonial secretary and helped determine administrative arrangements under the new system. From 1856 until his death he was a member of the upper house, except for a short interruption in 1861, when he and his conservative colleagues resigned in protest against the intended swamping of the chamber. He served in the ministry of Henry Watson Parker in 1856-7 as vice-president of the legislative council. An early advocate of intercolonial union, he proposed in the council in 1857 a motion for the federation of the Australian colonies. This made him one of the first federationists, though his support for the cause owed more to his desire for administrative efficiency than to national sentiment. 
In his later years Thomson devoted his attention chiefly to educational questions; he was vice-chancellor of Sydney University from 1862 to 1865, and was elected chancellor annually from 1865 to 1878. He was president of various institutions, including the Australian Jockey Club and the Sydney Infirmary. In the late 1860s he corresponded with Florence Nightingale about hospital improvements and the introduction of Nightingale nurses to New South Wales. 
Throughout his long career Thomson remained committed to administrative efficiency, social order, and the welfare and improvement of the colony. Although radicals criticized his conservative politics, he won and retained the respect of most colonists as well as successive governors. He died at his home, Barham, Darlinghurst, Sydney, on 16 July 1879, leaving his wife, two sons, and five daughters. He was buried at St Jude's Church, Randwick, New South Wales. He had been made CB in 1856 and KCMG in 1874. 


@@@@@


doc= 27299


Thomson, George (bap. 1607, d. 1691), merchant and politician, was baptized on 12 April 1607 at Watton-at-Stone, Hertfordshire, the second son of Robert Thomson (1570- 'c'.1638), and his wife, Elizabeth Halfhead 
(or Harsnett; 'bap'. 1579, died after 1622)
, and younger brother of Maurice Thomson, colonial merchant. He emigrated to Virginia in 1623, was elected to the Virginia house of burgesses for Elizabeth county, and became a lieutenant and JP. He returned to London and traded with St Kitts, Montserrat, and New England, and with Virginia, where he sent emigrants and accumulated land. In the 1640s he helped intrude the radical John Simpson as lecturer in St Dunstan's parish, and was appointed a lay trier and a member of the tenth London classis, for St Olave's parish, Southwark. A captain of horse under the earl of Bedford during the first civil war, he rose to command a London regiment of horse. He served under Waller at Basing House and lost a leg at the battle of Cheriton (29 March 1644), replacing it with a wooden one. In October 1644 he supported a petition in favour of Colonel Sam Jones retaining his command at Farnham, an act subsequently voted a breach of privilege. Recruited MP for Southwark in 1645, the following year he was accused of outspoken words against Lord Mayor Adams for the latter's reception of a letter from the king. 
Thomson was a witness to the battle of Maidstone in 1648, and sat on the militia and assessment committees for a number of south-eastern counties. As an MP in the Rump Parliament he dealt with the planter petitions from the Caribbean. He served as chairman of the Rump's navy committee and as such was to the fore in reporting to parliament on the financial reorganization of the navy, and reported the act for imposing customs duties on tobacco imported through New England. Appointed to the council of state in 1651, he was one of the six-strong commission to reorganize the navy during the First Anglo-Dutch War and travelled to the Downs to supervise the fleet. He protested at the dissolution of the Rump Parliament and was later imprisoned for conspiracy against Cromwell. In 1659 he returned to the council of state, his local committee roles, and his position as a naval commissioner, in which role he put pressure on the East India Company for a loan to the restored republic. 
Thomson lived at Lee in Kent, purchased 4000 acres of Irish land, and married thrice, with Elizabeth Brickland of Thorncliffe, Cheshire, Elizabeth Humphries of Surrey, and Abigail Barnes of Barking, Essex. He was the father of George, Elizabeth, and Mary. In 1661 he was under suspicion of involvement with the Fifth Monarchists and of supporting seditious sermons at Lee, and was briefly arrested. In 1667 he was nominated to the 1668-9 committee named by parliament to investigate the commissioners of the navy for failure in the Second Anglo-Dutch War, and in January 1670 accused Pepys of insufficient eagerness in the purchase of English plank. He died in Clerkenwell in January 1691 and was buried at St Olave's, Southwark. 
George Thomson's youngest brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 27300


Thomson, George (1619-1677), physician, of whose early life little is known, received some medical education as a young man from an apothecary (possibly Job Weale), who instructed him in both Galenic and chemical medicine. The death of his father prevented Thomson from enrolling at Oxford or Cambridge universities. He travelled to France and returned in 1644 to Weymouth. He joined the royalist army, served under Prince Maurice, and took part in the royalist victories in Cornwall. In October 1644 Thomson was taken prisoner at Newbury in Berkshire and was kept in the Fleet prison for several months. He continued his medical studies and on 19 June 1647 obtained an MA from Edinburgh. He then applied to the College of Physicians, London, for a licence to practise in London. He was first examined on 3 December 1647, and later on 7 January 1648, by a committee consisting of the president and censors. Although the committee acknowledged his medical skill, Thomson was not awarded the licence, as he was not able to pay the fee required by the college. Thomson, apparently on the suggestion of one senior member of the committee (possibly Baldwin Hamey), decided to go to Leiden. He matriculated at Leiden in June 1648 and on 14 July 1648 submitted his dissertation, entitled 'De apoplexia'. It was dedicated to his uncle Colonel Thomas Serle, mayor of Bandon Bridge, Ireland, to the Revd Walter Collins, the Revd Thomas Hazelwood, and the Revd John Cacket, ministers in Kent, to the Revd Robert French, to Baldwin Hamey, and to Job Weale, of Kingston. 
After taking his medical qualification Thomson practised at Rochford, Essex, where in 1651 he performed an experimental splenectomy. The excision of the spleen was performed on a dog, which survived for two years and three months. Thomson's experiment attracted the attention of William Harvey, Charles Scarburgh, Robert Boyle, and Henry Pierpont, marquess of Dorchester. It appears that Thomson, who brought the dog to London, did not get the recognition he expected for being the first to perform a splenectomy. He subsequently accused an anonymous Galenist (later identified as Charles Scarburgh) of plagiarism. Thomson defended his claim to be the first to perform a splenectomy in two of his works: 'Misochymias' (1671) and 'Splenotomia', which was published posthumously by his disciple Richard Hope as part of 'Tria peireteria anekousta, sive, Experimenta admiranda' (1680). 
It is apparent that already in the 1650s Thomson had regular recourse to chemically prepared medicines. These remedies he used both in the cure of the dog he had operated on in 1651, and in his successful treatment of Ann Taylor, of Romford, Essex, who was afflicted by stones. Thomson's adherence to J.-B. van Helmont's medicine dated back to the mid-1650s and was reinforced by George Starkey, who became his friend and mentor. 
In 1659 Thomson settled in London, where he prepared chemical remedies and practised medicine -- though without a licence. During the plague of 1665 Thomson, along with other Helmontians, stayed in London, where he studied the disease minutely, cured several people who had been infected, sold his medicaments, and dissected the body of a plague victim. He wrote two works on the plague: 'Loimologia: a Consolatory Advice, and some Brief Observations Concerning the Present Pest' (1665), which contains a letter from Starkey, and 'Loimotomia' (1666), dedicated to William Craven; the latter contains a narrative of Starkey's death from the plague. In the confrontation that took place in 1665 between the Helmontian iatrochemists and the members of the College of Physicians, Thomson's attacks on the college were particularly virulent. He severely criticized the members of the college for leaving the city during the plague epidemic. In the same year he was among the Helmontians who projected a college of chemical physicians to challenge the college's monopoly ['see 'Society of Chemical Physicians]. In 'Galeno-Pale, or, A Chymical Trial to the Galenists' (1665), dedicated to Gilbert Sheldon, archbishop of Canterbury, Thomson supported the Helmontian view that the physician is made by God. Though he recognized the importance of anatomy and extolled Harvey's discovery of circulation, he claimed they were of little or no help in medical therapy, which needed to act on the spiritual, invisible principles ruling the human body. Like other Helmontians, Thomson rejected bloodletting and the use of purgatives, ruled out humoral medicine, and maintained that the main functions of the human body were directed by a spiritual entity, that is, the Helmontian 'archeus', or vital spirit. Thomson also embraced the Helmontian theory of water and seminal principles as the beginnings of all natural bodies. In 'Aimatiasis, or, The True Way of Preserving Bloud' (1670) and in 'Orthometodos iatrochymike, or, The Direct Method of Curing Chymically' (1675) he criticized Thomas Willis's version of the Paracelsian theory of chemical principles (spirit, water, earth, sulphur, and salt) by claiming that they were not the ultimate constituents of bodies, but the product of fire. He supported Tachenius's theory of acid and alkali and engaged in the preparation of van Helmont's universal solvent, the alkahest, which, he maintained, was made of pure mercury and which could be prepared by liberating mercury from its sulphur. 
Thomson was attacked by William Johnson, chemist to the College of Physicians, in his 'Agurto-Matrix, or, Some Brief Animadversiones upon Two Late Treatises' (1665); by John Heydon in his 'Psonthonphankia, or, A Quintuple Rosicrucian Scourge' (1665); and in 'The Lord Bacons Relation of the Sweating-Sickness' (1671) by Henry Stubbe, with whom he engaged in a pamphlet war. While Johnson linked Thomson to empirics, such as Thomas O'Dowde and Lionel Lockyer -- an association which Thomson firmly rejected -- Stubbe attacked Thomson and the Royal Society. 
From 1659 to his death Thomson lived in London: at Duke's Place, Aldgate, until 1671 and from 1672 at Soper Lane, near Cheapside, in Well Court, where he had a laboratory. He died in London (having never married) on 11 March 1677 and was buried at St Mary-le-Bow. Richard Hope, whom he had taught chemical medicine, received some of Thomson's manuscripts from the executor of his will and published them in 1680. 


@@@@@


doc= 27301


Thomson, George (1792-1838), tutor and chaplain in the household of Sir Walter Scott, was the eldest son of George Thomson (1758-1835), and his wife, Margaret, daughter of Robert Gillon of Lessudden, Roxburghshire. He was born at Melrose, Roxburghshire, on 7 May 1792, his father having been licensed by the presbytery of Dunblane on 4 July 1786, and called to Melrose about two years later. He caused the church to be moved from the abbey and a new building erected near at hand in 1810. 
From a young age George did his utmost to relieve the necessities of his family, as his father's stipend was very small. He not only educated himself with the aid of a bursary, but took upon himself the education of two brothers out of his small income. In 1812 Scott wrote that his son was being tutored by Thomson, who walked between Melrose and Abbotsford 'with one leg of wood, and another of oak' (Lockhart, 3.8). As well as a respect for Thomson's learning, Scott had a special kindness for him, which was strengthened by Thomson's mishap -- he had lost a leg in some rough play during childhood and had refused to give the name of the boy involved. Thomson was tall and vigorous, an expert fencer and a dashing horseman, despite his infirmity, and Scott remarked of him that accident had spoiled 'as bold and fine looking a grenadier as ever charged bayonet against a Frenchman's throat' (Lockhart, 4.248). Thomson's personality was characterized, like that of his father, by independence and simplicity. To Scott, there was 'an eccentricity about him that defies description' ('Journal', 1.67), although it seems that he may have intended to capture some of it in his depiction of Dominie Sampson in 'Guy Mannering'; Thomson himself did not discourage the belief that he was the original of that character. On one occasion, after a day's hunting at Abbotsford, Thomson kept the company waiting while he extemporized an exceptionally lengthy form of grace. 
Scott frequently tried, though without success, to get Thomson a permanent post. Writing in 1819 to the duke of Buccleuch, he says, 'He is nearer Parson Adams than any living creature I ever saw -- very learned, very religious, very simple, and extremely absent' (Lockhart, 3.247). He added that he was a very fair preacher and a staunch anti-Gallican. In 1820 Thomson left Abbotsford to coach the sons of Mrs Dennistoun of Colgrain, but Scott still hoped to procure him a 'harbour on his lee' (ibid., 5.33). He went to see Scott at Christmas 1825, when his kind heart and eccentricities were again noted in the 'Journal'. In 1830 Scott was still petitioning the duke of Buccleuch on Thomson's behalf. Thomson died at Edinburgh on 8 January 1838. His only literary production seems to have been an 'Account of the parish of Melrose' contributed to Sir John Sinclair's 'Statistical Account of Scotland' (1791-9). 


@@@@@


doc= 27302


Thomson, George (1757-1851), music collector and publisher, was born on 4 March 1757 at Limekilns, Dunfermline, Fife, the son of Robert Thomson, schoolmaster, and his first wife, Anne Stirling. Little is known of his parents, though Robert remarried following Anne Stirling's death in the late 1760s or early 1770s. By this time the family had moved north to Banff, where Robert taught English language in the council school. George received his early education there (1762-72) before moving to Edinburgh in 1774. 
After working in a legal office, in 1780 Thomson was appointed junior clerk to the board of trustees for manufactures in Scotland. He states in an autobiographical letter that this was made possible only by the 'influence of Mr John Home, author of 'Douglas', with one of the members of the honourable Board of Trustees' (Wilson, 38-42). Soon afterwards he became senior clerk to the board, and he retained this post until his retirement in 1839. On 11 December 1781 he married Katharine Miller (1764-1841); they had two sons and six daughters. One daughter, Georgina, married the music critic George Hogarth, and their daughter Catherine became the wife of Charles Dickens. 
Thomson was an amateur violinist and singer, and through connections with the board he gained access to the select concerts of the Edinburgh Musical Society. There he heard the best of contemporary European composers and performers. The castrato Ferdinando Tenducci made a particularly strong impact with his renditions of traditional Scots songs. Thomson was so inspired that he decided to collect, commission, and publish 'all our best melodies and songs' with 'accompaniments to them worthy of their merit' (Hadden, 20). With the financial help of Robert Arbuthnot, secretary to the board of trustees, Thomson launched the first of his publications, 'A Select Collection of Original Scotish Airs' (1793). The title-page and preface explained his intentions: he provided 'Introductory & Concluding Symphonies & Accompanyments for the Piano Forte & Violin' (often performed with cello and later with flute too); he also presented 'Select & Characteristic Verses by the most admired Scottish Poets adapted to Each Air', some of which were 'entirely new', and provided 'Suitable English verses in addition to such of the songs that are written in the Scottish Dialect'. Over the next fifty years he commissioned Pleyel, Kozeluch, Haydn, Beethoven, Hummel, and Weber to provide musical arrangements, as well as British musicians George Farquhar Graham, Henry Bishop, and Thomson's son-in-law Hogarth. Thomson was an early champion of Beethoven's works in Britain, in his capacity as one of the first directors of the Edinburgh musical festival (from 1815). In addition to his selection of lyrics from other publications, he commissioned and corresponded with around forty writers, including Robert Burns, Walter Scott, Alexander Boswell (brother of the more famous James), James Hogg, Joanna Baillie, Amelia Opie, Anne Grant, William Smyth, and Lord Byron. 
Thomson conducted his publishing business from home, and used banking and diplomatic channels to transport his correspondence and manuscripts to and from Europe. He appeared on the title-pages as the proprietor, never as the publisher. His volumes were all issued by John and Thomas Preston of London. They included drawings by R. T. Stothard, David Wilkie, David Allan, Alexander Nasmyth, and Thomson's brother David ['see below']. Thomson continued publishing and reissuing volumes until just a few years before his death. They finally numbered six volumes of Scottish airs (1793-1846), three of Welsh airs (1809-17), and two of Irish airs (1814-16). He also issued a six-volume royal octavo edition between 1822 and 1825, which was later reissued. The bibliography of his collections is complex in the extreme, and the survey by Cecil Hopkinson and C. B. Oldman (1940) is invaluable. 
Portraits reveal a serious and studious man, with spectacles and rounded features. Thomson masterminded many of the trustees' events and was well liked, and a testimonial dinner was given in his honour in Edinburgh in 1846. He remains best known as the Scottish music publisher associated with famous composers and with Robert Burns. He is unpopular with Burns readers and scholars, primarily for his adaptation and alteration of many of Burns's songs, and for his pompous obituary of the poet ('London Chronicle', July 1796). Cedric Thorpe Davie's opinion that Thomson's 'huge pretentious volumes' were a 'sad memorial to misplaced enthusiasm and ignorant amateurishness' (Davie, 16) is typical of twentieth-century musicologists. Thomson died at his home, 1 Vanburgh Place, Leith, Edinburgh, on 18 February 1851, and was buried beside his wife at Kensal Green cemetery, Middlesex. 
Thomson's brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 27303


Thomson, George (1799-1886), army officer in the East India Company, second of six sons of George Thomson of Fairley, Aberdeenshire, formerly purser, East India Company service, and his wife, Agnes, daughter of Bailie John Dingwall of Rannieston, Aberdeenshire, was born at Fairley on 19 September 1799. He was educated by a private tutor and at Addiscombe College (1814-16), and passed out in October 1816 as an engineer cadet for the Bengal service. He arrived at Calcutta on 18 September 1818, and went to Cawnpore. In 1820 he joined the recently formed Corps of Bengal Sappers and Miners, commanded by Major Thomas Anburey, at Allahabad. On 28 January 1821 he took command of the detachment of sappers at Asirgarh. In 1822 he was constructing a road between Asirgarh and Nagpur, and later between Nagpur and Chapra. From March to June 1823 he was dismantling and blowing up the fort of Mandla. He was appointed adjutant of the Bengal Sappers and Miners on 29 May, and on 5 September he was promoted lieutenant. 
In March 1824 war was declared with Burma, and in September Thomson went to Calcutta to join the pioneer department, for active service under Captain Schalch. On 14 December he left Calcutta for Chittagong, where a force of 11,000 men, under Brigadier-General Morrison of the 44th foot, had been assembled to penetrate to Ava through Arakan. Thomson was appointed field engineer to the force and placed in command of the pontoon train. On 10 January 1825 he started with Morrison's force by a route along the sea-coast, and, after crossing the Mayu estuary, a little to the west of the modern port of Akyab, advanced north-east through difficult country, and crossed the Kaladan or Great Arakan River. Thomson was almost always in front on reconnaissance, and, the forests being too thick and the rivers too deep to allow any other way of travelling, he went on foot and suffered greatly from fatigue. The approach to Arakan lay across a narrow valley, bounded by a range of hills crowned with stockades and garrisoned by 9000 Burmese. An attack on 29 March failed, but on 1 April Thomson assisted in the assault and capture of the stockades, and Arakan was taken. He was mentioned in dispatches. 
On 7 May 1825 Thomson was appointed executive engineer, south-eastern division, of the public works department, and he was busy with the erection of cantonments in Arakan at the close of the rainy season. The division suffered very heavily from the unhealthy climate. Thomson was sent to survey and report upon the best situation in the islands near the mouth of the Beatong River for cantoning the division. He returned to Bengal in September 1826. 
On 7 October 1826 Thomson was appointed executive engineer in the public works department at Neemuch, and was employed in building a fort there. He was promoted captain in the Bengal Engineers on 28 September 1827. On 6 December he was appointed to the Bengal Sappers and Miners, and on 21 February 1828 he returned to the public works department as executive engineer of the Rohilkhand division. In February 1829 he took furlough to Europe. He married in Aberdeen on 4 February 1830 Anna (1812/13-1900), daughter of Alexander Dingwall of Rannieston, Aberdeenshire, postmaster of Aberdeen, and they had several children. 
Thomson returned to India in November 1831. On 9 December 1831 he was appointed to survey the country between Bankura and Shirghatti, and to estimate the cost of constructing a road from Jemor to the Karamnasa River. He was next placed in charge of the construction of the grand trunk road between Burdwan and Benares. In 1834 he had the additional task of constructing barracks at Hazaribagh for a European regiment; in this work, despite occasional conflict with the authorities, he adopted successful methods of his own for using convict labour. 
In March 1837 Thomson was appointed to command the Bengal Sappers and Miners at Delhi, and to be at the same time executive engineer of the Delhi division of the public works department, a combination which he did not think was for the good of the service. On 13 September 1838 he was selected to be chief engineer of the army of the Indus assembling at Karnal for the invasion of Afghanistan. He marched from Delhi with two companies of sappers and miners on 20 October to Karnal, thence on 9 November to Ferozepore, and on to Bahawalpur (230 miles), where he arrived on 29 December. Rohri, on the left bank of the Indus, was reached on 24 January 1839, and the fort of Bukkur, on a rocky island between Rohri and Sukkur, on the right bank, was seized without opposition on 29 January, and preparations made by Thomson to bridge the river. The channel between Rohri and Bukkur was some 360 yards wide, and that between Bukkur and Sukkur about 130 yards, and in both the water ran very fast. Thomson had asked the political officer to assemble at Rohri materials for bridging, but when he arrived none were there. By great exertion he procured boats, cut down and split palm trees, made grass cables, constructed anchors of small trees joined together and loaded with stone, made nails on the spot, and in eleven days completed an effective pontoon bridge: a notable achievement for which he was rightly praised. 
Thomson's services were of value in the long march through the Bolan Pass to Kandahar, which was reached at the end of April. On 27 June the march was resumed. Reports by the political officers of the weakness of Ghazni had induced the commander of the expedition, Sir John Keane, to leave his small battering train at Kandahar, but on arriving at Ghazni on 21 July he found it to be a formidable fortress which could be besieged only with a regular battering train. Thomson proposed to storm it, dash to the Kabul gate, blow it in, and admit the storming party. This was successfully done by Lieutenant H. M. Durand and others on 23 July. In the assault Thomson had a narrow escape. Keane, in his dispatch, ascribed to Thomson 'much of the credit of the success of this brilliant 'coup de main'' ('LondG', 30 Oct 1839). For this Thomson was promoted brevet major, dated from the capture of Ghazni. His account, 'Storming of Ghazni', and a description of his Indus Bridge by Lieutenant H. M. Durand, were published in the 'Professional Papers of the Corps of the Royal Engineers' (1840). 
The march to Kabul was resumed on 30 July, and it was occupied on 7 August. Thomson made an expedition over the mountains to Bamian to reconnoitre the route. In November he returned to India with some of the troops. For his services in the war Thomson received the thanks of the government and was made a CB, military division (December 1839), and from Shah Shuja received the order of the Durani empire (second class). 
Thomson resumed the duties of the command of the Bengal Sappers and Miners, and of those of the public works department at Delhi; but, as he found them incompatible, a warm correspondence ensued with the military board, which resulted in Thomson's retiring from the service on 25 January 1841, despite Lord Auckland's efforts to dissuade him. He believed he had been unjustly treated by the board, and resigned disgusted at this. His health had suffered and he had lost several children; also his brother John (1801-1840), captain, Bengal Engineers, had died on 12 August 1840 and left him a considerable bequest. Before leaving India he submitted to the government suggestions for the improvement of the Bengal Sappers and Miners. 
Thomson joined a brother in business in Liverpool; but this did not prosper, he lost money, and on 24 July 1844 he was glad to accept from the East India Company the appointment of recruiting officer and paymaster of soldiers' pensions in the Cork district, with the local rank of major. The former post he held until the company ended in 1861, and the latter until 1877, when he resigned and settled in Dublin. He was promoted brevet lieutenant-colonel on 28 November 1854. He became a director of the Great Southern and Western Railway Company of Ireland in 1846, and was practically the inspecting director, superintending the completion of the southern portion of the line and of the tunnel into Cork. He was tall, wiry, and 'a favourite in society' (Vibart, 333). He died at his residence, 33 Leeson Park, Dublin, on 11 February 1886. His eldest son, Hugh Gordon, born on 21 November 1830, became major-general of the Indian staff corps, and died on 23 May 1910. 


@@@@@


doc= 27304


Thomson, Henry (1773-1843), painter and illustrator, the son of a purser in the navy, was born at St George's Square, Portsea, Hampshire, on 31 July 1773. He was at school for nearly nine years at Bishop's Waltham, Hampshire. In 1787 he went with his father to Paris, and returned to London on the outbreak of the revolution in 1789. He entered the Royal Academy Schools in 1790, and became a pupil of John Opie at about the same time; remaining Opie's friend, he finished his former master's portrait of the duke of Gloucester in 1807, when Opie was on his deathbed. In 1793 he returned to the continent with his father, to complete his studies, and travelled in Italy until 1798 -- visiting Parma, Bologna, Florence, Rome, Naples, and Venice. He returned by Vienna, Dresden, Berlin, and Hamburg in 1799. 
Back in London, Thomson became a contributor to Boydell's Shakspeare Gallery notably 'Perdita' and some subjects from 'The Tempest'. As early as 1792 he had exhibited a portrait at the Royal Academy, but he did not become a regular contributor until 1800. In 1801 he was elected an associate member of the Royal Academy and in 1804 Royal Academician, 'Prospero and Miranda' being his diploma work. From this time until 1825 he continued to exhibit many mythological and domestic subjects, as well as portraits, at the academy. Major works included 'Love Sheltered' and 'The Red Cross Knight' (both painted in 1806 and engraved in mezzotint by William Say), 'The Infancy of Jupiter' (1812; engraved by Henry Meyer), 'Eurydice' (1814; engraved by William Ward), and 'Christ Raising Jairus's Daughter' (exh. RA, 1820; Tate collection). During the same period he contributed a large number of small illustrations to 'The British Classics' (1803-10), edited by John Sharpe, and other works and portraits to 'The Theatrical Recorder' (1805). He also translated A. C. Quatremere de Quincy's 'The Destination of Works of Art' (1821). 
In 1825 Thomson was appointed keeper of the Royal Academy, in succession to Henry Fuseli, but resigned the office after two years owing to a severe illness from which he never recovered sufficiently to work again at full strength. In 1828 he retired to Portsea, where he amused himself with boating, and with making sketches of marine objects in oil on rough paper, which he presented to his friends. However, he contributed some illustrations to 'The Ladies' Pocket Magazine' (1830), and continued to exhibit paintings until 1834. He died at his home, 18 Union Street, Portsea, apparently unmarried, on 6 April 1843, and was buried in Portsmouth churchyard near his mother's grave. 'From his secluded habits very little was known of him, except that his charity was extensive considering his means' ('GM', 100). In his will Thomson made several bequests, totalling about $4000, to his friends and servants. Examples of his work are in Stourhead, Wiltshire; the Tate collection, London; and Norwich Castle Museum. 
Though Thomson's pictures were extremely popular in his own day, they were subsequently known chiefly by the good mezzotint engravings in which they were reproduced. 


@@@@@


doc= 27305


Thomson, Henry William (1822-1867), judge in Ceylon, was born in Chelsea, London, in May 1822, the son of Anthony Todd Thomson (1778-1849), physician, and his second wife, Katherine Byerley (1797-1862) ['see 'Thomson, Katherine], novelist and biographer, of an old Durham family (in 1846 he changed his second forename to Byerley). He was educated at University College, London, and at Jesus College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in 1841, was a scholar in 1844, and graduated BA as senior optime in 1846. He was admitted at the Inner Temple on 25 April 1846, called to the bar on 14 May 1849, and practised on the northern circuit. 
Thomson specialized in military and international law, and published 'Laws of War Affecting Commerce and Shipping' (1854), 'The military forces and institutions of Great Britain and Ireland: their constitution, administration, and government, military and civil' (1855), based on much unused material from parliamentary blue books and similar sources, and 'The choice of a profession: a concise account and comparative review of the English professions' (1857). 
Thomson was then living at 8 Serjeants' Inn, Temple, and professional success seemed distant when, in May 1858, he was appointed queen's advocate in Ceylon by the colonial secretary, Lord Stanley ['see 'Stanley, Edward Henry, fifteenth earl of Derby]. The same year Thomson married Mlle Sarita Beaumont; they had two sons, Henry Byerley, who took orders in 1888, and Arthur Byerley. In 1861 Thomson was promoted puisne judge of the supreme court of Colombo. He soon started work on a digest of the law as administered in Ceylon, and in 1866 he was in London superintending the publication of his most permanent memorial, 'Institutes of the Laws of Ceylon' (2 vols., 1866), which ranked as an authority together with the judgments of Sir Charles Marshall, and which, as the chief justice of Ceylon Sir Edward Creasy said at Thomson's death, 'will long be cited with admiration and gratitude'. Thomson died at Colombo, as the result of an apoplectic seizure, on 5 January 1867. He was buried that month, probably in Colombo, and was survived by his wife. 
The judge's younger brother 


@@@@@


doc= 27306


Thomson, James (1700-1748), poet, was born on 11 September 1700 (and baptized on 15 September) in the village of Ednam, 2 miles north of Kelso, Roxburghshire, the son of Thomas Thomson ('c'.1666-1716), a Presbyterian minister, and Beatrix Trotter (died 1725) of Fogo, Berwickshire, who was distantly related to the noble house of Hume. Thomas Thomson, son of Andrew Thomson, gardener, was educated at the College of Edinburgh, ordained as a Presbyterian minister, and in 1692 appointed to his native parish. 
James was the fourth child of Thomas and Beatrix, in a family of four boys and five girls. Eight weeks after his birth his father was admitted minister of Southdean, close to the English-Scottish border. This hamlet was on the upper reaches of Jed Water in the wide bare foothills of Cheviot where snow would lie until April; it was mostly a harsh landscape, but the scenery was more gentle northwards towards Jedburgh and the dales of Teviot and Tweed. Here the future poet of 'The Seasons' received his first impressions of nature. 
Thomson perhaps attended the parish school in Southdean before being sent, about 1712, to the ancient grammar school that was housed in a transept of the abbey church at Jedburgh. He was a mediocre scholar, but began to write poetry under the encouragement of two men -- the scholar, poet, farmer, and (from 1717) Presbyterian minister Robert Riccaltoun (1691-1769), and Sir William Bennet (died 1729), a whig laird who was also a patron of Allan Ramsay (1686-1758). In autumn 1715 Thomson entered the College of Edinburgh. On 9 February 1716 his father died, probably of an apoplectic stroke, though local legend said he was struck by a ball of fire while carrying out an exorcism. Thomson completed his arts course at Edinburgh (Latin, Greek, logic, metaphysics, ethics, and natural science) by 1719, but did not choose to graduate. He entered Divinity Hall, Edinburgh, as a candidate for the Presbyterian ministry, supported by bursaries from the Jedburgh presbytery from 1720 to 1724. He studied divinity for over five years and performed the homilies, lectures, and other public exercises needed to qualify him for the pulpit, but also joined fellow collegians in secular literary clubs devoted to discussion and imitation of modern English authors. Among the lifelong friends he made at Edinburgh were the writers David Malloch, later Mallet (died 1765), Patrick Murdoch (died 1774), and William Paterson (died in or after 1760). 
Thomson's first published poems appeared in the 'Edinburgh Miscellany' (January 1720); one of them, 'Of a Country Life', a short georgic distantly modelled on John Gay's 'Rural Sports', anticipates in little 'The Seasons'. Another poem, 'Psalm 104 paraphrazed', was seen in manuscript by the critic William Benson (1682-1754), who said that if its author were in London he would meet with encouragement equal to his merit. David Malloch migrated to London in 1723 and had verse published there the following year. Encouraged by his example, Thomson sailed from Leith in February 1725. 
Thomson went to London almost certainly with literary ambitions, thinking of English ordination only as a last resort, but his first employment was as tutor to the four-year-old son of the poet Charles Hamilton, Lord Binning (1697-1732), a post probably obtained through Hamilton's mother-in-law, Lady Grisell Baillie, a distant cousin of Thomson's mother. Through Malloch, who had now Anglicized his name to Mallet, and through introductions provided by well-wishers in Scotland, he soon made the acquaintance of English poets, including Richard Savage, Aaron Hill, John Dyer, and Alexander Pope, and influential expatriate Scots such as Duncan Forbes, the artist William Aikman, and the duke of Montrose, Mallet's patron. Aikman painted Thomson's portrait in 1725 or 1726. Thomson's mother died on 12 May 1725 in Edinburgh. He wrote an elegy upon her, but the most notable works from his first year in England were early versions of a 'Hymn on Solitude' (influenced by Milton's 'Il Penseroso') and 'Winter', a blank-verse poem of nature description with devotional overtones, prompted by one of Riccaltoun's poems, perhaps 'A Winter's Day' (first printed in 'GM', 1st ser., 10, 1740, 256). 

'Winter' was published in April 1726 by John Millan, who, it was said, paid 3 guineas for the copy; it was dedicated to Sir Spencer Compton, speaker of the House of Commons, who tardily gave the author a present of 20 guineas. In June a second, revised and enlarged edition appeared, with a preface in which Thomson disparages satire and advocates sublime verse on lofty themes. By then he was writing 'Summer' and had left Lord Binning's household in order to act as tutor to a young gentleman at Watts's academy in Little Tower Street. 'Summer' was published in February 1727 and was dedicated to George Bubb Dodington -- like Compton, a prominent whig politician, but a far more generous and enduring patron. 'Summer' is descriptive and devotional, but it is also the first poem in which Thomson gives prominence to the Newtonian scientific ideas he had encountered in his fourth year at Edinburgh and had grasped more surely at Watts's academy, where one of his colleagues was the mathematician James Stirling (1692-1770). There is more Newtonian science in Thomson's next publication, a 'Poem to the Memory of Sir Isaac Newton' (May 1727), dedicated to Sir Robert Walpole, who responded with a gift of $50. Thomson's poem is an apotheosis rather than an elegy: it is a hymn on the works and wonders of almighty power in which the imagination follows Newton's soul on a great celestial voyage. 
Shortly afterwards Thomson left Watts's academy, hoping to live by his pen. He acquired more patrons, notably Frances Seymour, countess of Hertford, and Thomas Rundle, future bishop of Derry, who introduced him to Charles Talbot (1685-1737), solicitor-general. From 1727 Thomson was a regular summer guest at the country seats of Dodington, Talbot, and Lord and Lady Hertford. On his first visit to Eastbury, Dodington's mansion in Dorset, he met Voltaire, who later wrote of Thomson, 'I discovered in him a great genius and a great Simplicity, I liked in him the poet and the true philosopher, I mean the Lover of Mankind' (McKillop, 212). Johnson's assertion that Lady Hertford discontinued her invitations after Thomson's first visit to Marlborough Castle, Wiltshire, because he 'took more delight in carousing with lord Hertford and his friends than assisting her ladyship's poetical operations' is not true (Johnson, 'Poets', 3.287): Thomson's visits continued for more than ten years, during which he and the countess wrote a number of pleasing songs for one another. That said, Thomson was a keen and practised drinker. 
In January 1728 Thomson issued proposals to publish 'The Seasons' by subscription. This did not prevent him from publishing 'Spring', dedicated to Lady Hertford, on his own account in June 1728, apparently with little success, because in January 1729 the bookseller Andrew Millar bought up remainder copies and reissued them over his own imprint. January 1729 also saw publication of Thomson's first politically controversial poem, 'Britannia', which called for greater belligerence from the British government towards Spain. Four short poems of his, including the 'Hymn on Solitude' and 'The Happy Man', a eulogy of Dodington, were printed in 'Ralph's Miscellany' (April 1729) and he began to write his first play. 
By writing for the stage Thomson associated himself with his friend Aaron Hill's project to revive high-classical tragedy. Thomson's 'Sophonisba', set in ancient Carthage and based on a story from the Second Punic War, opened at Drury Lane on 28 February 1730, and, though Johnson observed that in its splendid audience 'nobody was much affected, and that the company rose as from a moral lecture' (Johnson, 'Poets', 3.288), it had a moderately successful run of ten nights, giving the author three benefit performances. One line, 'Oh Sophonisba! Sophonisba Oh!' (III.ii.19), was promptly parodied as 'Oh Jemmy Thompson! Jemmy Thompson Oh!' in an anonymous 'Criticism on the New 'Sophonisba'', and, a year later, as 'Oh! 'Huncamunca', 'Huncamunca', oh!' (II.v.1), in Henry Fielding's 'Tragedy of Tragedies' (1731), but Thomson was so little moved that he allowed the line to stand in all new editions of the printed play in his lifetime. The prologue to 'Sophonisba' was written by Pope and Mallet and the play was dedicated to Queen Caroline, probably through the agency of Lady Hertford, who was a lady of the queen's bedchamber. 
The queen also headed a glittering list of subscribers to 'The Seasons' in June 1730. The subscription quarto edition, which was also sold to the public through the trade, was printed by Thomson's friend Samuel Richardson and illustrated by engravings after William Kent. The poem now included 'Autumn', dedicated to Arthur Onslow, Compton's successor as speaker, and a concluding 'Hymn', as well as revised, enlarged texts of the three previously published 'Seasons'. The general tendency of the revisions, despite the addition of a pantheistic 'Hymn', is to make the poem more secular; it is more excursive, patriotic, and overtly whiggish than the earlier texts. 
By the middle of 1730, five years after leaving Scotland, Thomson had achieved a measure of fame and fortune. He had received royal notice as playwright and poet, he enjoyed the friendship and respect of men of wit, and the support of some discriminating patrons; his 'Seasons' had attracted 457 subscriptions at 1 guinea or more each, and he had profited from three author's benefit nights in the theatre and the sale of copyrights to booksellers: 'Spring' and 'Sophonisba' for $137 10's'. to Millar in January 1730 and all the other long blank-verse poems for $105 to Millan in July 1729. 
From November 1730 to early 1733 Thomson was in France and Italy, with an allowance of $200 p.a., as travelling companion of Charles Richard Talbot, eldest son of the solicitor-general. There are tantalizingly few surviving records of their travels, so the only places it is now certain they visited are Paris, Lyons, Rome, Florence, Naples, and Petrarch's Fontaine de Vaucluse, near Avignon. The only people it is now certain they met were English or Scots: Joseph Spence, John Forbes (son of Duncan), Lord Binning, and Lady Grisell Baillie. From this period there are only three surviving letters by Thomson and none to him, though Johnson testifies that Pope wrote to him: 'he had much regard for Thomson, and once expressed it in a poetical Epistle sent to Italy, of which, however, he abated the value by transplanting some of the lines into his 'Epistle to Arbuthnot'. (Johnson, 'Poets', 3.291)' Travel for the most part confirmed Thomson's patriotic insularity. Seeing Voltaire's 'Brutus' acted in Paris made him wonder what ideas a French audience might take from an old Roman republican declaiming on liberty; nevertheless he was impressed by French public work and cultural achievements. In Italy he thought the statues and paintings were fine enough, but he was more struck by poverty and misery brought about by bad government, civil and religious, and a potentially beautiful landscape made barren. His next long poem, 'Liberty', was prompted by those impressions of Italy, but the only poem he is known to have written abroad is a moving elegy in heroic couplets on his friend William Aikman, the painter, who died in June 1731. On 27 September 1733 Charles Richard Talbot died, but his tutor was not forgotten by his father, who, on becoming lord chancellor a month later, appointed Thomson secretary of the briefs in the court of chancery. The income from this sinecure (after payment to a deputy to carry out the duties of the post) was said to be $300 p.a., later reduced to a nominal $100, of which Thomson received nothing. 
Though Talbot was Walpole's lord chancellor, his relations with Walpole became strained in 1734; also his son William opposed Walpole in the Commons. Another of Thomson's patrons, Dodington, had gravitated to the opposition court of Frederick, prince of Wales. Government corruption at home had grown worse in the years when Thomson was abroad. Such factors drew him into the orbit of the prince, who, unlike his father, was an appreciative patron of literature. Thomson's new long blank-verse poem, 'Liberty', was therefore dedicated to Frederick. This whiggish historical narrative traces the rise and fall of liberty in ancient Greece and Rome and in modern Europe until its perfection in England at the revolution of 1688. The poem ends, however, as it had begun, among the ruins of Rome, with an implicit warning that luxury and political corruption might ruin even Britain. Thomson set great store by 'Liberty'; so did Andrew Millar, who paid $250 for the copyright in December 1734. The poem was published in five parts, three in early 1735, the remaining two a year later, and its ill-success is measured by a print order that diminished from 3250 copies of the first part to 1250 of the last two parts. Even so, Thomson wished to be known as the author of this poem, for his portrait by Stephen Slaughter shows him holding a drawing of personified Liberty. Verses by G. W. (probably Gilbert West, (1703-1756)) on this portrait appeared in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1st ser., 6, 1736). 
After returning from the continent in 1733 Thomson lived in or near the Strand, close to where he had lodged on his first arrival in London eight years earlier. By April 1736, though, he had moved to a cottage in Kew Foot Lane, in the fashionable village of Richmond, from which (being no horseman) he regularly walked to visit friends in London, 9 or 10 miles away, with The Doves inn at Hammersmith as his customary watering hole. Other friends were closer to hand, such as Pope at Twickenham and Mallet at Strand on the Green. Thomson was often visited by Pope, dressed in a light-coloured greatcoat which he commonly kept on in the house, and Thomson was always admitted to Pope, whether he had company or was alone. 
Most of Thomson's relatives were in Scotland, but were not forgotten. He gave his younger unmarried sisters, Jean and Elizabeth, capital to enable them to set up a milliner's shop in Edinburgh and he funded medical treatment for his youngest brother, John, who died in September 1735. A death with more effect on Thomson's pocket was that of his patron Charles Talbot on 14 February 1737. Talbot's successor as lord chancellor was Philip Yorke, earl of Hardwicke, a closer ally of Walpole than Talbot had been. Thomson had moved with Talbot's son William into opposition. Consequently his secretaryship was not renewed by the incoming lord chancellor, though some early biographers claimed that he could have kept the post had he not been too indolent to reapply for it. Whether or not that was so, he lost no time in writing a long blank-verse, 'Poem to the Memory of Lord Talbot', dedicated to William, now Lord Talbot, and published by Millar in June 1737. In September of that year Thomson's congratulatory 'Ode' to the prince of Wales, published in several newspapers less than a week after the prince was expelled from his father's court, stridently proclaimed Thomson's political position. 
Thomson was habitually careless in money matters. There is a story that after he lost his secretaryship he was imprisoned for debt of nearly $70 and released through the generosity of the actor James Quin. Certainly, the epicurean, witty Quin was a close friend of Thomson and a congenial spirit. So was the poet Richard Savage, whose notoriously irregular habits made him an impossible house guest for normal families. Their presence in Kew Foot Lane, or coming home drunk from The Castle inn, Richmond, at four in the morning, was a trial to Thomson's housekeeper, Mrs Hobart, but not to her bachelor master, who disliked regular hours and loved food, drink, and wit. Savage was master of ceremonies when Thomson was admitted freemason on 9 September 1737, along with two Scots bachelor poet friends, John Armstrong and William Paterson. It was about this time that Thomson was befriended by George Lyttelton, who would become his chief patron in the last decade of his life. Lyttelton, the prince of Wales's secretary, introduced Thomson to the prince, who interrogated him about his affairs and, receiving the reply that 'they were in a more poetical posture than formerly', allowed him a pension of $100 per annum (Johnson, 'Poets', 3.291). 
April 1738 saw the performance at Drury Lane of Thomson's second heroic tragedy, 'Agamemnon'. The name part was taken by Quin, but he was not the leading character. As in Thomson's 'Sophonisba', the emotional and dramatic centre of the play is a woman: in this case Clytemnestra, played by Mary Porter. 'Agamemnon' ran for nine nights (three author's benefit performances), but was never revived. It was heavily cut during the run in order to make it more acceptable to audiences who had no taste for the long declamations so typical of Thomson's plays. Two performances were by command of the prince and princess of Wales, and the printed play, published by Andrew Millar, was dedicated to the princess. Pope, who had written letters of recommendation to the theatre managers, appeared in a box on the first night and was recognized with a round of applause. He rarely attended the theatre: his presence on this occasion displayed his friendship for Thomson and his own politics. The evil counsellor in 'Agamemnon' is all too clearly intended to represent Sir Robert Walpole, as Pope himself underlined a month later in his 'Dialogue I', line 51, when he cited Aegisthus as a name for Walpole. 
Two slighter pieces of opposition polemic in 1738 were a reprint of 'Britannia' and Thomson's preface to a cheap edition of Milton's 'Areopagitica', both published by Andrew Millar, who became Thomson's sole publisher when, in June 1738, he bought all of Millan's Thomson copyrights. Thomson dined with the arch-tory Bolingbroke at Pope's house in July 1738, but he was more often in the company of the opposition whig George Lyttelton, and he readily lent himself to the political literary campaign orchestrated by Lyttelton on behalf of the prince of Wales. Thomson was one of three opposition playwrights who, early in 1739, had tragedies ready for the stage: the plays were Mallet's 'Mustapha', Henry Brooke's 'Gustavus Vasa', and Thomson's 'Edward and Eleonora', all of which parade high-minded patriotic sentiments and denounce evil ministers. 
Thomson wrote the prologue to 'Mustapha'. He alludes to the play's political theme of the monarch, 'To the false herd of flattering slaves confin'd' (line 18), but his remarks on the psychological effect of tragedy more interestingly throw light upon the aim of his own work. His tragic muse is a 'Queen of soft sorrows, and of useful fears' (line 6); tragedy should make the good man better and the bad man repentant. Pope, who read 'Edward and Eleonora' at this time, declared that Thomson excelled in the pathetic. Certainly this play is Thomson's most sentimental. It is based on the story of Prince Edward being stabbed by a poisoned dagger during the last crusade and his wife sucking the poison from his wound: so a woman is again at the drama's emotional centre. 
On 16 March 1739 the acting of 'Gustavus Vasa' was forbidden by the lord chamberlain: it was thus the first play to fall foul of the 1737 'Licensing Act'. Eleven days later, and two days before it was due to open at Covent Garden, 'Edward and Eleonora' was banned too. This play was on the whole far less politically contentious than 'Agamemnon', but a few speeches in which, for instance, Prince Edward is begged to save his father and his country from evil ministers were undoubtedly provocative. As the stage licenser received the text of 'Edward and Eleonora' as early as 23 February, his last-minute prohibition, after actors and theatre management had invested much time and money, was admonitory and vindictive. Thomson lost his benefit nights, but profited when he published subscription and trade editions of the play in May 1739. It was dedicated to the princess of Wales and carried a note about its prohibition, printed in Gothic lettering to remind readers of ancient liberties now at risk through the 'Licensing Act'. 'Edward and Eleonora' was first acted in 1775 and revived successfully several times in the last quarter of the century. John Wesley ('Journal', 14 Oct 1772) thought it was Thomson's masterpiece. 
The profit from 'Edward and Eleonora' enabled Thomson to move to a larger cottage (with seven rooms and a kitchen), further down Kew Foot Lane and next to Richmond Gardens. His first production after this move was 'Alfred: a Masque', which glorifies the idea of a patriot king, implicitly embodied in Frederick, prince of Wales. This work was written in collaboration with Mallet and was first performed on 1 August 1740, by command of the prince, in the garden at Cliveden House, his country retreat on the Thames, near Maidenhead. The performers were professional actors, singers, and dancers from the London theatres; the music was composed by Thomas Augustine Arne. Earliest newspaper reports attribute the words solely to Thomson, but the advertisement to a revised version published over Mallet's sole name in 1751, after Thomson's death, suggests that he wrote the larger share of the 1740 text also. This is probably true, though Mallet on other occasions was not above claiming other men's work as his own. What is beyond dispute is that Thomson wrote the words of the best-known song in 'Alfred': 'Rule Britannia' ['see also 'Britannia]. 
Thomson now enjoyed an uncertain but not inconsiderable income from his writings and pension, though he was notoriously careless about money: he lived on long credit, settling his accounts erratically but generously. His indolence was well known. It was said that, at Eastbury, he ate the ripe side of peaches hanging on the tree, without taking his hands from his pockets. Also that, at home in Richmond, he was found in bed one day at 2 p.m. by Charles Burney, the musicologist, who asked him why he was in bed at that hour and received the reply: 'I had no motive to rise' ('Public Advertiser', 16 April 1790). In his forties Thomson was apparently settled into a confirmed, easy-going, self-indulgent bachelor's life of late hours, over-eating, and hard drinking with witty and sociable male friends. However, it seems that late in 1742 he fell in love with a Richmond neighbour. She was Elizabeth Young, sister-in-law of a Scots physician at Kew with whom Thomson was friendly. He declared his love in a vehement letter of 10 March 1743 and in a series of agitated letters and love lyrics through the following two and a half years. 
Little is known about Elizabeth Young. It seems that she was red-haired, and that, like Thomson, she spoke with a broad Scots brogue. Further testimony is contradictory: she is described on the one hand as a quick-tempered, harsh-tongued tomboy, on the other as a gentle-mannered, elegant-minded woman. There is general agreement, though, that her mother (the widow of a naval captain) was a coarse, vulgar woman, and that she opposed the match because Thomson's financial prospects were uncertain. Reportedly, she said to her daughter, 'What! would you marry Thomson? He will make ballads and you will sing them' ('Universal Magazine', 67, 1780, 368). Her daughter may have seen other objections too. For all his poetic sensibility, Thomson gormandized and drank heavily; he carried himself awkwardly, had run to fat, was negligent in his dress, and sweated copiously; his love letters are eloquent but perhaps too self-pitying to please a woman of spirit. There is no evidence that Elizabeth Young ever encouraged Thomson's advances, and the man she married -- a gallant, talented, tall, handsome, wealthy naval officer (a future admiral) -- was as unlike Thomson as can be imagined. Nevertheless she carefully preserved Thomson's letters: they are now in the Pierpont Morgan Library, New York. 
Thomson's letters repeatedly assure Miss Young that his love for her will inspire him to overcome his indolent habits, and perhaps this was so (up to a point) because in the eighteen months following his proposal of marriage he wrote 'Tancred and Sigismunda' and parts of 'The Castle of Indolence' and 'Coriolanus'; he also planned a tragedy on Socrates and revised 'The Seasons'. This last project may have arisen from the reversion of copyright to Thomson fourteen years after the contracts of 1729-30. It was a very thorough revision, some of which was done at Hagley Hall, Worcestershire, where Thomson was the guest of George Lyttelton in August and September 1743. The manuscript of these revisions shows many by Lyttelton, generally in the interests of decorum or metrical regularity. Thomson's compliance was remembered twenty years later by James Grainger (died 1766), when he sent a poetical manuscript to friends and wrote: 'let Mr Shenstone know, that I can bear to have my verses butchered, as Thomson used to call it' (Nichols, 'Illustrations', 7, 1848, 279). 
The revised edition of 'The Seasons', published in June 1744, was enlarged to include more georgic material, such as fishing in 'Spring' and sheep-shearing in 'Summer', more tropical excursions (on fruits, beasts, sandstorms, hurricanes, plagues), and more compliments to opposition politicians. Additionally, hundreds of small revisions improved the precision, harmony, or vividness of the poem. Each 'season' retained the verse dedication to its original patron -- Lady Hertford, Dodington, Onslow, and Compton -- but the whole work was now dedicated to Frederick, prince of Wales. With further minor revisions in 1745 and 1746, this was the text by which 'The Seasons' became best known. It was influentially translated into German by Brockes (1745) and imitated in French by Saint-Lambert (1769). 
Before the end of 1744 Thomson had completed 'Tancred and Sigismunda', a tragedy set in twelfth-century Sicily, with a complicated love-and-honour plot from Le Sage's 'Gil Blas'. It was acted for nine nights (three author's benefit performances) at Drury Lane in March and April 1745, with David Garrick in the lead. Thomson wrote both prologue and epilogue: the latter was an unusual protest against customary flippant epilogues to serious plays. His new play marked the end of a development from 'Sophonisba', through 'Agamemnon' and 'Edward and Eleonora', which drew Thomson away from the historical and heroic towards the melodramatic, sentimental, and domestic. After 'Rule Britannia', it proved to be his most popular work for the theatre: it was revived on the London stage in most seasons to the 1790s, was still being acted as late as 1819, and was translated into German in part by Lessing and by Schlegel. 
Pitt and Lyttelton interested themselves in the first production by attending rehearsals and giving instruction to the players. As the play's political theme, insofar as it has one, is reconciliation rather than conflict, those quondam opposition patriots were making a political signal by their attendance: a point noted by satirists. Walpole had fallen in 1742; Lyttelton joined the new ministry under Pelham in December 1744 and Pitt lent his support to that ministry; both men withdrew from the prince of Wales's service. Thomson was still the prince's man to the extent that he dedicated the printed text of 'Tancred and Sigismunda' (considerably longer than the successfully acted version) to Frederick. However, the eventual result of Lyttelton's defection from the prince's court was that Thomson lost his pension. It is not clear whether this occurred before or after May 1746 when, thanks to Lyttelton's influence in government, Thomson was appointed, jointly with his old college friend William Paterson, to the office of surveyor-general of customs for the Leeward Islands. Paterson went to Barbados and carried out the duties of the post for $400 per annum while Thomson remained in Richmond and received, it was said, $300 per annum as a sinecure. 
With his added wealth Thomson doubled the size of his garden at Richmond, built a hothouse and greenhouse, and employed two nephews as gardeners. Here he continued to entertain old friends and new literary acquaintances, including William Collins and Joseph Warton. Aged forty-six Thomson had his portrait painted by John Patoun: it was an unprepossessing likeness, said by William Pitt to be 'beastly like'. A new edition of 'The Seasons', with the author's last revisions, was published in May 1746: 4000 copies were printed -- more than any earlier edition of that poem (though Thomson's plays each sold 4500 copies). 
Thomson completed 'Coriolanus' before the end of 1746. This play's theme is the invasion of a country by one of its natives and it was written during and just after the Jacobite rising of 1745, but it contains no obvious reference to contemporary politics. Rather it is a series of cerebral debates upon the just war, the legitimacy of revenge, the individual person's duty to the community, and other such general politico-moral questions. Its lack of dramatic action may have deterred theatre managers, though Thomson and his friends blamed rivalry between Garrick and Quin as to who should take the role of Coriolanus for the fact that the play was not staged during the remaining eighteen months of Thomson's life. 
Thomson's 'The Castle of Indolence', published in May 1748, was conceived about 1733 as detached Spenserian stanzas satirizing himself and friends. By 1742, when Thomas Morell (1703-1784), curate at Kew Chapel, wrote his Spenserian stanzas about Thomson's poem, its non-completion because of its author's indolence was a joke among those friends, some of whom are identifiable among the castle-dwellers in the completed poem. One of them, the physician John Armstrong (1708/9-1779), contributed four stanzas on diseases resulting from indolence. Thomson himself is in the poem as a bard 'more fat than bard beseems' (canto 1, line 604). The castle is described seductively as an earthly paradise, presided over by a smooth-tongued epicurean wizard, but in the second canto of the poem it is overthrown by a stern and energetic 'Knight of Industry'. Thomson's conventional message is that the penalty of Adam is hard, but idleness is worse. However, the poem also implicitly dramatizes a conflict between the didactic public poet and the romantic dreamer. Canto 1, stanza 40, has perhaps the earliest published reference in English to the Aeolian harp. This device is the subject of an ode by Thomson in the second edition of Dodsley's 'Collection of Poems' (June 1748); Thomson's 'Hymn on Solitude' and 'The Happy Man' had appeared in the first edition (January 1748). 
These were the last publications of Thomson's lifetime. Having overheated himself walking one summer evening from central London to Hammersmith, he took a boat for the rest of the journey to Kew and caught a chill, from which he had not fully recovered before he exposed himself once more to the evening dews. This brought on a tertian fever and then a malignant nervous fever, from which he died on 27 August 1748, at his house in Kew Foot Lane. His physician friends John Armstrong and William Robertson (brother-in-law of Elizabeth Young) were with him at the end. Thomson's remains were buried under a plain stone in the north-west corner of St Mary's Church, Richmond, on 29 August. It seems that the wake was as drunken as Thomson could have wished (see his 'Seasons', 'Autumn', 565-9), for it is said that an unidentified clergyman 'boasted, that at a supper after Thomson's funeral, he left Quin drunk under the table, whilst he was able to walk home' (R. O. Cambridge, 'Works', 1803, 50n.). 
Thomson died intestate and, it was said, hundreds of pounds in debt through ill economy. Letters of administration were granted to Lyttelton and to the diplomat Andrew Mitchell (1708-1771) in the interest of Thomson's sisters Mary Craig and Jean Thomson, both still living in Scotland. 'Coriolanus' was staged at Covent Garden; it ran for ten nights in January 1749, providing three benefit nights. Quin took the lead and unaffectedly wept as he spoke an emotional prologue written by Lyttelton. In May, William Collins's noble 'Ode on the Death of Thomson' was published. Thomson's effects, including his library, were sold in May 1749, after which his house was bought by his friend George Ross, who enlarged it. Later, in the ownership of Admiral Boscawen's widow, the house was a shrine of literary pilgrimage; in the 1860s it was incorporated into the buildings of Richmond Royal Hospital. In February 1750 Millar issued a new edition of Thomson's 'Works', with many unauthorized revisions and cuts made by Lyttelton to the great confusion of later editors, but no doubt to the profit of Thomson's estate. Thus Thomson's debts were cleared and 'a handsome sum' was remitted to Mary and Jean; this included $200 paid by Millar in February 1751 for Thomson's latest copyrights. Seemingly, the generous Millar bought 'Alfred' (which he regarded as Thomson's) and 'Coriolanus' twice over. 

'Tancred and Sigismunda' held the stage for over half a century, as did the last three acts of 'Coriolanus', conflated with two acts of Shakespeare in versions of 'Coriolanus' by Thomas Sheridan (1752) and John Philip Kemble (1789). All six plays were often reprinted, almost invariably in Lyttelton's greatly impaired versions (the last example as recently as 1979), but one suspects that, like 'Liberty', they were little regarded. 'The Castle of Indolence' contributed notably to the romantic vogue for Spenserian imitation and never lacked appreciative readers, but for most of the time since his death Thomson has been regarded primarily as the poet of 'The Seasons'. Over four hundred editions of this poem, including translations, were published before the flood of reprints began to slacken in the 1870s. Coleridge found a little worn-out copy of 'The Seasons' in the parlour of an obscure country ale-house and exclaimed ''That' is true fame!' (W. Hazlitt, 'My First Acquaintance with Poets', 'The Liberal', April 1823). 

'The Seasons' provided subjects for Haydn's oratorio and for artists as various as William Kent, Richard Wilson, Thomas Gainsborough, J. M. W. Turner, Henry Fuseli, William Etty, and Richard Westall. It did much to establish natural description as a proper subject and blank verse as a normal medium for long serious poems. Though not strictly a didactic or topographical poem itself, it gave impetus to a stream of blank-verse georgics and loco-descriptive poems in the second half of the eighteenth century. More significantly it was Thomson who, with Young and Cowper, showed how the sublimity of 'Paradise Lost' might be reshaped and internalized to suit the intellectual and spiritual concerns of their own age, and thereby prepared the way for Wordsworth. After Wordsworth's death Thomson still had a large popular readership, but was no longer a significant influence upon other poets. At the beginning of the twenty-first century most general readers know Thomson only through short passages of 'The Seasons' in anthologies. The chorus of 'Rule Britannia' remains a kind of national anthem, but very few of its singers could say who wrote the words. 
The earliest lives of Thomson were written by compatriot friends: Robert Shiels (died 1753) in Cibber's 'Lives of the Poets' (1753), and Patrick Murdoch in a subscription edition of Thomson's 'Works' published by Millar (1762). Shiels, unusually among early critics, found in Thomson's 'Castle of Indolence' 'more genius and poetical judgment than all his other works put together' (Cibber, 205). Subscriptions to Murdoch's 1762 edition and profits donated by Millar paid for the monument to Thomson, designed by Robert Adam and carved by Michael Spang, that stands between Shakespeare and Rowe in Westminster Abbey. Nearly fifty years later, thanks to the enthusiasm of David Steuart Erskine, earl of Buchan, a commemorative obelisk was raised on Ednam Hill, near Thomson's birthplace. Buchan was one of many eighteenth- and nineteenth-century writers who contributed to biographical information on Thomson, down to Leon Morel's thorough critical biography in 1895. Twentieth-century Thomson scholarship benefited most from McKillop's edition of the letters and his background studies. The fullest critical biographies to date are by Douglas Grant (1951) and James Sambrook (1991). 


@@@@@


doc= 27307


Thomson, James (1786-1849), mathematician, was born on 13 November 1786 at Annaghmore, near Ballynahinch, co. Down, the third son of James Thomson, farmer, and his wife, Agnes Nesbitt. The Thomsons had settled in presbyterian Ulster, having migrated in the 1640s from Ayrshire to escape religious persecution from episcopacy. Beyond the rudiments of education from his father James was largely self-taught. He made for himself a sundial and a night-dial (by which to tell the time by one of the stars of Ursa Major) and at the age of eleven or twelve he worked out, with the aid of slate and stone, how to make dials for any latitude. At the same age he witnessed the battle of Ballynahinch when the presbyterian United Irishmen's vision of an independent united republic was vanquished. Seeing the wanton destruction of the town by the king's forces, and the futility of the armed rebellion, moulded the young Thomson, whose lifelong radicalism would lead him to challenge all manner of establishments. 
About 1800 Thomson attended the school opened by a secessionist presbyterian minister, Samuel Edgar, to prepare intelligent young men for the ministry. There he studied mathematics and classics, and by the age of twenty-one he: 'was teaching eight hours a day at Dr Edgar's, and during the extra hours -- often fagged and comparatively listless -- I was reading Greek and Latin to prepare me for entering College, which I did not do till nearly two years after. (Smith and Wise, 8)' In 1810 he entered Glasgow University, supporting himself through the six-month winter sessions by teaching at Dr Edgar's during the summer. In 1812 he graduated MA, then took medical and theological courses, intending to become a minister. However, the launch of a radical educational enterprise in Belfast redirected his ambitions. Appointed in 1814 to teach arithmetic, geography, and bookkeeping in the school department, and in 1815 as professor of mathematics in the college department, of the Belfast Academical Institution, Thomson found himself among like-minded liberal and radical presbyterians eager for religious and economic reform. 
Within that circle Thomson met Margaret Gardner ('c'.1790-1830), daughter of William Gardner, a well-to-do merchant from Glasgow; they married in 1817. The Thomsons settled in a town house in College Square East, facing the institution, where their seven children were born. Throughout these Belfast years Thomson published a series of school textbooks: 'A Treatise on Arithmetic in Theory and Practice' (1819); 'Trigonometry, Plane and Spherical' (1820); 'Introduction to Modern Geography' (1827); and 'The Differential and Integral Calculus' (1831). His textbooks avoided everything of a metaphysical or disputed character, and aimed to be useful to the growing mercantile classes. Thomson was free to adopt and teach the methods of the continental analysts which he eagerly procured and studied. 
Thomson was awarded the honorary degree of LLD from Glasgow in 1829. Following the death of his wife in 1830, he accepted the offer of the chair of mathematics in Glasgow College. Moving with his young family to Glasgow just after the city's first major cholera epidemic in 1832, he discovered that his predecessor had not only failed to maintain authority over a declining class but also continued to be entitled to the salary attached to the mathematics chair, the new professor receiving only income from student fees. Moreover, the college was dominated by a tory oligarchy, led by the redoubtable principal, Duncan Macfarlan, opposed to all reform of the university to meet the needs of a rapidly industrializing city. Alone at first, but increasingly building a powerful radical and whig network of reform-minded allies among the newer generation of professors, Thomson championed the causes of the disenfranchised regius professors (who were denied equality with college professors) and of the abolition of university tests (by which anyone appointed to a Scottish university chair had to sign allegiance to the presbyterian Westminster confession of faith). Thomson's reform campaigns began fundamentally to change the character of Glasgow University from that of an ancient, inward-looking corporation whose primary function was the training of ministers of the established kirk to that of a knowledge-producing institution whose aims harmonized with the industrial, progressive goals of the second city of the empire. Thomson successfully promoted the election of his second son, William Thomson, later Lord Kelvin (1824-1907), to the moribund chair of natural philosophy in 1846. He did not live to see his first son, James Thomson (1822-1892), occupy the chair of engineering from 1872. 
During his Glasgow years Thomson rebuilt the mathematics classes, and educated his children. By 1842 he had 160 students, his best year so far. Textbook publication also prospered. He edited a version of Euclid's 'Elements of Geometry' (1834) while 'An Elementary Treatise on Algebra Theoretical and Practical' (1844) went through three editions in less than two years. Earlier texts went through successive editions, 'Arithmetic' reaching its seventy-second edition by 1880. In 1845 his net profits on all his texts amounted to a substantial $378. The recently established national schools in Ireland accounted in part for the huge demand and conformed to Thomson's conviction that practical, useful knowledge was the means by which to destroy sectarianism of all kinds within his native land. About 1845 he seemed likely to be appointed principal of the new Queen's College in Belfast, but was passed over in favour of an ordained clergyman. Less than four years later the second major cholera epidemic struck Glasgow and he died of the disease, on 12 January 1849. 


@@@@@


doc= 27308


Thomson, James (bap. 1788, d. 1850), engraver, was baptized on 5 May 1788 at Mitford, Northumberland, the fourth son of James Thomson, curate then rector of Ormesby, Yorkshire, and his wife, Ann. His name is often misspellt 'Thompson', both on his work and in art dictionaries. Because he showed an interest in art, he was sent to London to be articled to an engraver named Mackenzie in Margaret Street, and was given up for lost by his family when he took nine weeks to reach London by boat from South Shields. After completing a gruelling apprenticeship with Mackenzie ('c'.1803- 'c'.1810) he worked for two years under Anthony Cardon and then established himself independently. He married a Miss Lloyd of Rhayader and had two daughters, Eliza and Ann, who married Frederick Goodall RA. He joined the Artists' Annuity Fund in 1825 and signed the 1837 petition. 
Thomson became an accomplished engraver, employing both stipple and a mixed style of etching and line or stipple. He produced figure and portrait engravings. Much of his earliest work was after reliefs and sculpture, including plates for the annuals after Francis Chantrey, John Flaxman, Richard Westmacott, Edward Baily, and William Wyon. However, he is best known for his portraits, of which he completed a large number for important illustrated works such as E. Lodge's 'Portraits of Illustrious Personages of Great Britain' (4 vols., 1821-34), Horace Walpole's 'Anecdotes of Painting', ed. J. Dallaway (5 vols., 1826-8), C. Heath's 'Book of Beauty' (1833-49), 'The Keepsake', and 'A Description of the Collection of Ancient Marbles in the British Museum' (1812-61). A stipple portrait, 'John Britton', after R. W. Satchwell and T. Uwins, was the frontispiece to Britton's 'Autobiography' (1850). Further portraits appeared in 'The Imperial Dictionary of Universal Biography' (1861). Thomson's principal single plates include portraits of Lydia Storey, after Sir Thomas Lawrence (1826), John Wesley, after John Jackson (1828), Queen Victoria riding with Lord Melbourne, after Sir Francis Grant, Prince Albert, after Sir William Charles Ross, and Louis-Philippe and his queen, a pair, after E. Dubufe (1850). He also executed a number of figure subjects, including works by David Wilkie and Rembrandt, and 'Royal Recreation', after his own work. R. A. Artlett was his pupil. He died at his house at 97 Albany Street, Regent's Park, London, on 27 September 1850. 


@@@@@


doc= 27309


Thomson, James (1768-1855), editor of the Encyclopaedia Britannica, born in May 1768 at Crieff, Perthshire, was the second son of John Thomson and his wife, Elizabeth Ewan. Thomas Thomson (1773-1852) was his younger brother. He was educated at the parish school in Crieff and then at Edinburgh University. He was licensed to preach by the presbytery of Haddington on 6 August 1793, and frequently assisted his uncle, John Ewan, minister of Whittingehame, East Lothian. In 1795 he became associated with George Gleig, bishop of Brechin, as co-editor of the third edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica'. He wrote several articles himself, including 'Scripture', 'Septuagint', and 'Superstition'. That on scripture was retained in several later editions. During the same period he prepared an edition of 'The Spectator', with short biographies of the contributors (8 vols., 1799). Also in 1799, he published 'Rise, Progress, and Consequences of the New Opinions... Lately Introduced into France'. In 1796 he became tutor to the sons of John Stirling of Kippendavie, and resigned his post on the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' to his younger brother, Thomas. Both brothers were frequent contributors to the 'Literary Journal' founded in 1803 by James Mill, James Thomson contributing the philosophic articles. On 26 August 1805 Thomson was ordained minister of Eccles, Berwickshire. In his country life he wrote a sketch of Berwickshire agriculture published in his brother's 'Annals of Philosophy'. He also devoted himself to the study of the 'Bible' in the original tongues, and to the careful editing of his discourses on 'St Luke' and the 'Acts of the Apostles' published in 1845-51 and 1854 respectively. In 1842 he received the honorary degree of DD from the University of St Andrews, and in 1847 he resigned his charge and retired to Edinburgh. In 1854 he moved to London, where he died on 28 November 1855. 
On 10 October 1805 Thomson had married Elizabeth, eldest daughter of James Skene of Aberdeen, second son of George Skene of Skene, Aberdeenshire. She died in 1851, leaving three sons: Robert Dundas Thomson; James Thomson, chairman of the government bank of Madras, and Andrew Skene Thomson. There was also a daughter, Eliza. 


@@@@@


doc= 27310


Thomson, James (1834-1882), poet and satirist, was born at Church Street, Port Glasgow, on 23 November 1834, the eldest of three children of James Thompson (1806-1853), a merchant seaman, and his wife, Sarah Kennedy (1798-1843), a court dressmaker. Both parents were Scottish, and his mother was a devout follower of the preacher Edward Irving. In 1840 James's father suffered a disabling stroke while at sea, and about then the family moved to east London. In 1842 his mother, struggling to support the family, secured him a place at the Royal Caledonian Asylum (which decided he should be known as Thomson, his father's name at baptism). She died a few months later. 
Having done well at school, where he remained until 1848, Thomson trained in 1850-51 and 1853-4 as an army schoolmaster at the Royal Military Asylum, Chelsea. In 1851 he went as a student teacher to Ballincollig, near Cork, where he first met the future political activist Charles Bradlaugh. He also developed a tender relationship with a pupil, Matilda Weller, then only thirteen years old. Her death in 1853 was long thought to have had a profound effect on his pessimistic outlook, though later biographers have cast doubt on this. 
From 1854 Thomson spent eight nomadic years as an army schoolmaster in England, Ireland, and Jersey. Unexpectedly, on 30 October 1862, he was discharged in disgrace for an apparently minor breach of discipline. Intellectually these years were not wasted, however: he had studied languages, read widely, and discovered a special enthusiasm for Shelley and the German Novalis. He had also written much poetry, some of it published in 'Tait's Edinburgh Magazine'. 
Thomson now settled in London, and with Bradlaugh's help found work as a clerk and journalist. As B. V. or Bysshe Vanolis (to commemorate Shelley and Novalis) he published much of his poetry and literary reviews in Bradlaugh's 'National Reformer'. He participated actively in the propaganda of free thought and secularism, but never fully subscribed to the beliefs of his more militant colleagues. Lacking a wide audience he none the less came to the attention of discerning critics such as W. M. Rossetti. Attacks of alcoholism, however, aggravated by his poverty, loneliness, insomnia, and deeply pessimistic temperament, seriously affected his work. In 1866 he left the Bradlaughs' family home, and until his death, except for a few months in Colorado in 1872-3 as agent of a mining company, and a visit to Spain as war correspondent in 1873, lived in a succession of one-room lodgings, in Pimlico and Bloomsbury. Under these circumstances he contributed to the 'National Reformer' in 1874 his great visionary poem 'The City of Dreadful Night', which brought him the appreciation of George Eliot and George Meredith. 
After 1875, having quarrelled with Bradlaugh, Thomson transferred his services to 'The Secularist', and the monthly 'Cope's Tobacco Plant'. Through his friend Bertram Dobell he eventually achieved publication in book form of some of his poetry in a collection entitled 'The City of Dreadful Night and other Poems' (1880), followed by 'Vane's Story', 'Weddah and Om-el-Bonain and other Poems', and a prose collection, 'Essays and Phantasies', in 1881. During 1881-2 he spent some happy weeks with secularist friends, the Barrs, at their home near Leicester, spoiled by recurrent bouts of drinking. After setting fire to his landlord's kitchen, a fortnight in prison for the offence, and a final drunken binge when he seemed beyond rescue by his devoted friends, he took refuge in the home of the blind poet Philip Bourke Marston, where another friend found him in a state of collapse from an internal haemorrhage. He died on 3 June 1882 in University College Hospital, London, and on 8 June was buried in the grave of the secularist Austin Holyoake, in Highgate cemetery. 
Temperamentally 'B. V.' was capable of flashes of brilliant joyousness but the predominant mood of his verse was uncompromisingly sombre. His beliefs moved from pantheism to an atheism which causes less of a frisson now than it did in his own day, and his apocalyptic vision of the megalopolis in 'The City of Dreadful Night' continues to have resonance. The poet wanders in a vast city of endless night. Faith, Love, and Hope have died. A ranting preacher tells of visions of cosmic fire. Even the gate of hell is closed to one who has no hope left to abandon. There is no God and death is final -- 'The unsexed skeleton mocks shroud and pall' (VII, l. 14). Another preacher finds in the universe only 'Necessity Supreme' (XIV, l. 75), and finally the dreamer sees a great image of Melancholy, drawn from an engraving by Durer. The poem ceases in a blaze of moonlight with 'confirmation of the old despair' (XXI, l. 84). His poem 'In the Room', in which articles of furniture in a lodging-house room converse about its tenant, can still send a shiver down the reader's spine: only the bed is aware that its silent occupant is a corpse. 
H. S. Salt in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' described his 'courageous, genial spirit, coupled with an intolerable melancholia; spiritual aspiration with realistic grasp of fact; ardent zeal for democracy and free thought with stubborn disbelief in human progress' -- qualities reflected in his prose as much as in his verse. The obscurity of the journals in which he published made it difficult in his lifetime to evaluate the merits of his prose, but the judicious selection made by W. D. Schaefer, 'The Speedy Extinction of Evil and Misery' (1967), has done much to reveal its vitality, pungency, and remorseless wit. If Shelley was the presiding genius of Thomson's poetry, along with Dante, Heine, Leopardi, and Blake, the shade of Swift looms over his 'Satires and Profanities', among which may be highlighted his 'Proposals for the speedy extinction of evil and misery' and 'The Story of a Famous Old Jewish Firm' (a satire on the Trinity). 
Posthumously, in 1884 Bertram Dobell edited 'A Voice from the Nile and other Poems', while G. W. Foote edited 'Satires and Profanities'. Salt's ground-breaking biography appeared in 1889. Even then Thomson's reputation was dogged by misfortune, as a warehouse fire in 1890 destroyed most of his publisher's stock, making the earliest editions exceptionally scarce. Thomson's 'Poems, Essays and Fragments', edited by J. M. Robertson, followed in 1892, but it was Dobell's two-volume edition of the 'Poetical Works' (1895) which ensured his survival. 


@@@@@


doc= 27311


Thomson, James (1800-1883), architect, son of David Thomson of Melrose, was born on 22 April 1800. His boyhood was spent in Lambeth, London. From 1814 to 1821 he was a pupil and later assistant to John Buonarotti Papworth before practising independently from 'c'.1825. He married twice, on the second occasion, in 1838, to Anne Hudson. Their son John James was apprenticed to his father in 1854. 
In 1826-7 Thomson acted as executant architect for Cumberland Terrace and Cumberland Place, Regent's Park. In 1838 he designed the Royal Polytechnic Institute, Regent Street, and in 1848 the theatre adjoining it. He also designed the new buildings at Clement's Inn, and the Polygraphic Hall, King William Street. In 1842 Thomson was involved in the planning of the Ladbroke estate development, Notting Hill. His designs were later superseded, although some of his terraces in Ladbroke Grove were constructed and his concentric road plan largely remained. In 1850 Thomson worked on the Derbyshire Bank, Derby. He built the Russian Chapel, Welbeck Street, London, for the Russian embassy in 1865 and in the 1870s he made alterations and additions to Charing Cross Hospital. Between 'c'.1827 and 1853 Thomson worked for Joseph Neeld, a lawyer and later MP, and collector of Victorian sculpture, who had inherited a fortune and bought an estate on the Wiltshire-Somerset border. Construction, centring particularly on the villages of Alderton, Grittleton, Leigh Delamere, and Sevington, included schools, farmhouses, lodges, and cottages. Thomson's most notable works for Neeld were: an Italianate castle-villa at Kelston (1835); the rebuilding of Alderton church (1845) and Leigh Delamere church (1846); a new town hall for Chippenham (1833 and 1850); and the transformation of Grittleton House into a mansion mixing Jacobean and Romanesque forms (before 1843 and then 1851-3, when Thomson's involvement ceased before completion). 
Thomson was one of the earliest members of the Institute of British Architects, elected 1835, and as a fellow he read the following papers to the institute: 'Composition in architecture: Sir J. Vanbrugh' (15 June 1840); 'National advantages of fresco painting' (6 March 1843); 'Hagioscope at Alderton church' (28 April 1845); and 'Leigh Delamere church' (15 May 1848). He published 'Retreats: Designs for Cottages, Villas, and Ornamental Buildings' (1827) and 'School Houses' (1842). Thomson exhibited at the Royal Academy twenty-eight times between 1822 and 1853. He was a liveryman of the Loriners' Company. He died at home at 57 Devonshire Street, Portland Place, London, on 16 May 1883 and was buried at Finchley. 


@@@@@


doc= 27312


Thomson, James (1822-1892), mechanical engineer, was born on 16 February 1822 in College Square, Belfast, the third among the seven children of James Thomson (1786-1849), professor of mathematics, and his wife, Margaret (died 1830), daughter of William Gardner, a merchant in Glasgow. His father was an Ulsterman and his mother a Scot. His younger brother William Thomson (1824-1907) later became Baron Kelvin of Largs. After his wife's death in 1830, James Thomson senior chose to educate his family largely at home even after being appointed to the mathematics chair at Glasgow College in 1832. Having informally attended the junior mathematical class for two years, James matriculated in 1834, took his BA in 1839, and at the close of the 1840 session graduated MA with honours in mathematics and natural philosophy. 
From the age of fourteen James displayed a passionate interest in practical engineering. Even his earliest inventions shared a concern to minimize waste of useful work and to maximize economy of operation. Noting how the paddles of Clyde steamers 'wasted' power in lifting water prompted him in 1836 to devise a self-adjusting paddle blade which would minimize such losses of useful work. The efficient production of motive power from fluid flow was a central theme of his engineering career. 
Following an educational tour of Germany in 1840, Thomson entered the Dublin office of the engineer John MacNeill, but a knee injury sustained while walking in the Black Forest forced him home after only three weeks. During the early months of 1841 he spent some hours each day studying practical engineering at the Lancefield Spinning Mills in Glasgow, then acquired further practical experience before entering the Horsely Iron Works, Tipton, Staffordshire, early in 1843 as a pupil in the drawing office. By August he had become a premium apprentice (his father having paid $100 as his fee) at the Millwall shipbuilding and marine engineering works of William Fairbairn, then in the forefront of the new ocean-going iron steamship technology. 
At Millwall, Thomson studied the theoretical and practical problems of economy in relation to long-distance steam navigation. By August 1844 he had encountered the relatively unfamiliar theory of the motive power of heat (due to Sadi Carnot and Emile Clapeyron) which set theoretical limits to the perfection of heat engines. Working closely with his brother William, he used Carnot's theory to predict the effect of pressure in lowering the freezing point of water, a prediction for which William soon claimed experimental confirmation. The results were presented to the Royal Society of Edinburgh in January 1849. Over the next few years Carnot's theory was transformed into the new sciences of thermodynamics and energy. In 1857 Thomson used the principle of liquefaction by pressure as the basis for an explanation of the 'plasticity of ice', observed by Professor J. D. Forbes during extensive investigations of glacier motion. 
Upon his transfer to Fairbairn's Manchester works in October 1844, Thomson's health, never robust, broke down and he returned to Glasgow. For the next five years he based himself in the college, moving in Glasgow Philosophical Society circles and benefiting from the friendship of Lewis Gordon, first professor of engineering in the university. Gordon's familiarity with French horizontal water-wheels or water turbines encouraged Thomson to construct his own model, first tested in the spring of 1847 and finally patented on 3 July 1850 (no. 13156). Messrs Williamson Bros. of Kendal became the principal manufacturers. One such turbine, installed in a mill at Gayle in Upper Wensleydale about 1878, apparently ran for ninety-six years without requiring repair ('The Independent'). 
Thomson's patent involved the injection of high-pressure water at the same speed as, and in a spiral motion towards the outside of, the horizontal wheel. The water gradually transferred its energy to the wheel as it moved along vanes curving from radial to tangential and finally passed down a central drain. The guiding principle was to keep any given portion of the water as close as possible to a state of equilibrium while it moved from high to low pressure and so to minimize waste in the extraction of useful work. In contrast, French designs tended either (in the case of Fourneyron) to introduce water from the centre or (in the case of Poncelet) to transfer the kinetic energy of fast-flowing water to the wheel by redirecting it from tangential to radial along curved vanes. Thomson claimed efficiencies of 75 per cent, equal to the best conventional overshot water-wheels and superior to French water turbines. 
After his father's death in 1849 Thomson worked with Gordon in London, then returned in 1851 to Belfast, where he opened an office for civil engineering practice. On 28 December 1853 he married Elizabeth (died 1892), daughter of the Irish poor-law commissioner William John Hancock and sister of Neilson Hancock, professor of jurisprudence and political economy in Queen's College, Belfast. The Thomsons had two daughters and one son. By 1854 Thomson had become acting professor of engineering in Queen's. Three years later he was appointed to the chair that he retained until he succeeded Rankine as professor of engineering at Glasgow in 1873. 
In Belfast, Thomson's new concern was with centrifugal pumps. Conventional designs lost as much as half of the driving power in expelling water from their circumference with a rotational velocity which was then wasted as friction in the discharge pipe. Thomson added a second 'whirlpool' chamber which permitted conversion of the tangential velocity into increased water pressure capable of raising the water to a greater height at discharge. Efficiencies rose from below 50 per cent to about 70 per cent. As with his turbine, the guiding principle was to maintain approximate equilibrium between neighbouring portions of the vortex, which he subsequently named the 'whirlpool or vortex of equal energies' or 'vortex of free mobility'. In his own words, 'a duck could swim from place to place without expenditure of energy in like manner as in still water: Also that a fish in the interior of any whirlpool, except one of Free Mobility, would require a real finite quantity of energy in order to move from place to place. (Smith and Wise, 417)' Thomson also devised a 'jet pump' whereby a jet of water created a suction capable of raising water. A subsequent project, requiring a series of jet pumps, aimed to transform waste swamps into productive land. Related projects of public utility included service as engineer to the Belfast water commissioners (when pumping steam engines supplying water to the expanding town were erected under his charge), a scheme for the promotion of public parks in large towns, and superintending the construction of a flood sluice weir on the River Lagan navigation system between Belfast and Lough Neagh. 
Departing from his family's liberal Presbyterianism, but consistent with his devotion to causes of 'practical improvement' and 'rational reform', Thomson became a Unitarian. Professing belief in 'one God the Creator, the Preserver, and Governor of all other beings', he denied revelation other than through the works of nature and in the ideas implanted by God in the human mind. In politics James and William Thomson shared a powerful devotion to liberal causes but parted from the Liberals over Gladstone's espousal of Irish home rule. James's character, and his relationship with his more famous younger brother, was summed up by Hermann Helmholtz in 1863: '[James] is a level-headed fellow, full of good ideas, but cares for nothing except engineering, and talks about it ceaselessly all day and all night, so that nothing else can be got in when he is present. It is really comic to see how the two brothers talk at one another, and neither listens, and each holds forth about quite different matters. But the engineer is the most stubborn, and generally gets through with his subject. (Smith and Wise, 283)' Thomson received an honorary degree of DSc from Queen's University in 1875 and that of LLD from Glasgow University in 1870 and from Dublin in 1878. He was elected fellow of the Royal Society in 1877. He was president of the Belfast Literary Society in 1864-5, president of the mechanical section of the British Association in 1874, and president of the Institution of Engineers and Shipbuilders in Scotland in 1884 and 1885. Serious eyesight problems led him to resign the Glasgow chair in 1889. He died at his home, 2 Florentine Gardens, Hillhead Street, Glasgow, on 8 May 1892, followed within a week by his wife and younger daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 27313


Thomson, James Bruce (1810-1873), medical criminologist, was born in January 1810 at Fenwick in Ayrshire, the son of James Thomson and Helen Bruce. The parents appear to have died while their children were young. Left in destitute circumstances, James was raised and educated by a family friend. He studied at Glasgow University, and began medical practice in Tillicoultry, near Stirling, some years before taking his diploma as a licentiate of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh in 1845. He married Agnes Laing about 1845, but the marriage was not a success and resulted in a separation. 
In the woollen mills around Tillicoultry, Thomson acted as a factory surgeon, and in his first publication he extolled the healthiness of mill labour, especially for children. This gained him the attention of Sir John Kincaid, inspector of factories and prisons for Scotland, who subsequently drew the attention of the general board of prisons to Thomson's abilities. Consequently, he was appointed first resident surgeon to Perth general prison in 1858. 
Thus placed in medical charge of a large number of prisoners, Thomson was able to lend statistical weight to the developing medical literature on crime and criminality. Immediately prior to his appointment he had written on the hereditary predisposition to dipsomania, regarding severe cases of it as a form of moral insanity. Thomson's writings on criminals similarly emphasized hereditary factors and alleged a close connection between insanity and crime, or between 'madness and badness'. In his two most widely regarded papers, 'The hereditary nature of crime' and 'The psychology of the criminal', both published in the 'Journal of Mental Science' in 1870, he maintained that 12 per cent of prisoners were mentally weak, and that one in forty-seven was insane. Thomson's inclination to interpret crime in biological and psychological terms led him to search for physiognomical and other physical stigmata of criminality. From prison statistics, he established that tuberculosis was the most common ailment of criminals, and that diseases of the nervous system were next in frequency. Although in 1865, when he and Sir Robert Christison prepared a special report on the prison dietaries of Scotland, Thomson was hopeful that criminals might be reformed by improvements in their diet and environment, by 1870 he had become convinced that they were incorrigible. 
Thomson's work was contemporaneous with that of the medical statistician William Guy and the prison medical officers George Wilson and David Nicolson. In general, these men's writings amplified the progressive degeneration theory of the French criminal anthropologists B. A. Morel and P. Despine, and anticipated the work of the Italian C. Lombroso (1835-1909). Thomson regarded his work as more empirically based and practically orientated than that of the European theorists, and, indeed, it was these features which rendered it attractive both to penal reformers in Britain (especially those interested in refining the classification and segregation of criminals), and to professionalizing practitioners in the treatment of mental disorders. Chief among the latter was Henry Maudsley who celebrated Thomson's writings for the support they gave to his belief that mental illness was largely inherited and that a tendency to insanity could not be controlled by the will of the individual. Maudsley's appreciation mainly accounts for the attention Thomson's work has continued to receive from historians. 
Thomson maintained medical interests beyond those relating to criminality. In the 'Edinburgh Medical Journal' and the 'Journal of Mental Science', where most of his publications appeared between 1858 and 1870, he also wrote on the diseases of coalminers, epilepsy, the external use of medicines, poisoning, and the dietary of Scottish agricultural labourers. He was also the originator, in 1861, of the Perthshire Medical Association and was an active member of other local and regional professional bodies. In 1872 his health broke down. He suffered from gangrene of the leg for many months, and died at High Fenwick, Ayrshire, on 19 January 1873. 


@@@@@


doc= 27314


Thomson, John (1778-1840), landscape painter, was the fourth son of Thomas Thomson (died 1799), minister of Dailly, Ayrshire, and his second wife, Mary (1746-1822), daughter of Francis Hay. Born in his father's manse on 1 September 1778, he was educated at the parish school. He attended Glasgow University in 1791-2, studying for the ministry, the chosen profession of his grandfather and great-grandfather as well as his own father. In November 1793 Thomson moved to Edinburgh University, following his elder brothers, Thomas (1768-1852), who was training in the city for the bar, and Adam ('b'. 1776), who was working at the banking house of Sir William Forbes. John and Thomas in particular were supported through the patronage of Lady Hailes, a former parishioner of their father's, and spent much time at New Hailes, near Musselburgh. There, the young men were introduced to such rising stars of Edinburgh life as Francis Jeffrey and Walter Scott (then young advocates). During the vacations from his studies at Edinburgh University, Thomson sketched from nature in the wooded countryside around his native Dailly. During his last session at Edinburgh (1798-9), he enrolled for the landscape drawing classes offered by Alexander Nasmyth. 
Thomson was licensed by the presbytery at Ayr on 17 July 1799. His father had died a few months earlier, on 19 February 1799, and the son was presented by George III with the parish of Dailly. He was ordained, still aged only twenty-one, on 24 April 1800. On 7 July 1801 he married Isabella, daughter of John Ramsay, minister of Kirkmichael in Ayrshire. She died on 18 April 1809, leaving two sons -- Thomas and John -- and two daughters; the younger, Isabella, married the painter Robert Scott Lauder. During the next five years Thomson, while fulfilling his obligations as a minister, was increasingly preoccupied with painting, sending a group of drawings for sale in Glasgow in 1803. In autumn 1805 Thomson was translated from his Ayrshire parish to the living at Duddingston on the outskirts of Edinburgh. The parish was in the gift of the marquess of Abercorn, whose factor was Thomas Scott, the brother of Sir Walter Scott. Scott and Thomson's brother Thomas had remained close friends. It was very shortly after this that Thomson sold his first landscape painting, for 15 guineas. 
At Duddingston Thomson was close to the intellectual and cultural life of Edinburgh. His friendship with Scott in particular had a powerful influence on the subjects of his pictures as well as on his patrons, who included Scott's near neighbour and kinsman, the duke of Buccleuch. It was through his acquaintance with Scott that Thomson met Turner, entertaining the English painter as his guest in 1822 while both men were working on illustrations for Scott's 'Provincial Antiquities of Scotland'. Thomson started exhibiting in Edinburgh at the 1808 Associated Society of Artists exhibitions, continuing until the year of his death (1840). He declined ordinary membership of the Scottish Academy because of his clerical office but was elected (1830) an honorary one. Despite this determination to maintain his amateur status, his commercial success was considerable; he apparently earned $1800 a year from his painting during the 1820s. 
Thomson married, second, on 6 December 1813, Frances Ingram Spence (died 1845), widow of Martin Dalrymple of Fordell, Fife. With her he had three sons -- Francis, Charles, and Henry -- and a daughter, Mary Helen. Thomson's love for art was not confined to painting; he was also passionately fond of music, and played the violin and the flute. He was a member of a number of Edinburgh clubs and he contributed several articles on scientific subjects to the 'Edinburgh Review', then recently started. 
Thomson died at his home, Duddingston manse, near Edinburgh on 28 October 1840 and was buried in Duddingston kirkyard. His wife Frances died on 11 October 1845. Thomson had little or no formal training as a painter and this undoubtedly hampered his development considerably. He remained, however, the greatest Scottish painter of his generation, and the first to echo fully on canvas the scenery so extraordinarily and influentially conjured up by Sir Walter Scott in both poetry and prose; Thomson produced at least eleven views of Fast Castle, the probable model for Wolf's Crag in Scott's 'The Bride of Lammermoor', at least one for Scott himself (Abbotsford House, Roxburghshire). 
Unfortunately, many of Thomson's pictures are now in poor condition owing to his habit of painting upon an insufficiently hardened ground of flour boiled with vinegar, which he described as 'parritch', and a considerable use of bitumen. His slighter and more directly painted pictures are, however, in a much sounder state, freshly and elegantly painted and showing a considerable sensitivity and charm of handling which one would hardly expect from his more elaborate work where exaggeration of topography and of expression appears at times over-rhetorical and self-indulgent. 
Thomson does not appear to have travelled on the continent and most (though not all) of his subjects were found in the lowlands of Scotland. His vision of his native country and its scenery had a profound influence on the next generation of Scottish landscape painters, particularly Horatio McCulloch, whom Thomson befriended when the young man first arrived from the west of Scotland in the 1820s. 
Thomson is represented in the National Gallery of Scotland by some fourteen works which span every period of his career; there are five examples at Kelvingrove Art Gallery, Glasgow, and one in the Tate collection. 
There are portrait drawings of Thomson by William Bewick and Sir Thomas Dick Lauder, and two painted portraits by William Wallace in the Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh. The present location of a bust-length portrait by Raeburn is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 27315


Thomson, John (1805-1841), composer, eldest son of Revd Andrew Mitchell Thomson (1779-1831) and his wife, Jane Carmichael (died 1840), was born at Sprouston, near Kelso in the Scottish borders on 28 October 1805. Although initially trained for the law, he was brought up in a household which valued music highly. His father, who was minister of St George's, Edinburgh, contributed a number of vocal works to R. A. Smith's 'Sacred Harmony' (he also secured Smith's choral expertise for St George's). The family lived at 29 Melville Street, Edinburgh, where Thomson started composing at the age of fourteen. By his mid-twenties he had projected an Arabian opera to a text by C. B. Sillery (from which one or more numbers survive), composed music for 'The House of Aspen' at the Edinburgh Royal and a 'Benedictus and hosanna' for voices and orchestra, and had to his credit two piano trios, as well as a piano quartet, a fine rondo for solo piano, and a number of songs. It was probably the sunny C major trio of 1825, rather than the dark obsessive G minor trio of 1826, that impressed Mendelssohn as 'pretty'. Following their meeting in Edinburgh in July 1829, and with Mendelssohn's warm recommendation, Thomson went to Berlin and Leipzig, where he met Schumann and Ignaz Moscheles. The trip also took in Paris, but he was back in Edinburgh by July 1830. In Leipzig he became a student of Schnyder von Wartensee, but Thomson's autograph scores (held in the Reid Music Library in Edinburgh) show only that he submitted some of his works to Moscheles for comment; and it was to Moscheles that he dedicated the impressive sonata for pianoforte and violin, completed in 1835. 
Perhaps Thomson's most imposing large-scale work is the opera 'Hermann, or, The Broken Spear', first produced in London at the Lyceum in 1834. The simple and melodramatic plot is set in the southern Alps and features bandits, a fine drinking song, abduction, and repentance. Some of the numbers were popular for a time, and the powerfully dramatic overture has remained in the repertory. His other opera, 'The Shadow on the Wall', dates from 1835, in which year it was produced, again at the London Lyceum. 
Other works include a five-part glee, 'When whispering winds', composed in 1836 for the association in aid of the Edinburgh Professional Society of Musicians. The piece is, in essence, an ode to music, of great beauty and skilfully scored for the voices. A flute quartet and an allegro maestoso for flute and orchestra are sufficiently showy to suggest that Thomson was a flautist. His only works available on sound recordings are the overture to 'Hermann'; a flute concerto; a touching 'Bagatelle' for solo piano; and the 'Drei Lieder', the first of which is a ravishing setting of Byron (in German) followed by striking settings of poems by Schiller and Uhland. The work was published in Frankfurt in 1838, and Thomson (apparently in Leipzig at the time) dedicated a copy to Mendelssohn which the latter retained in his library until his death. A choral work composed in 1829 to honour the memory of R. A. Smith remains to be discovered. Although his music betrays no Scottish influences, Thomson made many arrangements of Scottish songs for 'The Vocal Melodies of Scotland', a joint publication with Finlay Dun in 1836. In October 1839, with recommendations from Mendelssohn and M. W. Balfe, Thomson was elected first Reid professor of music at Edinburgh University, and therefore the first such professor in Scotland. He set about preparing lectures on the history of music and, at the inception of the annual Reid concerts, introduced programme notes (probably the earliest instance of such a practice); but he did not live long enough to establish the chair or, indeed, fully to realize his considerable compositional gifts. 
Thomson married Jane Helen Lee, the daughter of the principal of Edinburgh University, on 8 December 1840. His portrait is in the Reid School of Music; from a letter to Catherine Jameson it would appear that he was short in height. He was remembered as a man of sweet disposition, and this is borne out by his surviving correspondence. At the time of his death (from dropsy), on 6 May 1841, he was living with his wife at 16 Howe Street, Edinburgh. His burial place is not known. 


@@@@@


doc= 27316


Thomson, John (1765-1846), physician and surgeon, was born at Paisley, Renfrewshire, on 15 March 1765, the son of Joseph Thomson, a silk weaver, and his wife, Mary, formerly Millar. At the age of eleven Thomson was bound apprentice to his father for seven years. His father destined him for the ministry; the boy, however, wished to study medicine, and persuaded his father to apprentice him in 1785 to Dr White of Paisley, with whom he remained for three years. He entered the University of Glasgow in the winter session of 1788-9, and in the following year migrated to Edinburgh. He was appointed assistant apothecary at the Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh, in September 1790, and a year later he became house surgeon to the institution under the designation of surgeon's clerk, having already from the previous June filled the office of an assistant physician's clerk. He became a member of the Medical Society at the beginning of the winter session in 1790-91, and in the following year he was elected one of its presidents. On 31 July 1792 Thomson resigned his appointment at the infirmary on account of ill health, and went to London, where he studied at John Hunter's school of medicine in Leicester Square. 
In London, Thomson made many valuable friendships, and on his return to Edinburgh early in 1793 he became a fellow of the College of Surgeons of Edinburgh and attended the Royal Infirmary as a surgeon. He married, in 1793, Margaret Crawford, second daughter of John Gordon of Caroll, Sutherland. She died early in 1804; of their three children only William Thomson (1802-1852), physician, survived him. 
During this period Thomson was occupied with the study of chemistry. He conducted a chemical class during the winter of 1799-1800 which met at his house, under the auspices of the earl of Lauderdale, and consisted chiefly of gentlemen connected with the parliament house. In 1800, nominated one of the six surgeons to the Royal Infirmary, he began teaching surgery. He also lectured on the nature and treatment of those injuries and diseases familiar to military surgeons, and he visited London in the autumn of 1803 to be appointed a hospital mate in the army in order to qualify himself, should it be found necessary to establish a military hospital in Edinburgh in the event of an invasion. 
The College of Surgeons of Edinburgh established a professorship of surgery in 1804, and, in spite of objections from the university, Thomson was appointed to the post. In 1806 he was appointed regius professor of military surgery in the University of Edinburgh, but he continued to hold the college professorship until 1821. Also in 1806 Thomson married Margaret, third daughter of John Millar (1735-1801), professor of jurisprudence at Glasgow University. Of their children, only a daughter and a son, later Professor Allen Thomson (1809-1884), biologist, reached adulthood. 
On 11 January 1808 Thomson obtained the degree of MD from the University and King's College of Aberdeen. In 1810 he resigned his post at the Royal Infirmary following criticism of his surgery by the surgeon John Bell. He continued to lecture, however, and in the summer of 1814 he visited the various medical schools in Europe to examine the different methods followed in the hospitals of France, Italy, Austria, Saxony, Prussia, Hanover, and the Netherlands. He was admitted a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh on 7 February 1815, since he was by then acting as a consulting physician as well as a consulting surgeon. In the following summer Thomson again returned to the continent to watch the treatment of the men wounded at Waterloo, and in September 1815 he was mainly instrumental in founding the Edinburgh New Town Dispensary. 
The smallpox epidemic of 1817-18 showed that vaccination conferred less protection than had been supposed, and Thomson published his views upon the subject in two pamphlets of 1820 and 1822. He delivered a course of lectures on diseases of the eye in the summer of 1819, paving the way for the establishment of the first eye infirmary in Edinburgh in 1824. During 1822-6 he was involved in the study of general pathology, and in 1821 he was an unsuccessful candidate for the chair of the practice of physic in the university, rendered vacant by the death of James Gregory. In 1828-9 and again in 1829-30 he delivered a course of lectures on the practice of physic, both courses being given in conjunction with his son, William Thomson. In 1831 he addressed Lord Melbourne on the advantages likely to flow from the establishment of a separate chair of general pathology. He was appointed professor of general pathology in the university, commencing in 1832. 
Thomson was a prolific writer and translator; among his major works 'Elements of Chemistry and Natural History', prefaced by 'Philosophy of chemistry', a translation of the work by Fourcroy (3 vols., 1798-1800), reached a fifth edition; 'Observations on Lithotomy, with a New Manner of Cutting for the Stone' (1808; with appendix, 1810) was translated into French; and 'Lectures on Inflammation: a View of the General Doctrines of Medical Surgery' (1813) was issued in America in 1813 and 1817, and was translated into German in 1820 and into French in 1827. The lectures were founded on the Hunterian theory of inflammation which was later modified. 
Repeated attacks of illness compelled Thomson to discontinue his visits to patients after the summer of 1835, but he continued to see those who came to his house. He resigned his professorship in 1841. The duties had long been performed by a deputy. He died at his home, Morland Cottage, near the foot of Blackford Hill, on the south side of Edinburgh, on 11 October 1846. 
Thomson died with the reputation of being in his time the most learned physician in Scotland. 'To almost the last week of his life he was a hard student', says Henry Cockburn in his journal, 'and not even fourscore years could quench his ardour in discoursing upon science, morals, or politics.... He never knew apathy, and, medicine being his first field, he was for forty years the most exciting of all our practitioners and of all our teachers. ('Journal of Henry Cockburn', 163-4)' 



@@@@@


doc= 27317


John Cockburn Thomson (1834-1860), Sanskritist, was born in London, and after studying at Bonn matriculated from Trinity College, Oxford, on 7 June 1852 and graduated BA from St Mary Hall (later incorporated into Oriel College) in 1857. At Oxford he worked at Sanskrit (continuing studies begun at Munich) under Horace Hayman Wilson, and before he graduated, when only twenty-one, he published 'The Bhagavad-gita, or, A discourse between Krishna and Arjuna on divine matters: a Sanskrit philosophical poem, translated [into English prose] with copious notes, an introduction on Sanskrit philosophy, and other matter' (2 vols., 1855). This was praised by Wilson and by foreign scholars and was used in the East India College, Haileybury. In 1857 Thomson won the Boden Sanskrit scholarship at Oxford, and was awarded a gold medal by Maximilian of Bavaria. He was a member of the Asiatic Society of Paris and the Antiquarian Society of Normandy. Under the pseudonym Philip Wharton he was joint author with his mother of 'Queens of Society' (1860) and 'Wits and Beaux of Society' (1860), two anecdotal volumes well received by the public. Following Wilson's death in 1860 Thomson became a candidate for the India Office librarianship but he was accidentally drowned when swimming at Tenby, Pembrokeshire, on 26 May 1860. He was unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 27318


Thomson, Joseph (1858-1895), explorer in Africa, the fifth and final son of William Thomson and Agnes Brown, was born on 14 February 1858 in the village of Penpont, Dumfriesshire, in a house which his father, a stonemason and master builder, had built for himself and his family. In 1868 the household moved 4 miles away to Gatelawbridge, where William Thomson leased an underdeveloped freestone quarry. 
Thomson began his education in the village school in Penpont, but owed his growing interest in the wider world to the stimulation of a new school and new acquaintances in the nearby small town of Thornhill. It was in the classes of the Morton School, and particularly from the lectures and cane of its stern Presbyterian principal, that Thomson obtained the bulk of his formal education. He read avidly: Shakespeare and Scott, the adventure stories of Robert Michael Ballantyne, and, some time after his eleventh birthday, a volume of travel literature that prominently featured the explorations of Mungo Park, James Bruce, Robert Moffat, and David Livingstone. The young Scot determined to follow in Livingstone's footsteps. 
From age fourteen Thomson also became a budding geologist. Stimulated by Dr Thomas Boyle Grierson, a warm-hearted eccentric and self-appointed popularizer of science and scientific thinking who had established a flourishing medical practice in Thornhill, Thomson began to collect botanical and geological specimens, and to discuss his findings with the members of Grierson's local Society of Inquiry. With hammer in hand he roamed the hills of Nithsdale looking for unusual outcrops or formations of rock. He discovered a few fossil forms that were new to the Lower Carboniferous limestone of Scotland. It was during a solitary outing in the narrow ravine of Crichope Linn that Thomson met Professor Archibald Geikie of the University of Edinburgh, who was then examining Nithsdale for the Geological Survey. Geikie apparently persuaded Thomson to take geology seriously, and to leave his apprenticeship in his father's stone quarry (he had left school at fifteen) for Edinburgh. There Thomson matriculated in 1875, studied with Geikie, Alexander Crum Brown (chemistry), John Hutton Balfour (botany), and Thomas Henry Huxley (natural history), and ultimately achieved medals in natural history and geology in the examinations of 1878. 
In that year Thomson, aged twenty, was appointed geologist and naturalist to an expedition under Alexander Keith Johnston the younger, which was sent by the Royal Geographical Society to open up a road from Dar es Salaam to lakes Nyasa and Tanganyika. After a practice trek from Pangani into the Usambara Mountains, Johnston, Thomson, James Chuma (a Presbyterian-trained Yao, who had worked with Livingstone and was a professional caravan leader), five assistant headmen, and 125 porters set out from Dar es Salaam for the interior on 19 May. Johnston died on 28 June 1879 from dysentery and malaria near what is now Kwa Mhinda along the northern banks of the Rufiji River. Thomson found himself in charge. 'I felt I must go forward,' he wrote, 'whatever might be my destiny' (Thomson, 'To the Central African Lakes and Back', 1881, 1.150). Thomson and Chuma led their expedition via Kilengwe and Mgunda across the Rufiji to Ifakara and on through the countries of the Hehe and the Bena into the Kipengere Mountains. Finally, his body racked with fever, Thomson plunged into the northern waters of Lake Nyasa on 22 September 1879. 
Thomson next examined the unexplored plateau separating lakes Nyasa and Tanganyika, becoming the first European to traverse its 250 miles of mountain and valley. He met chiefs of the Nyakyusa, Namwanga, Mambwe, and Lungu peoples, and on 3 November camped on the southern shores of Lake Tanganyika, which had first been sighted by Livingstone and Chuma in 1867 from a village nearby. He could have returned home with honour. Instead, taking just thirty-eight of his men (he wanted to trek briskly), he continued northward along the western shores of Lake Tanganyika. He reached the stockaded village of Pamlilo, where Verney Lovett Cameron had stopped in 1874, and went through the hostile country of the Tumbwe, to the village of M'pala, which Livingstone had visited in 1869. On Christmas day 1879 Thomson finally reached the Lukuga River and found it unmistakably flowing swiftly west, and thus emptying, not filling, Lake Tanganyika. His epic journey continued across the lake to Ujiji, then back to the Lukuga River, and then westward towards the headwaters of the Zaire River. After almost reaching that point, he went back to the lake, and then by sailing vessel south along its eastern shores to rejoin the remainder of the caravan on 5 April 1880. Thomson and the whole caravan proceeded via Lake Rukwa, which he was the first European to see, and what is now Tabora to Bagamoyo on the coast, where he arrived on 10 July. 
Thomson had trekked 3000 miles in the unusually short period of fourteen months. There had been no major fights, no defections, and no unnecessary loss of life. He had collected nearly 200 new species of flora (including a tree fern named after him) and 15 new species of lacustrine conchology (one named after him), and had made some general observations on geology, terrain, and cartography. 
Thomson's next enterprise was undertaken for the sultan of Zanzibar, who believed that the coal which Livingstone had reported in 1862 to exist in the Rovuma valley might be turned to profitable account. The sultan invited Thomson to make an expert examination. This he did for eight weeks in 1881, covering some 700 miles only to bring the sultan the disappointing news that the 'coal' was only useless shale. 
A very different task was that to which Thomson, under the auspices of the Royal Geographical Society, next braced himself -- the opening up of a route between the seaboard of eastern Africa and the northern shores of Lake Victoria. The society wanted Thomson to explore the 'snowy mountains' of eastern equatorial Africa, to find a route through or around the country of the fearsome Maasai, and to discover new trading opportunities in the face of threatened German competition. 
On 15 March 1883, Thomson, a Maltese named James Martin, and five experienced African headmen, led a caravan of 110 porters up country from Mombasa. They were a few months behind Dr Gustav A. Fischer, a German naturalist, and his entourage. Thomson's expedition traversed the hills of Tahta and reached Taveta on 5 April. Two weeks later, while enjoying the hospitality of the Chagga, he tried to climb Kilimanjaro in a day, but failed to reach beyond 8700 feet. In July Thomson finally attempted to lead his party across dreaded Masai. In order to do so peacefully, he had to persuade various groups of Maasai warriors that he had magical powers. This task he accomplished by popping two false teeth in and out of his mouth and, whenever danger approached, brewing up a fizzy froth of Eno's fruit salts. The expedition reached Ngong, near what is now Nairobi, in September, entered hilly Kikuyu country, then descended to the floor of the Great Rift valley. Thomson climbed the 9000 foot Mount Longonot, stopped along the shores of Lake Naivasha (where Maasai tormented him), climbed steamy Mount Eburru, and walked to Lake Elmenteita. 
With thirty of his porters, Thomson impulsively decided to investigate Mount Kenya. On 28 October he viewed its 'chaste beauty' from the banks of the Uaso Nyiro River. He could have been the first European to climb it but instead, always in haste, he and his men trekked to rejoin the rest of their party at Lake Baringo. Then he continued onward, through Nandi country, reached the vicinity of modern Eldoret, glimpsed and named Mount Elgon, and easily crossed northern Kavirondo reaching the shores of Lake Victoria near the modern border of Kenya and Uganda on 10 December. On the return journey, Thomson was gored by a wounded buffalo and, weak from that injury and from malaria, and subsequently from acute dysentery, was carried much of the distance to the coast, which he reached early in June 1884. 
Once again Thomson had travelled nearly 3000 dangerous miles without firing a shot in anger. He had demonstrated the accessibility of Lake Victoria, described many lakes new to Europeans, verified and provided information about Kilimanjaro and Mount Kenya, added considerably to the world's ethnographic knowledge of the Maasai and other indigenous peoples, shot and named a gazelle, and collected five new species of flora as well as 135 other important specimens. 
By the end of 1884 Thomson was fit to undertake new explorations, and when, in 1885, the Royal Geographical Society bestowed on him the founder's gold medal, he was already in Nigeria. On this occasion he was employed by the National African Company. His mission was to forestall the efforts of Germany by obtaining territorial concessions from the sardauna of Sokoto and the emir of Gwandu. By mid-March 1885 Thomson was in Akassa, at the mouth of the Niger River. He proceeded up river to Lokoja, at the confluence of the Benue River, and thence to Raba. He assembled a caravan of 130 porters and then went overland to Kontagora, and into Hausaland. Traders and people were everywhere; nothing reminded him of east Africa. In May he was welcomed into the palace of the sardauna, the ninth Sarkin Musulmi, ruler of nearly all of what was to become Northern Nigeria. At the end of the month, after exchanges of presents and promises of more, the Sarkin Musulmi signed a treaty giving the company territorial and trading privileges. The emir of Gwandu did likewise two weeks later, and Thomson returned to Britain where, however, his treaties were never confirmed by the Foreign Office. 
Thomson was twenty-seven, and, for some months, seriously ill. 'There seems to be very little chance of any more exploring on the big scale,' he wrote. 'Africa is played out...' (Thomson, 174). During 1886 he lectured in Britain, and travelled on the continent as far as Italy. He campaigned for a friend and home-rule parliamentary candidate in Thornhill, and one summer's day walked the 70 miles from Thornhill to Edinburgh in sixteen hours. He was asked to lead an expedition to rescue Emin Pasha (Eduard Carl Oscar Theodor Schnitzer), then supposedly cut off in the southern Sudan; but Henry Morton Stanley was chosen instead. In 1888 Thomson published 'Ulu: an African Romance', a two-volume novel about Africa, to take his mind off not being chosen to relieve Emin. The setting was Chagga, and Africans and whites were involved in a contrived but delightful love triangle, a kidnapping, and a battle against a marauding Maasai war-party. 
'I am thoroughly tired and disgusted with life in England,' Thomson confided in early 1888 (Thomson, 199). A few months later he decided to explore the Atlas Mountains of Morocco, and by May he was in Marrakesh. Despite troubles with his porters, a street brawl, and difficulties with local sheikhs, he climbed two high peaks, the 11,000 foot Jebel Ogdemt and the 12,870 foot Jebel Likoumt. He also surveyed other promontories in the mountains and visited many of the mountain towns before passing along the north-western flanks of the Atlas range to Agadir, on the Atlantic coast. By October he was in Casablanca, 'en route' for home. 
Thomson's final foray into Africa was at the behest of Cecil Rhodes. In 1890, after spending the intervening year writing several articles on Africa as well as a commissioned biography of Mungo Park, Thomson was asked to go on a treaty-making expedition to copper-rich Katanga (Shaba). He first sailed to Cape Town, and then went by rail to meet Rhodes in Kimberley. There Rhodes gave him orders to fill out the British South Africa Company's claims to trans-Zambezia by making treaties with local chiefs and, if possible, to persuade Msiri, believed to be the leading chief in Katanga, to do so as well. 
Thomson and James Grant sailed up the Zambezi and Shire rivers from Quelimane, on the Mozambique coast. From Chiromo, at the southern end of modern Malawi, they and their porters tramped overland to Blantyre, where Charles Wilson joined the expedition. Soon the party reached Nkhota Kota, on the western shores of Lake Nyasa, from where they began their westward trek in August. Thomson began making treaties with Bisa chiefs in the Luangwa River valley of what became eastern Zambia. Across the Muchinga Mountains, somewhere east of Serenje, he discovered that several of his porters had come down with smallpox. Despite a growing contamination, he pushed his party westward to the Luapula River, about 200 miles from Msiri's town. At Kavoi, near the modern Ndola, it became difficult to obtain local guides and Thomson himself was in terrible pain from cystitis. 
There, in the middle of central Africa, 50 miles from the great copper deposits of modern Zambia and Zaire, Thomson lost much of his appetite for exploration and discovery. Yet he crossed the Zaire-Zambezi watershed, headed south-west toward the Kafue River, made treaties near the modern Kapiri Mposhi and Kabwe, crossed the Mkushi, Lukusashi, and Luangwa rivers going eastward, and returned to Lake Nyasa in early January 1891. He had traversed 1200 miles, made thirteen treaties of dubious authenticity with chiefs across central and eastern areas of modern Zambia, and was himself very sick. He suffered from very painful stricture of the urethra, incontinence, and other complaints that were probably caused by schistosomiasis and pyelo-nephritis. 
Thomson was never again free from pain. Nevertheless, he managed to write several articles for geographical and literary journals before contracting serious pneumonia in 1892. In 1893, seeking relief for his damaged lungs, he sailed for Cape Town and spent three months in the tiny Karoo rail town of Matjiesfontein. Subsequently, Rhodes sent him to Kimberley for more recuperation. He went back to Scotland, still weak and wasted, in mid-1894. In the hope of easing what was probably rampant pulmonary tuberculosis, Thomson travelled to Italy and southern France in early 1895, but on 2 August of that year, at 3 York Gate, London, he died, aged thirty-seven. 
Thomson travelled more than 15,000 miles in Africa without causing more than occasional hard feelings. He bothered and disturbed Africans little. His motto was 'He who goes gently, goes safely; he who goes safely goes far' (Rotberg, 300). As a traveller, Thomson was swift and economical; but he was also hasty, missing many opportunities to claim a significant place in the annals of African discovery. His scientific methods were too often impressionistic, though now and then based on flashes of insight. He was a man of action, not a student of the little known. 
It was as a man of action that Thomson provided valuable information about Kilimanjaro and Mount Kenya, about the flow of the Lukuga River, and about the absence of coal along the Rovuma. He 'discovered' the Rift valley. He demonstrated the accessibility of lakes Nyasa and Tanganyika overland, and then of Lake Victoria. Active during the twilight of exploration in Africa, he filled in details and corrected earlier impressions. 
Thomson's important books were 'To the Central African Lakes and Back' (2 vols., 1881) and 'Through Masailand' (1883). He also wrote 'Ulu' with E. Harris Smith (2 vols., 1888); 'Travels in the Atlas and Southern Morocco' (1889); and 'Mungo Park and the Niger' (1890). In addition there were some thirty-five articles, thirty of which were about Africa. 


@@@@@


doc= 27319


Thomson, Katherine (1797-1862), historian and novelist, was the seventh daughter among the thirteen children of Thomas Byerley (1748-1810) of Etruria, Staffordshire, and his wife, Frances Bruckfield (1761/2-1838). Her father was a nephew by marriage and sometime partner and manager of the pottery works of Josiah Wedgwood. Her sisters included Maria Byerley (1787-1843) and Frances Parkes (1786-1842) ['see under 'Byerley, Maria]. She was well-educated, attending the Misses Jacksons' school in Brighton. During her youth, she met distinguished figures like Samuel Parr (1747-1825) and Samuel Taylor Coleridge. In 1810, her elder sisters opened a prestigious girls' school in Warwick, and a year later Katherine became an assistant teacher there. In 1817, the school moved to Barford, outside Stratford upon Avon. On 1 February 1820, she became the second wife of Anthony Todd Thomson (1778-1849), a Scottish physician; they had three sons, including Henry William Thomson (1822-1867), the jurist, and five daughters. A. T. Thomson's younger sister became the second wife of William Stevenson, the father of Elizabeth Gaskell; as a result of the family connection, the future novelist was sent to the Byerley sisters' school. The school moved in 1824 to Avonbank, which was the setting for Gaskell's 'My Lady Ludlow'. 
Katherine Thomson's marriage was a very happy one. She and her husband spent most of their married life in London, living first in Sloane Square, then in Hinde Street, and later in Welbeck Street. They were part of a literary and artistic circle, which included Francis Jeffrey and Lord Cockburn. Thackeray and Browning also visited them, and Edward Bulwer Lytton and Letitia Landon were close friends. In 1843, Katherine's sister Anne -- then married to Samuel Coltman -- recorded that she 'never saw any person so full of life, animation, and enjoyment as Mrs Thomson -- the people are all in love with her' (Hicks, 117). 
Apparently encouraged by her husband, in 1824 Katherine Thomson wrote a brief biography for the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge, 'The Life of Wolsey', which was commended by Henry Brougham. This was followed two years later by 'Memoirs of the Court of Henry VIII' (1826), which is one of her best works. Although, inevitably, most of her sources were standard printed ones, such as Holinshed's 'Chronicle', Cavendish's 'Life of Wolsey', and Strutt's antiquarian works, her material is well-organized and her judgement frequently intelligent. The 'Memoirs' showed close reading of the recently published work of John Lingard, and was deservedly commended by the 'Edinburgh Review' as a work of 'much good sense, impartiality, and research'. It was followed in 1830 by 'Memoirs of the Life of Sir Walter Raleigh'. 
In 1833 Mrs Thomson published the semi-autobiographical 'Constance, a Novel' (3 vols.), which she described in the preface as 'a natural picture of the affairs of life'. It is a well-written and interesting domestic novel, containing many amusing if rather superfluous cameos of minor characters, including Dr Clayton, a portrait of the Johnsonian Samuel Parr. Favourably mentioned in 'The Athenaeum', which described it as 'an animated picture of country life some forty years ago', 'Constance' was more successful than its successors, 'Rosabel' (1835) and 'Lady Annabetta' (1837). In the 1840s Katherine Thomson wrote several historical novels, including 'Anne Boleyn' (3 vols., 1842), a monotonous and melodramatic work in the style of W. H. Ainsworth and G. P. R. James. 
In her more serious work she abandoned the sixteenth century in favour of more recent history. In 1839 she published the 'Memoirs of Sarah, Duchess of Marlborough, and of the Court of Queen Anne' (2 vols.). This work is caustically described in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' as 'diffuse, indexless... and inexact', but is nevertheless a readable and informative biography, which remained the standard work on its subject until the 1930s. It was based mainly on the correspondence of the duchess, which had been printed in 1838, but Mrs Thomson had also consulted the Marlborough papers, then in the British Library. In 1847 she published the 'Memoirs of Viscountess Sundon' (2 vols.), a far less reputable work, which was deservedly criticized in the 'Quarterly Review'; the reviewer, J. W. Croker, described the work as 'one of the most flagrant specimens of book making that even this manufacturing age has produced', and criticized it as unnecessarily inflated with irrelevant material and grossly inaccurate. The last failing was evident even on the title-page, where the subject of the biography, Charlotte Clayton, Baroness Sundon (died 1742), was incorrectly described as viscountess and mistress of the queen's robes, when she could pretend to neither the rank nor the office. In the 1840s Mrs Thomson also wrote the first of her collections of biographical sketches, 'Memoirs of the Jacobites of 1715 and 1745' (3 vols., 1845-6). 
After 1849, when her husband died, Katherine Thomson spent some time abroad, before returning to London. Her later publications were works of light literature. In 1854 she published 'Recollections of Literary Characters and Celebrated Places' (2 vols.), a collection of essays of 'anecdotal topography' ('DNB'), which had originally appeared in 'Fraser's Magazine'. Her 'Celebrated Friendships' (2 vols., 1861) was, in her opinion, merely 'the details of private affairs'; it is an agreeable but generally unoriginal account of the relationships of diverse characters, including Sir Philip Sidney and Sir Fulke Greville, Marie Antoinette and the princesse de Lamballe, and Elizabeth Carter and Catherine Talbot. Other works of the same ilk were 'The Queens of Society' (2 vols., 1860), 'The Wits and Beaux of Society' (2 vols., 1860), and 'The Literature of Society' (2 vols., 1862). These three works were written jointly with her son, John Cockburn Thomson (1834-1860) ['see under 'Thomson, Henry William], the Sanskrit scholar, under the pseudonyms of Grace and Philip Wharton. She also published more novels, including the rather sensationalist 'Court Secrets' (1857), a contemporary tale based on the life of Kaspar Hauser. In 1860 John Cockburn Thomson was drowned while swimming at Tenby. Katherine Thomson is believed never fully to have recovered from his death; she died on 17 December 1862 at Dover, of gastric fever according to one of her obituaries. 
Katherine Thomson's work soon fell into obscurity, though her obituary in 'The Athenaeum' claimed that her 'Memoirs of the Court of Henry VIII' and her biography of Sarah Churchill had won her 'a good place in literature'. Her output, consisting largely of biographical works concentrating on social and cultural history, and of historical novels which were inspired by her research, was typical of the early Victorian woman historian. With the increasing professionalization of history after 1850, her work became by comparison more marginal and lightweight in character. It has been rightly said that she carried 'anecdotal biography' to 'the furthest limits of which this genre is susceptible' ('DNB'). 


@@@@@


doc= 27320


Thomson, Richard (d. 1613), philologist and Church of England clergyman, was born in the Netherlands of one English parent, the other, and most likely his mother, probably being a native of Brabant. Popularly known, therefore, as Dutch Thomson upon migrating to England, he matriculated as sizar at Clare College, Cambridge, on 26 June 1583, and proceeded BA in 1587 and MA in 1591. He was subsequently made a fellow of the same college, and in 1612 became senior proctor, in addition to being incorporated into Oxford University on 1 July 1596. 
It appears that Thomson never married, but he had at least one brother, Emmanuel. In 1612 Thomson was presented by Lancelot Andrewes, bishop of Ely, to the rectory of Snailwell, Cambridgeshire. He relied on the patronage of Sir Robert Killigrew and Sir Henry Savile during the early part of his career. About 1610 Thomson, along with Augustine Lindsell, helped Richard Mountague with his edition of Gregory of Nazianzus. His continued reputation in England as a philologist was enough for him to be selected as one of the translators of the King James 'Bible', working with Andrewes and John Overall on the first Westminster committee responsible for translating 'Genesis' to '2 Kings'. However, according to Mountague, he was 'better knowne in Italy, France, and Germany, than at home' (Montagu, 126). Thomson's wide circle of friends and his international reputation are reflected in the surviving correspondence of William Camden, Janus Gruterus, the librarian to Heidelberg University, Isaac Casaubon, Joseph Scaliger, Hugo Grotius, and Dominicus Baudius of Leiden University. 
Yet as the 'diligent Auditor, and familiar' of Overall (Plaifere, 22), Thomson also made a number of enemies due to his strongly held Arminian convictions. It appears that he was in the habit of making frequent visits to the Netherlands (for example, he visited Leiden in 1594) and in 1605 he was one of the few Englishmen who could speak of a personal acquaintance with Jacobus Arminius. In January 1611 Casaubon spent a day with Thomson in Killigrew's country house, where he read Petrus Bertius's recently published 'De sanctorum apostasia problemata duo' (1610). The copy of this notorious Dutch Arminian work was furnished by Thomson, who also showed Casaubon the manuscript of his own 'Diatriba de amissione et intercisione gratiae, et justificationis', which maintained the same basic position as Bertius. Thomson's treatise was refused an English licence in the late 1590s, and Overall arranged for it to be published posthumously at Leiden in 1616 and 1618. In this book Thomson argued that a man who was truly justified by faith may not always remain justified but could fall from grace entirely. The reprobate could be in Christ and justified, but then be cut off. As for the elect, although they finally persevered, this did not mean to say that they could not temporarily lose their faith and hence lose their justification also. To receive saving or justifying grace was not necessarily, therefore, to receive salvation. The refutation of this book, by Robert Abbot, bishop of Salisbury, published in 1618 and 1619 in both London and Frankfurt, 'De gratia, et perseverantia sanctorum', dismissed it as a mixture of Roman Catholic, Arminian, and philosophical error. 
Although Thomson laid himself open to the charge of Romanizing, he still held the pope to be Antichrist, as the only book he published during his own lifetime, 'Elenchus refutationis torturae torti pro reverendissimo in Christo patre domino episcopo eliense, adversus Martinum Becanum Jesuitam' (1611), makes plain. The entire book, dedicated to Sir Thomas Jermyn, was written against Jesuits in defence of Andrewes's case for the oath of allegiance. It was the charge of Arminianism, however, that was to stick the most. George Carleton, bishop of Chichester, associated Thomson with the Anti-Calvinists William Barret and Peter Baro in disturbing the prevailing 'uniformity in doctrine' and being justly 'refuted and rejected' by the Church of England (Carleton, 8-10). According to Thomas Hill, these men were 'a new brood of such as did assert Arminianisme' (Fenner, sig. A4'v'). Peter Heylyn also associated Thomson with the doctrines of Arminius, the remonstrants, William Laud, John Howson, and John Richardson. Thomson's presbyterian opponents tended to reject him on moral grounds as well as doctrinal ones. William Prynne described him as a 'dissolute, ebrious, prophane, luxurious' and 'deboist drunken English-Dutchman, who seldome went one night to bed sober' (Prynne, 268, fol. *4'r'). William Barlee wrote of him as 'Drunken dick Thomson, a man bewitched with the Conceit of his own parts as much as any Babylonian intoxicated by the Cup of the Whore' (Barlee, 26). Following in the same vein Henry Hickman also described Thomson's Arminianism. Allegedly, 'when men reproved him for his prophaness he would say, 'My will is free, I am a Child of the Devil to day; to morrow I will make my self a Child of God'' (Hickman, 227). Thomson died in 1613 and was buried at St Edward's Church, Cambridge, on 8 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 27321


Thomson, Richard (1794-1865), antiquary and librarian, was born at 25 Fenchurch Street, London, the second son of a Scotsman. Little else is known of his family; he may have been the person of that name who was baptized at St Botolph without Bishopsgate on 29 June, the son of Joseph and Susan Thomson, but this cannot be confirmed. His father travelled for and became a partner in a firm of seed merchants called Gordon, Thomson, Keen & Co., and variant names (London directories). A brother, James, was to continue in the family business in Fenchurch Street and also became honorary secretary to the Royal Highland School Society. It must be assumed that Richard was educated privately, and he never attended university. He appears to have enjoyed private means; there is no evidence that he entered any profession before he reached the age of forty. Instead he developed an interest in exploring the antiquities of London, and published a number of valuable historical studies. Heraldry was one of his hobbies, and he assisted enquirers in investigating their pedigrees. 
In 1820 Thomson published 'Account of processions and ceremonies observed in the coronation of the kings and queens of England, exemplified in that of George III and Queen Charlotte' and also 'The Book of Life: a Bibliographical Melody', presented to the members of the Roxburghe Club (though he was not, as became customary, a member), followed by a particularly finely printed edition of Izaak Walton's 'The Compleat Angler' (1823) and 'Chronicles of London Bridge', 'by an Antiquary' (1827; 2nd edn, 1839), a useful, if not entirely accurate (cf. Gordon Home, 'Old London Bridge', 1931) compilation of historical sources (a special enlarged edition, with manuscript continuation, is in the Guildhall Library). He published 'Illustrations of the History of Great Britain' (1828) in volumes 20 and 21 of 'Constable's Miscellany' and the anecdotal 'Tales of an Antiquary' (1828; 2nd edn, 1832), published anonymously in three volumes and dedicated (and sent) to the author of 'Waverley', in the apparent hope of a review in 'Blackwood's Magazine'. Sir Walter Scott described the book as 'one of the chime of bells which I have some hand in setting a ringing', and believed that its author 'really is entitled to the name of an antiquary. But he has too much description in proportion to the action. There is a capital wardrope of properties but the performers do not add up to their character' ('Journal', 448). 'The Legend of Killcrop the Changeling' was printed in 'Nimmo's Popular Tales' of 1866 (pp. 238-53). 'Historical Essay on Magna Charta' appeared in 1829. 
Thomson was a frequenter of the London Institution in Finsbury Circus, where he met and became a lifelong friend of the architect William Tite, its honorary secretary from 1824 until 1869. It was undoubtedly through the latter's influence that on 14 August 1834 Thomson and Edward William Brayley were elected joint librarians of the London Institution, following the retirement of William Maltby and the resignation of William Upcott. The catalogue of that library (then containing about 27,000 volumes), issued in four volumes between 1835 and 1852 and considered a model for its period, was largely compiled by Thomson, who published little else during these years. He did arrange, classify, and illustrate the antiquities found during the excavations for Tite's new building of the Royal Exchange; they were deposited in the museum of the corporation (W. Tite, 'Descriptive Catalogue of the Antiquities Found in the Excavations at the Royal Exchange', 1848, xlv). Thomson contributed poems imitating the great authors to 'A Garland for the New Royal Exchange' (1845), edited by Tite. He produced, anonymously, 'Historical notes for a bibliographical description of mediaeval illuminated manuscripts of hours, offices, &c.' (1858), 'Lectures on Illuminated Manuscripts and the Materials and Practice of Illuminators' (1858), and 'An Account of Cranmer's Catechism', printed as a memorial book for his friends and Tite's (1862). 
Thomson died at the institution on 2 January 1865, aged seventy and unmarried. During his lifetime he had given the institution anonymously many valuable works and bequeathed it the sum of $500. He was buried at Kensal Green cemetery in the same grave as his brother James, who had predeceased him in 1858. 


@@@@@


doc= 27322


Thomson, Robert Dundas (1810-1864), medical officer of health, one of the four children of James Thomson (1768-1855), minister of Eccles, Berwickshire, and editor of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1851), daughter of James Skene of Aberdeen, was born at Eccles manse on 21 September 1810. He was educated for the medical profession in Edinburgh and Glasgow. In Glasgow he studied chemistry under his uncle, Thomas Thomson (1773-1852), then professor there, and in 1840 he studied at Giessen under J. Von Liebig. He graduated MD and CM at Glasgow University in 1831, and became a member of the Royal College of Physicians, in London, in 1859. After making a voyage to India and China as assistant surgeon in the service of the East India Company, he settled as a physician in London about 1835, and took an active part in the establishment of the Blenheim Street school of medicine. About this time he married his first cousin, Margaret Agnes, the daughter of Thomas Thomson. 
Early in his career Thomson investigated a variety of physiological questions -- including the composition of the blood, especially in cholera -- and he soon made himself a reputation as an acute observer. He was employed by the government to make a series of experiments on cattle food and to analyse the water supplied by the different London companies. His researches on the constituents of food in relation to the systems of animals was published as 'Experimental Researches on the Food of Animals' (1846); this work became a standard source of reference for physiologists pursuing similar inquiries, and it was influential in later nineteenth-century dietary debates. 
In 1841 Thomson went to Glasgow as deputy professor and assistant to his uncle, the professor of chemistry, who was ill. Thomson's lectures were heavy and hesitating, his experiments slow, and his matter too profound for the students. He was unsuccessful as a candidate for the chair at his uncle's death in 1852, but after returning to London he was appointed lecturer on chemistry at St Thomas's Hospital, on the retirement of Dr Leeson. This post he held for some years. In 1856, when medical officers of health were appointed under the 'Metropolitan Local Management Act', he was the successful candidate for Marylebone. Thomson enthusiastically set about organizing a system of inspection in Marylebone, and upon the formation of the Metropolitan Association of Medical Officers of Health he became the association's first president. He became widely known as an authority on sanitary matters, and he was employed by the registrar-general to make a monthly report of the amount of impurity in the waters of the different London companies. 
Thomson was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 1 June 1854 and was also a president of the British Meteorological Society. He lived in London at 41 York Terrace, Regent's Park, and died at his brother's residence, Dunstable House, Richmond, Surrey, on 17 August 1864; his wife survived him. 
Thomson contributed numerous papers to the British and foreign medical and scientific journals. He also published nine books on subjects as diverse as school chemistry, diet, the effects of alcohol on health, and cholera. 


@@@@@


doc= 27323


Thomson, Robert William (1822-1873), engineer, son of John Thomson, a merchant, and his wife, Elspeth ('nee' Lyon), was born at Stonehaven, Kincardineshire, on 29 June 1822. He was destined for the pulpit, but, showing little aptitude for academic study, was sent in 1836 to Charleston, United States of America, to be taught the trade of a merchant. In a short time he returned home and began his self-education, aided by a weaver who was a mathematician. After a brief practical apprenticeship in workshops at Aberdeen and Dundee he was employed by a cousin, Mr Lyon, on the demolition of Dunbar Castle. The work was accomplished by blasting, and Thomson conceived the idea of electrically ignited controlled explosions. When Thomson went to London in 1841, Faraday gave him encouragement, and Sir William Cubitt engaged him in connection with the blasting operations on the Dover cliffs. For some time after this he was with a civil engineer in Glasgow, and then worked for Robert Stephenson. In 1844 he began business on his own account as a railway engineer, making plans and surveys for a line in the eastern counties of England. 
The collapse of the railway boom in the mid-1840s left Thomson with no employment so he began experimenting with new inventions. He proposed the use of rubber for tyres, taking out a patent on 10 December 1845; but rubber was then too expensive for such general use. He took out a patent on 4 July 1849 for a fountain pen, and contributed his design to the Great Exhibition of 1851. In 1852 he went to Java as agent for an engineering firm, and while there he designed new machinery for refining sugar. This machinery was so superior to anything previously in use that levels of production were greatly increased, and up to the time of his death he continued to supply the best sugar-refining machinery used in Java. Thomson also designed the first portable steam crane for use in the docks of Java. He did not patent the idea, but Messrs Chaplin, who made the first small steam crane for him, had begun mass production of the devices by the time he returned to Britain. The success of Thomson's invention consisted mainly in using the weight of the boiler as a counterpoise to the weight of the jib. In 1860 he visited Europe to oversee the design and construction of a hydraulic dock, based on a series of standardized, interchangeable components. A dock for the French government at Saigon and another for a company at Callao in Peru were successfully constructed on this plan. 
In 1862 Thomson retired from business in Java and settled in Edinburgh. He went on to take out patents for improvements in control mechanisms for steam engines, for alterations in the construction of steam boilers, and for 'improvements in steam-gauges'. His next invention, the 'road-steamer', was the result of the need for some form of traction engine for the transport of sugar cane in Java, capable of moving over rough, hard surfaces and soft, treacherous ones alike. Thomson returned to his old idea of rubber tyres, and produced what was essentially an early design for a continuous 'caterpillar'-tracked vehicle. He took out various patents connected with this invention between 1867 and 1873. The vehicle was very successful, proving the viability of continuous tracks; its chief disadvantage was the use of the very expensive rubber. 
Thomson died at his home, 3 Moray Place, Edinburgh, on 8 March 1873. He left a widow, Clara ('nee' Hertz); the date and place of their marriage is not known. 


@@@@@


doc= 27324


Thomson, Thomas (1768-1852), record scholar and advocate, was born on 10 November 1768 at the manse in Dailly, Ayrshire, the eldest son of the Revd Thomas Thomson, the parish minister, and his second wife, Mary Hay, daughter of Francis Hay in Lochside, Ayrshire. He was educated in the parish school until 1782, when he matriculated at Glasgow University, aged fourteen. During three sessions he distinguished himself in the Greek and other classes. Through his father's patron, Sir Adam Fergusson of Kilkerran, he gained a Dundonald bursary in 1785, and graduated MA on 27 April 1789. While sometimes assisting with the education of his younger brothers at Dailly, he spent two more years attending theology and philosophy classes, as well as law and political science under John Millar, who influenced his decision to enter the law rather than the church. He moved to Edinburgh, where he passed his first civil law trial in November 1792 and was admitted as advocate on 10 December 1793. In 1797 he set up house in Castle Street with his brothers Adam and John, who later became well known as a landscape painter. 
Thomson built a solid practice at the bar, including important cases such as the Craigingillan case (1807), appeals to the House of Lords such as the Bargany case (1797), and peerage cases. His strength lay in written pleadings, for his easy and conversational delivery in court lacked oratorical force. Freehold and entail cases particularly attracted him because of his study of feudal law, inspired perhaps by his early acquaintance with Lord Hailes. Although he abandoned a commission from Hailes's family to write a memoir and edit his works and letters, Thomson was drawn to the study of original records and charters, of which Hailes had been a pioneer. His profound acquaintance with the complexities of feudal tenure was best shown in his memorial 'on old extent' of 1816, written for the case of 'Cranstoun v. Gibson' over a disputed vote in the Midlothian election of 1812, which minutely interpreted historical forms of land taxation. 
During his studies and early practice Thomson formed lifelong friendships with his contemporaries at the bar Walter Scott, Francis Jeffrey, George Cranstoun, Thomas Kennedy, Francis Horner, Henry Cockburn, and other Edinburgh luminaries. They accepted him as their equal, admired his legal and historical learning, and cherished the genial hospitality of his supper parties. He was interested in politics, but his own activities were mainly confined to faculty affairs. As one of the whig literati who planned the 'Edinburgh Review', he contributed three articles in 1803-4, and edited the spring 1804 number. His painstaking writing method decided him against contributing again, but he obliged Jeffrey by editing three issues in 1813-15. 
A growing reputation for legal antiquities led Thomson to be consulted in 1804 by the lord clerk register, Lord Frederick Campbell, about the unpublished edition of the records of the Scottish parliaments in Register House prepared by William Robertson in terms of the record commission of 1800. The commissioners accepted Thomson's recommendation for the suppression of the whole work because it used flawed texts and omitted authentic ones, and in December 1804 they appointed him their Scottish subcommissioner. During 1805 he persuaded the commissioners to adopt his own larger publication scheme. At the same period they became convinced of the need to place Thomson in charge of Scotland's public records, particularly to stop irregularities in the framing of registers. Following Treasury approval for a post in March 1806, the king granted a warrant on 19 June, and on 30 June Thomson was appointed the first deputy clerk register, at an annual salary of $500. In July he was recommended to be a confidential adviser to Grenville's government, on account of his moderate whig politics, but nothing came of it, and he began his commission at General Register House to draft regulations for the formation, custody, and transmission of all the public records under the clerk register's authority. 
Reforms in Thomson's report to the commissioners on the state of the records were recommended to the Scottish law officers and keepers of registers and records in July 1807, and most of them were enacted by the court of session in 1808-11, and by parliament in 1809 (49 Geo. III.c. 42). They included improvements in the methods of compiling the registers of the great seal, deeds, sasines, and diligence. Thenceforward the register volumes issued by himself were a standard size and more uniformly filled, and by degrees Thomson established regular transmissions of registers from their keepers. Most of the reforms had been proposed by his predecessor, Robertson, but Thomson's achievement was to execute a series of well-planned measures which overcame the vested interests of the keepers and clerks. 
Beside these changes, Thomson initiated an overdue conservation programme, personally inspecting the bindings and condition of volumes, and bringing a specialist paper repairer from London, Mrs Weir, to work and to train assistants. Between 1807 and 1816 repairs were carried out on many of the almost 12,000 volumes in Register House, including the rebinding of 6500 and the inlaying of 30,000 leaves in 180 of them. His other innovations included repertories of the records in Register House, and, more importantly, abridgements and indexes sanctioned and financed by the record commissioners, to facilitate searching of the records. The first series covered were the retours up to 1700, the records of chancery dealing with heirs inheriting property, which Thomson abridged and indexed in three volumes under the title 'Inquisitionum ad capellam domini regis retornatarum... abbreviatio' (1811-16). Although he continued the abridgements from 1701, they lacked the intended indexes, and were not published in his lifetime. In order to ease searching and reduce fees, he compiled and printed abridgements and indexes to the registers of sasines, inhibitions, and adjudications for 1781-1830. 
Another project was an abstract of royal charters in the great seal and elsewhere in the public records, authorized by the commissioners in May 1806, and resulting in 'Registrum magni sigilli' (1814), which covered the period 1306-1424. It set a high standard of accuracy, but was only published after pressure by the commissioners, who were alarmed at the slow progress of Thomson's multiplying editorial schemes. Since 1806 he had also been transcribing crown charters in burgh and private muniments which were not among the public records. After being suspended between 1812 and 1824, transcribing resumed, and by 1831 over 1500 charters from before Mary's reign had been copied. Thomson's abridgements and transcriptions laid the foundations of later editions of charters. 
Of all Thomson's editing projects and achievements, the greatest was the 'Acts of the Parliaments of Scotland', starting with the second volume, published in 1814, and concluding with volume 11 in 1824. Thomson drew on the official records of parliament and supplemented them with other sources to compile what he held to be authoritative texts. However, there were gaps in the record which caused him considerable problems. Fresh discoveries of manuscripts in 1826 rendered volumes 5 and 6 obsolete, but he was unable to produce new editions. For the years before 1424 the lack of official records posed special difficulties. In trying to overcome them Thomson delayed publication of volume 1 year after year, acutely aware of the need to surpass the standards of Robertson's text, which he had condemned in 1804. His labour was immense and his scholarship exacting, but he failed to make a definitive selection of texts or to write an introduction, owing to what his friend Cosmo Innes described as his 'grand defect..., a morbid reluctance to commit his opinions to paper' (Innes, 184). The work was taken from him in 1841, printed but still unpublished. Innes edited and amplified it for publication in 1844, acknowledging his mentor's immense achievement. Thomson's edition has remained the standard one, but its main weakness, unlike Robertson's work, lies in the failure to identify the sources blended and presented as definitive versions. Further criticisms have attached to his decision, based on mistaken interpretations of their nature, to publish records of parliament's judicial proceedings separately as the 'Acts of the Lords Auditors' and 'Acts of the Lords of Council in Civil Causes'. The official pressure to publish them in 1839 prevented Thomson from writing a substantial introduction. 
Besides official works, Thomson edited prolifically for the Bannatyne Club, formed in 1823 to publish historical texts, of which he issued fourteen, including 'The History and Life of James the Sext' (1825). Having been the club's vice-president from 1823, he succeeded Scott as its president in 1832 and became 'our master and our guide', in Henry Cockburn's words (Laing, 7). He made up for not writing a historical work by generously imparting his knowledge to many other scholars. At his own expense he edited and published privately several other texts, ranging from medieval accounts to eighteenth-century memoirs. He also subscribed to the Maitland and Spalding clubs, and with Scott, Cockburn, Jeffrey, and others, belonged to convivial clubs such as the Friday Club and the Blair Adam Club. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1807, and of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland in 1817, and he was the latter's vice-president from 1828 to 1836. Probably through his friendship with the mathematician John Playfair, he was a founding director of the Edinburgh Astronomical Institution in 1812, and he also served as a curator of the Advocates' Library. 
In 1822-3 Thomson acted in appeal cases in London while lobbying for funds to complete the Register House work, but he was practising law less than formerly. He considered a place on the Scottish bench in 1827 but in January 1828, largely in order to continue his record work, he chose instead to be appointed a principal clerk of session, at a salary of $1000. Like Walter Scott, Thomson was able to fulfil his court duties with time to spare for his main interests, including the Bannatyne Club. Scott shared a passion for books with his close friend 'Mr Register Thomson', and sought his advice on legal as well as historical matters. Thomson served on the committees for Scott's monument from 1832, as he had for his friend Dugald Stewart's from 1828. 
Thomson married Ann Reed, daughter of Thomas Reed, a former army contractor of Dublin, at St Pancras parish church in London on 25 October 1836. They had no children. At this period financial problems beset him as a result of his admitted dilatoriness regarding money, his zeal for the public records, and generosity to a needy relation. After the record commissioners suspended payments for the sasine abridgements in June 1831, he had continued to employ twelve clerks at his own expense rather than lose their experienced skill. He obtained loans of $4000 on the security of his own and of his deputy's salaries in 1834-5. By 1836 the irregularity of payments to Thomson's assistants became known through the complaints of Robert Pitcairn, writer to the signet, hired to work on the great seal, but not until 1839 did the exchequer repeatedly demand the production of the Register House annual accounts from 1824. Thomson was reluctant to face his growing predicament, arising from the entanglement of his private and official finances, but eventually responded. 
The conclusion in November 1840 was that $8570 was owing to the crown, but Thomson avoided prosecution by convincing the government that the money had been applied to record work and not for his private use. A secret attempt by Jeffrey and other friends, who were to subscribe $1000 each to help repay the crown first, failed when Thomson's private creditor sought to recover the loans and the matter became public. The lord clerk register, being personally responsible for his deputy's mismanagement, dismissed and replaced Thomson on 19 April 1841. However, Thomson retained his clerkship and, like Scott, insisted on paying all his debts, applying most of his salary to them until he resigned in February 1852. The sale of his fine library in 3339 lots over twelve days in 1841 liquidated somewhat under half of the readjusted debt to the crown of $7000. 
After 1839 Thomson did no substantial editing work and largely withdrew from view, although he continued to preside over the Bannatyne Club and to enjoy the friendship of Cockburn and others who believed he had acted unwisely but not corruptly. In 1841 he left his house at 127 George Street, Edinburgh, for a series of smaller ones, and made several trips to London; in 1847 he even visited the continent. Following bronchial trouble he died at Shrubhill, Edinburgh, on 2 October 1852, and was buried in the Dean cemetery on 8 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 27325


Thomson, Thomas (1773-1852), chemist, was born on 12 April 1773 at Crieff, Perthshire, the seventh child and youngest son of John Thomson, a retired woolman, and his wife, Elizabeth Ewan. He was educated at home by his mother and his brother James, at Crieff parish school, and from 1786 to 1788 at the borough school of Stirling. In 1788 he won a bursary to the University of St Andrews where he studied classics, mathematics, and natural philosophy. From 1791 to 1795 he was a private tutor at Blackshields, near Edinburgh, which enabled him to attend a variety of classes at the university there from 1791. In 1794 he began to study medicine, graduating MD in 1799, but he was inspired by Joseph Black's lectures of 1795-6 to devote his life principally to chemistry. From 1796 to 1800 he replaced his brother James as assistant editor of the 'Supplement to the Third Edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica', to which he contributed the articles 'Chemistry', 'Mineralogy', and 'Vegetable, animal and dyeing substances'; these formed the basis of his 'System of Chemistry' (1802; 6th edn, 1820). 
From 1800 to 1811 Thomson was a private teacher of chemistry in Edinburgh where by 1807 he had instituted a pioneering practical laboratory class. In 1802 and 1803 he collaborated with his brother James and his friend James Mill, the editor, in planning, and for a short time in contributing to, a postal periodical, the 'Literary Journal'. In 1805 he acted as a well paid consultant to the Scottish Excise Board, invented the instrument known as Allan's 'saccharometer', and was elected fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. He was a pugnacious opponent of Hutton's geology and helped to found the Wernerian Natural History Society of Edinburgh in 1808. He became FRS in 1811 and launched himself as a historian with his unofficial 'History of the Royal Society' (1812). That year he visited Sweden, and in the next published an account of his travels, paying special attention to mineralogy and geology. From 1811 he resided in London, where he and James Mill lived rent-free in Jeremy Bentham's town house. In 1813 Thomson founded his own scientific journal, 'Annals of Philosophy', which he edited until 1821. With attractive features such as annual reports on the progress of science, it rapidly overtook its proprietary competitors. In 1816 Thomson married Agnes (died 1834), daughter of R. Colquhoun, a distiller near Stirling. They had three children, the elder son, Thomas Thomson (1817-1878), becoming well known as an Indian botanist and explorer and the daughter, Margaret Agnes, marrying Thomson's nephew, Robert Dundas Thomson. 
The last phase of the entrepreneurial career of this Scottish man of parts began in 1817 when Thomson was unanimously appointed lecturer in chemistry at the University of Glasgow. Within seven months he was made regius professor through the influence of James Graham, third duke of Montrose and chancellor of the university. As professor, Thomson worked hard to re-establish Glasgow's distinguished chemical tradition and to improve its growing medical school. Particularly during the 1830s he led the unsuccessful political attempts made by the regius professors to elevate their status and increase their rights in the university. Tired by unremitting effort, in 1841 he relinquished the supervision of his laboratory and part of his teaching to his nephew, R. D. Thomson, whom he had groomed as his successor and assisted as editor of 'Records of General Science', 1835-6. From 1846 to 1852 all Thomson's duties were discharged by his nephew who, however, failed to succeed his uncle. 
A self-taught practical chemist, Thomson secured his reputation through his 'System', which went through six editions in eighteen years and appeared in French, German, and American versions. As the first systematic textbook of a non-elementary kind to break the French monopoly of such works, it stressed the contributions made by British chemists to the so-called new chemistry created in the late eighteenth century. Unusually for British treatises of the time, Thomson's digest was based on a wide range of original and recent papers as well as on standard compilations. Thomson's style was usually clear, often succinct, and occasionally trenchant. He was well known for the warm and effective support which he accorded to the chemical atomic theory of John Dalton, whom he first met in Manchester in 1804. In the third edition of his 'System' (1807) he began a thirty-year stint as Dalton's bulldog when he made the first detailed public announcement of the theory and extended it from gases to include acids, bases, and salts. Early in 1808 Thomson was the first to publish an experimental illustration of Dalton's law of multiple proportions some months before the appearance of the latter's 'New System of Chemical Philosophy' (1808). After 1808 Thomson used the successive editions of his 'System' and his own 'Annals' to promote chemical atomism and to countervail the scepticism with which Wollaston and Humphry Davy received it. In 1815 he espoused a second and related chemical cause when he published in his journal William Prout's anonymous paper on the specific gravities of gases. From this time Thomson's research had three connected aims: to put Dalton's atomic theory on a wider and firmer experimental basis; to provide incontestable experimental evidence for Prout's hypothesis that the atomic weights of all elements were multiples of that of hydrogen; and to extend his own work on the composition and formulae of salts to include those of all known minerals. 
During his early years at Glasgow, Thomson and his laboratory students devoted themselves to the first two projects. Their results were eventually revealed in 1825 in his 'An Attempt to Establish the First Principles of Chemistry by Experiment'. The analyses recorded had not been carried out with sufficient care to justify the claim of high accuracy made for them by Thomson, and the work was very severely criticized, especially by the Swedish chemist Berzelius, himself an analyst of extraordinary skill, who went so far as to accuse the author of having done 'much of the experimental part at the writing table' (J. Berzelius, 'Jahresbericht', 6, 1827, 77). Even so, Thomson's atomic weights were widely accepted in Britain and the USA for ten years from 1825. In 1836 he completed his research programme with his uncontroversial 'Outlines of Mineralogy, Geology, and Mineral Analysis', in which minerals were arranged on the basis of experimentally determined chemical composition and not of physical properties. 
The outstanding pedagogic feature of Thomson's professorship was his emphasis on the laboratory teaching of practical chemistry. In autumn 1818 he extracted from the university a laboratory, and thus became the first teacher of practical chemistry in a British university. Some of his pupils subsequently worked in the Glasgow chemical industry, others formed a small research school. His pupils were prominent in the chemistry section of the British Association in the 1830s and in the founding of the Chemical Society of London in 1841. By the mid-1830s his new laboratory, opened in 1831 at a cost of about $5000, had become a nursery from which ambitious chemists migrated to complete their training elsewhere. 
Thomson became the patriarch of Glasgow science. His 'History of Chemistry' (2 vols., 1830, 1831), unique and authoritative for the period after 1760, presented chemistry as a noble, rational, autonomous, and useful science. From 1834 until his death he was the president and chief ornament of the Philosophical Society of Glasgow, which he changed from a moribund affair dominated by artisans into a nationally important society led by Glasgow's learned professionals. Though he was sometimes arrogant and perpetually sardonic, the short and muscular Thomson, well known though not unassailed as teacher, researcher, writer, editor, and historian, was happy to end his career as Glasgow's senior scientific host and figure. A widower since 1834, he died on 2 July 1852 at Kilmun, near Dunoon, and was buried in Glasgow later that month. 


@@@@@


doc= 27326


Thomson, Thomas (1817-1878), botanist and geologist, was born in Glasgow on 4 December 1817, the eldest son of Thomas Thomson (1773-1852), professor of chemistry at Glasgow University, and his wife, Agnes Colquhoun (died 1834), daughter of a distiller near Stirling. Thomas was educated at Glasgow high school and Glasgow University. When only seventeen he published a well-regarded paper on his discovery of fossil marine mollusca on the Firth of Clyde. Intending initially to adopt chemistry as a profession, Thomson studied inorganic chemistry in the university laboratory under his father, and spent the summer of 1837 at Giessen under J. von Liebig, when he discovered pectic acid in carrots. However, on entering medical classes at Glasgow University, he concentrated his attention on botany, under Sir William Jackson Hooker. 
On 21 December 1839, having graduated MD, Thomson entered the service of the East India Company as an assistant surgeon. Subsequent promotions were to surgeon (1 December 1853) and surgeon-major (21 December 1859). On his arrival in Calcutta early in 1840 he was appointed curator of the Asiatic Society's museum, but in August he was sent to Afghanistan in charge of a party of European recruits. He reached Kabul in June 1841, and proceeded to Ghazni, where he was attached to the 27th native infantry. There he began a botanical and geological study of the area, but was besieged during the winter of 1841-2 and was taken prisoner when the town fell in March 1842. He was destined to be sold into slavery in Bukhara, but, together with some fellow prisoners, bribed his captor to convey him to the British army of relief. 
Thomson returned to India having lost all his specimen collections and personal effects, and from 19 June 1843 until 1845 was stationed at Moradabad where he acted as civil surgeon. Following service through the Sutlej campaign of the first Anglo-Sikh War he was stationed at Moradabad, Lahore, and Ferozepore. During this period he investigated the botany of the plains and outer Himalayas. In June 1847 he was appointed one of the British commissioners for defining the boundary between Kashmir and Chinese Tibet. Having reached Leh in October the commissioners split up, Thomson subsequently making extensive explorations in the Kashmir territories, going as far north as the Karakoram Pass, and obtaining important geographical information and specimen collections. On his return to Ferozepore he suffered repeated attacks of malaria and took furlough at Simla, where he made further botanical researches. He published an account of his explorations in his 'Western Himalaya and Tibet' (1852), a well-received though prosaic work. 
In early 1850 Thomson joined his friend Joseph Dalton Hooker in Darjeeling, and from May 1850 undertook fieldwork with him in the Sikkim forests, Assam, and Chittagong, finally returning to England in bad health in March 1851. The next few years were spent at Kew, laboriously working on the extensive collections made during these travels. In the mistaken belief that financial assistance would be given by the East India Company, he and Hooker brought out the first volume of their 'Flora Indica' (1855), the publication of which was subsidized by a legacy from Thomson's father. However, the sole support obtained from the company was an offer to purchase 100 copies. No more volumes appeared, Thomson withdrawing from a plan to resume publication in 1870, following an argument with Hooker. 
At Bath, in early 1855, Thomson married Catharine, daughter of R. C. Sconce of Malta. Thomson then proceeded immediately to Calcutta where he was installed as superintendent of the botanical garden in April. He was also appointed professor of botany at the Calcutta medical college, and held the two posts until 1861, when he retired and returned to England in ill health. He lived first at Kew and then at Maidstone and retired officially from the medical service in September 1863. In October 1871 he returned to India as treasurer and translator to the expedition under Sir Norman Lockyer sent out to observe the solar eclipse on 12 December 1871. He died at his home, 16 Horbury Crescent, Notting Hill, London, from 'malignant disease' on 18 April 1878 and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. He was survived by his wife; they had no children. 
Thomson was elected a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1852, of the Royal Geographical Society in 1854, and of the Royal Society in 1855. He was for twelve years an examiner in natural science for the medical services of the army and navy, and on several occasions examiner in botany for the University of London and the Royal School of Mines. 


