@@@@@


doc= 27327


Thomson, Thomas Napier (1798-1869), historian and biographer, was born at Glasgow on 25 February 1798, and was the fifth son of Hugh Thomson, West India merchant, and his wife, Agnes, 'nee' Davidson. About 1812 the family moved to London, and Thomson was placed at a boarding-school near Barnet in Hertfordshire. Having contracted a bronchial affection, he was sent to his uncle's house in Ayrshire, and in October 1813 he entered the University of Glasgow as Thomas Thomson, having dropped the 'Napier' owing to a disagreement with the Napier family. Thomson was a distinguished student. In 1818 he published 'The Immortality of the Soul, and other Poems', his only publication in verse. After entering the Divinity Hall as a student for the ministry, he was reduced to poverty by his father's misfortunes, but managed to support himself at college as a private tutor, and in 1823 he obtained the two highest prizes in the University of Glasgow. Having received a licence as a preacher, he officiated in many parts of Scotland, as well as in Newcastle and Birmingham, besides writing for the 'Christian Instructor'. In Glasgow he delivered a series of lectures to women on the philosophy of history. 
In 1827 Thomson was appointed assistant to Laurence Adamson, minister of Cupar, Fife; but, owing to a return of his throat affection, he had to resign. He was then ordained to the charge of the Scottish church in Maitland, New South Wales, Australia, for which he sailed on 11 May 1831 with a brother and sister. On arriving at Maitland, he found there was neither church, manse, nor congregation, so he initiated a charge at Bathurst on 13 July 1832. About this time he married Lucy Agnes Hall. Shortly after the birth of their second child he resigned his charge and returned to Britain, where he arrived in 1835, to devote himself to literature. Charles Knight (1791-1873) engaged him to edit and remodel Robert Henry's 'History of Great Britain'. This was afterwards abandoned in favour of a new work, 'The Pictorial History of England' (1838), to which Thomson was one of the principal contributors. He also wrote extensively for the periodical press, and contributed biographical and critical notices for 'The Book of the Poets: Chaucer to Beattie' (1842). 
In 1840 Thomson was commissioned by the Wodrow Society to edit David Calderwood's 'Historie of the Kirk of Scotland'. As he had to transcribe the original manuscript in the British Museum, the task took him nearly five years. In July 1844 he left London for Edinburgh, where he had been appointed by the Free Church to edit a series of works it was about to publish. After the appearance of several volumes, comprising the 'Select Works' of John Knox and other Scottish ministers, the scheme collapsed, and Thomson again turned his attention to the periodical and newspaper press. In 1851 he became connected with Messrs Blackie & Son, the publishers, for whom he afterwards turned out an immense amount of work, notably (along with Charles Macfarlane) 'The Comprehensive History of England' (4 vols., 1858-61). In 1851 he had written a supplemental volume of R. Chambers's 'Biographical Dictionary of Eminent Scotsmen', and immediately before his death he prepared a new edition in three volumes, revised throughout and continued with a supplement, which was published between 1869 and 1871. His own biography is contained in the supplement. Having suffered for some years from chronic bronchitis, Thomson died at his house, Summer Lodge, Trinity, Leith, on 1 February 1869. 
Thomson was the author of small works written in his college days, entitled 'Richard Gordon', 'The Christian Martyr', 'A Visit to Dalgarnock', and 'The City of the Sun'. He also published naval biographies (1839), army biographies (from Alfred to Wellington, 1840), and a history of Scotland for schools (1849). He edited Robert Fleming's 'Discourse on the Rise and Fall of the Papacy' (1846), Milton's 'Poetical Works' (1853), and the works of James Hogg, the Ettrick Shepherd (2 vols., 1865). 


@@@@@


doc= 27328


Thomson, William (1746-1817), writer, was born at Burnside in the parish of Forteviot, Perthshire, the son of Matthew Thomson, carpenter and farmer, and his wife, the daughter of Mr Miller, the schoolmaster of Avintully, near Dunkeld. He was educated at the parish school, at Perth grammar school, and at St Andrews University, which he entered at the age of fifteen, despite his family's very limited means. There he was made private librarian to the university chancellor, Thomas Hay, earl of Kinnoull, who encouraged him to study for the church and promised him a parish in his patronage. Having completed his theological studies at St Andrews and, later, at Edinburgh University, Thomson was ordained on 20 March 1776 as assistant to James Porteous, minister of Monivaird, Perthshire, but he soon displayed tastes and affinities discordant with his office. He did not always confine himself within the bounds of ascetic puritanism, and the parishioners made urgent complaints about his irascible temper and his taste for sensual and social pleasures. He eventually resigned his post, on 1 October 1778, and settled in London as a man of letters. 
At first unsuccessful, for several years Thomson depended mainly on an annual income of $50 granted by the earl of Kinnoull. At length he won notice and regard by his successful continuation of Robert Watson's 'History of Philip III of Spain' (1783), for which he wrote the fifth and sixth books. On 31 October of the same year he received the honorary degree of LLD from Glasgow University, and he soon had his hands full of work. For the next thirty-five years he wrote on a great variety of subjects, producing pamphlets, memoirs, elaborate biographies, voyages, travels (in Europe, Asia, and Africa under the names of Thomas Newte, Sergeant Donald Macleod, or Andrew Swinton), commentaries on the 'Bible' scripture (under the name of Harrison), and treatises on national history, such as the 'History of Great Britain from the Revolution of 1688 to the Accession of George' (1787), or on military tactics ('Memoirs Relative to Military Tactics' [1805]). He seems to have avoided verse but he essayed into novels and dramas. Most of these had a decidedly philosophical bent, such as 'The Man in the Moon' (1783), a satirical novel in the manner of Swift, where a lunar sovereign visits the earth, comments on man's intellectual and artistic achievements, and meets Charles Fox, or 'Mammuth, or, Human nature displayed on a grand scale, in a tour with the tinkers into the central parts of Africa' (1789), a travel book intended to demonstrate the adaptability and universality of man's intellectual and social faculties. Besides writing under his own name Thomson collaborated with others and he appears to have used many different pseudonyms. From 1790 to 1800 he prepared the historical part of 'Dodsley's Annual Register'. From 1794 to December 1796 he owned the 'English Review' and largely furnished its contents with political and literary articles. In a letter to Dr Parr (1 March 1792), much reprinted and circulated, he defended the principles of the French Revolution, but not its methods, and advocated progressive changes. The 'English Review' was later incorporated into the 'Analytical Review'. Thomson also wrote for the 'European Magazine', the 'Political Herald' (where, in articles signed Ignotus, he supported Fox's policies and party), 'The Oracle', and the 'Whitehall Evening Post', for which he wrote a weekly report of parliamentary debates. Thomson was twice married: his first wife was Diana Miltone, a Scot; his second was a minor novelist, of whom no other details are known. There were children of both marriages, two sons and two daughters in all. A man of great and varied ability and very wide attainments, Thomson could always produce respectable and sometimes even excellent results, but he had no extraordinary literary ambition or perseverance. Thomson died at his home at Kensington Gravel Pits, London, on 16 February 1817. 


@@@@@


doc= 27329


Thomson, William (1802-1852), physician, was born on 3 July 1802 in Edinburgh, the second son of John Thomson (1765-1846), surgeon (subsequently professor of surgery at the College of Surgeons of Edinburgh, professor of military surgery at Edinburgh University, and professor of pathology at Edinburgh University), and his first wife, Margaret Crawford Gordon (died 1804). From the high school in Edinburgh, Thomson matriculated as a medical student at Edinburgh University in the session 1818-19 and studied medicine there and at the Edinburgh extramural school until 1821. He spent the session 1821-2 at Glasgow University studying medicine and philosophy. 
By the beginning of the 1820s the pathological discoveries being made in France had attracted the attention of British medical men. Thomson's father, who resigned his post as professor of military surgery at Edinburgh in 1822, had become interested in the study of pathological anatomy. At his father's behest Thomson and another Edinburgh medical practitioner, Robert Carswell, spent the best part of the years 1822 to 1824 in France, initially in Paris and subsequently in Lyons, studying French methods in pathology and surgery. The information gleaned from this was used by John Thomson in his subsequent lectures on pathology. 
After returning from Paris, Thomson became a fellow of the College of Surgeons of Edinburgh in 1825. In 1826 he was elected one of the surgeons of the New Town Dispensary in Edinburgh. From 1826 to 1828 he gave lectures on the institutes of medicine. In December 1827 he married Eliza, daughter of Ninian Hill, a solicitor. They had six children. From 1828 to 1841 Thomson worked closely with his father, lecturing initially on the practice of medicine, and in 1830 taking over his father's course on the practice of physic. 
In 1831 Thomson was awarded the MD of Marischal College, Aberdeen, by examination, and two years later, in 1833, was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh. In that same year he acted as a delegate from the College of Surgeons of Edinburgh to parliament during its consideration of amendments to the 1815 'Apothecaries Act'. In 1834 he was again a delegate to parliament, this time as part of a deputation from the Edinburgh colleges of physicians and surgeons and Edinburgh University, which was monitoring and giving evidence to a select committee on medical education and privileges. He was also involved in professional and public affairs in Edinburgh outside the colleges, being for a time secretary of the Medico-Chirurgical Society of Edinburgh, as well as holding the office of secretary to the Edinburgh School of Art. Thomson was appointed physician to the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary in 1841, but held this office for only a short time. Later that year he was appointed professor of the practice of medicine at Glasgow University. 
As well as his medical duties Thomson undertook a heavy administrative workload during his time as professor, although he had no private practice. He again accepted appointment as physician to the Royal Infirmary from 1843 to 1846, and from 1848 to 1851, since the tenure of high medical office within the university was no guarantee of the right to have beds at the Royal Infirmary. He was by virtue of his professorship a director of the Royal Infirmary. In the university he was also clerk to the faculty (a general administrative body, not to be confused with the faculty of medicine) for a number of years in the 1840s. In this capacity he was closely involved with the selection of records for the 'Munimenta alme universitatis Glasguensis', edited by Cosmo Innes and published in 1854. Thomson was also a director of the lunatic asylum at Gartnavel, where he acted as physician during the winter of 1848-9, while there was a vacancy in the post of physician superintendent. During that period there was an outbreak of cholera in the asylum which resulted in the deaths of more than forty patients. 
Thomson made a number of contributions to the medical literature, and was particularly well regarded by his contemporaries for his ability to cut to the heart of the matter in his writing. His only book was 'A Practical Treatise on Diseases of the Liver', published in Edinburgh in 1841. Thomson was cultured in his manners, which were described as being 'dignified and polished' (Cowan, 204). He was not considered a great success as a teacher because of his inability to organize the material on which he was lecturing, although he was very warmly disposed to his students and interested in their careers and well-being. 
Towards the end of the 1840s Thomson's health, which had never been good, began to fail. At the beginning of the 1850s he began to have symptoms of heart disease. This gradually worsened, and during the first week of May 1852 he suffered shortness of breath and chest pains. On 10 May he travelled to Edinburgh to consult medical colleagues on his symptoms, but he died suddenly on the morning of 12 May 1852. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 27330


Thomson, William (1819-1890), archbishop of York, born at Whitehaven on 11 February 1819, was the eldest son of John Thompson of Kelswick House, near that town. Both his parents were of Scottish extraction. His mother, Isabella, was maternally descended from Patrick Home of Polwarth, and was related to the earls of Marchmont. His father migrated to Whitehaven in 1813 to join the business of his uncle, Walter Thompson. John Thompson became director of the local bank and chairman of the Cleator Moor Hematite Iron Company, the first hematite company formed in the north of England. He died at Bishopthorpe Palace on 18 April 1878, aged eighty-seven ('West Cumberland and Whitehaven Herald', 25 April and 2 May 1878). 
William was educated at Shrewsbury School, entering at the age of eleven. During his schooldays he preferred science to classics, although at Shrewsbury he had no opportunity of following his bent. On 2 June 1836 he matriculated from Queen's College, Oxford. He was elected a scholar in the following year and a fellow in 1840. He graduated BA in that year and MA in 1844. 
While an undergraduate, Thompson devoted himself chiefly to the study of logic, somewhat to the detriment of his work for the schools, and before he graduated he had practically completed a treatise entitled 'Outlines of the laws of thought'. This was published in 1842, and brought him his earliest reputation. The germ of his work, he states, he derived from Christian von Wolff's 'Philosophia rationalis' and Daniel Albert Wyttenbach's 'Praecepta philosophiae logicae'. Thompson's treatment of his topic was remarkably clear, and he arranged his matter with great skill. The merits of the treatise brought him into communication with many authorities on the subject, including Sir William Hamilton, Professor De Morgan, James McCosh, Philip Henry, Lord Mahon (later fifth Earl Stanhope), and William Whewell. From these, and especially from Sir William Hamilton, Thompson received many suggestions which induced him to make considerable alterations in the later editions of his work. Thompson's 'Outlines' in some respects anticipated John Stuart Mill's 'System of Logic', and was long used extensively as a textbook. 
Soon after the publication of his treatise in 1842, Thompson was ordained deacon, and left Oxford to devote himself to clerical work. He took priest's orders in 1843, and in the next four years served curacies, first at St Nicholas, Guildford, Surrey (1844-6), and afterwards at Cuddesdon, near Oxford, under the nominal vicar, Samuel Wilberforce, bishop of Oxford. About this time he dropped the 'p' from his name, thinking 'Thomson' less plebeian; he was mocked for this for the rest of his life, especially at Queen's. 
Thomson's growing reputation as a logician led Queen's College in 1847 to recall him to Oxford to act as college tutor. In this capacity he did much to retrieve the standing of the college. Indefatigable in his attention to its affairs, he filled the office not merely of tutor, but also of chaplain and dean. In 1852 he became junior bursar, and in 1854 bursar. At the same time he was recognized in the university as a preacher of power. In 1848 he was appointed select preacher, and in 1853 he was chosen Bampton lecturer. Taking as his subject the atoning work of Christ, he dwelt on the expiatory character of the atonement, and his sermons constitute a very complete exposition of that theory of the purpose of Christ's incarnation. They attracted great attention, and St Mary's was more crowded than it had been since the time of Newman ('The Times', 7 June 1853). 
In the matter of academic organization Thomson was strongly in favour of reform. He disapproved of the principles on which college fellowships were filled. At that period they were nearly all confined to persons born in particular districts, and at Queen's College, contrary to the statutes, elections were restricted to natives of Cumberland and Westmorland. In conjunction with another fellow, George Henry Sacheverell Johnson, Thomson endeavoured to remedy this state of things. In 1849 the fellows rejected the candidature of Goldwin Smith, afterwards regius professor of modern history, and elected instead a native of Cumberland whom they had previously removed from the list of expectants on account of his insufficient attainments. Thomson appealed against this action to Lord John Russell, the prime minister; as a result of this and other representations a royal commission was appointed in 1850 to inquire into the constitution and revenues of the university, and in 1854 a second commission was empowered to revise the statutes of the university and of the colleges and halls. The proposed innovations alarmed the more conservative members of the university, and several attacks on the commissions appeared. In reply to one of these, entitled 'The Case of Queen's College' (1854), by the Revd John Barrow, Thomson penned 'An Open College Best for All' (1854). This pamphlet was generally considered the ablest contribution to the reformers' side of the controversy, and was much quoted in the parliamentary debates. 
In 1855 Thomson married Zoe, daughter of James Henry Skene, British consul at Aleppo, and his wife, Rhalon Rizo-Rangabe, a Greek beauty of aristocratic descent. With her he had five daughters and four sons, including the 'spycatcher' Sir Basil Home Thomson and Jocelyn Home Thomson. As a result of his marriage, Thomson lost his fellowship; he was presented by the crown to the rectory of All Souls, Marylebone. Within a few months, however, on the death of the Revd John Fox, on 11 August, he was elected provost of Queen's College and resigned his living. As provost he steadily pursued his liberalizing policy. He advocated the enlargement of the curriculum of university studies, and, with a view to aiding scientific study, was one of the projectors of the university museum, which was afterwards erected in the university parks. Outside Oxford he accepted preferment, whereby he extended his reputation as a preacher who appealed to the intellect rather than to the emotions of his audience. In 1858 he was elected to the preachership of Lincoln's Inn, and in 1859 he was appointed chaplain-in-ordinary to the queen. 
Thomson's theological position was conspicuously defined during the controversy that followed the publication in 1860 of 'Essays and Reviews'. In his ardour for reform at Oxford he had associated himself with Benjamin Jowett and the newer school of broad-churchmen, and in 1855 he had contributed a paper, 'Crime and its excuses', to 'Oxford Essays'. He was to have been one of the contributors to 'Essays and Reviews', but failed to get his paper to the printer in time (happily for him, in view of the events of the next two years). However, when 'Essays and Reviews' was published, in 1860, Thomson led the orthodox campaign against it, editing in reply 'Aids to Faith' (1861). This volume included contributions from Edward Harold Browne, Frederick Charles Cook, Charles John Ellicott, and Henry Longueville Mansel, besides an article of his own, 'The death of Christ', which was substantially a restatement of his Bampton lectures in more popular form. 'Aids to Faith' was the most substantial general answer to 'Essays and Reviews', and possesses historical value as a clear statement of the orthodox position at that period. Almost at the same time Thomson was engaged, as one of a committee of ten, in preparing the 'Speaker's Commentary', to which he contributed an 'Introduction to the synoptical gospels', probably the best treatise on the subject then extant. 
In the same year (1861), on the translation of C. T. Baring to the see of Durham, Thomson, whose established fame as a preacher marked him out for promotion, was appointed Baring's successor in the see of Gloucester and Bristol. Within ten months of his consecration, however, Charles Thomas Longley, the archbishop of York, was translated to Canterbury, and, though so junior a bishop, Thomson was appointed Longley's successor, A. C. Tait having declined. This rapid advancement, coupled with public knowledge of his ambivalent role in the 'Essays and Reviews' affair, excited envy and distrust among his clerical colleagues. He was enthroned at York Minster on 25 February 1863, and entered on an archiepiscopate which extended over twenty-eight years. The new archbishop was a very tall man (and wore a size eight hat). He was imposing in full episcopal dress, with long, bushy hair and side-whiskers. He and his wife were known as a handsome couple. He was vain about his appearance and had a reputation for vulgarity. He signed a hotel register: 'His Grace, the Lord Archbishop of York'. None the less Thomson performed the various duties of his office with success. From the commencement of his archiepiscopate he realized that, to keep its place in English life, the English church must show itself able to meet modern needs. He was active in his support of diocesan conferences and church congresses, and showed a keen interest in social, economic, and political questions, together with a just discernment of their relation to ecclesiastical matters. He made his first public appearance as archbishop at a meeting of the Castle Howard Reformatory in 1863, and from that time onwards he was present at every large public meeting in the diocese, whether its object was the amendment of the criminal law, the amelioration of the state of the poor, the encouragement of education, or the cultivation of art or science. 
In 1862 the increase of population in the north of England had surpassed the resources of the church, and in the large towns the numbers of the clergy were quite inadequate for the needs of the people. Sheffield, for example, had only one church for 8000 inhabitants, and that town, like all its neighbours, was a centre of anti-clerical feeling. Thomson from the first set himself to meet these difficulties. In 1865, at the church congress at York, he suggested the addition of a working men's meeting to the ordinary programme. In 1869 he gained the attention of the workers of Sheffield, who had hitherto treated the clergy with scorn, by a speech defending the English church from the charge that it was a useless institution maintained at an undue cost to the nation. This speech was followed by others of like tenor. The population of Sheffield at once acknowledged the force of his argument, and their attitude of hostility or indifference to all that concerned the church was converted into one of devoted esteem for himself and his aims. His artisan admirers subscribed to give him a present of cutlery in 1883 ('Yorkshire Post', 13 June 1883). His success in Sheffield was only typical of what he achieved throughout the labour centres of northern England. During the latter part of his life no man equalled him in the affections of the working classes, and it is difficult to overestimate the effect of his influence in strengthening the position of the English church in the northern province. He was one of the first English clergymen who, while not himself a socialist, recognized the good elements that went to the making of socialism. When he dissented from opinions which to most people of the time seemed revolutionary, he did so without bitterness and with full allowance for differences in the point of view from which the question was approached. 
From the time of his elevation to the bench of bishops Thomson took an important part in ecclesiastical legislation. One of the first problems that engaged his attention was the reconstitution of the final ecclesiastical court of appeal. He was thus involved in a prolonged controversy with Samuel Wilberforce, bishop of Oxford, who was ultimately victorious. At the outset in 1871 Thomson successfully opposed Wilberforce's proposal to reduce the bishops to the position of assessors in the judicial committee of the privy council. But in 1873 a clause was introduced into the 'Supreme Court of Judicature Act' removing the episcopal members from the judicial committee altogether, and, though two years later they reappeared as assessors, they did not regain their judicial functions. In 1871, with John Jackson (1811-1885), bishop of London, Thomson introduced the 'Dilapidations Act', intended to compel the clergy to keep their residences and church buildings in repair. It was not, however, very happily framed, and some years later was condemned by a committee of the House of Commons. In 1874 he joined his friend Tait, by then archbishop of Canterbury, another disciplinarian of liberal origin, in introducing the 'Public Worship Regulation Bill'. The measure was intended in part to check the growth of ritualistic practices, and in its original form largely increased the authority of the bishops; the extensive modifications it received in its passage through parliament, however, partially destroyed the effect that its framers had in view. Gladstone and the Tractarians vigorously opposed the bill, and the act led to a number of notorious imprisonments. In 1883 Thomson supported Tait's motion for the appointment of a commission on ecclesiastical courts. But, though he signed the general report of the commission, he joined with a minority in issuing a dissentient report, and was the author of a severe criticism on the work of the commission which appeared in the 'Edinburgh Review' for January 1884. 
A strict disciplinarian, Thomson came conspicuously forward in 1887 as the champion of ecclesiastical order. He had refused to admit Canon Tristram's election as a proctor in convocation, on the ground that he was not duly qualified. In consequence he was required to show cause in the court of queen's bench why Tristram's election should not be accepted. Thomson conducted his case in person, and, appearing before the court on 28 November 1887, took exception to the court's jurisdiction. His pleading was successful, and the ability he displayed led Lord Coleridge, who tried the case, to remark that, had Thomson been a lawyer, he would have been the second person in the kingdom instead of the third. 
In 1888 the 'Clergy Discipline (Immorality) Bill' was introduced into parliament. It was materially altered in committee, and Thomson, disapproving of it in its amended form, hastened to London to oppose it on the third reading in the House of Lords. He pointed out that it tended to increase the cost of prosecution, and at the same time prevented an appeal to a higher court on matters of fact; the bill, after passing the third reading, was allowed to drop. In the conduct of the ecclesiastical affairs of his province Thomson displayed both strength and tact. Though he had been accused of narrowness and intolerance, he earned the gratitude of people of opinions widely different from his own, and from each other's, by interposing his authority to shield them from petty annoyance. The only clerical prosecution for doctrine or ritual which he promoted took place in 1869, when he instituted proceedings for heresy against the Revd Charles Voysey, rector of Healaugh in Yorkshire, author of 'The Sling and the Stone', who, among other things, had published a sermon entitled 'Is every Statement in the Bible about our Heavenly Father Strictly True?' The case was finally decided against Voysey on 11 February 1870. The result did not, however, affect the personal friendship which had existed for many years between Voysey and the archbishop. In the judicial committee of the privy council Thomson's voice was frequently raised for toleration, and when, on 16 December 1863, Robert Gray (1809-1872), the bishop of Cape Town, pronounced sentence of deposition against John William Colenso, Thomson warned him of the illegality of his proceedings. On another occasion, in the case of William James Early Bennett, he laid down the maxim that the question to consider in cases of difference is not whether a person's views are in strict accord with the teaching of their church, but whether their views are so discordant as to render toleration impossible. 
Prior to the appointment of Archdeacon Crossthwaite in 1880 as bishop of Beverley, Thomson had no suffragan. He always dispatched the business of the see with punctuality, but the labour and anxiety gradually undermined his health and compounded the diabetes which affected him from about 1880. He was taken ill while boating at Keswick in September 1890 and died on Christmas day 1890 in Bishopthorpe Palace. He was buried in the churchyard of Bishopthorpe, near York. The pall was borne by working men of Sheffield. His wife, Zoe, died on 30 December 1913 and was buried with her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 27331


Thorburn, Grant (1773-1863), entrepreneur and author, was born at West Houses, near Dalkeith, Edinburghshire, on 18 February 1773, the son of Elizabeth Fairley (died 1776) and James Thorburn, a nailmaker. His mother died when he was three years old and his subsequent neglect left him physically undersized. In 1792 he joined the Friends of the People, a group committed to reforming parliament by more equal representation, and in the winter of 1793, along with seventeen others, was held in Edinburgh as 'a suspicious person', but dismissed. In 1794 he emigrated to New York, where at first he worked at the nailmaking trade. In 1796 he and his brother started a hardware business, which presently became Thorburn's sole concern. In June 1797 he married Rebecca Sickles, with whom he had a son. Rebecca died in 1800, and in 1801 Thorburn married Hannah Wortemby (died 1852). By this year the introduction of cut-nails forced him to abandon his trade and he opened a grocery store which he stocked with flowering plants. From this he developed a seed business and in 1812 issued the first seed catalogue in America, 'The Gentleman and Gardener's Kalender for the Middle States of North America'. Although faced with such set-backs as fire, crop failure and imprisonment for debt, he re-established his business in 1816, and thereafter it prospered. 
From his youth Thorburn believed that he was under the care of a special providence, and his 'self-help' autobiography, 'Forty years' residence in America, or, The doctrine of a particular providence exemplified in the life of Grant Thorburn' (1834), while it is meant to justify this theory, reveals that he was an extraordinarily resilient character whose unflagging optimistic outlook turned many of his failures into successes. 
Thorburn first became widely known as the model for the hero of John Galt's 'Lawrie Todd, or, The Settlers in the Woods' (1830). Now financially independent, Thorburn wrote articles and sketches for newspapers and magazines. Noted for his energy, originality, candour, and wide interests, many of these are humorous and 'folksy' pieces on current affairs. Some give accounts of his meetings with famous radicals such as Thomas Muir (with whom he was imprisoned in Edinburgh) and Thomas Paine, while others recount his experiences in the wake of the yellow fever outbreak in New York in 1798. Among the most interesting works of this dedicated republican is his 'Men and manners in Britain, or, A bone to gnaw for the trollopes, fiddlers, & c., being notes from a journal on sea and land, 1833-4' (1835), a caustic response to Frances Trollope's 'Domestic Manners of the Americans' (1832), in which he pronounces on the savagery of English history, the servility of English shopkeepers, and the profound ignorance of the British about America, but the work is also invaluable for Thorburn's more serious observations of British culture in that period, in particular his sense of social and cultural change in his native Scotland. His other works include 'Fifty Years' Reminiscences of New York' (1845), 'Sketches from the Note-Book of Lawrie Todd' (1847), 'Lawrie Todd's Hints to Merchants, Married Men, and Bachelors' (1847), 'Notes on Virginia, with a Chapter on Puritans, Witches and Friends' (1848), and 'Lawrie Todd, Life and Writings of Grant Thorburn' (1852). His second wife died in 1852, and in 1853 he married Maria, with whom he moved from New York to Winsted, Connecticut, and then to New Haven, where he died on 21 January 1863. He was buried in New Haven. 


@@@@@


doc= 27332


Thorburn, Robert (1818-1885), miniature painter, was born at Dumfries on 10 March 1818, the son of a tradesman. He received his early education at Dumfries high school, where he developed a love of art. At fifteen he was sent to Edinburgh to study under Sir William Allan at the drawing academy of the Royal Institute of Scotland; he made rapid progress and won two first prizes. He exhibited at the Royal Scottish Academy between 1835 and 1856, and was made an honorary member in 1857; a self-portrait, now very badly bituminized, is in the academy's collection. As a native of Dumfries he enjoyed the special patronage of the duke of Buccleuch. About 1836 he went to London and entered the Royal Academy Schools. He exhibited at the Royal Academy between 1837 and 1884, and was elected an associate in 1848. On 16 October 1846, in Edinburgh, he married Elizabeth Robertson. 
On 23 February 1844 Queen Victoria wrote of Thorburn in her journal: 'He is a young Scotchman, of great talent, who studied 2 winters in Italy, & has painted some splendid miniatures, with such depth of colouring & such power, as I have never before seen in a miniature' (D. Millar, 886). In that year he painted several important miniatures for the queen and Prince Albert; she described one of herself, given to her by the prince, as 'so like & so beautiful' (ibid.). Also in 1844 Thorburn was paid $123 15's'. for five watercolour sketches, including portraits of Albert Edward, prince of Wales; Ernest II, duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha; and Duke Ernest of Wurttemberg (Royal Collection). Ernest II was drawn during a visit between 20 November and 17 December 1844, when his wife also sat to Thorburn for a miniature. The sketch of the duke of Wurttemberg formed the basis for the life-sized half-length portrait painted for the 1844 room at Buckingham Palace. A miniature of Prince Albert in full armour, painted by Thorburn in 1843 (Royal Collection), was said to be the queen's favourite. In the Royal Academy exhibition of 1848 Thorburn exhibited a portrait of her with Princess Helena and Prince Alfred that had been painted 'by command of the Queen' (Graves, 'RA exhibitors', 378). 
Thorburn's success as a miniature painter was soon secured, and for many years he shared the patronage of fashionable society with Sir William Charles Ross. Foster's 'British Miniature Painters' contains a reproduction of a self-portrait miniature and a list of Thorburn's principal sitters, comprising most of the beautiful women of the time (pp. 95-7); one of his most widely known portraits is that of Louise, duchess of Manchester ('c'.1853; priv. coll.). His carefully finished miniatures were larger than is usual, showing more of the figure and often accompanied by a landscape background. They were painted on large pieces of ivory, sometimes on pieces joined together, and are now subject to cracking. They were very much admired at the time of their production, and at the Paris Exposition Universelle in 1855 Thorburn was awarded a gold medal. When photography began to supersede miniature painting he took to painting in oils more frequently; in later years he exhibited portraits, including crayon drawings, and subject pictures, often of a religious nature, at the Royal Academy, with moderate success. Examples of his work are in the Royal Collection, the Scottish National Portrait Gallery, Edinburgh, and the National Gallery of Scotland, Edinburgh. 
Thorburn died at Tunbridge Wells, Kent, on 2 November 1885, having outlived the great reputation of his earlier years, and was survived by his wife. For probate his address was given as Winkston, Peeblesshire, sometime of Forest Field, Kelso; he gave the latter address when he exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1879. In 1884, the last year in which he exhibited at the academy, his address was 17 Cumberland Walk, Tunbridge Wells, where his son Archibald was living when he was nominated executor of his will; another son, John, was living in London. Archibald Thorburn (1860-1935) was a wildlife artist, well known for his paintings of birds. 


@@@@@


doc= 27333


Thoresby, John (d. 1373), archbishop of York, came of a family that took its name from the Lincolnshire village of North Thoresby, in Lindsey. Styled 'magister' by 1326, he had graduated as bachelor of canon law at Oxford by 1341, having served between 1326 and 1334 as chaplain and attorney to William Melton, archbishop of York (died 1340), who secured for him a position in chancery. During the 1330s and early 1340s Thoresby was frequently employed as a diplomat, on missions to France and the papal curia. Keeper of the privy seal between July 1345 and September 1347, he accompanied Edward III on his French campaigns of those years; and on 16 June 1349 he was promoted to the chancellorship. His civil service income was supplemented by the revenue from a total of twenty-one benefices, all no more than profitable sinecures. Crown service prevented him from making much impact on his first two dioceses, St David's (1347-9) and Worcester (1350-52); and when Edward III advanced Thoresby to the see of York in 1352 he ensured that his two most trusted ministers were in control of the English church -- Simon Islip (died 1366), keeper of the regency government's seal in 1346 and keeper of the privy seal after Thoresby, had been appointed archbishop of Canterbury in 1349. The bull licensing Thoresby's translation to York was issued by the pope on 17 November 1352, and the temporalities were restored on 8 February 1353, though he was not enthroned until 8 September 1354. As archbishop Thoresby continued to further crown interests, for instance, ordering prayers of thanksgiving throughout his diocese in 1356 for the victory of Poitiers, and zealously enforcing collections of clerical tenths which helped to finance Edward III's wars. 
On 27 November 1356 Thoresby resigned as chancellor. The energy he subsequently devoted to the administration of his diocese, in which he would be continually in residence, suggests that he welcomed the opportunity to give exclusive priority for the first time in his life to diocesan administration. Thoresby's friendship with Islip and the diplomatic skills he had acquired in government service were applied to the ending of the long-standing dispute between the archbishops of Canterbury and York over the right to bear the primatial cross in each other's province. In 1353 it was agreed that each archbishop could bear his cross in the province of the other. Thoresby also devoted the wealth he had amassed as a crown servant and ecclesiastical careerist to building projects in his cathedral. He laid the foundations of the new choir in York Minster in 1360, making an immediate donation of 100 marks and contributing $200 a year until his death, and he also built the lady chapel in the east end of the cathedral. 
Thoresby's qualities as an experienced government official and administrator made him realistic in his attempts to discipline layfolk and to cater for their social and moral welfare. His first pastoral initiative was to restore the morale of the clergy in a diocese suffering from the after-effects of the black death of 1348-9. Morale was low among the religious communities where mortality rates were high; not only did he undertake visitations of monasteries in the diocese in 1352-3, but he also issued commissions of inquiry into the condition of certain houses. Mortality rates were also high among parish priests; the consequent shortage of parochial incumbents was exacerbated by the way in which many parish priests deserted their parishes to profit from the increasing demand for chantry priests to celebrate for the souls of victims of plague. Thoresby responded by ordaining more priests, usually officiating at ordination services himself. In 1361 and 1362 he issued pastoral mandates enforcing residence in the chapter at York and in the archdeaconries in the diocese. Among the constitutions he issued in September 1367, and had approved before the northern convocation, was legislation echoing the 'Statute of Labourers' of 1350, which fixed wages of stipendiary chaplains at 6 marks and forbade clergy to leave their parishes to work in chantries. He also issued instructions forbidding clergy to depute the administration of any sacraments to laymen, something that had occurred during plague years when laymen had felt obliged to hear confession and celebrate mass for want of a priest. 
Thoresby's most important pastoral reform was his plan to improve the religious instruction of the laity, embodied in a Latin injunction recorded in the archbishop's register on 25 November 1357. After prefatory remarks on the ignorance of the laity and the need for instruction in the vernacular, Thoresby suggests the items on which teaching is needed: the articles of faith, the commandments, the works of mercy, the cardinal virtues, the sacraments, and the deadly sins. So that the clergy have no doubt as to what information should be given on these matters, a brief exposition of each in turn is given. The injunction concludes with an exhortation to the clergy to convey this information and to examine their parishioners on their knowledge of it during confession, and with a promise to the laity of forty days' indulgence for those whose knowledge and practice of the material is adequate. This programme of instruction (in which there is envisaged a significant extension of the scope of the sacrament of penance by thus including an examination of penitents' religious knowledge) was modelled on that published in 1281 by Archbishop John Pecham of Canterbury (died 1292), which was itself issued in response to the demands of the Lateran Council of 1215, which made annual confession to the parish priest compulsory. 
Thoresby's injunction, and the instructions accompanying it, are preceded in his register by an expanded vernacular version of the teaching, which refers to Thoresby's ordinance and to his indulgence. The author of this English text, which was made at Thoresby's behest, was John Gaytryge, a Benedictine monk of St Mary's Abbey, York, who stayed in Thoresby's household in December 1356. Presented in rough, alliterative verse to facilitate memorization, this so-called 'Lay Folk's Catechism' is a penitential handbook whose originality lies in its simplicity and conciseness. Its appeal is shown by its wide circulation. There are twenty-six surviving manuscripts, many reworked with interpolated texts; and it gained considerable currency outside the diocese. Archbishop Islip seems to have followed Thoresby's example, for in 1361 he provided a 'Brevis libellus' (which does not survive) on the seven deadly sins and ten commandments for the use of the clergy of his province. 
In such legislation as the 1357 injunction, and in 'The Lay Folk's Catechism', Thoresby tried to instil in parishioners a sense of community, with the parish church as the focus for order and stability of life. His legislation expresses concern over the high levels of violence among clergy and laity in a society where vendettas were pursued. He envisaged that during annual confession priests would discover if parishioners harboured hostile attitudes towards their neighbours, and then impose penances whose performance would reconcile them to their communities. Thoresby may also have been behind such other vernacular pastoral initiatives as the religious plays. The 'York Corpus Christi' cycle of forty-eight biblical plays was first performed by the York craft guilds on the feast of Corpus Christi around the time of the publication of 'The Lay Folk's Catechism'. These plays, written by clergy of the diocese and probably supervised by the York Minster clergy, were an important means of transmission of biblical education. 
Thoresby had considerable influence on the careers of his kinsmen. Yorkshire clerks had been prominent in secular government since the reign of Edward I, and Thoresby perpetuated this tradition, ensuring that members of his family held important positions in chancery until the reign of Richard II. Thus he may be presumed to have introduced into government circles his brother Ralph Thoresby, who was keeper of the hanaper from 1345 to 1357, and his relations by marriage Richard and John Ravenser, both of whom also became keeper of the hanaper. Richard Ravenser, moreover, was archdeacon of Lincoln between 1368 and 1386. And the archbishop's great-nephews John and William Waltham were later to be keeper of the privy seal, and later treasurer, and keeper of the hanaper, respectively. Two other nephews, a younger John Waltham, a fellow of Balliol College, Oxford, who became an official in the court of York in 1367, and another John Thoresby, who incepted as doctor of civil law at Oxford in 1356, lectured there on canon and civil law, and became provost of Beverley in 1373, also had their paths made easier by their uncle's patronage. The great theologian John Wyclif (died 1384), who was probably ordained priest in York Minster in 1351, may have been introduced to his patron, Archbishop Islip, by Thoresby. Wyclif was a contemporary at Merton and Balliol of Thoresby's nephews Dr John Thoresby and John Waltham. His later emphasis on the performance of pastoral duty, condemnation of non-residence, and belief in the importance of the vernacular dissemination of religious knowledge may well owe much to early exposure to the reforming ambitions of Thoresby and his followers. 
In his surviving letters Thoresby emerges as an urbane, courtly man, with a sense of humour and a high regard for good wine and friendship, especially among his old chancery colleagues. He died at Bishopthorpe on 6 November 1373 and is buried in his lady chapel in York Minster. A good illustration of the truth that civil servants and lawyers, when they had the opportunity, could make good pastors, by raising standards of religious knowledge and moral awareness in his diocese, Thoresby, with his clerks, laid the foundations for a perceptible growth of lay piety and dissemination of devotional literature there towards the end of the fourteenth century. They also established principles of pastoral care that enabled the next generation of York clergy to adapt the pastoral office from the provision of basic religious instruction to controlling and moderating the religious enthusiasm that had been aroused among the laity by Yorkshire mystical writers. 


@@@@@


doc= 27334


Thoresby, Ralph (1658-1725), antiquary and topographer, was born on 16 August 1658 at Kirkgate, Leeds, the son of John Thoresby (1626-1679), a wool merchant of that city who had served in the parliamentarian army under Fairfax, and his wife, Ruth (died 1669), the daughter of Ralph Idle of Bulmer, near York. The Thoresby lineage could allegedly be traced back to the time of King Canute and at the time of the Norman conquest was seated at Thoresby in Yorkshire. Ralph Thoresby did extensive research on his pedigree and was especially proud of the connection with John Thoresby, the archbishop of York. 
Thoresby was educated at a private grammar school under the Revd Robert Garnet and then at Leeds grammar school. Destined by his father for the wool trade, in 1677 Thoresby was placed with John Dickenson, a cloth merchant of London related to his father, in order to learn the profession. While in London, Thoresby spent much of his time visiting the remarkable places about the city, copying inscriptions, and attending nonconformist meetings. On the advice of his father, while in London, Thoresby began his diary on 2 September 1677, a habit which he kept throughout his adult life. The diary was published in 1830. 
Having returned to Leeds in February 1678, in July of that year Thoresby was sent by his father to Rotterdam, to learn Dutch and French, and to further his knowledge of the wool trade. He spent much of the summer travelling through the principal towns of Holland, including a visit to collections in the physic garden and anatomy theatre in Leiden. His time abroad was cut short when he developed a serious ague, and he returned home in December. 
Thoresby spent many months recuperating during which time he made several small excursions in the Yorkshire countryside, taking advantage of these trips to improve his knowledge of local antiquities. His travels continued over the next decade, visiting London and Scotland, visiting men of learning, and viewing collections, including the Ashmolean Museum in 1684, Mr Charlton's museum, and the repository at Gresham College in 1695. He also scoured the local countryside making observations and recording inscriptions. About 1690 he resolved to write a county history. 
John Thoresby died in October 1679, having been predeceased by his wife and his eldest son. Thoresby, who had been much influenced by his father, felt the loss deeply but determined to continue his father's business as a wool merchant and also assumed responsibility for the care of his younger brother and sister. The foreign wool trade to Leeds had fallen off in the years before and Thoresby diversified his interests to include linens. For this he bought his freedom in the incorporated Society of Merchant Adventurers trading to Hamburg, and in the Eastland Company in 1685. By his own admission, however, Thoresby 'never made a merchant worth a farthing' (Atkinson, 1.222). He retired from the cloth trade in 1704. 
On 25 February 1685 Thoresby married Anna (died 1740), the third daughter and coheir of Richard Sykes of Leeds. They had ten children, three of whom survived: a daughter and two sons, both of whom were bred to the church. The marriage was happy, Thoresby describing his wife after thirty-five years of marriage as 'the greatest blessing' (Atkinson, 1.245). It was, however, marred by differences of opinion on religion and the proper education of their children after Thoresby changed his views on conformity. 
Thoresby was raised a presbyterian but had always occasionally conformed. In December 1683 he was indicted at quarter sessions under the 'Conventicle Act'. He was acquitted but after this attended conformist services weekly. About 1699 he committed to the established church, 'judging it to be the strongest bulwark against popery and a union of protestants absolutely necessary'. Religion remained important to him throughout his life. When a charity school was founded at Leeds, he was instrumental in raising money in support of it. Likewise, he was a corresponding member of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge and took pains in distributing pious books among the poor. His correspondence includes many letters devoted to questions of religion. 
Thoresby was elected a common councillor for Leeds in 1697 and took the oaths of allegiance and supremacy in June of that year. The following year he was much occupied with difficulties stemming from an oil-mill speculation in Sheepscar in which he had embarked a decade earlier. It involved him in a lawsuit, caused the loss of his capital, and for a short time he was imprisoned for debt. 
After his retirement from trade, Thoresby's interests turned increasingly to antiquarian pursuits and the study of antiquities. His father had founded the Musaeum Thoresbyanum by purchasing the cabinet of coins and library of Lord Fairfax from his heir for $185. Thoresby now continued his father's antiquarian interests and expanded the collection. 
The museum expanded rapidly under Thoresby's care and by the time the catalogue was published in 1715 included a great variety of material. The largest part was given over to coins and medals, numbering over two thousand. These formed the heart of the collection, as well as the primary focus of Thoresby's researches. As early as 1682 he lent a number of the Saxon coins to Obadiah Walker to be engraved in his edition of Spelman's 'Life of King Alfred'. Edmund Gibson and Sir Andrew Fountaine benefited from a similar loan for illustrations in Camden's 'Britannia' and the 'Numismata'. 
In addition to the coins and medals, the museum contained a substantial collections of plants, shells, minerals, and fossils. Thoresby also kept remains of animals, including feet, horns, and skin, many of which were of exotic species. He had numerous funerary urns with human remains, as well as parts of human bodies testifying to unusual medical or accidental occurrences. By his own estimation his most notable of the human curiosities was the arm of the marquess of Montrose, whose quarters had been disposed of to several cities in Scotland, whence his specimen had come. Thoresby also kept instruments of war and of mathematics, and a variety of statues and amulets collected not only in Yorkshire but from around the world. 
Thoresby's museum attracted virtuosi and the curious to visit his home in Leeds. His diary frequently reports him showing his collection to visitors whose numbers included members of both houses of parliament and visitors from abroad. In addition to this, the collection, and especially his study of and observations on its contents, brought him into discussion with many of the eminent men of his time. Two volumes of their letters to him were published in 1832, another volume in 1912. 
The Musaeum Thoresbyanum was remarkable not only for the variety of material which it contained but also as a highly developed manifestation of what was largely a metropolitan pastime in a provincial setting. While many of the fellows of the Royal Society collected, few had collections as large or esteemed as Thoresby's. Richard Gough considered him to have inherited Tradescant's mantle as the foremost private collector in Britain, though he found the curiosities demonstrated a 'credulity and want of judgement' (Gough, 2.436). In its mixture of natural specimens and cultural artefacts, the collection is typical of its day and the narratives which Thoresby constructed around them were welcomed into the most sophisticated intellectual circles in England. 
From early adulthood Thoresby cultivated and expanded his father's antiquarian circle in Leeds, including Mr Thornton, the recorder of Leeds, Bishop William Nicholson, Bishop Edmund Gibson, Thomas Gale, the dean of York, and his son Roger Gale, Sir Andrew Fountaine, Thomas Hearne, William Richardson, John Ray, and Bishop White Kennet. His interest in and skill at heraldry brought him into correspondence with John Anstis, garter principal king at arms, and Peter Le Neve, Norroy king at arms, while his study of medals brought him into contact with other virtuosi, including the earl of Pembroke. 
In 1697 Thoresby was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on the strength of an account of some Roman antiquities he had discovered in Yorkshire, communicated to the society by his correspondents Martin Lister and Dr Gale. Following his election, at least thirty of his communications to the society were published in the 'Philosophical Transactions'. These deal with Roman and Saxon monuments in the north of England, with inscriptions on coins, or with accounts of uncommon accidents. Thoresby expanded his correspondence to include the prominent antiquarians and collectors within the Royal Society of the day, including Sir Hans Sloane. 
Thoresby's great work was the 'Ducatus Leodiensis, or, The Topography of Leedes' (1715). From the time he settled on the project in the early 1690s, Thoresby worked industriously towards its completion. This was not the first topographical publication of importance about a provincial town but it was the first work of importance by a Yorkshire antiquary. Attached to the main body of the text was a catalogue of the Musaeum Thoresbyanum and the volume included a very fine map of the area. 'Ducatus' was published by subscription and was dedicated to Peregrine Osborne, marquess of Carmarthen and heir apparent to the duke of Leeds, and to the mayor of Leeds and aldermen of Leeds. About 2000 copies were printed and sold for $3. A second edition appeared in 1816, with notes and additions by Thomas Dunham Whitaker. 
Encouraged by the success of 'Ducatus', Thoresby planned to complete the work with a historical account of the area. In 1724 'Vicaria Leodiensis, or, The History of the Church of Leedes' was published. On his death he left the completed manuscript for the history, beginning with the Britons, through the Romans, Danes, and Normans to the sixth century. This was published, along with a biography by his eldest son, in 'Biographia Britannica'. 
Thoresby remained active until almost the end of his life. He was esteemed by others an ingenious and sober gentleman, and an industrious antiquary. He was skilled in the Saxon language. He was kind to his friends and never more happy than when he could share with them some piece of antiquity or a valuable manuscript. 
In October 1724 Thoresby had a major stroke, losing his speech and the ability to walk. Though he recovered over the coming months, one year later he had a second stroke and, after languishing for six days, he died on 16 October 1725. He was buried among his ancestors in the chancel of St Peter's Church, Leeds, on 19 October. 
Thoresby's elder son inherited his collection. After the son's death it was sold at auction in London in 1764 over three days. The sale included coins and medals, manuscripts, curiosities, and ancient deeds. The sale was attended by many of the prominent antiquarians and collectors of the second half of the eighteenth century, including Horace Walpole, but it realized only $450. The printed books were sold separately. Many of the curiosities languished in a garret in Leeds after Ralph Thoresby's death; they were sold eventually to Jonathan Swale and some by him to Dr Burton. Much of the once-celebrated collection was left to rot and was eventually simply thrown out. 


@@@@@


doc= 27335


Thorius, John (b. 1568), writer and translator, son of John Thorius MD, of Bailleul, Flanders, was born in London. He matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 1 October 1586, having supplicated for the degree of BA on the 15th day of the previous April. John Thorius is noteworthy not so much because of his own accomplishments as because of the minor part which he played in the tragicomedy acted out by Gabriel Harvey and Thomas Nashe. 
Thorius became involved in this literary quarrel between Harvey and Nashe when he wrote two letters and several poems which Harvey attached to 'Pierce's Supererogation' (1593), a reply to Nashe's attack on him in 'Strange News' (1592). Harvey dedicated 'Pierce's Supererogation' to John Thorius, Barnabe Barnes, and Anthony Chewt, describing Thorius as 'the many-tonged Linguist' and urging him not to 'forget thy Netherlandish traine under Him, that taught the Prince of Navarre, now the valorous king of Fraunce'. Thorius apparently regretted the position in which Harvey's publication had placed him, even though his contributions are distinctly more restrained than their companions. In 'Have with You to Saffron Walden' (1596) Nashe writes, 'Of this John Thorius more sparingly I wil speake, because hee hath made his peace with mee, & there bee in him sundrie good parts of the Tungs and otherwise' ('Works of Thomas Nashe', 3.105). Nashe includes in his text a letter from Thorius in which Thorius claims that he did not see the entire text of Harvey's work, denies that one of the sonnets is his, and claims that Harvey has altered his work (ibid., 3.135). 
Thorius translated from the Spanish Bartolome Felippe's 'The Counseller' (1589), Antonio de Corro's 'Spanish Grammer' (1590), and Francisco de Valdes's 'The Sergeant-Major' (1590); from the Dutch he translated 'A Spiritual Wedding' (1597). Thorius also contributed verses to Florio's 'Queen Anna's New World of Words' (1611). 


@@@@@


doc= 27336


Thorius, Raphael (d. 1625), physician and poet, was born at Belle, Flanders, the son of Francis Thorius, a well-known French physician and poet, who befriended the protestant poet Daniel Rogers during the latter's visit to Paris in 1565. In May 1570 Rogers wrote a poem for and about Francis, 'Ad Franciscum Thorium medicum et poetam', which indicates that by then Francis had fled France as a protestant, to settle in Belle. Raphael Thorius studied medicine at Oxford, but graduated MD from Leiden, where he matriculated in medicine on 31 December 1590 and received his MD only twelve days later, with a thesis on dropsy. He then began to practise in London, but without a licence from the College of Physicians. In 1593 he was threatened with imprisonment after one of his English patients died, and three years later found himself in trouble again with the College of Physicians for practising without a licence. This time, however, on 23 December 1596, he was admitted to the college as a licentiate. On his return from Leiden, Thorius first resided in the parish of St Gabriel Fenchurch in London, where he developed a successful practice. Later he moved to the parish of St Benet Finck. 
Like his father, Thorius was a learned humanist and a distinguished Latin poet. He published only a couple of works during his lifetime. His 'In orbitum Jo. Barclaii elegia' (1621) includes a poem entitled 'Venator', which defends the then embattled Archbishop George Abbot. The following year one of his poems was included in the commemorative volume 'Epicedia in orbitum', for Simon Ruytinck, the minister to the Dutch Reformed community in London. Among those who contributed to this volume were some of his colleagues and fellow Reformed refugees from the College of Physicians, Johannes Brovaert and Baldwin Hamey, not to mention two of his friends, the Anglo-Dutch merchant Jacob Cool and the Dutch diplomat and humanist Sir Constantijn Huygens. Thorius was closely associated with the foreign Reformed communities in London. In 1604 he and Jacob Cool were chosen to write the poetry needed in connection with the triumphal arch erected by the Dutch community in London to celebrate James I's coronation entry into the city. 
Thorius's most famous work, 'Hymnus tabaci', written in 1610, but later revised and augmented in 1625, was published posthumously in London in 1626. It proved popular and went through several editions. The poem, which is divided into two books, is an elegant composition in hexameters and deserves a place among the metrical works of physicians beside the 'Syphilis' of Hieronymus Fracastorius, which may well have inspired it. Thorius also completed, in 1625, another long poem, 'Hyems', which he dedicated to Constantijn Huygens, whom he had befriended during the latter's visit to England in 1618-19. A manuscript volume of his and his father's poems is preserved in the British Library (Sloane MS 1768). It contains mainly Latin poems, some of which, like those praising the Huguenot prince Henri of Navarre, later King Henri IV of France, show their protestantism. The volume also incorporates a number of smaller poems by Raphael Thorius to friends, such as Theodore de Mayerne, William Camden, Meric Casaubon, and Matthias Lobel, plus the poems written for King James's coronation entry, and what is probably the original copy of book 1 of his poem on tobacco. 
Thorius had a wife, Mary, and seven children: Jean, Elizabeth, John, Paul, Francis, Matthew, and James. John became a physician and received his MD from Leiden in 1626. Thorius died of the plague in his house in St Benet Finck in July or August 1625. 


@@@@@


doc= 27337


Thorn, Sir Nathaniel (d. 1857), army officer, was commissioned ensign in the 3rd (Buffs) on 15 October 1802, and became lieutenant on 25 June 1803. He went with his regiment to Madeira in December 1807, and from there to Portugal in August 1808. The Buffs did not take part in the advance into Spain under Moore, but they formed part of Wellesley's army in 1809. They were the first troops to cross the Douro, and at Talavera they were hotly engaged as part of Hill's division, Thorn being in command of the light company. 
Thorn was promoted captain on 4 January 1810, and in March he was appointed deputy assistant quartermaster-general to the 2nd division. He held this post until the end of the war. He was present at Busaco, the first siege of Badajoz, Albuera, Arroyo Molinos de Montanches, Almaraz, Vitoria, the battles of the Pyrenees, the Nivelle and the Nive, Garris, Orthez, Aire, and Toulouse. He was wounded at the battle of St Pierre (13 December 1813), and General W. Stewart strongly recommended him for promotion, as it was the fourth time he had brought his services to notice during that campaign. He received a brevet majority on 3 March 1814, and ultimately the silver medal with ten clasps. 
In July 1814 Thorn was appointed assistant quartermaster-general to one of the brigades sent from Bordeaux to Canada, and he was present at the action at Plattsburg in September. He was made brevet lieutenant-colonel on 21 June 1817. On 14 August 1823 he was placed on half pay, but on 29 June 1826 he was appointed to the permanent staff of the quartermaster-general's department, on which he served for twenty years. He was promoted colonel on 10 January 1837, major-general on 9 November 1846, and lieutenant-general on 20 June 1854. On 25 July 1854 he was given the colonelcy of the Buffs. He was made CB in 1831, KH in 1832, and KCB in 1857. He went to Windsor for the installation on 24 January 1857, caught cold, and on his return home died suddenly at Upcott House, Bishop's Hull, near Taunton, Somerset, on the 28th. He was buried at Halse, Somerset, where a fine window was installed to his memory. He was married, and his wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 27338


Thorn, William (1780-1843), army officer and cartographer, was born on 22 May 1780 in Neuwied, near Koblenz, Germany, the youngest of five sons and one daughter born to master tailor Johann Philipp Thorn (1733-1798), whose second wife, Anna Catharina Singmeister, of Heddesdorf, was William Thorn's mother. After attending local schools he came about 1796 under the patronage of Major George Gordon, deputy inspector-general of foreign corps serving with HM forces on the continent, and it was this connection which determined his subsequent career. He began his military education in England, purchasing a cornetcy in 1799 in the 29th light dragoons, to which Gordon had transferred, and joined the regiment in India. Promoted lieutenant in 1801, he saw much action in the Second Anglo-Maratha War (1803-6) and distinguished himself in 1803 at the battle of Laswari in which he was also wounded. He was promoted captain in 1807 and was brigade major to the cantonment of Bangalore, Mysore, until in November 1810 he accompanied the expedition against French-held Mauritius, where he saw action before returning to India in 1811. 
That year Thorn took part in the expedition to Java. Despite being wounded while attacking the French at Weltevreden (Gambir, central Jakarta), he took part in the main assault on Fort Cornelis. He was thanked in public orders by Sir Samuel Auchmuty, the leader of the expedition, and, after the conquest of Java was complete, he was appointed deputy quartermaster-general of the British forces in Java and promoted brevet major. 
In 1812 Thorn served with distinction and was commended for his part in actions in Sumatra and Java. He stayed in Java, making a geographical study tour of the island, but ill health obliged him to resign his staff appointment in 1814 and he returned to Europe where he spent six months writing his 'Memoir of the Conquest of Java' (1815). Thorn left England to fight at Waterloo and after peace was declared returned to Germany. He is believed to have married Johanna Maria Giese in Wiesbaden in September 1815. They settled in Neuwied where he immersed himself in local affairs, becoming an active member of the local Lutheran church, helping its school and founding a society which succeeding in erecting a bridge over the Rhine at Neuwied which opened in 1817 and which was of great use to the local inhabitants. He continued to write, publishing 'A Memoir of Major-General Sir R. R. Gillespie', anonymously in 1816 and 'A Memoir of the War in India' in 1818, of which French and German editions were published in 1818 and 1819 respectively. He was put on half pay in 1818, breveted lieutenant-colonel in 1819, and resigned in 1825. For his services he was made a knight of the Royal Guelphic Order in 1832. 
At various stages of his army career Thorn had had responsibility for surveying and map making, and his three books all contained maps and plans. He continued to make maps in retirement, notably for the house of Wied, since he counted Prince Maximilian of Wied a personal friend. He published a map of the possessions of the princely house in 1824 and contributed a map and geographical notes to Prince Maximilian's 'Reise in das innere Nord-America' (3 vols., 1839-41), which is best known for the engravings of Native American life by Karl Bodmer, the prince's travelling companion, and which went through numerous editions in German, French, and particularly English. After a brief illness Thorn died of apoplexy on 29 November 1843, leaving a widow and six children. He was buried in the cemetery in Neuwied, later renamed the Julius Remy Friedhof. 


@@@@@


doc= 27339


Thornborough, John (1551?-1641), bishop of Worcester, was probably the son of Giles Thornborough of Salisbury, Wiltshire. In 1569, aged seventeen, he was admitted a demy of Magdalen College, Oxford, as of Wiltshire. He led a raffish undergraduate life, employing as his servant the young Simon Forman, who recorded that among other dubious activities Thornborough jilted a daughter of Giles Lawrence, archdeacon of Wiltshire. He graduated BA on 1 April 1573, and proceeded MA on 27 June 1575. 
Having become chaplain to Henry Herbert, second earl of Pembroke, Thornborough accumulated a series of west country rectories: Ockford Fitzpaine, Dorset, and Orcheston St Mary, Wiltshire, in 1575; Marnhull, Dorset, in 1577; and Chilmark, Wiltshire, in 1578. On 16 June 1576 he was installed prebendary of Netherbury in Salisbury Cathedral on the presentation of a local brewer. Probably by 1582 he had become chaplain-in-ordinary to Queen Elizabeth, and on 22 March that year proceeded BTh at Oxford. In January 1586 he received letters patent for the mastership of the Savoy Hospital, London. On 14 July following he exchanged Netherbury for the Salisbury prebend of Bedminster and Ratcliffe. On 12 June 1587 letters patent for the archdeaconry of Norfolk proved ineffective. 
According to his own account Thornborough was in 1588 responsible for bringing 'that concealed land of the Dacres to her majesty's receipts of exchequer' (BL, Lansdowne MS 75, fol. 32'r'). This financial coup, and perhaps other secret services, evidently rendered him 'persona grata' at court and secured him Elizabeth's unwavering support. When in May 1589 she demanded his further preferment Sir Francis Walsingham suggested the bishopric of Salisbury. Archbishops John Whitgift and John Piers pronounced him too young and insufficiently learned for so senior a post, proposing a junior deanery (Peterborough or Rochester) instead. Elizabeth therefore ordered Walsingham to 'bring him to accept one of these... for a beginning to further advancing of him' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/224/39). Thornborough managed to drive a better bargain and in October was elected dean of York. On 17 March 1590 Archbishop Piers collated him to the prebend of Tockrington in York Minster. 
Although the deanery yielded over $300 per annum Thornborough quickly fell into debt. In July 1592 he applied in abject terms to the lord treasurer, Lord Burghley, for the bishopric of Limerick, to be held 'in commendam' with his deanery. He was prepared to resign the Savoy and live in Ireland, solely on Limerick's revenues, until his debts were discharged. By July 1593 he and his sureties (his father and brother) had become liable to imprisonment for defaulting on payment of his first fruits. Desperate, he petitioned Elizabeth herself, offering to resign the deanery and live on an 'ex gratia' pension. Elizabeth was predictably sympathetic and in September 1593 he was duly granted Limerick and allowed to hold his deanery 'in commendam'. 
For the next five years Thornborough shuttled between Ireland, London, and York, successfully petitioning for the regularization of Limerick's revenues, preaching there when in residence, and championing the cause of a government agent, William Udall, who had supplied information about the activities of Spanish spies and of the earl of Tyrone. In 1597 he was again a candidate for the bishopric of Salisbury. 
Thornborough is last mentioned in the Irish state papers in December 1598 and in March 1599 he returned to York as a member of the council in the north. In 1601 and 1602 he obtained the Yorkshire rectories of Kirby Misperton and Brandesburton. 
All this despite a scandal that would have destroyed a man who did not have the queen's entire backing. About 1582 Thornborough had married Elizabeth Bold. In 1594 or 1595, having reared several children, they were divorced, probably on the grounds of Elizabeth's adultery. Thornborough immediately remarried, even though as the law then stood divorce was no more than judicial separation and remarriage an impossibility. His new wife, Elizabeth Baynes, was moreover suspected to be pregnant at the time. Yet the queen seems to have condoned his actions: the second Mrs Thornborough was specifically mentioned in a deed of indenture which Elizabeth ordered to be drawn up to provide maintenance for Thornborough's former wife, and when he returned to York in 1599 it was with her 'special directions' that the council in the north 'yield him such countenance as may be seeming for one of his sort' (TNA: PRO, SP 15/34/3). 
Thornborough certainly required such countenance. As Archbishop Matthew Hutton observed to Robert Cecil, his remarriage was 'flat contrary' to English law and 'much misliked by most of the clergy of this realm' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/270/75). Yet Hutton himself thought him the innocent party in the divorce case and, assured by Thornborough that he had not had sexual relations with his second wife before marriage, was prepared to consider it lawful. 
Hutton may have come to regret his acquiescence. In 1601 the former Mrs Thornborough brought an action at common law, claiming that the bishop had defaulted on his alimony payments and invoking a penalty clause by which she was entitled to a lump-sum payment of $250. He countered with a plea in the court of requests, accusing her of deliberate fraud: that having secretly remarried she then remained in hiding, circulating a rumour that she was dead in order to cause his default and liability to the penalty clause. The outcome of the case is unknown but on 17 November 1602 Thornborough preached what proved to be Elizabeth's last accession day sermon. John Chamberlain pronounced it dull but perhaps it was Elizabeth's way of demonstrating her continuing belief in him. 
On resigning Limerick, but again retaining his deanery 'in commendam', Thornborough was enthroned bishop of Bristol on 23 August 1603. He perhaps owed his new sinecure to his wholehearted espousal of James I's plans for political union, for in 1604 he published 'A discourse plainly proving the evident utilitie and urgent necessitie of the union of England and Scotland'. The House of Commons took immediate offence. Having emasculated James's proposals on the subject in April, they launched an attack on the book as violating the parliamentary privilege of secret debate. Their attempts to suppress it did not deter Thornborough, who returned to his theme in 'The Joiefull and Blessed Reuniting the Two Kingdomes, England & Scotland' (1605). 
Never resident in Bristol, Thornborough remained an active dean of York. It was complained that his visits were usually infrequent and that he refused to allow important business to go forward in his absence but he was certainly preoccupied with the question of recusancy. Although his relations with archbishops Hutton and Toby Matthew are obscure he antagonized Edmund, third Lord Sheffield, president of the council in the north from 1603. In 1607, describing him as 'the unholy bishop of Bristol', Sheffield accused Thornborough of neglecting his preaching duties for his own gain and in order to curry favour with the government, 'for what time he could spare from bowling and carding' he spent in hounding recusants ('Salisbury MSS', 19.274). In fact Thornborough's efforts were more statesmanlike than Sheffield was prepared to admit. He was as concerned with recusant conformity as with extracting recusancy fines and after 1611 had the backing of the new primate, George Abbot. 
Yet scandal was never far from Thornborough's door. In February 1612 an (unnamed) son committed suicide, apparently terrified of admitting to his stepmother that he had lost money at tennis. In 1615 Thornborough fell foul of the privy council for failing to provide a preaching minister in Pickering, capitulating only when summoned to London to answer charges. During the winter of 1615-16 Mrs Thornborough was obscurely implicated in the 'cause celebre' of James's reign, the poisoning of Sir Thomas Overbury. 
Still Thornborough prospered. After more than thirty years of government service and despite the candidature of Henry Beaumont, the duke of Buckingham's kinsman, he was elected bishop of Worcester on 25 January 1617 at the suit of William, third earl of Pembroke. Still vigorous, he immediately conducted a primary visitation, thereafter visiting triennially until 1636, proved an energetic Worcestershire magistrate, and seldom delegated episcopal functions to subordinates. 
In 1621 Thornborough celebrated his lifelong interest in chemistry and alchemy by publishing, in Latin, 'Lithotheorikos'. Parading his wide knowledge of ancient, medieval, and Renaissance authorities on the subject, it argues a deep, dark strain in his psyche. In 1627 he prepared for himself a grandiose tomb, decorated with obscure mottoes and astrological symbols rather than scriptural texts. 
That year Thornborough secured the presentation of the next vacant prebend in the cathedral for his son Giles and in 1629 collated his son Edward to the archdeaconry of Worcester. In February 1630 Giles Thornborough recorded the sudden death of his stepmother. The bishop subsequently took a third wife, Anne ('nee' Beswick), widow of Sir Henry Bromley of Holt Castle, Worcestershire. 
Always at heart an Elizabethan Calvinist, Thornborough won the good opinion of Richard Baxter, who noted with approval that he never used the sign of the cross in baptism. Yet his one work of theology, 'The last will and testament of Jesus Christ touching the blessed sacrament of his body and blood' (1630), was perhaps, like his later visitation articles, an attempt to move with the times. His last years were nevertheless overshadowed by an increasingly acrimonious relationship with his chapter and its Laudian dean, Christopher Potter, installed in 1636, as well as by further family scandals. He evidently recognized that Charles I's church was doomed and told the king not long before his death that, while he had outlived several men who had expected to succeed him, he was now afraid that he would outlive the bishopric itself. Among his manuscripts was a plea for unity and peace in the church, 'Pax vobis'. He returned to an abiding theme in his last published work, 'A Discourse... Advocating the Union of England and Scotland' 'into one Great Britain' (1641). 
Thornborough died at Hartlebury, Worcestershire, on 9 July 1641 and was duly buried in his tomb in Worcester Cathedral. His third wife predeceased him. In his will he provided for the children of his eldest son, Sir John, and his second, Sir Benjamin, who had both predeceased him. He made bequests to Edward and his family, and to the families of his daughters Jane Finch, Anne Smith, and Lady Elizabeth Willoughby. His son Giles, prebendary of Worcester (died 1663), goes unmentioned. His son from his second marriage, Sir Thomas, already in receipt of a yearly annuity, received only a token bequest. One son-in-law, Francis Finch, was made overseer; another, Emmanuel Smith, his chaplain, witnessed the will. 


@@@@@


doc= 27340


Thornbrough, Sir Edward (1754-1834), naval officer, was born at Plymouth Dock on 27 July 1754, the only son of Commander Edward Thornbrough (died 1784) and his wife, Mary. He had two younger sisters. In June 1761 he went to sea as servant to his father, first lieutenant of 'Arrogant' (74 guns), and spent two years in the Mediterranean. For the next five years he was on the books of the 'Firm' (60 guns), guardship at Plymouth, and was presumably at school. 
In March 1768 Thornbrough rejoined his father in 'Temeraire' (74 guns), also guardship at Plymouth, commanded by Captain Edward Le Cras (died 1793), two of whose daughters he was later to marry; the tedium of guardship life was broken by a short trooping visit to Gibraltar. After four months in 'Albion' (74 guns) at Spithead he again joined his father, now first lieutenant of 'Captain' (64 guns), flagship of Rear-Admiral John Montagu, and sailed for North America in June 1771. After nearly two years berthed in Boston harbour he was promoted lieutenant on 16 April 1773 and joined the sloop 'Cruizer', but he rejoined the 'Captain' and his father in September, and returned home in August 1774. In October he joined the sloop 'Falcon' as second in command and returned to North America; she was soon supporting the army at Bunker Hill on 17 June 1775. On 8 August Thornbrough led a gallant but unsuccessful attempt by the ship's boats to capture a well-armed American schooner which 'Falcon' had chased into Cape Ann harbour. Twenty-four of his men were taken prisoner, and several were wounded, including Thornbrough. He was invalided home but in April 1776 joined the frigate 'Richmond', and served in her for three years mostly off North America. After seven months in the frigate 'Garland' escorting a convoy to Newfoundland and back, he joined the frigate 'Flora' (Captain William Peere Williams) and distinguished himself in a sanguinary action when the French frigate 'Nymphe' was captured off Ushant on 10 August 1780. 
For this Thornbrough was immediately promoted commander and given command of 'Britannia', a hired ship protecting trade in the North Sea and escorting a convoy to New York. On arrival he was promoted captain (24 September 1781) and appointed to command the frigate 'Blonde'. In May 1782 she captured an American ship laden with naval stores; when towing her to Halifax 'Blonde' ran aground in thick fog off Nantucket. While the prize continued to Halifax, 'Blonde''s crew and her American prisoners landed on an uninhabited islet, and were rescued two days later by two American ships. In return for Thornbrough's humane treatment of his prisoners, he and his ship's company were released by the Americans at New York, which was in British hands. At the subsequent court martial Thornbrough was commended for his conduct and acquitted. On his return home he was appointed to the 'Egmont' (74 guns), intended for the East Indies, but she paid off at the peace in 1783. 
However, in October Thornbrough assumed command of the frigate 'Hebe'. By now his reputation was such that 'Hebe' was selected by Lord Howe to take the nineteen-year-old Prince William Henry (later William IV) on his promotion to lieutenant in June 1785. William served as her third lieutenant for nine months, including on a cruise round Great Britain, and told his brother that he was 'upon the best terms with Captain Thornbrough, who is a very worthy man and does everything to make me happy' (25 Nov 1785, 'Correspondence of George, Prince of Wales', 1.150). On 16 March 1784 Thornbrough had married Ann (died 1801), elder daughter of Edward Le Cras, then a commissioner of the navy. Their elder son, born while the prince was serving in 'Hebe', was baptized William Henry at the prince's request; he died aged fourteen, already a lieutenant in the navy. The younger son became a rear-admiral, and there were four daughters who died young. After six years in command of 'Hebe' in home waters, 'a period unexampled in time of peace' (Marshall, 165) and in which he was particularly active against smugglers, Thornbrough commissioned 'Scipio' (64 guns) in July 1790 for six months during the Spanish armament. 
On 21 December 1792, in anticipation of war with France, Thornbrough commissioned the frigate 'Latona', in the Channel Fleet under Howe. For the courageous way in which, on 18 November 1793, he approached a French squadron under heavy fire and endeavoured to delay it until the British line of battleships could get up, he was publicly commended in a letter from the Admiralty to be read to all the ships' companies. At the battle of 1 June 1794 'Latona' was stationed abreast the centre of the British line to repeat Howe's signals, but entered the thick of the fight to assist the hard-pressed 'Bellerophon' under attack from two French 74s. 'Latona' answered the fire of the 74s 'with as smart a return as a frigate's battery could give' (James, 1.155). 
In July Thornbrough was rewarded with command of 'Robust' (74 guns), and served in her in the Channel Fleet for nearly five years. She took part in the ill-fated royalist expedition to Quiberon in 1795, giving passage to 'two French Dukes, five Field-Marshals, four Admirals and 10 ADCs etc.etc.etc., in all upwards of 50' (26 Jan 1796, TNA: PRO, ADM 1/2597). On 12 October 1798 Thornbrough led Sir John Borlase Warren's squadron into action, suffering severe damage when a French squadron was defeated near Tory Island off Donegal, thus thwarting an invasion of Ireland. All participants received the thanks of parliament. On 14 February 1799 Thornbrough was appointed colonel of marines and in the same month transferred to 'Formidable' (90 guns), 'which ship Captain Thornbrough has had the merit of making the crack ship of the fleet' (St Vincent to Lord Spencer, 14 Sept 1800, 'Private Papers of George, Second Earl Spencer', 4.17). 'Formidable' sailed to the Mediterranean under Sir Charles Cotton and took part in the unsuccessful search for Bruix's fleet. Promoted rear-admiral on 1 January 1801, Thornbrough hoisted his flag in 'Mars' (74 guns) and for six months held the arduous command of the inshore squadron off Brest. His first wife died on 20 November 1801 and on 14 December 1802 he married Elizabeth (1775-1813), daughter of Sir Edwin Jeynes (1750-1810), mercer and banker of Bristol. 
With the renewal of war in 1803 Thornbrough commanded a squadron in the North Sea and off the Texel under Viscount Keith for two years, and was then captain of the fleet to Lord Gardner in the Channel Fleet for four months. In October 1805 he hoisted his flag in 'Kent' (74 guns) and was about to sail to join Nelson off Cadiz when news of Trafalgar was received. He was promoted vice-admiral on 9 November and in 'Prince of Wales' (90 guns) commanded a detached squadron off Rochefort and subsequently in the channel until October 1806, when ill-health obliged him to go ashore. By February, however, he was again afloat, in the 'Royal Sovereign' (100 guns), and he joined Lord Collingwood in the Mediterranean as his second in command. He spent most of the next three years guarding Sicily or blockading Toulon until his health obliged him to return home in December 1809. He was an admirable second in command but, as St Vincent wrote of him, though he was 'as brave as a lion in the presence of the enemy' (16 Nov 1806, 'Naval Miscellany', 4.482), he lacked the nerve to take the weight of great responsibility. Collingwood perhaps felt the same when he wrote to his wife in October 1809: 'I do not like to part with so firm a man. He would be a host to me in battle' ('Public and Private Correspondence', 2.408). 
From August 1810 to November 1813 Thornbrough was commander-in-chief of the Irish station; on 4 December 1813 he was promoted admiral of the blue and on 2 January 1815 he was created KCB. His second wife died in November 1813 and on 23 August 1814 he married Frances Le Cras (1764/5-1851), younger sister of his first wife. He was commander-in-chief, Portsmouth, for three years from April 1815 with his son as his flag lieutenant. Advanced to GCB on 11 January 1825, on 30 January 1833 he was appointed vice-admiral of the United Kingdom and lieutenant of the Admiralty. He died, an admiral of the red, in Bishopsteignton Lodge, Devon, on 3 April 1834, aged seventy-nine, and was buried in Bishopsteignton on 11 April. There is a memorial to him in Exeter Cathedral. 
Thornbrough's career is remarkable for the exceptional length of his sea service -- forty-nine and a half years between 1761 and 1818 by his own reckoning (TNA: PRO, ADM 9/1/21). 'As a practical seaman', wrote Sir William Hotham, who served under him, 'he had very few rivals and certainly no superior... This knowledge of the minutiae of a seaman's duty extended to the managing of a fleet... He was very good-natured and... it was not easy to leave Sir Edward's society and conversation without acquiring some increase in professional knowledge.('DNB'; Hotham, 1.198-203)' 



@@@@@


doc= 27341


Thornbury, (George) Walter (1828-1876), author, was born in London on 13 November 1828, the son of George Thornbury (1795-1873), solicitor, of 16 Chancery Lane, and his wife, Jennet Ann. He was educated at Cheam, Surrey, by the rector, Barton Bouchier, who was the husband of his father's sister, Mary. His parents had hoped that he would enter the church, but Thornbury wanted to be an artist, and spent some time at the academy of James Mathews Leigh. By the age of seventeen he had published topographical and antiquarian papers in Felix Farley's 'Bristol Journal', and ultimately decided to be a writer. 
Thornbury was living in London by 1851, and became a regular contributor to many other periodicals, including 'Bentley's Miscellany', 'Ainsworth's', 'Welcome Guest', 'Once a Week', and 'Chambers's Journal'. He was a prolific writer, but not meticulous in his habits; one friend spoke fondly of his 'disastrously bad hand. The prevailing impression in your mind was that not ink, but a succession of small bomb-shells had been discharged from poor Walter's pen, and that these petards had exploded on the paper' (Sala, 1.276-7). Thornbury was also a frequent contributor to the later volumes of Dickens's 'Household Words', and became one of a group of journalists -- including G. A. Sala, Percy Fitzgerald, and Edmund Yates -- commonly referred to at the time as Dickens's 'young men' (Sala, 1.77, 94). Many of Thornbury's articles dealt with geographical and topographical themes, and he travelled widely in search of material for the journal -- to the United States and Palestine, the Iberian peninsula and Turkey. His articles on Spain printed in 'Household Words' were later collected and reprinted as 'Life in Spain: Past and Present' (2 vols., 1859). His contributions to Dickens's second periodical, 'All the Year Round', consisted of two more extended series. 'Old stories retold', fifty-three articles running from 20 October 1866 to 18 July 1868, recounted events in recent history, and often dealt with crimes and criminal proceedings. The content and tone of some of these articles worried Dickens, as he began to feel that Thornbury was 'rather given to horrors' ('Letters of Charles Dickens', 11.371). He rejected one article, feeling that its detailing of criminal acts was 'not wholesome for a large audience' and 'scarcely justifiable... as claiming to be a piece of literature' (ibid., 11.346-7). But Dickens valued Thornbury as a contributor, and interested himself in his reprinted collections as well, cautioning him away from 'too many murders' (ibid., 11.394). Thornbury's later series of thirty-one articles on the safer topic of travel around Britain was instigated at Dickens's suggestion and was printed in 'All the Year Round' between 12 December 1868 and 27 November 1869 under the title 'As the crow flies'. When Thornbury reprinted the series in two volumes in 1870 as 'A Tour Round England', he dedicated it with permission to Dickens. Throughout their association Dickens demonstrated regard for Thornbury and his writing, remarking in a letter in 1866 that 'For some years I have had so much pleasure in reading you, that I can honestly warrant myself 'a good audience'' (ibid., 11.245-6). 
All the while Thornbury was engaged in art criticism; he was a regular contributor to 'The Athenaeum' and the 'Art Journal'. His first contributions in this vein to 'The Athenaeum' were reprinted as 'The Courts of the Crystal Palace in Hyde Park' (1851). But his most important publication was his 'Life of J. M. W. Turner' (2 vols., 1861), based on original letters and papers. It was written under the supervision of John Ruskin, a situation which Thornbury likened to 'very much like working bareheaded under a tropical sun!' ('DNB'). In the same year he also produced 'British Artists, from Hogarth to Turner: a Series of Biographical Sketches' (1861). His other writings were varied in style and subject matter, including translations such as 'Pierre Dupont's Legend of the Wandering Jew' (1857) and 'The Fables of La Fontaine' (1867), and historical works such as 'Shakespeare's England' (1856). His 'Haunted London' (1865) was 'a huge book, full of most curious matter' ('The Athenaeum', 829), where his slightly macabre interests seemed more acceptable than in his purely historical writing. His collections of poetry were generally undistinguished, although one poem from 'Songs of the Cavaliers and Roundheads' (1857), 'The jester's sermon', is occasionally still anthologized, and sections of its catalogue of follies remain quotable, such as: 'The fool that eats till he is sick must fast till he is well'. Thornbury was also a novelist, although his fiction was less highly regarded than his other work. 'True as Steel' (1863) was based on Goethe's 'Gotz von Berlichingen', and 'Wildfire' (1864) was an expansion of a sketch by Diderot, and dealt with the French Revolution. His best-known novel at the time was probably 'Greatheart' (1866), the eponymous hero of which was modelled on John Douglas Cook, the temperamental editor of the 'Saturday Review', an identification which 'got its author into some trouble' (Escott, 233). 
On 7 October 1873 Thornbury married Harriett, the daughter of William Furmedge. They had known each other for some time -- Dickens had teased him about their relationship in a letter in 1868 referring to 'the specially gentle and beautiful face' ('Letters of Charles Dickens', 12.210). Thornbury was afflicted with mental illness during his last years, and he died on 11 June 1876 at the Camberwell House Lunatic Asylum, Peckham Road, London from, as his death certificate records, 'exhaustion from acute mania'. He was buried on 13 June at Nunhead cemetery, London, survived by his wife and three young sons. The second volume of his popular descriptive history of London, entitled 'Old and New London', had appeared just before his death. The series was completed in four additional volumes by Edward Walford. 


@@@@@


doc= 27342


Thorndike, Herbert (bap. 1597?, d. 1672), biblical scholar and theologian, was probably baptized on 16 April 1597 at Cumberworth, Lincolnshire, the third of four sons of Francis Thorndike (died 1645) of Scamblesby in the same county, and of his wife, Alice (died 1623), daughter of Edward Coleman of Waldingfield, Suffolk. Like his father he was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, from where he matriculated as a pensioner in Michaelmas term 1613. He became a scholar in 1614, graduated BA in 1617, and proceeded MA in 1620, when he was incorporated at Oxford. In the 1620s he acted as deputy to his friend and colleague George Herbert, public orator in the university until 1627. He was a university preacher in 1631 and served as proctor in 1638-9. His interest in Near and Middle Eastern languages was evidenced in his 'Epitome lexici Hebraici, Syriaci, rabinici et Arabici' (1635), and in 1640 he was Hebrew lecturer at Trinity. Ordained priest, he was a prebendary of Lincoln Cathedral from 1636 to 1640 and vicar of Claybrooke, Leicestershire, from 1639 to 1642, but he continued to reside in Cambridge. 
When traditional episcopal government was under attack in the Long Parliament in 1641, Thorndike published 'Of the Government of Churches: a Discourse Pointing at the Primitive Form'. Like Archbishop James Ussher's 'Judgement of Doctor Rainolds Touching the Originall of Episcopacy' of the same year, it presented a historical case that the apostles had appointed presbyters to serve the churches they had founded and that they were then succeeded by bishops, who presided over groups of presbyters in the major cities of the ancient Mediterranean world. Current circumstances, Thorndike contended, demanded not the abolition of the episcopate but the restoration of presbyters (priests, in the language of the church's ordinal) to their role of assisting bishops, perhaps by associating the latter more closely with their cathedral chapters. His 'Of Religious Assemblies and the Public Service of God' (1642), which drew extensively on Hebrew and Greek sources, defended the 'Book of Common Prayer' as providing services that were consistent with biblical and ancient models. He rejected the Roman Catholic doctrines of the sacrifice of the mass and of transubstantiation, while he cited approvingly Calvin's teaching that the Lord's supper should be celebrated frequently. 
Following the outbreak of civil war in 1642, Thorndike, who that year became senior bursar of his college as well as rector of Barley, Hertfordshire, was among a number of Cambridge scholars considered dangerous by parliamentary leaders. In September 1643 he was the leading candidate for master in a closely contested election at Sidney Sussex College, but parliamentary soldiers seized and carried off John Pawson, a fellow who supported Thorndike, thus throwing the election to Richard Minshull. Subsequently Thorndike lost not only his fellowship at Trinity but also, some time before 31 May 1645, his living at Barley. By 1648 Thorndike was associated with Sir Justinian Isham of Lamport, Northamptonshire, a royalist whom he assisted with advice about book purchases; in the late 1650s he was a guest at Isham's country house. He was also among 'distressed clergy' assisted by John Scudamore, Viscount Scudamore. According to his biographer Arthur Haddan, despite his expulsion, Trinity College gave him money in 1649, 1650, 1651, 1654, and 1659. 
These years of dislocation were a time of remarkable achievement for Thorndike as a scholar and writer. In the wake of parliament's abolition of episcopacy and ban on the public use of the prayer book, he published 'A Discourse of the Right of the Church in a Christian State' (1649). Departing from the tradition of Richard Hooker and other conformist writers, he attempted to distinguish the appropriate spheres of responsibility of the church and the civil government. Referring several times to Thomas Hobbes's 'De cive' (1642), he described the church as a society with its own organization and activities, chiefly assembling for worship, which it was bound to continue against, if necessary, all the civil law in the world. In a Christian state, he argued, it was appropriate for the civil authorities to regulate the church's external affairs, but they could not by right alter the church's polity or curtail its spiritual functions; bishops were those who exercised the highest ecclesiastical power in the church and must be left in place. In 1650, Thorndike's earlier treatises on the government of the church and on Christian worship were reissued in Cambridge with a 'review', answering objections that had been raised, under the title 'Two Discourses'. His 'Letter Concerning the Present State of Religion' (1656) advised his correspondent to have nothing to do with any pastor intruded in his parish church under the terms of the ordinance setting up 'triers' for ejecting scandalous ministers and those who adhered to 'Popery and Prelacy' (p. 1). To Thorndike, the ordinance contradicted the idea of 'one holy Catholic and apostolic church' in its rejection of those clergy committed to the historic episcopate, especially since they fulfilled its other criterion of profession of faith in Jesus Christ according to the scriptures. Indeed, he concluded that it also violated presbyterian and congregational polity. However, he reassured his correspondent that he could find clergy of the pre-war church who were willing to catechize children and administer the sacraments, and that, in any case, he had the prayer book, homilies, and scriptures authorized by that church and could use them in private. 
From the early 1650s Thorndike had been working as one of the chief compilers of the edition of the 'Bible' in its original languages, prepared under the direction of Brian Walton and published as 'Biblia sacra polyglotta' (1657); he had special responsibility for the Syriac portion. Soon after its appearance, in 1657-8, he considered an invitation from William Sancroft, a former fellow of Emmanuel College, Cambridge, to migrate to the Netherlands, but did not immediately accept, probably because he wanted to stay in London, where he was busy with his scholarly projects. Thorndike did go abroad in late November 1659 to visit Isaac Vosius, the Dutch classicist and patristics scholar, and to search for manuscripts, particularly of the writings of the ancient Greek Christian theologian Origen. He obtained from Vosius the 'Codex Holmiensis', containing the only complete Greek text of Origen's treatise 'On prayer' (Trinity College Library, Cambridge), but he was suffering from a serious stomach illness and he cut his trip short, returning to London by the end of the year. 
Thorndike's own major publication of the interregnum, 'An Epilogue to the Tragedy of the Church of England', used what he called 'the Present Calamity of the Church of England' as the basis for discussing a wide range of theological issues: scripture and tradition, the Trinity, justification, predestination, the sacraments, and relations between church and state. His intention was evidently to lay a foundation not only for the restoration of the Church of England but also for the bringing together of the major Western churches. Reason was the means of resolving differences, but it was to be guided by the scriptures as understood by the 'whole Church, from the beginning' (bk 1, pp. 1-3, 35). In the section entitled 'The covenant of grace' he combined a doctrine of justification by grace through faith with a doctrine of the church as the body of the baptized who sought to be obedient to God's commands and were nurtured by the word and sacraments. The 'Epilogue' expressed both a protestant soteriology and a largely Catholic ecclesiology. Thorndike regarded the Roman Catholic church as 'a true Church' which 'continueth the same visible body, by the succession of Pastors and Lawes' from the apostles' days, but considered that it was corrupt in many ways and had made unwarranted additions to the historic Christian faith. He saw a mean between the extremes of Roman Catholicism and the radical protestant sects as the surest way to salvation. The work was not universally well received by Anglican loyalists: Edward Hyde reacted sharply in May 1659 to news of the book's publication, expressing dismay that Thorndike had cast doubt on the English church's prospects for survival and had thus aided its enemies. 
With the Restoration and the reinstatement of bishops in the established church, Thorndike received back posts he had lost fifteen years before, taking up residence as a fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, and regaining the rectory of Barley, although he resigned from the latter in 1662. He set out his plans for a reunited English church in 'The Due Way of Composing the Differences on Foot Preserving the Church' (1660), where he argued that like the ancient church, it should be episcopally governed and its life centred on the celebration of the eucharist. He saw the reconstitution of the English church as an opportunity for Christians of all kinds, including protestant sectarians and recusant Roman Catholics, to form a single body which would reflect the greater unity that Christians sought. In practical terms, however, he was less eirenic, opposing, for example, the recognition of non-episcopal ordinations of the period of the civil wars and interregnum. Comprehension of the kind he had encouraged was not the result of the Savoy conference of 1661, of which he was a member, and he assisted in the preparation of the more narrowly drawn revised 'Book of Common Prayer', imposed by the 'Act of Uniformity' of May 1662. A hardening attitude can be detected in his 'Just Weights and Measures' (1662), which attempted to describe, using reason and the evidence of the practice of the church through the ages, the essential characteristics of the universal church. The sacraments of baptism and the eucharist were placed at the heart of the life of the church while the other traditional sacraments -- confirmation, ordination, marriage, penance, and unction -- were closely linked to the latter. 
In 1663 Thorndike was nominated as a Cambridge DD by royal mandate, but he did not proceed to the degree. After resigning his fellowship at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1667, Thorndike retired to Westminster Abbey, where he had been a prebendary since 5 September 1661, and lived in a residence in the cloisters. From 1668 he was joined by his nieces Alice and Martha, daughters of his late brother, John, recently returned from America. He had not retired from ecclesiological controversy. In 'A Due Discourse of the Forbearance, or, The Penalties which a Due Reformation Requires' (1670), he argued against a proposed comprehension of ministers who had been ordained by presbyters only, on the grounds that episcopal ordination was now available to them. He acknowledged that foreign reformed divines who had been ordained by presbyters only had been recognized by the English church, but he asserted that their ordinations had been carried out by necessity, since bishops had not been available. He was, however, sympathetic to the presbyterian stress on the need for greater spiritual discipline in English parishes, which for Thorndike would include the use of private confession, and he proposed a conference on this subject. The same year he published a work he had evidently worked on for some time, 'De ratione ac jure finiendi controversias ecclesiae disputatio', a restatement in Latin of his fundamental theological principles, reflecting his continuing interest in reconciliation among the churches. This was the first volume of a projected longer work, and was reissued in 1674 as 'Origines ecclesiasticae, sive, De jure et potestate ecclesiae Christianae exercitationes'. 
Thorndike died on 11 July 1672 in Chiswick, where he had moved to a facility maintained by Westminster Abbey for those in failing health. He was buried in the abbey on 13 July. In his will he left funds for the augmentation of Trinity College livings, especially the vicarage of Trumpington, and benefactions for his nieces Alice and Martha and his great-niece Alice Alington (granddaughter of his brother Francis). Thorndike left unpublished Latin writings to Peter Gunning, bishop of Chichester. Several works, unpublished in Thorndike's lifetime, were first printed in his 'Works', edited by Arthur W. Haddan, from manuscripts in the chapter library at Westminster Abbey. 
Thorndike was a controversial writer in his time, as Edward Hyde's response to the 'Epilogue' suggests. Henry More, the Cambridge Platonist, in his 'Brief Reply to a Late Answer' (1672) took issue with what he saw as Thorndike's too favourable view of the Roman Catholic mass. Meanwhile, George Whitehead, in 'The Popish Informer Reprehended for his False Information Against the Quakers Meetings' (1670), had attacked Thorndike for his assertion that the Quakers' reliance on the guidance of the Holy Spirit was greater than their reliance on the scriptures. Edward Stillingfleet took the side of More against Thorndike on the question of the Roman Catholic church's alleged idolatry in the use of images, in 'A Defence of the Discourse Concerning the Idolatry Practised in the Church of Rome' (1676). On the other hand, the Roman Catholic writer Thomas Godden cited Thorndike's views approvingly in his 'Catholicks No Idolators' (1672). A few years later, in an effort to vindicate Thorndike from suspicion of popery, Stillingfleet published a manuscript by Thorndike, written 'a little before his death', which he included as part of 'Several Conferences between a Romish Priest, a Fanatic Chaplain, and a Divine of the Church of England' (1679). Here the Church of England spokesman cited Thorndike's opinions on several doctrines of the Church of Rome, including transubstantiation, the papal deposing power, and the efficacy of indulgences, showing that he was soundly protestant. Nevertheless, Thorndike continued to be viewed in some quarters as pro-papal. Isaac Barrow, in 'A Treatise of the Pope's Supremacy' (1680), found Thorndike's stress on the unity of the visible church as too close to the Roman Catholic claim that all churches should be under one government. Richard Baxter, in his treatise 'Against the Revolt to a Foreign Jurisdiction' (1691), charged that Thorndike advocated a universal church with legislative powers, governed by general councils, in which the papacy would play a key part, both in the councils and in the regular life of the church. 
In the nineteenth century Thorndike was rediscovered and his ideas championed by adherents of the Oxford Movement. In 'Tracts for the Times' (6 vols. in 5, 1834-41), J. H. Newman, J. Keble, W. Palmer, and others quoted excerpts from Thorndike's writings on baptism, on the authority of doctrine, and on the eucharist. J. S. Brewer edited a new edition of Thorndike's 'A Discourse of the Right of the Church in a Christian State' in 1841, and John David Chambers edited passages from Thorndike's writings for his 'The Doctrine of the Holy Eucharist' in 1855. Edward B. Pusey wrote to H. E. Manning on 12 August 1845 that it was Thorndike's writings that first caused him to question 'our hereditary maxim that a particular church had a right to reform itself', and had thus led him to a broader view of the church (Nockles, 179). Of the greatest importance for this revival of interest in Thorndike was the edition of his 'Theological Works' in the Library of Anglo-Catholic Theology (1844-56), with a detailed life of the theologian by Arthur W. Haddan. Haddan included several hitherto unpublished works as well as letters and papers relating to Thorndike. 
Yet Thorndike's standing as a theologian has never been altogether secure. In the early twentieth century T. A. Lacey wrote that Thorndike, while learned, 'lacked the gift of a noble and lucid style which was shared by most of his compeers' (Lacey, 5). More recently it has been questioned why Thorndike was 'given such massive attention' in the Library of Anglo-Catholic Theology, 'when his contorted writings were regarded with deep suspicion by contemporaries' (Spurr, 395). The most recent full-length study, by Ernest Charles Miller, shows Thorndike, in his emphasis on reason, to be more closely connected to the latitudinarian tradition of rational theology in the seventeenth century than has been acknowledged. Miller sees Thorndike's ecclesiology as a creative integration of Anglican themes into a cohesive system that remained largely unappreciated before the Tractarians rediscovered his thought. From the evidence cited here, Thorndike emerges as an original, critical, and scholarly theologian and biblical commentator who began his career as a moderate Calvinist and ended it -- impelled by his experience of religious and political radicalism during the civil wars and interregnum -- as a forerunner of the Tractarians. His stress on the church's autonomy, on the importance of episcopacy, on the centrality of the sacraments, and on the eventual goal of a reunited, universal, visible church all mark him as an Anglican who anticipated many of the values and ideas expressed in his church in later centuries. 


@@@@@


doc= 27343


Thorne, James (1795-1872), Methodist Bible Christian preacher, was born on 21 September 1795 at North Furze Farm, Shebbear, Devon, the third child of John Thorne (1762-1842), farmer, and his wife, Mary (1760-1843), daughter of Samuel and Mary Ley of Rightadown Farm in the neighbouring parish of Bradford. Educated at Langtree School, Thorne was a serious-minded child of evangelical disposition; confirmed in 1812, he even entertained thoughts of becoming an Anglican clergyman. However, on 17 August 1815 he heard the Methodist preacher William O'Bryan (1778-1868) preach at Cookbury, and was sufficiently impressed to invite him to come to Lake Farm (to which the Thornes had moved). In the kitchen of the farm, on 9 October, the first Bible Christian society was formed; among its first members were John and Mary Thorne and their five children. 
James Thorne quickly became immersed in the Bible Christian movement. He preached his first sermon on Christmas day 1815, and became a local preacher on 1 January and a full-time itinerant minister on 15 March 1816. He evangelized Devon and Cornwall for four years, mostly on foot, suffering privation and opposition, frequently preaching five times every Sunday and twelve times each week, and securing conversions at nearly every service. On 21 February 1820 he set out to evangelize Kent, spending much of the next six years there or in London. His exertions at this period are described in his diary for 1816-27, extracts from which appeared in his son's memoir. It was in London that he married, on 15 September 1823, Catherine Reed (1797-1874), the third daughter of William and Catherine Reed of Holwell Farm, Buckland Brewer, Devon, and herself a Bible Christian itinerant. They had six children between 1824 and 1838, three of whom predeceased Thorne. 
As secretary of conference, Thorne worked alongside O'Bryan in devising the connexional polity, preparing the hymnbook, establishing the book room, and founding chapels. After O'Bryan's separation from the Bible Christians in 1829, it was largely due to Thorne's leadership skills that the whole movement did not collapse, spiritually and financially, an achievement which, from his base around Shebbear, left him in virtually undisputed authority over the connexion for the next forty years. Throughout this period he constantly held high office, including the presidency of conference on five occasions, and was particularly active in publishing, chapel building, and educational and foreign missionary work. Until 1844 he also travelled extensively in southern England, visiting the societies. In 1870 failing health caused him to retire to Plymouth, where he died on 28 January 1872, after a fortnight's illness and within hours of conducting his last service. He was buried in the graveyard of Ebenezer Chapel, Shebbear. 
It was rightly said by Frederick William Bourne (1830-1905), the connexion's third leader, of Thorne's contribution to the Bible Christians that 'he either originated nearly every forward movement or his executive ability was speedily requisitioned to carry it to a successful issue' (Bourne, 'Bible Christians', 31). When he became a preacher in 1816 the connexion had 237 members and no chapels; on his death it had 18,438 and 560 respectively. However, Thorne's efforts were not confined to one denomination, nor his skills to the pulpit or office. He was a noted platform orator, denouncing slavery, tithes, and religious discrimination; supporting temperance, Sunday schools, Methodist union, the Anti-State Church Association, the Evangelical Alliance, and the Bible Society; and campaigning for the Liberals. Such vitality owed much to his physical strength (he was a large-limbed man of above average height), cheerful disposition, and personal habits verging on the puritanical. 


@@@@@


doc= 27344


Thorne, James (1815-1881), topographical writer and antiquary, was born in London in September 1815. He was probably the James Thorne baptized on 8 October at St Mary's, Whitechapel, the son of James and Rebecca Thorne. He was educated at a private school, and for several years afterwards worked as an artist. As a young man he supplied short articles on antiquarian subjects to 'The Mirror', the 'Gentleman's Magazine', and other publications, the result of research in libraries and of frequent rambles through many districts of England. In 1843 he became connected with the author and publisher Charles Knight, and they collaborated for more than twenty-five years. The reissue, in 1873, of Knight's 'Passages of a Working Life' contained an introductory note by Thorne. 
Under Knight's direction Thorne contributed many topographical articles to the second series of the 'Penny Magazine', and wrote large portions, besides supplying many illustrations, of the four volumes, entitled 'The Land we Live in' (1847-50). His 'Rambles by Rivers', published under Knight's aegis between 1844 and 1849, covered mainly rivers in the south of England; a contemporary critic found them 'delightful volumes' (Allibone, 'Dict.'). Thorne was also working editor of the two volumes on geography in 'The Imperial Cyclopaedia' (2 vols., 1830-53) and of the 'English Cyclopaedia' (1854-70) with its supplements, and for twenty-five years he wrote for the 'Companion to the British Almanac'. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries on 21 March 1872. 
Thorne's energies were for several years devoted to the compilation of the two volumes of his 'Handbook to the Environs of London' (1876), a painstakingly detailed survey of the topography, buildings, and historic remains for 20 miles around London. His great knowledge and immense industry are shown throughout its pages, and it remains his lasting achievement; an overview of London histories published in 1968 called it 'a useful and well documented reference book' (Rubinstein, 138), and its enduring value has been further attested by its reissue in facsimile (1970 and 1983). At the time of his death he was engaged in preparing a new edition of Peter Cunningham's 'Handbook of London', which he thoroughly revised, adding 'much fresh information and many illustrative quotations' (preface, v). The revision was completed by Henry B. Wheatley, who published it as 'London Past and Present' in 1891 and paid generous tribute to Thorne in his preface. Thorne died of cancer of the colon at his home, 52 Fortess Road, Kentish Town, London, on 3 September 1881, leaving his widow and their children in straitened circumstances. An obituarist noted that he 'was not a prolific writer, but he did his work most carefully and conscientiously, and in a manner which commanded the respect of those in whose service his pen was employed' ('The Times', 7 Sept 1881). 


@@@@@


doc= 27345


Thorne, John (d. 1573), composer and poet, is of obscure origins; nothing is known about his parents or the place and date of his birth. From 1550 he resided in the York parish of St Michael-le-Belfry; he was wealthy and had lands at Clifton and leases of the tithes of two parsonages. He is probably to be identified with John Thorne, singing-man of the choir of the parish church of St Mary-at-Hill, London, in 1539-40. 
Thorne was appointed organist at York Minster on 24 July 1542, having received payment the previous year as 'organist within the choir'. When the minster organs were temporarily silenced in 1552, Thorne, as master of the choristers, was ordered to 'helpe to sing Divyne Service within the quere of the churche' (Raine, 'Statutes', 77), though his stipend as organist continued without interruption until 1573. He also served as keeper of the fabric from 1567; his account for the year 1567-8 reflects the zeal with which the Marian decorations were swept away under orders from the new dean, Matthew Hutton, and includes the entry 'for making playne and washyng over with whyte the places where the altar stood' (Raine, 'Fabric Rolls', 113-14). 
Thomas Morley cited Thorne, with Redford, Tallis, and others, as a composer particularly skilled in writing upon plainsong. In view of this high opinion of his abilities it is unfortunate that so little of Thorne's music has survived. In the Bodleian Library, Oxford, there is a four-part 'In nomine' (MSS mus. sch. D.212-216), and a manuscript in the British Library (Add. MS 29996) contains the organ score of a motet, 'Exultabant sancti'. Both works are in the imitative polyphonic style of the mid-century, as is the three-part Marian motet 'Stella coeli', included by Baldwin in his commonplace book of 'c'.1600 (BL, Royal Music MS 24.d.2, fols. 161'v'-163'r') and later printed by Hawkins. The text of this motet pleads for deliverance from pestilence, making it probable that the work was composed in one of the years in which York suffered a particularly severe plague. The setting is hardly comparable to the best work of Redford or Tallis, but the counterpoint is technically assured and there is considerable rhythmic subtlety. Thorne's willingness to adapt to changing circumstances is evident from his setting of the 'Te Deum' (English words), of which only the tenor part is extant. The underlay is predominantly syllabic, no doubt to fulfil Archbishop Holgate's requirement in 1552 that music sung at York should be 'withoute any reportes or repetinges which may induce any obscurenes to the herers' (Raine, 'Statutes', 74). 
Three poems by Thorne are in a manuscript once thought to be in John Redford's hand (BL, Add. MS 15233). One, 'The Hunt ys up' (fols. 33'r'-34'v'), is a religious parody of Gray's popular ballad; the others were subsequently printed in Richard Edwards's 'Paradyse of Daynty Devises' (1576). Another poem in this collection (no. 21) is signed 'M. T.' and is probably also by Thorne. 
Thorne died in York on 7 December 1573 and was buried in York Minster. His epitaph, recorded by Drake, celebrated his skill in logic as well as in music. He was succeeded as organist and master of the choristers by his son Henry Thorne, who continued in office until his death in 1597. 


@@@@@


doc= 27346


Thorne, Sir Richard Thorne (1841-1899), physician and public health officer, was the second son of Thomas Henry Thorne, banker, and his wife, Joanna Hughes, of Bath Street, Leamington Spa, Warwickshire, where he was born on 13 October 1841. He was sent to school first at Nieuwied in Rhenish Prussia and then moved to France at the age of fourteen, to attend, after a year's schooling there, the 'cours de troisieme' at the Lycee St Louis, Paris, where he gained two first prizes. He then returned to England and became a pupil at Mill Hill School, from which he matriculated at London University. He began his medical studies as an apprentice to a medical practitioner in Leamington Spa, and afterwards entered as a student at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London. In 1863 he was admitted a member of the Royal College of Surgeons, London, and served as a midwifery assistant at St Bartholomew's Hospital. In 1865 he became a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians of London, and in the following year he graduated MB at London University, with first-class honours in medicine and obstetric medicine. He married on 5 April 1866 Martha, daughter of Joseph Rylands, a merchant of Sutton Grange, Hull; they were to have three sons and a daughter. 
From 1864 to 1866 Thorne worked as junior resident medical officer at the Sussex House Asylum, Hammersmith, London, and in 1867 he was elected assistant physician to the general dispensary in Bartholomew Close in the City, a post he resigned in the following year, when he was appointed physician to the Hospital for Diseases of the Chest in the City Road. From 1869 to 1871 he was assistant physician to the London Fever Hospital. He was chosen to be demonstrator of microscopic anatomy in the medical school of St Bartholomew's Hospital in 1869, and from April 1870 he was casualty physician to the hospital. 
Thorne entered the field in which he was to become known best, on being employed as a supernumerary inspector in the medical department of the privy council in 1868. In this capacity he conducted several investigations into outbreaks of typhoid fever, helping to establish that the fever could be spread by an infected water supply, and demonstrating the value of isolation hospitals. Thorne showed such marked ability that in February 1871 he was appointed a permanent inspector. After the privy council department was merged with the London government board, he rose gradually from this position until in 1892 he succeeded to the post of principal medical officer to the Local Government Board on the retirement of Sir George Buchanan. As medical officer Thorne persuaded the board to institute a national cholera survey in 1892, which awakened local authorities to the threat of the disease and which became a valuable index of the sanitary state of the country. He continually emphasized the need for higher standards of cleanliness and secured some important sanitary measures. Under his direction the board was highly successful in preventing a cholera outbreak in Britain during the continental epidemic of 1894-5. Thorne was a major influence in the decision to abandon quarantine in Britain, and to replace it with port inspections. 
Thorne's knowledge of French and German, no less than his polished manners and courtly address, and his experience in collating information from foreign sources, soon made him especially acceptable to his political chiefs. He was repeatedly selected to represent Britain in matters of international hygiene. He was the British delegate at the International Conference on Cholera Prevention held at Rome in 1885, at Venice (Paris sitting) in 1892, at Dresden in 1893, at Paris in 1894, and at Venice in 1897; and he signed the conventions of Dresden in 1893, Paris in 1894, and Venice in 1897, the last being largely drawn up under his guidance. He had a difficult role in persuading other countries of the effectiveness of the British system of inspection, which replaced the quarantines imposed in other countries. His services were recognized by the government, which increased his salary on the recommendation of a special committee in 1898. 
At the Royal College of Physicians of London Thorne was admitted a member in 1867, and was elected a fellow in 1875; he acted as an examiner from 1885 to 1889, and was a member of council from 1894 to 1896. In 1891 he delivered the Milroy lectures, 'Diphtheria: its natural history and prevention'. These lectures, later published, utilized board data to show that diphtheria mortality was unaffected by sanitary improvements. Thorne began to lecture on hygiene at the medical school of St Bartholomew's Hospital in 1879, and he was formally appointed there as the first permanent lecturer on public health in 1891. He was elected FRS on 5 June 1890 and was awarded the Stewart prize of the British Medical Association in 1893. In 1895 he succeeded Sir John Simon as crown nominee at the General Medical Council, and in 1898 honorary degrees were conferred upon him by the University of Edinburgh, the Royal University of Ireland, and the Royal College of Physicians of Ireland. His services to public health were recognized by his selection as an honorary member of the Royal Academy of Medicine at Rome, a corresponding member of the Royal Italian Society of Hygiene, and a foreign associate of the Society of Hygiene of France. He was president of the Epidemiological Society from 1887 to 1889, and in 1898 he delivered the Harben lectures, 'On the administrative control of tuberculosis'. He was a member of the royal commissions on tuberculosis in 1896, and on sewage disposal in 1898. He was made CB in 1892, and KCB in 1897. He died at his home at 45 Inverness Terrace, Hyde Park, London, on 18 December 1899, and was buried at St John's, Woking. 
Thorne ranked as one of the foremost exponents of the science of public health, both in Britain and elsewhere, and he worthily filled the position occupied in succession by Sir Edwin Chadwick, Sir John Simon, and Sir George Buchanan. He became well known for his research on sanitary issues, particularly concerning diphtheria and typhoid fever. He showed a remarkable ability in integrating such knowledge into practical sanitary administration, as seen in the board's 'model' by-laws. Throughout Europe his name became inseparably connected with attempts to abolish the expensive and tedious methods of quarantine in favour of a higher standard of cleanliness combined with the early and efficient notification of individual cases of epidemic disease. Almost the whole of Thorne's work is recorded in the form of reports in the blue books of the medical department of the privy council and the Local Government Board. Munk considered that 'He represented the ideal type of official -- painstaking, firm, progressive, and open-minded' (Munk, 'Roll'). 


@@@@@


doc= 27347


Thorne, Robert, the elder (c.1460-1519), merchant, was the fourth of five sons of Thomas Thorne (died 1471) of St Albans and his wife, Rose. The family's long-established position in the wine trade of Bristol, Cyprus, Rhodes, and Seville, gave Robert scope for speculative engagement in the sugar trade of the Canaries and the Azores and in stockfish with Iceland from 1479. 
Trading intelligence he gained in 1493 in Seville may well have encouraged Thorne to anticipate John Cabot's discovery of Newfoundland in 1497. On the back of a map drawn up in 1577-80 John Dee posited this formal claim to North America by writing 'Circa 1494 Mr Robert Thorn his father, and Mr Eliot of Bristow, discovered Newfound Land' (BL, Cotton Augustus 1.I.i). In 1527 his eldest son, Robert ['see below'], described them as 'the discoverers of the Newfound Lands' but in another passage implies they were frustrated by their pilot's behaviour (BL, Cotton MS Vitellius C. vii, fols. 329-45). In 1501 both men received a bounty for ship construction from Henry VII. On 7 January 1503, with his brother William Thorne and Hugh Elliott, the elder Robert bought shares in a ship built at Dieppe for the wine trade, securing another $20 bounty from Bristol's customs on renaming her the 'Gabriel'. As mayor of Bristol, Robert Thorne received a commission from the lord admiral of England to form Bristol's court of admiralty to act with thirteen others as from 13 May 1510. In 1515-16 he devised city ordinances on metering and aulnage of woollen cloth and linen. 
The 'great orphan book' of Bristol (Bristol RO, 04421/1, fols. 141-2) says Robert Thorne 'finished his days in London' and transcribes his will, made on 20 January 1518. His wish to be buried in St Nicholas, Bristol, was not met; he was interred in Temple Church, London, where the memorial stone was noted by Richard Hakluyt in 'Divers Voyages' (1582, p. 258). His will, proved on 6 July 1519, made many ecclesiastical and charitable bequests for Bristol including a cellar of salt (83 tons worth) for the almshouses of the Three Kings, Greyfriars, and others in Long Row and Newgate, again suggesting a trading interest in salted fish from the Azores, Newfoundland, and Iceland. His widow, Jone or Johane Wytheypolle, in her will of 10 April 1523 left large legacies to their children, Robert, Nicholas ['see below'], and Alice (died 1548), but little to Ellen, left in the abbess's care at Lacock. 


Thorne's notions of a near polar passage to Cathay were first advanced in royal and diplomatic circles in 1526 to Dr Ley, then Henry VIII's ambassador to the court of the emperor Charles V. Transcribing Thorne's texts as 'An information of the lands discovered and of the way to the Moluccas by the north' and 'A declaration of the Indies and lands which Robert Thorne discovered' in his 'Divers Voyages' (London, 1582, sigs. B1'r'-D4'v'), Hakluyt added an engraved version of Thorne's map of 1527 (opposite sig. B4'v'), while elsewhere (sig. B3) he cites Thorne's claim that the north-western route would be 'nearer by almost two thousand leagues than the southern ones'. This text also speaks of an astrolabe and a chart in use well before 1519 by his father, who 'with an[o]ther merchant of Bristol, named Hugh Elliot [were] the discoverers of the Newfounde Lande; for all is one coast as by the carde appeareth'. Robert Thorne's apprentice Emmanuel Lucar (1494-1574) is reported in his old age, while living with his son, Cyprian (1544-1611?) in Botolph's Lane near Aldgate, London, as having a copy of Robert Thorne's text and perhaps the map lent to John Dee at Mortlake in 1577. Dee certainly had the letter from Robert Thorne to Ley copied as the 'Declaration of the Indies' (now BL, Cotton MS Vitellius CVII, fols. 329-43, but without the map). 
Strype's revision of 'The Survey of London' (1720, bk 2, p. 1213), transcribes Thorne's memorial stone in the south choir of St Christopher-le-Stocks, providing his vital dates. That memorial was surpassed by one in the south aisle of Walthamstow church completed in 1535 with $1000 used at the discretion of his executor, Paul Withypoll. Thorne's other executor, his brother Nicholas, dealt with his Bristol estate and his trading partner's commitments, making a detailed inventory and disbursing $16,935 under the terms of the will. This left a residue of $4286 for Nicholas. However, charged to that inheritance there were trading debts in Spain, England, Flanders, and Italy, including debts of adventure in Ancona and for pearls bought in Venice; and the major debts owed in trade with his brother ($4091) plus $94 for a house and slaves in Seville. Robert allocated $3000 to Vincent Thorne -- 'my sonne being in Spayne' -- to be banked in St George of Genoa in the whaling port of St Jean-de-Luz, where Anna Garrera, mother of this illegitimate son, Vincent, was awarded $50 on condition that she renounce any claim to his inheritance should Vincent die before coming of age. 
Thorne gave some very large awards to his home city of Bristol, including $100 to five Bristol almshouses, $100 to repair the highways of Bristol, and $100 for the road from Commermarsh to Bristol, plus similar sums to those imprisoned in London and Bristol and other sums to be spent in various parishes in London and Bristol. He gave at least $700 to Thomas and Emmanuel Lucar to spend on worthwhile civic causes, as well as $100 for 'the making a place for the merchants of Bristol'. He also gave $300 to relief of the poor of Bristol and 'toward the making up of the free scole of Saincte Bartilmews in Brystowe, $300' as well as $25 to Thomas Moffett, first master of that grammar school, and $25 to Moffat's son, Robert. The creation of Bristol's grammar school was an interest he shared with his brother Nicholas from adolescence, as they both tried to establish navigational instruction and foreign language tuition in the city of Bristol. The derelict hospital of St Bartholomew in Christmas Street was converted to a 'conveyent Schole house to be for a fre[e] grammar schole to taught and kept within the towne of Bristowe' (Bristol RO, 04026 (1), fols. 141-2). The idea developed further through a trading partnership with Sebastian Cabot's erstwhile associate, Roger Barlow, and saw more significant steps taken in 1526 and 1530. On 6 October 1532 Robert Thorne added a bequest of $400 towards its rebuilding. Robert's will was entered in the great orphan book and book of wills of Bristol (Bristol RO, 04026 (1), fols. 139-42) because his civic bequests and initiative in maritime education were thought significant. 


By 1526 Robert Thorne the younger and Nicholas Thorne became co-partners in a Sevillian soap factory. Shortly before 1533 Nicholas joined his factor William Ballard to import wine from the eastern Mediterranean. Actions in the court of exchequer in 1535 (TNA: PRO, E 159/312) allege he exported coloured English cloth without paying export duties. 
When Henry VIII visited the manor of Thornbury, near Bristol, for ten days from 18 August 1534, he was escorted by Nicholas Thorne, Thomas White, and the chamberlain of Bristol, and gifts were presented to the king and his queen, Anne Boleyn. Although he was once characterized as a 'nigard' (BL, Cotton MS Cleopatra E. v.361), Nicholas had many children to support -- a problem vividly represented on his memorial brass, which records that he died on 19 August 1546 aged fifty, having been lord mayor and having been married twice, with four sons and four daughters (two of whom survived him) through his first marriage, to Mary Wigston, and one son and one daughter, John and Bridget, from his second marriage, to Bridget Miles. 
Of Nicholas's sons with his first wife, Robert had children but no obvious wife; Nicholas (died 1591) had three legitimate children: Edward married Sir William Harper's widow, Margaret; and the youngest, John, was left $100 to invest in Thomas Shipman's shipbuilding business through John Millis of Southampton. To Robert, Nicholas, and Edward, children of his second marriage, Nicholas left his share in another shipbuilding business conducted with Thomas Shipman, then building a ship called the 'Saviour'. 
In his will of 4 August 1546, proved on 15 October 1546, Nicholas made provision for his second wife's earlier daughters by her first husband, Alice, Barbara, and Katheryn. He apprenticed his illegitimate Spanish children, Robert and Nicholas Thorne, to William Ostrich of London, haberdasher, paying him '$66 13s 4d, which is to be the keeping of the master to whom Nicholas is prentis for seven years'. That family bond was significant, for it was Henry Ostrich who brought Sebastian Cabot back to Bristol in 1548 at the privy council's charge to inform a strategy of exploiting near polar passages. 
Nicholas Thorne's complex will allocated his school 'all such books as I have meat for the said library, more my astrolabia, which is the keeping of John Sprynt, [a]poticary, numbers of cardes etc., maps and all such instruments belonging to the science of astronomye or cosmography' (Bristol RO, 04421, fol. 276). It also provided for coloured glazing of the school's windows. His executor, Robert Barlow (died 1554), wrote for this college 'A Brief Summe of Geographie' -- a further copy of which he presented to Henry VIII in 1541 (BL, Royal MS 18 B. xxviii). Nicholas provided $20 for a lawyer to vest his school (and 250 tons of salt) in the mayor and commonality, expecting litigation from his illegitimate son, Nicholas Thorne, and John Goodrich over the family wills. Unexpectedly Francis Galliardet of Messina also took action against the heirs of Nicholas Thorne for recovery of his freight on shipping wine from Sicily and Candia (Crete) in the high court of admiralty in 1546 (TNA: PRO, HCA, 24/7 24/17 and 18; HCA 14/3 and 4). None the less the school survived, finally moving to Tyndall's Park, Bristol. 


@@@@@


doc= 27348


Thorne, William (fl. c.1397), Benedictine monk and chronicler, of St Augustine's Abbey, Canterbury, wrote a history of that house from its foundation in 598. This survives in two manuscripts: Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MS 189, which ends in 1375 and dates from about the late fourteenth century; and BL, Add. MS 53710, which comes down to 1397 and dates from no more than a few years later. The latter also forms a revision as well as an expansion of the former, adding or altering material in a good many places. 
Thorne's work is disappointing for Anglo-Saxonists because down to the 1220s he relies heavily on the late thirteenth-century chronicle of Thomas Sprott, while right through his work he is careless in his copying of charters and other texts, omitting such details as the names of witnesses and sometimes the date as well. He wrote in a spirit of zeal for his abbey's prosperity, and was interested neither in the minutiae of its documentary history nor in events of national significance; archbishops of Canterbury are portrayed only in terms of their actions or intentions 'vis-a-vis' the abbey, and the black death is ignored totally. 
Thorne's method was to quote or paraphrase documents (doubtless all drawn from the abbey's archives or such works as Sprott's chronicle), making a paragraph or two out of each such text, and setting them into a chronological sequence. These texts were mostly concerned with the estates, rights, and legal proceedings of the abbey; he gives detailed information about such matters as appropriations of churches and ordinations of vicarages, dealings with the royal justices, and similar financial and administrative affairs. He has relatively little to say about the internal history of his house and virtually nothing about its spiritual life, though he does find space for a copy of the papal grant by which St Augustine's feast day was made a double office. 
Thorne's account of events in his own century is increasingly lively, and he knew how to tell a good story. A short tale is that of Solomon Ripple, a monk of St Augustine's who acted on the abbot's behalf as a tax collector in 1335 and extorted so much money that royal justices fined the abbot $80; Thorne concludes with an account of Ripple's improvements to the abbey's estates. Much longer is the narrative of the time that he himself spent following the papal court around Italy in 1387-90, as he struggled in vain to obtain confirmation from Pope Urban VI ('r'. 1378-89) of the election of William Welde as abbot of St Augustine's. The tale of his dealings with Cardinal Brancaccio, 'a grasping and avaricious man, most notably tainted with the sin of simony' ('William Thorne's Chronicle', 656), who with his auditor had to be given 100 florins before he would act, is an essay in restrained irony. 
Almost nothing is known about Thorne beyond the little that is revealed in his chronicle. He was a candidate for the abbacy of St Augustine's in 1375, but was unsuccessful despite initially having the prior and sacrist on his side. His loyalty to his house was unaltered and he worked hard for both the abbot who had defeated him, Michael Peckham, and for his successor, William Welde. 
Thorne's chronicle was edited by Sir Roger Twysden, in his 'Historiae Anglicanae scriptores X' (1652), and it was translated by A. H. Davis as 'William Thorne's Chronicle of St Augustine's Abbey, Canterbury' (1934). 


@@@@@


doc= 27349


Thorne, William (1568?-1630), classical and Hebrew scholar and Church of England clergyman, was born in Semley, Wiltshire. His father, according to Oxford University records, was 'plebeius': neither a gentleman nor a clergyman. There is no record of any marriage. Thorne entered Winchester College in 1582 and New College, Oxford, in 1586, and graduated BA on 12 April 1589. He proceeded MA in 1592, and later the same year published 'Ducente Deo Willelmi Thorni Tullius seu 'Retor', in tria stromata diuisus', a commonplace book reorganizing Cicero's ideas on rhetoric into logical categories, with extensive references to a wide range of other sources, especially Aristotle and the Hellenistic rhetoricians. 'Ducente Deo' was the first work to be dedicated to William Herbert, future earl of Pembroke, who was then twelve years old. There was apparently a pre-existing link between Thorne's family and the Pembrokes, since William acknowledged their generosity towards his family in the dedication. The work also included a dedicatory verse by John Case, the well-known Aristotelian, and Thorne himself wrote a verse for Case's posthumous work 'Lapis philosophicus' (1600). About the same year Thorne assembled a manuscript anthology of verse in praise of Thomas Sackville, baron of Buckhurst, then newly appointed chancellor of Oxford University. 
Thorne and his collaborators exhibited their linguistic skills, including poems in both Latin and Greek, and he peppered his prose dedication with Hebrew expressions. Licensed to preach in 1597, he qualified BD in 1600, and DD in 1602. At his vespers or doctoral disputation, he defended the positions of the Church of England on the canonicity of the 'Bible', and made enough of an impression to be cited as an authority in Thomas Pye's 'Epistola ad Iohannem Honsonum' ('Epistle to John Honson', 1603). He was regius professor of Hebrew from 1598 to 1604. There is good evidence of Thorne's ability in Hebrew, since there are extant letters and poems written to him in Hebrew; he is known to have written at least one poem in Hebrew, and he was a frequent correspondent of the famous Dutch Hebraist Johan Drusius. The latter dedicated a work to him, 'Opuscula quae ad grammaticam spectant' (1609) in gratitude for Thorne's generosity in taking in Drusius's son for two years in Oxford. In that work, there is a quotation in Syriac and a remark implying that Thorne also knew that language. There is, in addition, ambiguous evidence that he knew Arabic. 
With the accession of James I, Thorne published his second book, an English sermon addressed to the king: ''Esoptron basilikon', or, A Kenning-Glass for a Christian King' (1603), an extended interpretation of Pontius Pilate's words, 'behold the man'. A document signed by fifteen bishops in 1605 or 1606 recommends Thorne for promotion, referring to him as the king's chaplain and as one of the Oxford translators of the Authorized Version of the 'Bible'. He received much preferment: he was installed dean of Chichester on 30 December 1601 and in the same year was presented to the rectory of Tollard Royal, Wiltshire. He resigned his fellowship in 1602, and was collated to the prebend of Bussall in 1603, which he also resigned the following year. In 1606 he became vicar of Amport, Hampshire, and in 1607 he was presented to the rectory of Birdham, Sussex. In 1613 he was collated to the prebend of Hova Villa. In 1616 he became rector of North Marden, Sussex, and in 1619 of Warblington, Hampshire. He died on 13 February 1630 and was buried in Chichester Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 27350


Thornhill, Sir James (1675/6-1734), decorative painter, came from a family which had owned the lordship of the manor of Thornhill, Dorset, from at least 1227. His father, Walter Thornhull ('b'. 1637), was the eighth son and the youngest of the sixteen children of George Thornhull of Thornhill and Woolland; the latter, acquired in 1540, became the principal family home. His mother was Mary, the daughter of Colonel William Sydenham, governor of Weymouth, and later of the Isle of Wight during the protectorate. 
James Thornhill was born in 1675 or 1676. The register of baptisms at St Mary's, Melcombe Regis, records his baptism there on 7 September 1675, but the entry is a later pencil addition, squeezed between the lines, and some doubt is cast on the reliability of the date by the inscription 'J. Thornhill Etat.57/ on this July ye 25th', on Jonathan Richardson's portrait sketch of Thornhill (BM). Little is known of Thornhill's childhood. His father appears to have been largely an absentee, first operating as a grocer or merchant in Dorchester, contracting a debt to a Sydenham sister-in-law and evading it by absconding to New England and later to Ireland. The young Thornhill may have joined the London household of his great-uncle Dr Thomas Sydenham (d. 1689), the eminent physician; in his will, made the previous year, Dr Sydenham left Thornhill $30 for apprenticeship to some trade or profession. On 9 May 1689 Thornhill was apprenticed for seven years to a relative, Thomas Highmore, later sergeant-painter to William III. 
The earliest evidence of Thornhill's practice as a decorative artist is the date 1699 inscribed on the frontispiece to a sketchbook (BM) used intermittently until 1718. On 1 March 1703 he was made free of the Painter-Stainers' Company. Thornhill possibly provided the design (sketchbook, fol. 15'v', BM) for the ceiling of the great cabin of the 'Royal Sovereign' (now in the admiral superintendent's house, Chatham Dockyard, Kent), executed by another artist and completed in 1701. Thornhill's style was greatly influenced by the work of Antonio Verrio and, more particularly, Louis Laguerre. He may have been one of Verrio's assistants in the decoration of the queen's drawing-room at Hampton Court Palace ('c'.1702-4): sketches for the feigned tapestries (sketchbook, fols. 113'v' and 114'r', BM) appear to be alternative designs for, not after, those executed, and passages of the ceiling itself indicate Thornhill's hand, although Giovanni Battista Catenaro and Nicholas Scheffers are the only assistants recorded by Vertue. 
In 1705 Thornhill designed the scenery for Thomas Clayton's opera 'Arsinoe, Queen of Cyprus' (designs V&A), performed at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane. In the same year he completed his first large-scale independent commission, from Thomas Foley MP, for the decoration of the hall, staircase, and overmantels at Stoke Edith, Herefordshire; only the overmantels survived destruction by fire in 1927 (now at Marble Hill, Twickenham, Surrey, English Heritage). More important was his activity at Chatsworth; his principal work there, in the Sabine Room ('c'.1706), is his most substantial early surviving 'oeuvre'. Executed in what Croft-Murray describes as his distinctive 'happy palette' of clear blues, pinks, crimsons, and warm browns (Croft-Murray, 1.170), the scheme shows Thornhill at ease with classical sources. A drawing of the Peak Castle and the Devil's Arse at Castleton, Derbyshire (Bodl. Oxf), signed and dated 22 July 1707, suggests that Thornhill was then still working at Chatsworth. 
In 1707, though still relatively unknown, Thornhill won his greatest secular commission for decorating the painted hall at the Royal Naval Hospital, Greenwich, a work which was to occupy him throughout the greater part of his career and to earn him $6685. Arguably the most impressive baroque interior in England, it is Thornhill's masterpiece and established him as the leading native decorative history painter in a field hitherto dominated by foreigners. Thornhill concentrated on the lower hall first, painted between 1708 and 1712 or 1714. Details of the commission, progress of work, and payments to Thornhill are recorded in the Admiralty papers; on 17 July 1707 the governors of the hospital ordered that: 'as soon as the Scaffolding in the Hall is ready Mr James Thornhill do proceed upon the painting thereof, by primeing it himself, or servants, and that he make such Alterations in his designe, in inserting what more he can relating to maritime affairs. (TNA: PRO, ADM 67-8)' It is thus clear that Thornhill had submitted designs prior to this date. The evolution of the scheme can be traced through numerous sketches and oil modellos. Through an elaborate iconographical programme the lower hall glorifies the constitutional monarchy of William III and Queen Mary, sustained through maritime strength and mercantile prosperity, notably demonstrated by a great ship's stern at the ceiling's west end. Thornhill's 'great and Noble design, an Honour to our Nation' (Bold, 148) was publicly applauded by Richard Steele in 'The Lover' (1715). 
In 1715 the scaffolding was removed from the lower hall to the upper. By 1717 Thornhill had received only $635 and, before commencing work on the upper hall, submitted a memorandum to the governors requesting further payment; but, as was to become a recurring theme throughout his career, his bill was queried. Nicholas Hawksmoor and John James, clerks of works at Greenwich, were requested to compare payments made to other artists for similar schemes, and leading artists were invited to inspect Thornhill's work. After favourable reports, the governors awarded Thornhill $3 per yard for the ceiling and $1 per yard for the walls, less than Thornhill had requested but, as they argued, 'this was the first great work he ever undertook in England, and served as an introduction to bring him into reputation' (Croft-Murray, 1.75-6). 
In 1710 Thornhill was employed by the lawyer Thomas Vernon at Hanbury Hall, Worcestershire, and at nearby Hewell Grange, near Bromsgrove, owned by the earl of Plymouth (oil sketch, Tate collection); and, as a foray into portraiture which he continued intermittently throughout his career, he painted 'Sir Isaac Newton' and 'Ezechiel Spanheim' (Trinity College, Cambridge). The following year, 1711, he completed work in the chapel royal and royal closet, Hampton Court. 
On 21 May 1711 Thornhill set out on a trip to the Low Countries with the mason-contractor Edward Strong (1676-1741) and Joseph Roberts (1679-1742), sergeant plumber, known to him through their employment by the office of works at Greenwich and St Paul's (Edward Strong, or his father of the same name, provided Thornhill's scaffolding at Greenwich). Thornhill's sketchbook journal (V&A NAL, L.1380-11.IV.1961) documents their progress through East Anglia to Harwich, the voyage to Hellevoetsluis, and thence to Delft, Rijswijk, The Hague, Honselaarsdijk, and other towns to Tournai. Abroad for the first time and at leisure, Thornhill sketched and noted things of personal interest such as the decoration in Huis ter Nieuburch, Rijswijk; the dramatic mix of architecture, ceremonial, and music in the churches of Ghent; and details of the interior of Tournai Cathedral. After he left Tournai on 22 June 1711, Thornhill's text stops. On 15 August, however, he painted a set of twelve Delft plates with the signs of the zodiac (BM). 
By 1713 Thornhill had probably completed the staircase of Easton Neston, Northamptonshire, for Thomas Fermor, first earl of Pomfret. In 1714 he won the commission to paint the bedchamber of the prince of Wales (later George II) at Hampton Court Palace, through the influence of the prominent whig Charles Montagu, Lord Halifax, first lord of the Treasury, who overruled Lord Chamberlain Shrewsbury's preference for Sebastiano Ricci, telling Shrewsbury (according to Vertue) that 'if Richi was imploy'd he would not pay him for it' (Vertue, 'Note books', 1.45). Halifax added that: 'Mr Thornhill our Country man has strove against all oppositions & difficultys & now had got near the very Top of the Mountain & his grace would thro' him down & crush all his endeavours. wich would prevent & discourage all countrymen everafter to attempt the like again. (ibid.)' Thornhill himself keenly advocated the need to foster home-grown talent. In October 1711 he had been elected one of the twelve directors of the new Great Queen Street Academy; with Sir Godfrey Kneller as its governor, it offered through its life class a degree of informal instruction as well as professional alliance. Several of its members, for example, Richard Steele and Jonathan Richardson, as well as members of the Rose and Crown Club to which Thornhill also belonged, publicly argued for the establishment of a Royal Academy to train a British school of painters able to compete with the best in Europe. In 1714 Thornhill sought official sponsorship through Lord Halifax, submitting to him architectural plans 'for to Build an Accademy for Painting at the upper end of the Meuse [Mews]', the cost estimated at $3139 (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.74). 
A competition to decorate the dome of Sir Christopher Wren's St Paul's Cathedral had been announced in March 1709. The most coveted contemporary commission, it attracted Thornhill, Antonio Pellegrini, Pierre Berchet, Louis Cheron, and Catenaro. The subject matter, determined by the commissioners of the fabric, was to be 'confined to the Scripturall History taken from the Acts of the Apostles' (St Paul's Cathedral, 'Minute Book of H. M. Commission for rebuilding St Paul's Cathedral', 'Wren Society', 16, 1939). At what stage Thornhill elected to concentrate on the life of St Paul, dividing the dome into eight scenes, is not clear. By 1710 the field was narrowed to two candidates, Thornhill and Pellegrini, each being required to execute their proposed designs on a model of the cupola. Political contention between successive building committees delayed decision -- 'mighty contests and parties were made about it' (Vertue, 'Note books', 2.125) -- but recent examination of events by Carol Gibson-Wood (1993) exonerates Thornhill himself from old charges of intrigue. On 28 June 1715 Thornhill was awarded the commission by a whig, low-church dominated committee inspired by a moral Anglican nationalism. Archbishop Tenison's supposed pronouncement 'I am no judge of painting, but on two articles I think I may insist: first that the painter employed be a Protestant; and secondly that he be an Englishman' has no known contemporary source, but echoes the patriotic sentiment published in June 1715 in the 'Weekly Packet', that the committee's decision will 'put to silence all the loud applauses hitherto given to foreign artists' (Meyer, 71 n. 212). 
The commissioners of the fabric stipulated in 1715 that the decoration was to be 'in Basso-Relievo' (grisaille). On 1 May 1716 Thornhill hosted an entertainment in the cupola to celebrate the start of painting, and on 29 August Dudley Ryder, a student at the Middle Temple on a visit to St Paul's, noted that the architectural painting was complete but the 'history part' not yet begun. Thornhill worked with at least two or three assistants, one of whom, Robert Browne, reputedly saved his master from falling to his death from the scaffolding platform -- although some sources identify this individual as Bentley French, Thornhill's 'attentive footman' (Croft-Murray, 2.322). The committee's minute books record progress and regular payments to Thornhill. In 1718 he persuaded the committee to have the lantern painted, and in 1719 he was asked to paint the Whispering Gallery with further incidents in the life of St Paul (no longer extant). In May 1720 he presented to George I a set of engravings of his St Paul's cycle, executed by professional engravers chosen by himself, such as Charles Simmoneau, Bernard Baron, and Gerard Vandergucht. By September 1721, when his outstanding bill was paid, Thornhill had received over $6500. A large number of pencil, ink, and oil sketches survive which trace the evolution of the scheme from inception to completion, and which reveal Thornhill's considerable skill as a baroque draughtsman. The painted hall at Greenwich and the decoration of the dome of St Paul's combined to establish Thornhill's contemporary standing beyond doubt. 
While engaged on the St Paul's project, Thornhill completed various decorative commissions in Oxford. At the east end of the chapel of All Souls College he completed (by Easter 1716) a painting of the apotheosis of Archbishop Chichele, founder of the college, in a full-blooded baroque style appropriate to high-church Oxford, and in direct contrast to the style required for St Paul's. For Queen's College, he painted the ascension on the chapel's chancel ceiling, and produced designs of Queen Anne as Britannia to be executed in sculptural relief on the pediment of front quad; he also designed lead figures (positioned in 1717) for the roof of Hawksmoor's Clarendon Building. In June 1716 Thornhill was at work at Blenheim Palace, Oxfordshire, painting the hall. In 1714 he had estimated the cost of decorating the hall, saloon, and gallery, with scenes glorifying the military triumphs of John Churchill, first duke of Marlborough, at $1800; but, in the first major setback of his career, his spiralling costs so alarmed the duchess that he was dismissed, having completed only the hall. Laguerre painted the saloon for half Thornhill's estimate. 
On Kneller's resignation as governor of the Great Queen Street Academy, Thornhill accepted the governorship, in a letter of 29 October 1716. In February 1717 he set out on a three months' trip to Paris and its environs, sketching and making notes on buildings at Fontainebleau, Marly, and Versailles, as well as buildings and art collections in Paris, in a pocket book (V&A NAL, L.1455-18.IV.1961). In Paris he purchased Annibale Carracci's 'Virgin and Child Surrounded by Angels' (Christ Church, Oxford) and, more famously, Poussin's 'Tancred and Erminia' (Barber Institute of Fine Arts, Birmingham). The Poussin was particularly acclaimed on his return. Thornhill's friend and associate Jonathan Richardson devoted extensive analysis to it in 'Two Discourses' (1719). A conversation piece attributed to Gawen Hamilton depicts 'Sir James Thornhill Showing his Poussin to his Friends' (Beaverbrook Art Gallery, Fredericton, New Brunswick). 
In June 1718 Thornhill was officially recognized as the foremost decorative painter in England by his appointment as history painter-in-ordinary to the king. In October, at his house on the north side of the Piazza, Covent Garden, where he had lived since at least 1716, he hosted the annual dinner of the Society of the Virtuosi of St Luke, the oldest and most prestigious art club, to which he had been admitted on 18 December 1716 (his design for the invitation card is in the Tate collection). In many ways the period 1718-21 was the apex of Thornhill's career. Other court appointments followed in quick succession. In March 1720 he became the king's sergeant-painter, in place of his old master, Highmore, and on 2 May he was knighted, the first British-born artist to be so honoured. Vertue claims that these positions were gained through the patronage of Lord Sunderland, first lord of the Treasury, as a favour to John Huggins, a solicitor and warden of the Fleet prison, and an intimate of Thornhill's, to whom Sunderland was indebted. On 19 October Thornhill was appointed master of the Painter-Stainers' Company. His mounting fortune and the sale of $2000 worth of South Sea stock in 1720 enabled him that year to purchase the old family manor of Thornhill in Dorset, sold by Robert Thornhull in 1686. Thornhill later transformed it into a handsome summer residence, the drawing-room ceiling decorated by himself 'with his head in the centre' (Hutchins, 3.675). The desire to possess a country estate no doubt followed his knighthood, but from at least 1718 Thornhill had been spending time in his native county, carrying out three commissions there: from General Thomas Erle in 1718 for the staircase of Charborough Park, interestingly signing it 'Thornhull', the local version of his name which he had abandoned on moving to London; he was employed by Henry Seymour Portman, a patron of his work at All Souls, Oxford, for Sherborne House ('c'.1718-20), and by George Bubb Dodington, first Lord Melcombe, his neighbour in Covent Garden, at Eastbury House. 
In 1721 Thornhill was granted the freedom of the city of Weymouth, Dorset, and presented an altarpiece of 'The Last Supper' to the parish church of St Mary's, Melcombe Regis (perhaps his own place of baptism, and certainly that of his two elder brothers). In 1721, sponsored by Bubb Dodington, Sir James Thornhill was elected MP for the constituency of Weymouth and Melcombe Regis, a seat he retained until his death. 
Other projects continued to engage him. In December 1717 Thornhill submitted fresh designs for the upper hall, Greenwich, and began work on them in 1718, completing the ceiling by 1722. At some point between 1719 and 1724 he painted the saloon at Cannons, Middlesex, a palatial house built for John Brydges, first duke of Chandos, where many decorative painters were employed. He designed scenery for the temporary theatre in the great hall, Hampton Court (1718); and he designed book illustrations, for the Oxford 'Bible' (1717) and for Jacob Tonson's editions of Milton (1720) and Addison (1721). In 1720-21, in the role of architect to which he aspired, he submitted designs for the church of St Martin-in-the-Fields (RIBA), and in 1721 he designed, for stained glass, the figures of Christ and eleven apostles for the great rose window, Westminster Abbey. By March 1721 Thornhill had been commissioned by the patriotic tory patron Edward Harley, second earl of Oxford, to paint the chapel at Wimpole Hall, Cambridgeshire. On 16 March Charles Bridgeman, James Gibbs (architect of the chapel), John Wootton, and Thornhill, a coterie of native talent, travelled to Wimpole together, the coach journey being the subject of a humorous ballad by Thornhill, 'A Hue and Cry', composed on 18 March. He refers to himself as 'Monte Spinosa' ('Wren Society', 17, 1940, 12-13). The colourful 'Adoration of the Magi' at the east end of the chapel is evidence of Thornhill's embracement of new stylistic tastes, being a successful blend of traditional baroque movement with classical restraint and Raphaelesque gesture. 
In March 1722 Thornhill lost the commission to decorate the king's new apartments at Kensington Palace, a project which should have been his as the king's history painter, but which was given to the cheaper William Kent (Thornhill had asked $800 for one room; Kent underbid him at $300). It was a 'mighty mortification' that marked him for the rest of his life. Thornhill's personal influence diminished after 1718, when whig dominance of the board of works removed Wren and Hawksmoor, with whose buildings he had been closely associated. His own bid in 1719 for the surveyorship of the king's works antagonized many; and he had increasingly to contend with the third earl of Burlington's patronage and active promotion of William Kent. In 1730, still bitter, he described himself as 'disgraced and supplanted in his Royall Masters favour', attributing the decline in his career to 'the overbearing power of the late Vice Chamberlain Coke & the present Earle of Burlington' (Paulson, 1991, 1.85). 
In 1723 Thornhill was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, and in 1724 he opened a free drawing academy in a room at the back of his house in Covent Garden. In the same year he 'took a draught' (ink sketch, Museum of London) of the convicted criminal Jack Sheppard in Newgate prison, as reported in the 'Daily Journal' (10 November 1718). He became master of the freemasons' Greenwich lodge in 1725 and senior grand warden of London's grand lodge in 1728. In 1725-8 Thornhill executed what appears to have been his last great commission, Moor Park, Hertfordshire, for the City financier Benjamin Styles. Thornhill acted both as architect and decorative painter, but Styles challenged his bill and brought two lawsuits against him, in 1728 and 1730. The courts found in Thornhill's favour. Vertue surmises that the difficulty arose, once again, through 'Mr Kents friends & interest' who 'no doubt endeavourd to foment this difference & slurr the reputation of Sr James' (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.35). In 1730-32, 'intended as a mortification' to Thornhill (ibid., 3.63), Styles had Thornhill's paintings replaced by the Italian Jacopo Amigoni (in an important adaptation to changing tastes, Thornhill's paintings had been on canvas framed by high-relief plasterwork. The latter, also designed by Thornhill, was retained). Meanwhile, in 1726 Thornhill had completed work at Greenwich. The walls of the upper hall, which celebrated the protestant succession and the new Hanoverian dynasty, had been carried out largely by an assistant, Dietrich Ernst Andre, a 'Polander' recently arrived from Brunswick (Croft-Murray, 1.263). It was completed in 1725, and was followed by the vestibule in 1726. The painted hall had been a paying tourist attraction since 1720; to aid visitors in an understanding of the complicated iconography, 1000 copies of Thornhill's 'An Explanation of the Painting in the Royal-Hospital, Greenwich' were printed in 1726-7, in English and French. 
In 1729 Thornhill was granted a royal warrant to make copies of Raphael's 'Acts of the Apostles' cartoons, then at Hampton Court Palace. The cartoons were revered as ideal exemplars of artistic excellence, central to current aesthetic and religious discourse; Thornhill hoped to make them the focus of academic instruction. He set out to surpass previous artists' attempts at copying them (for example, the engraved sets by Simon Gribelin, 1707, and Nicolas Dorigny, 1720). He made three sets of copies, one full-size, later displayed in the Royal Academy's lecture theatre, Somerset House (RA); one quarter-size (Columbia University, New York), and one small set (one-sixteenth), incorporating what had been lost at the hands of restorers, thus presenting what he believed to be the true Raphael. He also made separate studies of heads, hands, and feet, intended to be engraved as a manual for students. An album of more than 200 such tracings, made directly from the originals, survives (St Paul's Cathedral), as well as an album of more than 160 smaller-scale drawings (V&A), several of which were published in John Boydell's 'School of Raphael' (1759). 
After completing his copies in 1731, Thornhill seems to have lived much in retirement. In 1732 he was appointed a commissioner for the rebuilding of Blandford Forum, Dorset, and resigned his office of sergeant-painter in favour of his son John. In April 1734, according to Vertue, a 'violent Illness' took away Thornhill's voice. Slightly recovered, on 29 April he set out for Dorset, 'were being arrivd. but fatigued with his journey he did not survive many dayes' (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.70). Thornhill died, intestate, on 4 May 1734. The following February his important collection of pictures was sold (Cock's sale catalogue, 24-5 February 1734, V&A), followed on 26-8 February by his 'Prints, Drawings, Models, Plasters etc.' (sale catalogue, copy BM). His wife, Judith, whose maiden name, date of birth, and date of marriage are unknown, died on 12 November 1757, two months after their son John. 
Thornhill's obituarist in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' proclaimed him 'the greatest History painter this Kingdom ever produced' ('GM', 1st ser., 4, 1734, 274). In his day he was an eminent public figure who positioned himself as the figurehead of the emerging British school of painting. Today, however, his importance in the history of British art curiously neglected, he is known chiefly as the father-in-law of William Hogarth, who eloped with his daughter Jane in 1729. They are said to have remained estranged from Thornhill until about 1731, by which time they had joined Thornhill's household in Covent Garden. Thornhill was the chief influence on Hogarth's life: in his early years, Hogarth recalled, it was 'the Painting of St Paul's and greenwich hospital which were... running in my head' (Paulson, 1991, 1.95). His deep patriotism, championship of British artists, antipathy towards Burlington and all things Italian, and aspirations towards grand-manner history painting were inspired in him by his father-in-law. Hogarth's defence of Thornhill in the 'St James' Evening Post' (7-9 June 1737), signed 'Britophil', is a measure of his loyalty and respect. 
Thornhill's earliest biographer, A. J. Dezallier, admitted weaknesses in the artist's draughtsmanship, the result of a lack of sound training. To contemporaries such as Vertue, however, who considered him 'the most Excellent Native history painter' (Vertue, 'Note books', 3.38), neither Thornhill's skill nor his prominent position in the artistic community was ever in question. Thornhill's arrogant self-confidence was noticed by the duchess of Marlborough, who 'never saw any great man more imposing than hee is in all that concerns his trade' (Marlborough to James Craggs, BL, Stowe MS 751, fol. 205). By the early nineteenth century, however, Thornhill's reputation had already suffered a decline: in 1813, on a visit to the painted hall, Greenwich, Joseph Farington and a group of connoisseurs, including Benjamin West, PRA, greatly admired the decoration of the hall but attributed the work to Thornhill's assistant, Andre. West made the pertinent observation, however, that the work had undergone 'ill advised' restoration, which had 'blackened the surface & very much injured the purity of the Colour' (Farington, 'Diary', 20 Aug 1813, 12.4413). Twentieth-century critical assessments of Thornhill's ability usually commend his talent as a draughtsman but are less complimentary about his ability on a large scale, comparing him unfavourably with the great Venetian decorators then active in England. It should be borne in mind, however, that the painted surface of the majority of his surviving schemes is in fact the handiwork of a succession of restorers, not Thornhill himself. Croft-Murray (1962) did much to re-establish Thornhill's reputation, although he perceived him as working in an idiom already established by Verrio and Laguerre. His death, nevertheless, closed the epoch of grand baroque decorative painting in Britain. It is only in recent years that Thornhill's importance in other areas, such as architecture, collecting, connoisseurship, and the formulation of art theory, has been and continues to be explored. Though he holds a central place in the growing consciousness of a British school of painting, Thornhill remains the least studied of the great names in British art history. 


@@@@@


doc= 27351


Thornhill, William (1702?-1755?), surgeon, was a member of one of the younger branches of the Dorset family of Thornhull of Woolland, and a nephew of the artist Sir James Thornhill, whose mother was a niece of Thomas Sydenham's. Thornhill was educated in Bristol under John Rosewell, a noted barber-surgeon of the city. He married, in 1730, Catherine (died 1782), daughter of Richard Thompson, a wine merchant of York; they had a daughter, Anne (died 1800), who married, in 1749, Nathaniel Wraxall (1725-1781) of Mayse Hill, near Bristol. Their son, Sir Nathaniel William Wraxall, wrote the 'Historical Memoirs of my Own Time' (1815). Thornhill was elected on 20 May 1737 at the surgeons' hall in the market place to be the first surgeon to the Bristol Infirmary, founded in 1735. 
Thornhill's attendance at the infirmary was so remiss that he more than once fell under the censure of the house visitors, and in 1754 he was called upon to resign his office. He refused to do so, and it was not until June 1755 that he retired. His services were, however, recognized by a unanimous vote of the committee. He left Bristol and practised for a short time at Oxford, but without much success, and he finally retired to Yorkshire, where he died. 
Thornhill was one of the earliest English surgeons to adopt and improve the operation of suprapubic lithotomy. The records of his work, published by his colleague John Middleton, prove that his experience in the operation and his success were greater than any contemporary English surgeon could show. He performed his first suprapubic operation on a boy privately on 3 February 1723. In 1727, when his cases were recorded by Middleton, he had performed like operations thirteen times. He did not confine his attention to this part of his profession, for he was also celebrated as a man-midwife. He was a handsome man, of polished manners, and habitually wore an entire suit of black velvet with an elegant steel handled rapier. 


@@@@@


doc= 27352


Thornton, Bonnell (1725-1768), writer, was born in February 1725, probably in Maiden Lane, Westminster, but not baptized until 28 September, the son of Rebecca and John Thornton. His father was a successful apothecary who later styled himself 'Gent.' and moved to the somewhat grander Chandos Street. In 1736 Thornton was admitted to Westminster School; he became a king's scholar in 1739. Here he met Charles Churchill and William Cowper; his later friends Robert Lloyd and George Colman the elder were also at Westminster. He was elected to Christ Church, Oxford, and matriculated there on 1 June 1743. He took his BA in 1747, his MA in 1750, and the MB in 1754. His father wished him to practise as a doctor. Thornton had however already commenced a literary career while at Oxford. He produced an 'Ode on Saint Caecilia's Day, Adapted to the Ancient British Musick' (1749), a parody of the odes produced each 22 November, comically designed for hurdy-gurdy, Jew's harp, saltbox, and marrow bone and cleaver. He assisted Christopher Smart on 'The Midwife, or, The Old Woman's Magazine' (October 1750) and 'The Student, or, Oxford and Cambridge Miscellany' (1750-51). 
In 1751 Thornton was one of the early governors of St Luke's Hospital for Lunatics. In 1752 he was hired to write a paper countering Fielding's the 'Covent Garden Journal'. Thornton's 'Have At You All, or, The Drury-Lane Journal' ran for twelve numbers from 16 January to 9 April 1752 and consisted of a close parody of Fielding's style, though it included other targets such as Johnson's 'Rambler'. On 16 November 1752 he began the 'Spring-Garden Journal', another Fielding parody, which ran for four issues. On 14 November he began contributing to John Hawkesworth's 'Adventurer', an association which lasted until 3 April 1753; he appears to have written those papers marked 'A'. 
On Thursday 31 January 1754 Thornton and Colman began 'The Connoisseur'. It ran for 140 numbers to 30 September 1756, and was jointly written, though there were contributions from Cowper and Lloyd. Colman's son (not a disinterested witness) suggests that Thornton was lazy, or drunk, and occasionally left the efficient Colman to repair his omissions. Johnson thought the periodical's essays on contemporary life 'wanted matter', but Boswell defended its 'just views of the surface of life, and... very sprightly manner' (Boswell, 'Life', 1.420) and the periodical was much reprinted. In 1755 Thornton and Colman produced the two-volume 'Poems by Eminent Ladies', a broad-minded anthology of poetry by women from the Restoration onwards, with biographical notes. About this time the ['see 'Nonsense Club] began to meet every Thursday to plan burlesques and practical jokes; the main members were Thornton, Colman, Lloyd and Cowper. 
Thornton wrote 'Idler' no. 15 (22 July 1758), a Hogarthian exploration of henpecked tradesmen. In 1760 he published 'City Latin', demolishing with assurance John Patterson's published Latin inscriptions for the new bridge at Blackfriars. He and Colman became closely associated with Garrick, whose side they took during the theatre controversies of the period. Robert Lloyd's 'The Actor: a Poetical Epistle to Bonnell Thornton' (1760) includes much praise of Garrick's style. On 14 March 1761 Thornton, with Colman, Garrick, and other investors, founded the 'St James's Chronicle', a thrice-weekly literary newspaper born from the theatre war and partly designed to manipulate public opinion. Thornton was a substantial contributor and adviser. The paper was successful and prestigious, but a 'Yearly Chronicle' of pieces from the paper lost money and was discontinued. 
On 22 April 1762 a 'Grand exhibition of the Society of Sign-Painters' opened at Thornton's rooms in Bow Street. The project of mocking the exhibitions of the Society of Arts and its rival the Society of Artists with a collection of 'street art' appears to have been his, though Hogarth retouched some of the signs, which were extracted from various sites in town and country. The exhibition, which ran until 8 June (thus matching the 'serious' exhibitions), was much described and catalogued, especially in the 'St James's Chronicle'. The joke was reviewed warmly as a sample of Thornton's humour in the 'London Register' (April 1762, 345-52). 
On 24 May 1763 Boswell called on Thornton and found him 'a well-bred, agreable man, lively and odd'. He ascertained that Thornton's father had left him about $15,000. Wilkes, Churchill, and Lloyd arrived and Boswell found himself 'just got into the middle of the London Geniuses' ('Boswell's London Journal', 286). Thornton's rooms were a sort of political office during the Wilkes crisis. Thornton tried to help Wilkes through his influence in the 'Public Advertiser', the other paper with which he was closely associated, and offered to indemnify its printer, Henry Sampson Woodfall, against legal expenses. He was kept under surveillance for his association with Wilkes and Churchill, with whom he travelled in the summer of 1763. He revived his burlesque St Cecilia 'Ode', using letters, essays, and accounts of rehearsals in the newspapers to publicize it. Wilkes was at the performance at Ranelagh House (10 June 1763), giving a political edge to the robust 'Englishness' of the ode. The music was apparently by Thomas Arne, though Charles Burney also claimed to have produced a setting. Johnson 'praised its humour and seemed much diverted with it' (Boswell, 'Life', 1.420). 
On 3 February 1764 Thornton married Sylvia, the daughter of Colonel John Braithwaite, governor of Cape Coast Castle in Africa. This seems to have cut his political links. 
Lloyd, arrested for debt and thrown into the Fleet, was furious that Thornton failed to bail him out (he died in gaol on 15 December 1764). Wilkes found parts of a satire on Thornton among Churchill's papers but suppressed it at Colman's request. Thornton's son Bonnell George was born on 6 January 1765 (Christopher Smart dedicated his 'The Parables of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ' to the child in 1768); his daughter Sylvia was born in July 1766 and another son, Robert John Thornton, was born in 1768 after his father's death. 
Thornton had announced his intention to translate Plautus into English verse as early as December 1762, publishing specimens in Lloyd's 'St James's Magazine'. Colman's successful completion of a similar translation of Terence in 1765 finally spurred him to publish and in 1767 two volumes, containing seven plays, were published. Colman, to whom the translation was affectionately dedicated, contributed the translation of 'Mercator' while Richard Warner translated 'Captivi' and supplied some of the critical matter. After Thornton's death Warner completed the project in three further volumes (1772 and 1774), using Thornton's partial translations of two further plays. The translation was highly regarded for its purity and elegance, and its ability to replicate the wit of the original. 
Thornton's last publication, 'The Battle of the Wigs', a Scriblerian satire on a subject similar to that of Samuel Garth's 'Dispensary', appeared early in 1768. Colman's son records that as he lay on his deathbed (at his home in Orchard Street, Westminster) Thornton was still full of mischief (G. Colman, 'Random Records', 1830, 1.142-3). He died on 9 May 1768. The 'St James's Chronicle' (7-10 May 1768) published a warm tribute to his sensibility and benevolence. He was buried on 15 May at St Margaret's, Westminster; a monument in the east cloister of Westminster Abbey includes a Latin epitaph by Joseph Warton celebrating his sincerity and liveliness as a writer and as a companion. 
Thornton made no formal will. On 9 February 1764 he had written two memoranda leaving all his goods to his wife. Small bequests for mourning were made to Colman, Lloyd, and Cowper, alongside bequests to his wife's family and his servants. He asked for such papers as were not business documents to be burnt. The court granted probate to the widow and the Revd Thomas Winstanley (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/940, sig. 260, 1768). A picture of Thornton in the British Museum shows him wearing his own hair, a peculiarity for which he was noted. 


@@@@@


doc= 27353


Thornton, Sir Edward, count of Cassilhas in the Portuguese nobility (1766-1852), diplomatist, was born on 22 October 1766. He was the third son of William Thornton, a Yorkshireman settled in London as an innkeeper, and brother of Thomas Thornton (d. 1814). Early left an orphan, he was educated at Christ's Hospital, before being admitted sizar of Pembroke College, Cambridge, on 19 June 1785; he graduated BA as third wrangler in 1789. He took the members' prize in 1791, being elected a fellow and proceeding MA in 1798. 
In 1789 Thornton became tutor to the sons of James Bland Burges, under-secretary of state for foreign affairs. Burges took a great liking to him, and recommended him to George Hammond, who, when he became the first minister accredited to the United States in 1791, appointed Thornton as his secretary. In June 1793 Thornton became British vice-consul in Maryland, and in March 1796 secretary of legation at Washington; he acted as charge d'affaires from 1800, when the then minister returned to England, until 1804. In November 1804 Thornton accepted an appointment in Egypt, which he did not take up; in May 1805 he became minister-plenipotentiary to the circle of Lower Saxony and resident with the Hanse towns, his headquarters being at Hamburg. From there he had to retire to Kiel on the approach of the French troops, and in August 1807 he returned to England. 
On 10 December 1807 Thornton was sent to Sweden as envoy-extraordinary and minister-plenipotentiary, with a view to obtaining an offensive and defensive alliance against Napoleon. In November 1808 he returned to England unsuccessful, and for a time was prevented by the hostile attitude of Sweden from returning to his post. In October 1811 he again went to Sweden on a special mission in HMS 'Victory', negotiated treaties of alliance with both Sweden and Russia, and thus assisted in the first step towards the union of the northern powers against Napoleon. On 5 August 1812 he was again appointed envoy-extraordinary. In 1813 he negotiated the treaty with Denmark by which Heligoland was ceded to Great Britain. From 1813 to 1815 he accompanied the prince royal of Sweden (Bernadotte) in the field, and was present at the entrance of the allies into Paris. In 1816 he was sworn of the privy council. 
On 29 July 1817 Thornton was appointed minister to Portugal, and in this capacity went to the Portuguese court in Brazil. On 12 April 1819 he was temporarily granted the rank of ambassador, and held it until March 1821, when he returned to England. In August 1823 he went to Portugal as envoy-extraordinary and minister-plenipotentiary, but was only there a year, during which he invested the king with the Order of the Garter, and sheltered him during the insurrection. For this he was created count of Cassilhas by the king of Portugal, the title to run for two further lives. He became a GCB in 1822. He retired from the service on a pension in August 1824. 
Thornton married, in 1812, Wilhelmina Kohp, a Hanoverian, with whom he had one daughter and six sons, one of whom, Sir Edward Thornton, GCB (1817-1906), followed him in the diplomatic service. After his retirement Thornton purchased Wembury House, Plymouth, where he died on 3 July 1852. He was an unusual example of a self-made diplomatist. 


@@@@@


doc= 27354


Edward Thornton (1799-1875), who was at East India House from 1814 to 1857, and was head of the maritime department from 1847. Among his publications were gazetteers of the territories held by the East India Company and the 'countries adjacent to India on the North-West', and a six-volume 'History of the British Empire in India' (1841-5). He was also responsible for entries in the eighth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' on Indian subjects, which have also been attributed to Edward Parry Thornton. This Edward Thornton died at 1 Montpelier Street, Brighton, on 24 December 1875. 


@@@@@


doc= 27355


Thornton, Edward Parry (1811-1893), administrator in India, born on 7 October 1811 at Clapham Common, was second son of John Thornton (1783-1861) ['see under 'Thornton, Samuel] of Clapham, commissioner of Inland Revenue, and his wife, Eliza, daughter of Edward Parry. He was educated at Charterhouse School and Haileybury College, where he was ranked second in his class. In 1830 he obtained a writership in Bengal. He was appointed assistant to Robert Merttins Bird, the commissioner of revenue in the Gorakhpur division in 1831. Here his first important task was to complete the Gorakhpur district settlement. He subsequently became the chief settlement officer of Saharanpur and Muzaffarnagar, and in 1840 and 1841 published the settlement reports for each district. He enjoyed the unwavering support of Bird against those commissioners who retained reservations about the terms of the settlement regulations. 
On 14 January 1840 he married Louisa Chicheliana (1816-1883), daughter of Richard Chicheley Plowden of the Bengal civil service and his wife, Sophia Fleming. They had six sons and two daughters. 
Thornton returned to England on furlough early in 1842, and when he returned to India in 1845 was appointed joint magistrate and deputy collector at Meerut, and later in the same year chief magistrate and collector. In 1848 he was transferred in the same capacity to Saharanpur. In 1849, when Dalhousie was choosing the ablest officials for the task of organizing the Punjab, Thornton was appointed a commissioner and placed at Rawalpindi, in the Jhelum division. In 1852 he distinguished himself by his arrest of Nadir Khan, a discontented son of the raja of Mandla, who was endeavouring to promote a rising of the hill tribes. He received a bullet wound in the throat while executing his mission, but succeeded in preventing the rising. In May 1857, at the time of the mutiny, John, Lord Lawrence, made Rawalpindi his headquarters. Thornton was constantly with him, and he afterwards gave interesting details of Lawrence's conduct at that time, which have been preserved in Smith's 'Life of Lord Lawrence' (1885). After Lawrence had taken the troops from the Punjab to assist in the operations against Delhi, Thornton was called on to exercise more independent authority. In the beginning of September 1857 the intelligence reached Lady Lawrence that the tribes in the lower Hazara country contemplated revolt. She communicated the report to Thornton, who succeeded in arresting the leaders within a few hours, and by this prompt action prevented any attempt at rebellion. On the conclusion of the mutiny Thornton was appointed judicial commissioner for the Punjab, and on 18 May 1860 he was made a companion of the Bath in recognition of his services. He retired from the Indian service in 1862, having been on extended leave on full salary since 1860. In retirement he joined the banking firm of H. S. Thornton. 
Thornton died in London at his home, 61 Warwick Square, on 10 December 1893. 
Several works on India commonly attributed to Thornton are by other writers of the same name, principally 


@@@@@


doc= 27356


Thornton, Gilbert of (b. in or before 1245, d. 1295), justice, was the son of Robert de Bussy, of Thornton-le-Moor in Lincolnshire, which lies about 6 miles north-east of Market Rasen. Gilbert is himself commonly called Gilbert de Bussy of Thornton in local property deeds before the late 1280s. His appointment as the attorney of the abbot of the Lincolnshire abbey of Thornton (a different Thornton, about 15 miles to the north of Thornton-le-Moor) in 1266 indicates that he cannot have been born after 1245 and may well have been born several years earlier. One of the earliest surviving law reports shows him acting as a serjeant in the eyre of 1271-2 held in his home county of Lincolnshire, and other evidence suggests that he also acted as a serjeant before the same group of eyre justices in Warwickshire in 1272. The earliest surviving report of an identifiable case heard in the common bench in which he appears as a serjeant comes from 1275, but it seems clear that he was by then already well established as one of the serjeants of the court, and reports show him appearing there on a regular basis thereafter. Late in 1280 Thornton succeeded Alan of Walkingham as the king's serjeant on the northern eyre circuit, challenging claims to franchises on behalf of the king and attempting to recover lands in the same cause. He managed to combine this with what was clearly an extensive private practice, not just in the same eyres but also (in between eyre sessions) in the common bench. 
In the autumn of 1284 Thornton was dispatched by the king to Ireland to act in 'quo warranto' proceedings brought in the Dublin bench against Thomas Fitzmaurice relating to the shrievalties of the counties of Waterford, Cork, and Kerry, and in other proceedings in which the king was asserting his claim to the Decies and Desmond. He remained in Ireland until the summer of 1285. While in Dublin he also acted for the earl of Norfolk in litigation in the Dublin bench, and was well rewarded by the earl for his forensic success. The autumn of 1285 saw him resume his previous position as king's serjeant on the northern eyre circuit and also his extensive private practice, both on eyre and at Westminster. During the course of the Gloucestershire eyre of 1287 he was superseded as king's serjeant by the younger William Inge. Puzzlingly he also disappears from the reports of litigation heard in the common bench during 1288 and 1289, though he reappears acting for the king in a case heard there towards the end of Hilary term 1290. This can have been only just before his appointment as a justice of the court of king's bench, which had occurred before the end of that same term. When Ralph Hengham was disgraced, probably in late February 1290, Thornton succeeded him as chief justice of the court, and remained chief justice until his death, which took place in London on 28 August 1295. 
The name of Thornton's wife is unknown and it seems likely that she had predeceased him. He may also have had an elder son who predeceased him, for his heir was his son Alan, who was in clerical orders and who in 1286 received permission from the archbishop of York to absent himself from his living of Rowley to study theology or canon law. The Gilbert of Thornton who succeeded Hengham in 1294 as rector of the Yorkshire living of Middleton in Pickeringlithe may have been another son. Thornton also had at least two daughters: Richilda, who was still alive in 1313 and claimed to be Alan's coheir, and another whose name is unknown but whose son, William Cateby, claimed to be Alan's other coheir. 
Gilbert of Thornton may have been involved in the teaching of law. A 'summa de casibus' which contains mainly brief notes on various points of law, and which apparently belongs to the period 1272-5, survives in two Cambridge University Library manuscripts (Dd.7.14 and Ee.6.18) and in a manuscript now in the Carson collection of the Free Library of Philadelphia (LC 14.13). It probably derives from teaching, and its use of the names Gilbert of Thornton and Gilbert Buscy by way of example may well indicate that Gilbert was the teacher. It may also have been for didactic purposes that Gilbert prepared the epitome and partial updating of 'De legibus et consuetudinibus Angliae', formerly attributed to Henry of Bratton or Bracton (died 1268), which is known to have been owned by his son Alan (Lincoln's Inn, Hale MS 135); he also prepared a revised (and still further abbreviated) version of the same epitome, one copy of which is now in Harvard law school and a second (but mutilated) copy of which was once owned by John Selden. This revised version must have been finished while he was chief justice of the king's bench, as it incorporates references to two of the legislative enactments of 1290 ('Quia emptores' and the 'Statute of 'Quo warranto''). 


@@@@@


doc= 27357


Thornton, Henry (1760-1815), banker and political economist, was born on 10 March 1760, the youngest son of John Thornton (1720-1790), of Clapham, Surrey, merchant and philanthropist, and his wife, Lucy (1722-1785), daughter of Samuel Watson of Hull. John Thornton was one of the leading lay patrons of the early evangelical movement. Henry's brother Samuel Thornton achieved prominence as a merchant and governor of the Russia Company. At five Henry was sent to school with a Mr Davis on Wandsworth Common, and at thirteen he was moved to a Mr Roberts at Point Pleasant, Wandsworth. In his 'Recollections', written for his children, Thornton described his schooldays as unprofitable. He learned more than the usual amount of Latin and Greek from Davis, but suspected him of having been an 'unbeliever' who rushed over prayers. Roberts offered a curriculum, taught entirely by himself, of 'latin, greek, french, rhetoric, drawing, arithmetic, reading, writing, speaking, geography, bowing, walking, fencing' (Thornton, 'Recollections'), besides Hebrew and mathematics. Thornton acquired only 'habits of idleness' (ibid.) and many of his fellow pupils there were 'vicious' (ibid.). Henry spent 1778-80 in the counting-house of his cousin Godfrey Thornton, in 1780 entering his father's house, where he subsequently became a partner. He left in 1784 (against his parents' advice) to join the banking firm of Down and Free which soon became Down, Thornton, and Free, of which he remained an active partner until his death. Under his management, and with the help of a legacy of about $40,000 inherited from his father, Thornton's bank grew from a smallish concern into one of the largest in London, with an extensive network of country connections. 
In 1782, at his mother's prompting, Thornton set out to contest Hull for parliament, but withdrew on finding that he was expected to make each voter a present of 2 guineas. In September that year he was elected for the London seat Southwark, which he held for the rest of his life. Although he refused to follow the custom of treating the Southwark voters to a guinea each, and lacked popular appeal, Thornton was respected for his integrity and independence. His share of the vote dropped in later years, partly, he felt, because he had neglected his constituents for occupations 'which I have thought more useful and becoming' (Thornton, 'Recollections'). 
Thornton regarded his father as 'on the whole a great character' (Thornton, 'Recollections'). But he was a more cultivated and fastidious evangelical than his parents, whom he criticized for their 'peculiarities' (ibid.), ignorance of the world, and over-reliance on the doctrine of predestination which led them to be unsystematic about his education (ibid.). His cousin William Wilberforce had been given house room by John Thornton after his conversion, and it was Wilberforce who became Henry's model in religion and one of his closest friends. In 1792 Thornton bought Battersea Rise, a villa on Clapham Common which he shared with Wilberforce until his marriage. The library at Battersea Rise (reputedly designed by William Pitt) became a meeting-place for the so-called Clapham Sect, a group that gathered informally around Wilberforce and became a powerful instrument of evangelical enterprise. 
Like other Clapham evangelicals, Thornton felt called to public life by God. In politics he distrusted party spirit and insisted on 'the inconsistency of private vice with public virtue' ('Christian Observer', February 1807, 139). He came to regard the French Revolution as 'an experiment made upon human nature by men insensible of our natural corruption' (ibid., 140), and Napoleon as an extraordinary figure 'whom the Almighty has ordained to execute his righteous judgements on the earth' (ibid., September 1807, 628). Thornton was a diffident orator and spoke infrequently in parliament. His most valuable work there was done in committee. As an MP his first vote was in favour of peace with America, which immediately connected him with the friends of Pitt. Thornton generally supported Pitt, Henry Addington, and the Grenville-Fox administration. He considered the war with France 'more just than almost any other in the British history' (Thornton, 'Recollections'), yet favoured most initiatives for the restoration of peace. He approved of the peace of Amiens and was averse to the subsequent renewal of hostilities. Thornton voted for Catholic emancipation earlier than Wilberforce, and disagreed with his Clapham friends in opposing Spencer Perceval's orders in council (1807), fearing rightly for their effect on relations with America. He supported Earl Grey's 1797 motion for parliamentary reform and backed measures against sinecures and the sale of seats, while having no sympathy for the ideas of radicals and 'democrats'. 
Thornton served on parliamentary committees to examine the public debt (1798), the Irish exchange (1804), and public expenditure (1807 onwards). In 1810 he was appointed to the bullion committee, which investigated the high price of gold, the state of the currency, and foreign exchange. The committee's report, written by Thornton, Francis Horner, and William Huskisson, pressed unsuccessfully for the resumption of cash payments (suspended by the Bank of England in 1797) after two years. He published two speeches on the report in 1811. 
Thornton lived at a time of change and turbulence in the banking system, and it was the crisis of 1797 that produced his most enduring legacy as an economist, 'An Enquiry into the Nature and Effects of the Paper Credit of Great Britain' (1802). Intended to expose some popular errors, such as the notion that an increase in paper was itself responsible for current economic ills, the book grew into a general treatise, described by J. S. Mill as 'the clearest exposition that I am acquainted with, in the English language, of the modes in which credit is given and taken in a mercantile community' (Mill, 3.11.4). The work provided a complete account of the English monetary system: not only the circulation of money, but also a detailed discussion of how the Bank of England should act to prevent instability, and also how to deal with instability whenever it occurred. According to the 'New Palgrave' 'Thornton's exposition of the issues involved represents an important contribution to monetary economics' (Laidler, 'Thornton, Henry'). 
An article by Horner in the first number of the 'Edinburgh Review' helped to spread Thornton's ideas; the book appeared in French and German translations (Geneva, 1803; Halle, 1803), in America (Philadelphia, 1807), and was reprinted in 1857 by J. R. McCulloch. Marx owes something to Thornton and quotes him in the 'Grundrisse'. Among his contemporaries Thornton was generally eclipsed by David Ricardo. His twentieth-century reputation, initially the result of transatlantic interest, rates highly his originality and powers of analysis, and places him in the front rank of monetary economists. 
Thornton played a leading role in the Clapham Sect's opposition to slavery, support for Christian missions, and concern to reform public manners. In 1791 he became chairman of the court of directors of the newly constituted Sierra Leone Company, which took over Granville Sharp's failed 'Province of Freedom' settlement dedicated to establishing a colony of freed slaves in Africa. The company aimed to confer on Africa the blessings of European religion and civilization through a trading operation that would be both profitable and free from the taint of slavery. Thornton was the company's most influential director and remained chairman throughout its life, writing virtually all its published reports and administering Sierra Leone from offices alongside his bank in Birchin Lane. He formed a lasting friendship with Zachary Macaulay, governor of the colony from 1794 to 1799 and then secretary to the company. Sierra Leone was transferred to the crown in 1808. The company had not prospered. It was undermined by the continuing slave trade, disasters suffered in the French war, disputes between groups of settlers, and also (as Thornton acknowledged in his 'Recollections') inexperience and over-optimism on the part of himself and his fellow directors. Notwithstanding the commercial failure, Thornton blessed the project for teaching him 'to feel for the african race' (Thornton, 'Recollections'), and hoped that providence would still make it an instrument of good. Thornton became treasurer of the African Institution, founded in the wake of slave trade abolition with similar aims to the Sierra Leone Company. 
Thornton is said to have contributed over eighty articles to the Clapham Sect's journal, the 'Christian Observer', which he helped to launch in 1802. He enjoyed a warm friendship with Hannah More, to whom Wilberforce introduced him in 1789. He gave money to her schools, and wrote and revised tracts for her 'Cheap Repository' series, visiting hawkers on her behalf to learn the secrets of the distribution trade. He was first president of the Sunday School Society, founded in 1785. Other evangelical societies predictably chose Thornton as treasurer, including the British and Foreign Bible Society (1804) and the Society for Missions to Africa and the East (1799, later the Church Missionary Society). Thornton shared in the efforts of Wilberforce, Charles Grant, and other friends to change the East India Company charter in favour of evangelizing the Indians. Like his father, he bought church livings to present to suitable clergymen. 
On 1 March 1796 Thornton married Marianne Sykes (1765-1815), only daughter of Joseph Sykes, a Hull merchant and an evangelical. They had nine children. The eldest son, Henry Sykes Thornton (1800-1881), succeeded his father in banking; the youngest, the Revd Charles Thornton (1810-1839), became a friend of John Henry Newman and the Tractarians. The marriage was affectionate; in his family Thornton was warmer and more spontaneous than he usually appeared to the outside world. He took great care over the education and religious upbringing of his children, insisting on their being useful and aware of public affairs from an early age. His eldest daughter's 'Recollections', quoted extensively by Thornton's great-grandson E. M. Forster in 'Marianne Thornton, 1797-1887: a Domestic Biography' (1956), show the Thornton household as a model of evangelical family life, that great influence on the Victorians. The children's guardian, Sir Robert Inglis, published a number of Thornton's writings after his death, all concerned with domestic worship and education: 'Family Prayers' (1834), family commentaries on the sermon on the mount and the 'Pentateuch' (1835, 1837), 'Lectures on the Ten Commandments' (1843), and 'Female Characters' (1846). 'Family Prayers' was widely used, and went through more than thirty editions in twenty years. 
According to Sir James Stephen's essay on the Clapham Sect, Thornton 'never laid aside the Ermine' (Stephen, 295). He was grave, dispassionate, and rational, inspired by Wilberforce but utterly unlike him. Yet Wilberforce himself recognized 'the generous heart that glowed within' (Wilberforce and Wilberforce, 4.231); as the story of the Sierra Leone Company shows, Thornton could be moved by vision and enthusiasm as much as by prudence and business sense. Brougham called Thornton 'the most eminent in every respect' of Wilberforce's associates (Brougham, 1.273). His charity, mostly to evangelical causes, was considerable: Stephen says that he gave away between $2000 and $9000 a year, six-sevenths of his income before his marriage and one-third after it. When income tax was introduced he paid more than required, believing that the tax, though just, was not fairly distributed. As a banker he would stand by insolvent clients who had, for example, obtained credit from a third party because of their association with him: a moral obligation which once cost him more than $20,000. He valued a good income, but declined to build up a great fortune for his children, urging them in his 'Recollections' to follow his own and his father's example of limited expenses and large liberality. Thornton's health was never good. His headaches, sleeplessness, and digestive troubles were exacerbated by overwork; from 1799 he took opium. He became ill in the autumn of 1814 and died of consumption on 16 January 1815 at Wilberforce's house in Kensington Gore, London. He was buried in the Thornton vault at the Old Church, Clapham, Surrey, on 24 January. 


@@@@@


doc= 27358


Thornton, John (1720-1790), merchant and philanthropist, was born on 1 April 1720, the only son of Robert Thornton of Clapham, Surrey, and his first wife, Hannah Swynocke. His father was a merchant, and became a director of the Bank of England. After his death Thornton inherited the Clapham estate and about $100,000, which he increased greatly in the Russian trade. A large part of Thornton's income was devoted to the encouragement of a gospel ministry in various parts of the world. Much of this money was donated anonymously through third parties so that he would not have excessive demands on his charity, and it is impossible to discover the extent of his charitable gifts. In 1772, for example, he got a Mr Bentley to purchase 1000 copies of a hymnbook published by the Revd Dyer of St George's, Southwark, which had failed to sell. These were to be sent to Lady Huntingdon for distribution. Similarly he employed the Revd Thomas Scott of the Lock Hospital in London to distribute bibles in England and Wales. 
Although Thornton was a devout evangelical Anglican and disliked Wesleyans and Baptists, his support extended to most protestant denominations. The Revd William Bull who trained Independent ministers at Newport Pagnell was a close friend; the Revd Mr Winter also took some of his students. His allowance for a student was 25 guineas a year, and in 1783 he supported three. For these and other evangelical curates he endeavoured to find livings, with only limited success. When he was unable to persuade the lord chancellor to appoint them to crown livings he resorted to buying advowsons which he eventually placed in a trust, with Henry Venn and two other clergy as trustees. In 1783 he responded to a request from Lady Huntingdon on behalf of an Essex curate with the statement that he was considered 'a speckled Bird' with no influence (Thornton to Lady Huntingdon, 7 Oct 1783, Cheshunt archives, F1/554). Even his contribution to building new churches at Clapham and elsewhere did not give him the power to appoint a minister. 
Thornton travelled widely in later life and used every opportunity to advance the evangelical cause. During a long stay at Swansea in 1783 he rented a room in the town for occasional preaching as there was no gospel ministry. He also visited Scotland, St Edmund Hall in Oxford (the home of Calvinistic Methodist students), and Lady Huntingdon's training college for ministers at Trefeca, near Brecon. Although he made no donation to the college he did assist Lady Huntingdon with a loan at no interest. In 1761 he and George Whitefield handled the negotiations by which she bought the advowson of Aldwincle All Saints, Northamptonshire, to save the patron, John Kimpton, from bankruptcy. Better known was his gift of $200 a year to John Newton while curate of Olney, Buckinghamshire, which he increased when Newton took charge of the affairs of the poet William Cowper. Thornton's closest association was with his brother-in-law, the Revd Richard Conyers, rector of Helmsley, Yorkshire, whom he described as his chaplain. He related how on one occasion he persuaded Conyers to enter a Quaker meeting. 
On 28 November 1753 Thornton married Lucy (1722-1785), the heir of Samuel Watson of Hull. They had four children: Samuel Thornton (1754-1838), who went into business and became a director of the Bank of England; Robert, who went into parliament; Jane, who married the earl of Leven; and Henry Thornton (1760-1815), who continued his father's religious and charitable work. Thornton died on 7 November 1790 as the result of an accident at Bath and was buried at Clapham. Notwithstanding his many benefactions he died a very wealthy man, able to leave $40,000 to the youngest of his sons (his other bequests are not known). Henry described his father as 'rough, vehement and eager' (Forster, 11), and disapproved of his behaviour, but was greatly influenced by his example. 


@@@@@


doc= 27359


John Thornton (1783-1861), was born on 31 October 1783. He graduated BA at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1804 and MA in 1809. In 1807 he married Eliza, the daughter of Edward Parry; they had six sons and four daughters. She published 'Lady Alice: a Ballad Romance', in 1842, 'The Marchioness, a Tale', in the same year, and a third novel, 'Truth and Falsehood, a Romance', in 1847. John Thornton became successively commissioner of the boards of audit, stamps, and inland revenue, as well as treasurer of the Church Missionary Society and of the Bible Society. He died at Clapham on 29 October 1861. 


@@@@@


doc= 27360


Thornton, Robert (b. in or before 1397, d. in or before 1465?), compiler of miscellanies and copyist, son of Robert Thornton and perhaps of Isabel Gray, and brother of Richard, became lord of the manor of East Newton in the parish of Stonegrave, wapentake of Ryedale, North Riding of Yorkshire, on his father's death in 1418. His grandfather, also Robert, died in 1402. Thornton was alive in 1456 and appears, it seems, as a witness to a charter dated 1468, though this evidence conflicts with a family pedigree, originally compiled by a family relative, Thomas Comber, dean of Durham (died 1699), which suggests that he must have died by 1465, when his second wife, Isabel, is recorded as marrying John Mekylfield. Thornton's first wife was Agnes. 
Robert Thornton is believed to be the gentleman amateur compiler and generally careful copyist of two manuscript miscellanies in which he occasionally signs his name: Lincoln Cathedral, MS 91 (A.5.2), known as the 'Thornton manuscript', and BL, Add. MS 31042 (the 'London Thornton manuscript'). 
Thornton was probably educated at home; he did not attend either university. Local landholdings afforded him a respectable degree of prosperity and influence. In 1441 he was named as an executor of the will of Sir Richard Pikeryng of nearby Oswaldkirk; he appears as witness in land transactions in 1442 and 1448-9; and he was commissioned as a tax collector for the North Riding, in 1453. He may have been a distant relative of Robert Stillington, bishop of Bath and Wells and chancellor of England, and have held some official post such as steward to the abbot of Rievaulx. With his second wife he had three sons, William, Thomas, and Richard. In the Lincoln manuscript William apparently records the birth of a grandchild, Robert, in 1453-4 (Lincoln Cathedral MS 91, fol. 49'v'). 
This paper manuscript of 314 folios, written 'c'.1430-50 (rebound in 1974), is divided into three main sections: secular, religious, and medical ('Liber de diversis medicinis'). It is a major source for Middle English romances, both tail-rhyme and alliterative, including the northern version of 'Octavian', 'Sir Isumbras', 'Diocletian', 'Sir Degrevant', 'Sir Eglamour', 'Lyarde', 'Thomas of Erceldoune', and 'The Awntyrs off Arthure at the Terne Wathelyne'. It preserves unique copies of the 'Prose Life of Alexander', the alliterative 'Morte Arthure', and 'Sir Percival of Galles'. The religious section contains a variety of prayers, meditations, and instructional material in English and Latin, including works by the Yorkshire hermit Richard Rolle, three short items from Walter Hilton, 'John Gaytryge's Sermon', 'The Mirror of St Edmund', 'The Abbey of the Holy Ghost', 'A Revelation of Purgatory' (1422), and the unique alliterative 'St John the Evangelist'. Textual variants suggest that Thornton may have had access to exemplars from a house for female religious, such as the Benedictine priory of St Mary at Nun Monkton. A prayer to St Leonard may connect with the Thornton family's reverence for this saint by whose altar their tomb lay in Stonegrave church. The volume comprises a variety of material for the entertainment and spiritual and bodily health of the compiler and his family, who seem to have read it, and resewn leaves, and jotted their names down in it, until their fortunes waned and it passed into the possession of Lincoln Cathedral, probably via Comber's association with Daniel Brevint, dean of Lincoln (1682-95), and possibly in 1692 when East Newton and its furnishings were sold. 
Watermarks suggest that BL, Add. MS 31042 was being compiled contemporaneously with the Lincoln manuscript. Its 179 folios contain English verse romances and religious works less distinctly separated, including two long excerpts from 'Cursor mundi', 'The Quatrefoil of Love', 'Richard the Lionheart', 'the Romance of the childhode of Ihesu Criste' (BL, Add. MS 31042, fol. 163'v'), 'The Parliament of the Three Ages', short religious and didactic pieces by Lydgate, and unique copies of 'The Siege of Jerusalem', 'The Siege of Milan', 'Roland and Otuel', and 'Winner and Waster'. There is no Chaucer, Gower, or Langland in either volume. 


@@@@@


doc= 27361


Thornton, Robert John (1768-1837), physician and writer on botany, was probably born in London, youngest of the two sons and a daughter of the writer Bonnell Thornton (1725-1768), who died before his son's birth, and his wife, Sylvia, daughter of Colonel John Braithwaite. After early private education, and intended for the church, Thornton entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1786 aged eighteen, but was drawn into medicine. He was strongly influenced by the botanical lectures of Professor Thomas Martyn, who introduced him to Linnaeus's sexual system for plants. Subsequently he attended lectures by Henry Cline and William Babbington at Guy's Hospital medical school, and graduated as MB at Cambridge in 1793. His thesis on 'oxygen air imbibed by the blood' signals the interests in life forces in terms of the new chemical theories of Lavoisier and others that were to characterize much of his subsequent writings. 
After travels in Scotland, Ireland, France, the Netherlands, and Germany, Thornton set up as a physician in London in 1797, using techniques advocated by Thomas Beddoes (founder of the Pneumatic Institute and follower of the Brunonian system), which involved the inhalation of 'factitious airs', including laughing gas. He had already begun the publication of 'The Politician's Creed' (8 vols., 1795-9) and 'The Philosophy of Medicine, being Medical Extracts' (4 vols., 1796, and subsequent editions). Apart from an uncertain income from popular writing, Thornton appears to have depended upon practising medicine for his living, since he additionally became an MD of the University of St Andrews (1805), and a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians (1812). However, in 1796 he was appointed lecturer on medical botany at Guy's and St Thomas's hospitals, and was devoted to the latter science. Already he was working on a gigantic literary speculation which was to ruin him. This work, the 'New Illustration of the Sexual System of Linnaeus' (better known under its 1804 title of 'The Temple of Flora'), was first advertised in 1797 and began to appear in parts from 1799, published by T. Bensley and priced at 1 guinea (later 25's'). The complete text with illustrations was advertised as available in 1799 for 20 guineas. Its bibliographic history was complicated, the three main parts being issued at a variety of times and in different formats. Thornton's subsequent publications, including 'Botanical Extracts' (2-4 vols., 1810) and 'The British Flora' (5 vols., 1812), annexed material from the 'New Illustration' in a characteristically opportunistic and bibliographically confusing manner. The huge costs of illustration and printing seriously eroded Thornton's personal fortune. As a promotional exercise in 1804 he exhibited the originals of his plates at 49 New Bond Street, and in 1811 an act of parliament (51 George III, cap. 103) authorized his 'Royal Botanical Lottery', for which he issued 20,000 tickets at 2 guineas each. The top prize was the set of original paintings, with other prizes of his printed illustrations and texts. In spite of his efforts to market his publications, his finances never recovered. 
At the heart of the 'New Illustration' was Thornton's scheme to produce a specifically British botanical publication of a magnificence to surpass all previous examples. Teams of master engravers and colourists, including Francesco Bartolozzi, Richard Earlom, and John Landseer, used the full range of modern printing techniques to produce coloured illustrations after paintings by such prominent artists as Sir William Beechey, James Opie, Henry Raeburn, John Russell, Abraham Pether, and his two favoured illustrators, Peter Henderson and Philip Reinagle. The illustrations were not restricted to the 'choicest flowers' in the world, but included portraits of eminent botanists -- including the famous portrait of Linnaeus in Lapp (Sami) dress -- elaborate allegories, such as 'Cupid Inspiring the Plants to Love', and a bust of Linnaeus being honoured by Aesculapius, Flora, Ceres, and Cupid. The text, which includes a translation of Linnaeus's 'Prize dissertation' on the sexuality of plants (1759), is similarly not bound to accounts and texts of scientific botany, but deals with a wide range of religious, political, spiritual, social, and emotional issues, not only in prose but also through extensive use of poems by modern and ancient authors. It is easy to regard much of this material as irrelevant to the publication's botanical aims, but this is to miss the universal human and religious purposes of botanical learning in Thornton's system of thought. 
The tenor of Thornton's enterprise shares much in common with Erasmus Darwin's poem 'The Botanic Garden', especially the second part, 'The Loves of Plants' (1789), but Thornton's fervent religious beliefs, moral conservatism, royalist passion, and disgust for the French Revolution stand in marked contrast to Darwin's radicalism and libertarianism. For Thornton the study of botanical science in the wake of Linnaeus's system of classification inculcated, particularly in the young, a love of order and proper feelings of awe for divine providence. The power of love expressed by plants through their sexual activities, conducted with instruments of such beauty and wonder, provided exemplary expressions of the highest sentiments which human beings could attain in the context of conjugal fidelity. His dedicatee, Queen Charlotte, who had given her family name to 'Strelitzia' (the 'queen plant', imported by Sir Joseph Banks), provided the supreme model. Her chastising letter to the king of Prussia, lamenting the miseries of European wars, was quoted by Thornton among the supporting material for his plate of roses (drawn by himself) to reinforce his advocacy of universal peace. The botanical diversity of the world, the result of the wide variety of geographical habitats, gave unequivocal support for the notion of free trade rather than military conquest and perpetual strife: Thornton's model of peaceful civilization for the world was that provided by Britain under its monarchy. 
The twenty-eight illustrations in the 'Temple of Flora' in its large format (about 24 x 18 in.) are the most overtly dramatic in the history of botany. Each plant is characterized assertively against an evocative background. The 'Night blowing cereus' from Jamaica, as drawn by Reinagle, is shown in a moonlit landscape of church and 'dimpled' river by Pether; the 'American cowslip' appears in front of a sea view with sailing ships, evoking travel; the 'Egyptian bean' assumes a geometrical air before the pyramids; while the 'Dragon arum' displays the 'confusion dire' of its phallic sexual equipment against a stormy mountainscape, appropriate for such a 'foetid' plant. The settings are not consistently ecological; rather they play in various ways to the plants' aesthetic potential, their exotic origins, the seasons and times of their flowering, their personalities and emotional associations, their socio-political connotations, and, above all, to their significance within the spiritual system of meaning in God's creation. The plates may be seen as complementary to the other systems of illustration used by Thornton, ranging from diagrammatic tabulations of the sexual organs according to the Linnaean system and illustrations of experiments, to pictorial representations of the 'anatomy' and 'dissection' of particular flowers. 
Viewed as a whole, Thornton's publications embrace, in a single if loosely organized system, many of the varied motivations in British science at the turn of the century: a respect for experiment; a search for systems of mathematical rigour; an awe at the power of life forces, particularly those of chemical and electrical nature; a rhapsodic delight in the magic of nature in all its dramatic manifestations; a strong sense of national pride in the political and scientific achievements of Britain; a love of freedom in nature and society, as opposed to continental mores; an enthusiasm for the role of lavish, large-scale illustrations for the portrayal of truths of man and nature; and, above all, a keen awareness of the supreme power of the provident creator, designer of the 'great chain of being', at the top of which stand God's Englishmen. 
The date of Thornton's marriage to his wife, Susannah, is not known; two children, Robert John and Septima Elizabeth, were baptized in 1817. He continued to write popular or elementary books on his favoured botanical, educational, and religious themes, including 'A New Family Herbal' in 1810 with illustrations by Thomas Bewick, and 'Illustrations of the School Virgil' (1814), the second edition of which contained woodcuts by William Blake (1824). His final publication was 'The Lord's Prayer, Newly Translated with Notes' in 1827. Thornton had failed to recover his losses from 'The Temple of Flora' when he died at Howland Street, Fitzroy Square, on 21 January 1837, leaving his children on the edge of poverty. 'The Temple' has been characterized as a visually magnificent failure, with 'little botanical value' (Blunt and Stearn, 236), but this is to misunderstand its place in Thornton's writings and within a particular phase of British science in the era of Romanticism. 


@@@@@


doc= 27362


Thornton, Samuel (1754-1838), merchant and bank governor, was born on 6 November 1754, the eldest son in the family of three sons and one daughter of John Thornton (1720-1790), a merchant, of Hull and Clapham, and his wife, Lucy, the daughter of Samuel Watson, a Russia merchant of Hull. Henry Thornton (1760-1815), philanthropist and economist, was his younger brother. Samuel married on 12 December 1780 Elizabeth, the only daughter of Robert Milnes, of Fryston Hall, in Yorkshire; they had four sons and six daughters. 
When his father died in 1790, worth about $600,000, Samuel Thornton succeeded him as head of the family business in Hull, which was engaged in trade with the Baltic countries. He was appointed a director of the Bank of England in 1780, a post he held for fifty-three years, serving as deputy governor between 1797 and 1799 and governor from 1799 until 1801. He became an assistant of the Russia Company in 1778 and governor from 1810 until his death. He was also an assistant of the Eastland Company from 1795 and deputy governor from 1810 until his death. 
In March 1784 Thornton was returned as a tory member of parliament for Hull, together with his cousin William Wilberforce. He held this seat until 1806. In May 1807 he was returned for Surrey, where he had bought an estate at Albury in 1800, defeating Lord William Russell, who had held the constituency in five parliaments. Thornton himself was defeated at the general election in 1812, but was returned at a by-election in the following year. He was defeated in 1818, and then decided to retire from public life. 
In the House of Commons Thornton was an informed, and often influential, speaker on commercial and business affairs, especially when they related to the Bank of England. He took, for example, a leading part in the debates on the 'Bank Restriction Bill' of 1797, a bill which, when eventually passed, authorized the suspension of cash payments. He usually, although not always, supported William Pitt, and privately approved of Pitt's proposed income tax as beneficial to the state. He defended the policy of the bank when it issued exchequer bills during the commercial crisis of April 1793. 
As governor, Thornton moved the renewal of the bank's charter in 1800, some twelve years before it expired -- part of measures adopted to prevent the founding of a rival institution -- saying that the banknotes issued by the bank were both valid and adequate. He opposed the resumption of cash payments in 1811, but insisted in 1815 that the bank was anxious to resume cash payments as soon as possible. As late as 1818, however, in his last important speech before his retirement, Thornton said that such a step would be dangerous, in view of the number of foreign loans and a recent run of bad harvests. He defended on numerous occasions the steps taken by the bank to prevent the forgery of its notes. 
Although widely regarded as a member of the Clapham Sect, Thornton did not wholeheartedly maintain all of its views. He supported Wilberforce's campaign against the slave trade, was in favour of the repeal of the 'Test Act', and opposed public lotteries. He voted in favour of Catholic relief in 1816 and again in 1817. In 1796 he supported plans for a wet dock in London, citing the example of the new schemes at Hull, which at first were unpopular, but in 1802 he came top of the poll at Hull, where the dock schemes were proving successful. He was both surprised and offended to lose his seat there in 1806. 
By about 1810 Thornton was experiencing financial difficulties. The failure of the business firm of Watson of Preston cost his own firm $50,000, and the depressed state of the trade with the Baltic brought the London branch of his firm to a temporary halt in 1810. He sold his Albury estate in 1811 for $72,000. 
Thornton was a governor of the Royal Naval Hospital, Greenwich, and president of Guy's Hospital, and in 1798 became lieutenant-colonel of the Clapham Volunteers. He died at his house in Brighton on 3 July 1838. 
His eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 27363


Thornton, Thomas (bap. 1767?, d. 1814), writer on Turkey, was the son of William Thornton, a Yorkshireman settled in London and working as an innkeeper. He was probably the Thomas Thornton who was baptized on 29 December 1767 at St Peter Cornhill, London, the son of William and Dorothy Thornton. That couple also had a son Edward baptized on 16 November 1766; the latter may be identified as Sir Edward Thornton (1766-1852), who is known to have been Thomas's brother. Thomas was the uncle of Sir Edward Thornton (1817-1906). 
Thornton was left orphaned when young and engaged in commerce from an early age. About 1793 he was sent to the British factory at Constantinople, where he lived for fourteen years; he also stayed for fifteen months in Odessa and paid occasional visits to Asia Minor and the islands of the archipelago. While at Constantinople and before 14 July 1799 he married Sophie Zohrab, the daughter of a Greek merchant and a member of a powerful family well connected in the Middle East, with whom he had a large family. His youngest son was William Thomas Thornton (1813-1880). 
After his return to England Thornton published in 'The Present State of Turkey' (1807) a brief summary of Ottoman history and a detailed and comprehensive account of the political and social institutions of the Turkish empire; a second edition, revised and improved, was published in two volumes in 1809. Thornton had gleaned his information from living so long at Constantinople, from his friendship with the European ambassadors, from his extensive reading of previous works, and from his facility in languages. His account was hailed as 'by far the best book ever published on that country' ('GM', 1st ser., 84/1, 1814, 418). Thornton was sympathetic towards Turks, who he felt had been unjustly disparaged by previous authors. He severely criticized William Eton's 'Survey of the Turkish Empire' (1798), and drew from Eton in reply 'A letter to the earl of D... on the political relations of Russia in regard to Turkey, Greece, and France' (1807). 
About the end of 1813 Thornton was appointed consul to the Levant Company, but on 28 March 1814, on the eve of setting out for Alexandria, he died, 'of a pulmonary complaint' ('GM', 1st ser., 84/1, 1814, 418), at Burnham, Buckinghamshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 27364


Thornton, Thomas (1751/2-1823), sportsman, was born in London, the only son, with one daughter, of William Thornton (1713-1769) of Thornville, Cattal, Yorkshire, and his second wife, Mary (died 1800), daughter of John Myster of Epsom. His father was MP for York (1747-54 and 1758-1761) and in 1745 he financed and commanded the West Riding militia, serving in Scotland and later Hanover. Thomas Thornton was educated at Charterhouse School before entering Glasgow University in 1766; he continued his education there until 1771 when he left aged nineteen. After he inherited his father's estates on his coming of age he pursued his sporting interests, achieving fame with his several packs of hounds, with which he provided free hunting of foxes, stags, and hares for the Yorkshire gentry. From 1772 to 1781 he managed the Falconers' Club near Cambridge, which he had inaugurated as an upper-class society for hawking and falconry. Fishing and competitive shooting also interested him and he was a member of a notorious 'savoir-vivre' club, but he had little interest in gambling on games of chance, preferring to bet upon his own prowess, and that of his hounds and horses. He rode his own horse to win a match at York in 1778, and acted as steward at Boroughbridge races in 1783, but it was his gambling on the rider Alicia Meynell ['see 'Thornton, Alicia] that made him publicly infamous. In 1804 at York races she rode his horse for a bet of $1000 in an unprecedented match. She lost the race and Thornton reneged on the bet, so the dispute went to court but the case was thrown out. Alicia made another match at York in 1805 for more than 2000 guineas, which she won, but Thornton was publicly horsewhipped there by the previous opponent, all of which was reported in the press. The precise nature of Thornton's relationship with Alicia remains unclear. Alicia, though frequently referred to as Mrs Thornton, was thought by the diarist Charles Fothergill to be Thornton's mistress. She eloped with a soldier in 1806, and in July of that year, at Lambeth, Thornton married Eliza Cawston of Mundon, Essex. Their son, William Thomas, was born at Kenyon House, London, the following year. Thornton also had a daughter, Thornvillia-Rockingham Thornton, who was born to a mistress, Priscilla Duins, in 1801. 
Thornton made two expeditions to the Scottish highlands about 1786, which were described as one journey in his book 'A sporting tour through the northern parts of England and great parts of the highlands of Scotland' (1804), which was probably ghost-written by a Revd Martyn. A sloop was chartered for Thornton, his guests, servants, dogs, hawks, and guns; other supplies were sent by road so that the party lived in luxurious conditions in floored tents with doors and stoves, and they entertained visitors to lavish dinners. A tour of France during which Thornton met Napoleon was described in 'A Sporting Tour through Various Parts of France' (1806). Thornton was a substantial patron of the artists George Garrard, Philip Reinagle, and Sawrey Gilpin, whom he took with him on his travels to record his exploits. Thornton had been appointed colonel of the West Yorkshire militia but was forced to resign after a court martial in 1795 for allowing his soldiers to draw him into camp in a triumphal carriage, although he retained his rank. 
Thornton entertained lavishly, with unbounded hospitality, providing field sports for large groups of gentlemen, but contemporaries wrote that he became greatly unpopular and lost people's respect by his shabby tricks and deceitful behaviour. He led an ostentatious life with two London houses and his family seat of Thornville. The latter was sold and he bought the duke of York's large mansion at nearby Allerton Mauleverer in 1789, and in 1791 he built a hunting lodge, Falconer's Hall, at Boythorpe. These Yorkshire properties were sold in 1805 to pay his debts and he quitted Yorkshire with great panache, moving to Spye Park, Wiltshire, which he rented. Reports in the 'Hull Advertiser' for November 1808 refer to his final departure followed by a cavalcade consisting of a 'boat waggon covered with skins of stags... otter spears, fishing rods and guns... a dog cart with milk white terriers [and]... a hundred staghounds'. The procession was made up of horses, a falconer in livery, and nine more wagons. His considerable art collection, including pictures by Rubens and Van Dyck, was auctioned to pay his debts in London in 1819. After several visits to France, Thornton went to live there some time after 1817. He bought a derelict chateau at Pont-sur-Seine, south-east of Paris, and rented the Chateau de Chambourd there, from which he styled himself marquis de Pont and prince de Chambourd. He died in lodgings in Paris on 10 March 1823, leaving his estate to his illegitimate daughter. The will was successfully contested in London and France by his wife, on behalf of their son. 


@@@@@


doc= 27365


Thornton, Thomas (1786-1866), journalist and writer, born in London on 12 July 1786, was the son of Thomas Thornton, East India agent, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Kitchener. In early life he was employed in the custom house, and published several works dealing with East Indian trade. The first of these, 'A Compendium of the Laws Recently Passed for Regulating the Trade with the East Indies', appeared in 1814. It was followed by 'The duties of customs and excise on goods... imported, and the duties, drawbacks, &c., on goods exported, brought down to August 1818' (1818) and by a supplementary edition published in the succeeding year. In 1825 he published 'Oriental Commerce, or, The East Indian Trader's Complete Guide', a geographical and statistical work originally compiled by William Milburn, an employee of the East India Company. Thornton greatly reduced the historical part of this work, but added supplementary matter. 
In 1823 Thornton married Elizabeth, daughter of Habbakuk Robinson of Bagshot, Surrey, with whom he had three sons and three daughters. In 1825 their eldest son, Robinson Thornton, was born, and in this same year Thornton became connected with 'The Times', and remained a member of its staff until the year before his death. For forty years he supplied highly regarded summaries of parliamentary debates, characterized by their unfailing terseness and grasp. Between 1841 and 1850 he was engaged in recording the proceedings of the ecclesiastical and maritime courts. His 'Notes of Cases', published monthly and collected in seven volumes in 1850, came to be regarded as authoritative. 
Thornton also published 'A History of China... to the Treaty with Great Britain in 1842' (2 vols., 1844) and, in 1846, a 'History of the Punjab and the Sikhs' (3 vols.). In 1813 he edited the 'Complete Works of Thomas Otway' (3 vols.) and prefixed a short life of the dramatist. 
Thornton died on 25 March 1866 at 29 Gloucester Street, Belgrave Road, London, survived by his wife and several children. His son Robinson Thornton was warden of Trinity College, Glenalmond, from 1870 to 1873, Boyle lecturer in 1881-3, and became archdeacon of Middlesex in 1893. His second son, Thomas Henry ('b'. 1832), was judge of the chief court of the Punjab and member of the legislative council of India in 1878-81. His third son, Samuel (1835-1917), was first bishop of Ballarat (1875-1900) and was vicar of Blackburn from 1901 to 1910. 


@@@@@


doc= 27366


Thornton, Sir William (1779?-1840), army officer, was the elder son of William Thornton of Muff, near Londonderry, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Perrott James of Magilligan. He obtained a commission as ensign in the 89th foot on 31 March 1796, and served with it in Ireland. He was promoted lieutenant in the 46th foot on 1 March 1797, and captain on 25 June 1803. Early in 1803 he had been appointed aide-de-camp to Lieutenant-General Sir James Henry Craig, then inspector-general of infantry. On Craig's appointment as commander-in-chief in the Mediterranean, Thornton accompanied him as aide-de-camp in April 1805, arriving at Malta on 18 July. On 3 November he left Malta with Craig in the expedition to Naples, to co-operate with the Russians under General Maurice Lacy; after disembarking at Castellamare, in the Bay of Naples, on 20 November, Thornton took part in the operations for the defence of the Neapolitan frontier. On 14 January 1806, the Russian troops having withdrawn to Corfu, Thornton embarked at Castellamare with the British army for Messina; after disembarkation, which did not take place until 17 February, he was busy with his general in organizing the defence of the fortress. In April Thornton returned to England with Craig, who had resigned because of ill health. 
Thornton next served as aide-de-camp to Lieutenant-General Earl Ludlow, commanding the Kent military district, and on 13 November 1806 he was promoted major in the Royal York rangers. He was in temporary command of the regiment in Guernsey until August 1807; he then went to Canada as military secretary and first aide-de-camp to Craig, who had been appointed governor-in-chief and captain-general in British North America. On 28 January 1808 Thornton was promoted brevet lieutenant-colonel, and appointed inspecting field-officer of militia in Canada, in addition to his other duties. He returned to England with Craig in 1811, and on 1 August of that year was brought into the 34th foot as a lieutenant-colonel. On 23 January 1812 he was transferred from the 34th and became lieutenant-colonel commanding the Greek light infantry corps, and assistant military secretary to the commander-in-chief, the duke of York. On 25 January 1813 he was given the command of the 85th light infantry. 
In July 1813 Thornton went to the Peninsula in command of the 85th, and took part in the siege of San Sebastian. He commanded the regiment at the passages of the Bidassoa, Nivelle, Nive, and Adour rivers, and in all the operations of the left wing of Wellington's army, including the siege of Bayonne. 
In May 1814 Thornton embarked with the 85th at Bordeaux, and sailed in the expedition under Major-General Robert Ross for North America. He was promoted brevet colonel on 4 June 1814 for his services in the Peninsula. He landed with the expedition on 19 August at St Benedict's on the Patuxent, and was given the command of a brigade consisting of the 85th foot, the light infantry companies of the 4th, 21st, and 44th regiments, and a company of marines. The army marched on Washington by way of Nottingham and Marlborough, Thornton leading with his light brigade. On 24 August the enemy were met at Bladensburg, where they were posted in a most advantageous position on rising ground on the other side of and above the river. Thornton pushed quickly through the town, and although suffering much from the fire of the enemy's guns when crossing the bridge, he was no sooner over than, spreading out his front, he advanced to attack. He was severely wounded, and, the enemy being completely defeated, he was left at Bladensburg when the British army advanced to and entered Washington. 
In reprisal for American burning of the public buildings at York (later Toronto) in April 1813, the British force on the night of 24 August burned the Washington public buildings, including the Capitol and the president's house, then withdrew on 25 August and returned to their ships. They left their wounded at Bladensburg under Commodore Burney, US Navy, who had been wounded and taken prisoner at the battle of Bladensburg, and who was given parole. It was arranged with Burney that Thornton and the other wounded should be considered prisoners of war of the Americans, and exchanged as soon as they were fit to travel. Early in October Burney himself escorted Thornton and the other prisoners in a schooner to join the British fleet in the James River, where the British army, after the failure at Baltimore and the death of Ross, had embarked. 
Thornton sailed with the army on board the fleet to Jamaica, where Major-General Keane, having arrived from England with reinforcements, took command. The expedition sailed on 26 November for New Orleans, which was reached on 10 December; but it was 21 December before all the troops were landed on Pine Island in Lake Borgne. An advance guard, consisting of the 4th, 85th, and 95th regiments, was formed under Thornton's command, and, embarking in boats, proceeded up the creek Bayo de Catiline by night to within a few miles of New Orleans on its northern side, where they landed and established themselves. After repulsing a night attack with considerable loss, the advance guard was reinforced gradually by the arrival in detachments of the main body, and the whole army was in position by 25 December, when Sir Edward Michael Pakenham arrived from England and took command. After an ineffectual attack on 27 December Thornton was busy cutting a canal across the neck of land between Bayo de Catiline and the river. This was completed on 6 January 1815, when he embarked the 85th and other details, amounting to under 400 men, crossed the river on the night of 7 January and took a gallant part in the attack of 8 January, gaining on his side of the river a complete success. Storming the entrenchments, he put the enemy to flight, capturing eighteen guns and the camp of that position. In this attack he was severely wounded, and learning in the moment of his victory of the death of Pakenham and the disastrous failure of the main attack, he retired to his boats, recrossed the river, and joined the main body. The reunited army retreated to the fleet and re-embarked. Thornton was sent to England, where he arrived in March 1815. He was made a CB, military division. 
On 12 August 1819 Thornton was appointed deputy adjutant-general in Ireland. He was promoted major-general on 27 May 1825, and appointed colonel of the 96th foot on 10 October 1834. He was made a KCB in September 1836, and lieutenant-general on 28 June 1838. On the death of Sir Herbert Taylor he was transferred to the colonelcy of his old regiment, the 85th light infantry, on 9 April 1839. For the last few years of his life he resided in the village of Greenford, near Hanwell, Middlesex. He became subject to delusions -- that he had been accused of smuggling, and that he possessed forged banknotes -- and shot himself at about seven o'clock in the morning on 6 April 1840 at his residence, Stanhope Lodge, Greenford. He was buried on the same day in Greenford churchyard. He was unmarried. The order announcing his death to the 85th stated it was 'to his unremitted zeal and noble example the regiment is principally indebted for that high character which it has ever since maintained' ('GM', 649). 


@@@@@


doc= 27367


Thornton, William Thomas (1813-1880), economist and civil servant, born at Burnham, Buckinghamshire, on 14 February 1813, was the youngest son of the merchant Thomas Thornton (bap. 1767?, d. 1814) and his wife, Sophie Zohrab, daughter of a Greek merchant. Having been educated at the Moravian settlement at Ockbrook in Derbyshire, he spent three years in Malta with his cousin Sir William Henry Thornton, the auditor-general. From 1830 to 1835 he was in Constantinople with consul-general Cartwright, and in August 1836 he obtained a clerkship in the East India House. Twenty years later he was put in charge of the public works department, and in 1858 became first secretary for public works to the India Office. In 1873 he was created CB on the recommendation of the duke of Argyll. In spite of weak health, he devoted the greater part of his leisure to literary work, and more especially to the study of economic issues. He was a close friend of John Stuart Mill, and one of the most able adherents of Mill's school of political economy. But he differed widely from Mill on other subjects, and the friendship was based largely on a fondness for discussion (A. Bain, 'J. S. Mill', 1882, 174). Thornton contributed to the 'Examiner' of 17 May 1873 an account of Mill's work at the India House. 
Thornton's first work on economics, which appeared in 1845, was 'Over-Population and its Remedy'. His argument for the colonization of Irish wastes by Irish peasants was referred to in laudatory terms by Mill in his 'Principles of Political Economy' (1st edn, 392). Thornton attached little value to emigration, but argued strongly in favour of the subdivision of the land and against state intervention. The work did much to confute the views of John Ramsay McCulloch as to the effect of a wider distribution of landed property on the increase of population, and challenged then current notions as to the comparative prosperity of the labouring population in medieval and Victorian times. On the latter point Thornton's work was adversely criticized (probably by Herman Merivale) in the 'Edinburgh Review' of January 1847. 
Thornton developed his views in more detail in 'A Plea for Peasant Proprietors, with the Outlines of a Plan for their Establishment in Ireland', published in 1848. Mill read the proofs, and the book appeared a few weeks before his 'Political Economy', on which it had an important influence (A. Bain, 'J. S. Mill', 86 n.). Thornton's book, which had gone out of print, came into request again during the discussion which attended the passing of the 'Irish Land Act' of 1870. It was republished in 1874 with two additional chapters, one dealing with the 'Social and moral effects of peasant proprietorship' (chap. 4), and the other with 'Ireland: a forecast from 1873' (chap. 7). Thornton looked to the nationalization of the land as his ultimate ideal, but argued that the minimization of the evils of private ownership was all that was practical in the short term (chap. 7). 
In 1869 Thornton published his most influential work on economics. The book, entitled 'On Labour, its Wrongful Claims and Rightful Dues: its Actual Present and Possible Future', presented critiques of both the classical approach to supply and demand theory and the wages-fund doctrine. In a review of the book in the 'Fortnightly Review' in the same year, John Stuart Mill argued against most of the criticisms levelled at supply and demand theory but accepted Thornton's argument against the predetermined nature of the wages-fund doctrine. Building on this, Mill went on to criticize and recant from the wages-fund doctrine. Mill's recantation, prompted by Thornton, has come to be regarded as a significant event in the decline of classical economics and has provoked numerous interpretations. In a second edition of 'On Labour', published in 1870, Thornton attempted to rebut Mill's criticisms of his analysis of supply and demand but incorporated some of Mill's recantation arguments concerning the wages-fund doctrine into his own discussion. A German translation by Heinrich Schramm was published in 1870. 
Besides his works on economics, Thornton was the author of 'Old-Fashioned Ethics and Common-Sense Metaphysics', a volume of essays published in 1873, in which the ethical and teleological views of Hume, Huxley, and the utilitarians were adversely criticized; and of 'Indian Public Works and Cognate Indian Topics' (1875). In 1854 he published a poem, 'The siege of Silistria', and in 1857 a volume of verse entitled 'Modern Manichaeism, Labour's Utopia, and other Poems'. In 1878 he produced 'Word for Word from Horace', a literal verse translation of the 'Odes'. The version showed a lack of metrical grasp, but was praised by Professor Robinson Ellis for seventeenth-century quaintness. 
Thornton's last publication was, perhaps fittingly, a delayed review in the 'Nineteenth Century' (August 1879) of J. E. Cairnes's 'Some Leading Principles of Political Economy Newly Expounded' (1874). In his volume Cairnes attempted an unsuccessful rehabilitation of the wages-fund doctrine. Once again Thornton's main point was that the wages fund was not predetermined. Thornton died at his home, 7 Cadogan Place, Sloane Street, London, on 17 June 1880. He left a son, Edward Zohrab Thornton. 


@@@@@


doc= 27368


Thornycroft, Mary (1809-1895), sculptor, born at Thornham, Norfolk, and baptized on 24 December 1809 at Redruth, Cornwall, was the third daughter of the four children of John Francis (1780-1861), sculptor, and his wife, Mary ('nee' Nelson?), though she told her husband and children that she was born in 1814. In 1823 the Francis family settled at 56 Albany Street in London, where John Francis ran a sculpture studio with assistants and pupils, among them his daughter, Mary. In 1835 Mary Francis made her debut at the Royal Academy with her 'Bust of a Gentleman'. In the same year Thomas Thornycroft (1815-1885) of Chiswick, Middlesex, came to the Albany Street household and studio to be apprenticed to John Francis. Five years later, on 29 February 1840, he married Mary. Of their six surviving children, four studied at the Royal Academy Schools: Sir (William) Hamo Thornycroft (1850-1925) became a sculptor and member of the Royal Academy, (Mary) Alyce Thornycroft (1844-1906) was a sculptor and painter, and Helen Thornycroft (1848-1937) and Theresa Thornycroft (1853-1947) were both painters. The first-born son, Sir John Isaac Thornycroft (1843-1928), became a naval architect, and Frances (Fanny) Thornycroft (1846-1929) married John Donaldson of her brother's engineering firm. Both Fanny and Hamo had children and grandchildren who became artists as well. 
Ideal works of children and portraits in a neo-classically inspired, Romantic style predominate in Mary Thornycroft's 'oeuvre'. She exhibited regularly at both the Royal Academy (1835-77) and the British Institution (1845-64) but is best-known for her work for the royal family. Her works in the Royal Collection exemplify the salient features of her style: a highly naturalistic rendering of human form and movement with crisp and detailed carving of surfaces. Her works are by no means radical or unusual for her period, but they manifest a virtuosity in modelling, proportion, and design which is strikingly successful in reconciling the sometimes conflicting nineteenth-century allegiances to classicism and naturalism. Although consistent with the idealizing tendencies of sculpture in the period, her portraits retain a high degree of likeness, as seen, for example, in her bust of 'Mary, Duchess of Gloucester' (1852, Royal Collection, Frogmore House, Windsor). Her allegorical statues of the royal children are similarly closely observed and modelled in an unobtrusive style which manages to be both realistic and ideal. 
Some accounts credit the sculptor John Gibson with launching Mary Thornycroft's career as a court sculptor by recommending her to produce portrait statues of the royal children. However, Mary's father had established a connection with Queen Victoria when he was commissioned to sculpt a bust of her about 1838, and Mary herself had already achieved critical acclaim in 1838-40 for her ideal marble 'Orphan Flower Girl', exhibited at the Royal Academy and the British Institution (called 'Orphan Girl' when exhibited in plaster initially at the RA in 1838). Thus, she may have been known to the queen and Prince Albert as a sculptor of children before she and her husband became friendly with Gibson during their sojourn in Rome from 2 December 1842 to 26 April 1843. While in Rome, having left their first-born child, Ann (1841-1858), in the care of Thomas's mother in England, Mary Thornycroft not only gave birth to her second child, John, on 1 February 1843, but also sculpted a marble statue of a sleeping child watched over by a spaniel (priv. coll.) -- another work which could have recommended her ability in portraying children to Gibson. 
Mary Thornycroft's first work for the royal family was a statue of Princess Alice in 1845, which the sculptor soon adapted for an allegorical series, produced between 1846 and 1848, representing the eldest royal children as the four seasons. Various versions of these figures were produced in marble, bronze, and statuary porcelain for the royal collections at Osborne House and Buckingham Palace (exh. RA, 1850; British Institution, 1851; Great Exhibition, London, 1851). Further marble statues for Osborne House of Princess Helena as 'Peace' (1856), Princess Louise as 'Plenty' (1856), 'Princess Beatrice in a Nautilus Shell' (1858), the prince of Wales as a hunter (1860), and Prince Leopold as a fisher (1860) followed, as well as numerous busts and statues of four generations of the royal family. Many of these were reviewed in the 'Art Journal', accompanied by engraved reproductions. Reduced-scale Parian versions of her bust of Alexandra, princess of Wales, were Art Union of London prizes in 1863-4. From this same period came her 'Skipping Girl', shown at the Paris Exhibition in 1855 (exh. RA, 1856 and 1867; British Institution, 1857; Parian version exh. Universal International Exhibition, London, 1862; Osborne House, Isle of Wight), and reportedly praised by the Danish sculptor J. A. Jerichau as 'one of six of the finest statues in the world' for its precisely balanced, light, and energetic rendering of the child in mid-skip ('The Queen', 16 Feb 1895). Tragedy followed shortly thereafter, however, when in 1858 her daughter Ann died of tuberculosis; 'Jephthah's Daughter' (exh. British Institution, 1858), sculpted in that year, was perhaps the artist's response to her loss. 
Mary Thornycroft's steady income from portrait and royal commissions was the mainstay of the Thornycroft family, as Thomas did not enjoy such regular demand for his sculpture. Professional insecurity seems to have incited Thomas in letters to his patron, W. B. Dickinson, to promote his role in the production of Mary's works to the point of implying his own authorship of them. Their granddaughter, Mary Donaldson, recounts that Thomas Thornycroft had been known to cut the heads off Mary's clay models, ostensibly to position them better, but provoking exasperated cries of 'Only 'tell' me! Thorny, only 'tell' me!' from his wife as she tried to protect her works (Manning, 'Bronze and Steel', 51-2). The Thornycrofts did, however, collaborate on large sculptural projects. Thomas Thornycroft did much of the carving of the numerous works and replicas ordered from Mary's royal commissions; he wrote in 1861 that: 'We have executed in Bronze or Marble for the Queen not less than thirty original works not counting minor commissions of copies in plaster' (Thomas Thornycroft MSS, letter TTC161). Together the couple produced the funerary portrait of the child John Hamilton-Martin (died 1851), completed in 1857 for Ledbury church in Herefordshire, and there is some suggestion that they collaborated on the statues of James I and Charles I for the houses of parliament (now in the central criminal court of the Old Bailey). Later the entire Thornycroft coterie participated in realizing two of Thomas's major works: 'The Poet's Fountain' (1871-5, formerly Park Lane, London; destroyed) and the 'Boadicea' group (begun 1856; erected 1902, Westminster Bridge, London). 
Mary Thornycroft's letters to her children are replete with words of encouragement for their artistic careers. In addition to teaching her children, she was engaged by Queen Victoria to instruct the royal princesses in modelling; of them, Princess Louise went on to work as a sculptor in her own right. After a short illness, Mary Thornycroft died on 1 February 1895 and was buried in Chiswick churchyard at her husband's side as she requested, 'within sound of the hammers' (Manning, 'Bronze and Steel', 70). 


@@@@@


doc= 27369


Thornycroft, Thomas (1815-1885), sculptor, was born in Great Tidnock, near Gawsworth, Cheshire, on 19 May 1815 and baptized on 16 June 1816 in Gawsworth church, the eldest of three sons of John Thornycroft (1791-1822), a farmer, and his wife, Ann Cheetham (1795-1875), who also came from a farming background. Thornycroft was educated at Congleton grammar school. After a brief apprenticeship to a surgeon, in 1835 he went to London, where he spent four years as a studio assistant to the sculptor John Francis. On 29 February 1840 Thornycroft married at the Old Church, St Pancras, Francis's daughter, Mary (1809-1895) ['see 'Thornycroft, Mary], a fellow sculptor. Following a visit to Italy (1842-3), the Thornycrofts returned to London, where they established a studio near Regent's Park. 
Through the recommendation of John Gibson, Mary Thornycroft received commissions for portrait busts and statuettes of the children of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert. The royal couple admired Thomas Thornycroft's over-life-sized plaster equestrian statue of Queen Victoria, shown at the Great Exhibition in 1851. Thornycroft portrayed the queen wearing a close-fitting riding habit and gave her horse a jaunty gait. While the statue's informal realism drew mixed critical reactions, it contrasted refreshingly with the more dignified, iconic images usually accorded to monarchs. Thornycroft was subsequently commissioned by the Art Union to produce fifty bronze statuettes, several of which he cast in his studio, and in 1868 he executed a full-sized version for Liverpool town council (St George's Hall, Liverpool). Thornycroft's accompanying memorial statue of Prince Albert, commissioned in 1862, stands near by; there are similar versions in Halifax (1864) and Wolverhampton (1866). 
Although Thornycroft was now established as a leading English sculptor, few major commissions were forthcoming. In 1857 he was placed joint fifth in the competition for the Wellington memorial at St Paul's Cathedral. Ten years later he was commissioned to carve the marble group representing 'Commerce' for the Royal Albert Memorial (Kensington Gardens, London), a competent, if mundane, Victorian allegory. From the mid-1850s onwards Thornycroft's sculptural ambitions focused on the monumental equestrian group 'Boadicea and her Daughters' (Westminster Bridge, London). Although Prince Albert warmly supported the idea, the monument was not cast in bronze until 1902, seventeen years after Thornycroft's death. Its erection was made possible by the donation of the plaster model and $1500 by his son, the marine engineer Sir John Thornycroft. 
In his later years Thornycroft devoted little attention to sculpture and more towards assisting his son John with designs for steam launches. One of his last works, the 'Poets' Fountain', near Hyde Park Corner, London (1875; destr. 1947), was jointly executed with Mary and another son, (William) Hamo Thornycroft. Photographs of it indicate an incongruous amalgam of high Victorian realism and the elegance of Hamo Thornycroft's New Sculpture. More successful is the charming, if sentimental, memorial to John Hamilton-Martin (1857; St Michael's, Ledbury, Herefordshire). It is signed by both Thomas and Mary Thornycroft; the latter carved the effigy which, following the tradition of Thomas Banks and Francis Chantrey, portrays the child not dead, but sleeping. 
Although the Thornycrofts' marriage was a happy one, Mary's more sustained and distinctive talent aroused her husband's periodic jealousy. Thomas Thornycroft died at Brenchley, Kent, on 30 August 1885, survived by his wife and six of their seven children. He was buried in Chiswick Old Church, Middlesex. His correspondence (Henry Moore Institute, Leeds) indicates a man of lively intelligence and inventiveness who practised sculpture during a creatively bleak era, caught between the neo-classicism of Gibson and the 'renaissance' of the New Sculpture. Further examples of his work are in the Old Bailey and Westminster Abbey, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 27370


Thorold, Anthony Wilson (1825-1895), bishop of Winchester, was born at Hougham, Lincolnshire, on 13 June 1825. His father, Edward Thorold, was the fourth son of Sir John Thorold, ninth baronet, and held the family living of Hougham-cum-Marston, Lincolnshire. His mother was Mary, daughter of Thomas Wilson of Grantham, Lincolnshire. Thorold was educated privately, and matriculated from Queen's College, Oxford, in 1843. Having obtained an honorary fourth class in mathematics he graduated BA in 1847 and MA in 1850, receiving the degree of DD by diploma on 29 May 1877. Thorold was ordained deacon in 1849 and priest in 1850. He married in 1850 Henrietta, daughter of Thomas Greene MP. In opinion he belonged to the evangelical school. His first curacy was the parish of Whittington, Lancashire, where he worked from 1849 until 1854. Three years at Holy Trinity, Marylebone, followed, and then, in 1857, the exertions of his friends procured for him the lord chancellor's living of St Giles-in-the-Fields, London, where he became well known as a preacher and organizer. He also began to write, and was one of the early contributors to 'Good Words'. His first wife died in October 1859 and he married, in 1865, Emily, daughter of John Labouchere. 
Ill health led Thorold to resign St Giles's in 1867. But after a little rest and a short incumbency at Curzon Chapel, Mayfair (1868-9), he resumed parish work in 1869 as vicar of St Pancras, London. Here, as at St Giles's, he showed organizing power. He improved the schools of the parish, was one of the first to adopt parochial missions, and was returned in 1870 as a member for Marylebone to the first school board for London. In 1874 Archbishop Thomson, formerly a tutor at Queen's College and for whom he had long worked as examining chaplain, gave Thorold a residentiary canonry in York Cathedral. Higher promotion soon came. In 1877 Disraeli offered him the see of Rochester, one of several appointments of low-churchmen by Disraeli. He was consecrated in Westminster Abbey on 25 July. 
The great work of Thorold's episcopate was his extensive reorganization of the diocese, and he has been considered an example of a devoted parish priest who made an admirable bishop (Carpenter, 283). He consolidated the existing diocesan organizations; carried to a successful issue a Ten Churches Fund; encouraged the settlement of public school and college missions in south London; promoted diocesan organizations for deaconesses, lay workers, higher education, and temperance; and began the restoration of St Saviour's, Southwark, projecting its elevation to the rank of a quasi-cathedral. For recreation he travelled much, going as far afield as America and Australia. He spoke occasionally and with effect in the House of Lords, and he was one of the assessors in the trial of the bishop of Lincoln at Lambeth in 1889. In 1890 he succeeded Harold Browne in the see of Winchester. But his health was not equal to the business of the diocese. He died, worn out, at Farnham Castle, Farnham, Surrey, on 25 July 1895, the eighteenth anniversary of his consecration. His second wife had predeceased him in December 1877. 
Although without striking characteristics or powerful mind, Thorold had a grasp of detail, and inspired others as much by his own industry as by his words. Strong mannerisms repelled many, but threw into relief his real sincerity and goodness. He read widely, and, although given to tricks of style, he both spoke and wrote well. His published works were exclusively devotional or diocesan. 


@@@@@


doc= 27371


Thoroton, Robert (1623-1678), antiquary, was born on 4 October 1623 at Morin Hall, Car Colston, Nottinghamshire, the eldest son of Robert Thoroton (1601-1673) and his wife, Anne Chambers of Stapleford (married in St Mary's, Nottingham). His ancestors had long been small landowners in Nottinghamshire and the family owed its name to the hamlet and chapelry of Thoroton, formerly Thurveton, near Newark. Thoroton entered Christ's College, Cambridge, as a sizar, in 1639, graduating BA in 1642-3 and MA in 1646. He married on 27 October 1645, probably at Nottingham, Anne, daughter of Gilbert Boun, serjeant-at-law, recorder of Newark, and MP, raising three daughters. In 1646 he was licensed by the university to practise medicine. 
Thoroton settled at Car Colston where he combined medical practice with the occupations of a country gentleman, and although, on his own authority, he met with competent success as a physician, he acknowledged that he was unable 'to keep people alive for any length of time'. Consequently, he: 'charitably attempted, notwithstanding the Difficulty and almost contrariety of the Study, to practice upon the dead, intending thereby to keep all which is or can be left of them, to wit the Shadow of their Names, (better than precious Ointment for the Body,) to preserve their memory, as long as may be in the World. (Thoroton, 'Antiquities of Nottinghamshire', preface)' Although a staunch royalist, Thoroton apparently took little part in the civil war. He seems to have been among those 'gentry of the county' of whom Clarendon said the garrison of Newark, besides its inhabitants, mainly consisted. In writing later of that town, Thoroton referred to the second siege, where in 1644 he saw troops under Prince Rupert relieve the town. 
After the Restoration Thoroton became a justice of the peace for his county, and a commissioner of royal aid and subsidy. In the former office, together with his fellow justice and friend Penistone Whalley, he rendered himself notorious by stringent enforcement of the laws concerning conventicles against the Quakers. This retaliation for the imprisonments and confiscations suffered by his relatives and friends during the Commonwealth called forth some abusive pamphlets. He also rebuilt Morin Hall, Car Colston, now the Old Hall, illustrated by the Leicester topographer John Throsby (1740-1803). 
Thoroton commenced his 'Antiquities of Nottinghamshire' in 1667. He first worked on some transcript notes which his father-in-law Gilbert Boun had made from 'Domesday Book'. He assisted Sir William Dugdale in his 'Visitation of Nottinghamshire, 1662-1664'. For his researches he employed paid assistants at considerable expense to himself, delving into family archives, registers (some now lost), estate papers, church monuments, and epitaphs. Like a number of county antiquaries he was little concerned with his own times, or indeed with his own century, but tried to trace the manorial history of each parish back to 'Domesday'. He showed little interest in Roman remains, while protesting at enclosure and destruction of woods. His notes, made on the back of letters from his patients in Nottinghamshire, Leicestershire, and Derbyshire, are now in Nottingham Public Library. 
The folio volume of Thoroton's 'Antiquities' was printed in London in 1677, illustrated with engravings by Hollar after Richard Hall and dedicated to Gilbert Sheldon, archbishop of Canterbury, and Dugdale, both personal friends. Dugdale wrote to the antiquary Sir Daniel Fleming, 'Dr Thoroton's book cost me 16s to 18s. I do esteem the book well worth your buying, though had he gone to the fountain of records it might have been better done' (1 Sept 1677, 'Le Fleming MSS', 139-40). John Throsby published a reprint of 'Antiquities' with additions, in three volumes (published 1790-96 but dated 1797). 
Thoroton erected in 1664 a memorial outside the south aisle of Car Colston church recording the names of his ancestors, which survives at the time of writing, and in 1672 he designed for himself an imposing coffin of carved Mansfield stone. In 1673 Thoroton presented an alms dish to the church, while his wife, Anne, presented a silver flagon engraved with her arms. Thoroton died at Car Colston on 21 November 1678 and on 23 November was buried in the coffin, where his remains rested until 1842. The level of the churchyard by the church door was then lowered, and after re-burial of its contents, the coffin was brought into the church. Thoroton's wife survived him. He left his property to his daughter Anne Sherard, having earlier helped his younger brother to buy Screveton Hall estate, which remained in the family. The Thoroton Society, Nottinghamshire's local history society, is named after him. Sir Frank Stenton said of him: 'It is perhaps the greatest merit of Thoroton's work that he fully grasped the essential fact that the key to all manorial history lies in the distribution of land recorded in 'Domesday', and... as far as the work of identification is concerned, independent investigation can often do little more than confirm his minuteness and accuracy. ('VCH Nottinghamshire', 1.246)' 



@@@@@


doc= 27372


Thoroton, Thomas (1723?-1794), politician, was the eldest son of Robert Thoroton, of Screveton, Nottinghamshire, a landowner, and his wife, Mary, the daughter of Sir Richard Levett, lord mayor of London, and widow of Abraham Blackborne, a London mercer. He was educated at Westminster School (1736-42) and Trinity Hall, Cambridge (1742-5), and entered Lincoln's Inn in 1745. A descendant of Thomas, the younger brother of the antiquary Robert Thoroton, he was also distantly related to John Manners, third duke of Rutland, and he lived at Belvoir Castle and Rutland House. Thoroton acted as agent to the duke in all his political and private business, and became the Rutland group's parliamentary whip or 'man of business'. On 6 October 1751, at Knipton, Leicestershire, he married Roosita Drake ('b'. 1735), the illegitimate daughter of the duke of Rutland. They had eight sons and five daughters. 
In gratitude for the assistance rendered by the Rutland connection, the first duke of Newcastle returned Thoroton to parliament on 15 January 1757 for the borough of Boroughbridge, and on 27 March 1761 for the town of Newark. On the appointment of the duke's son, John Manners, marquess of Granby, as master-general of the ordnance on 1 July 1763, Thoroton became secretary to the board, a post which he held until 1770. Although he was regarded as one of Newcastle's Nottinghamshire friends, his loyalty was to the Rutland family, and he voted consistently with Granby. He supported the Grenville ministry, opposed the repeal of the 'Stamp Act', and supported the Chatham ministry ['see 'Chathamites]. After a period of strained relations with Newcastle, Thoroton withdrew from Newark, and on 14 February 1769 he was returned for Bramber, Sussex, as Granby's nominee. He retained his seat until 1782. In January 1770 he followed Granby into opposition, but after Granby's death his conduct was less predictable. Although he voted against the government on the Middlesex motion on 26 April 1773, he was classified by John Robinson at the end of this parliament as a government supporter. 
After retiring from parliament Thoroton continued to look after the interests of the Rutland family, and between 1784 and 1787, while Charles Manners, fourth duke of Rutland, was lord lieutenant of Ireland, he looked after the latter's English business. He died at his home, Screveton Hall, on 9 May 1794 and was buried in the neighbouring church of St Wilfrid's. Of his thirteen children, John became rector of Bottesford and chaplain of Belvoir Castle, and was knighted in 1814; Robert was appointed private secretary to the fourth duke of Rutland during his viceroyalty of Ireland, and clerk to the Irish parliament; and Mary in 1778 married Charles Manners-Sutton (1755-1828), who became in 1805 archbishop of Canterbury. 


@@@@@


doc= 27373


Thorp, Charles (1783-1862), Church of England clergyman and university principal, born at Gateshead rectory in co. Durham on 13 October 1783, was the fifth but second surviving son of Robert Thorp and his wife, Grace (1745-1814), daughter of Thomas Alder of Horncliffe, on the Tweed. 


His son Charles Thorp, who spoke with a distinct Northumbrian burr, was educated at the Royal Grammar School, Newcastle upon Tyne, and then at Durham School. Having originally been intended for Cambridge, where he was admitted pensioner at Peterhouse on 29 June 1799, he matriculated from University College, Oxford, on 10 December the same year, graduating BA in 1803, MA in 1806, BD in 1822, and DD in 1835. In 1803 he was elected a fellow and tutor of his college and was ordained in that year. In 1807 he was presented by Shute Barrington, bishop of Durham, to the rectory of Ryton, in succession to his father. He retained the living until his death. Thorp refused several valuable preferments, including the lucrative living of Stanhope, on account of his attachment to his parish. He built at his sole expense a church at Greenside in commemoration of his parents and later arranged the separation of Winlaton and Blaydon, diminishing his own income to provide the endowment of the former. For many years he was chaplain to Earl Grey. He married twice: first, at Alnwick on 7 July 1810, Frances Wilkie, only child of Henry Collingwood Selby of Swansfield, Northumberland. She died childless in 1811, and on 7 October 1817 Thorp married, at Little Ouseburn, Yorkshire, Mary, daughter of Edmund Robinson of Thorp Green, with whom he had a son, Charles Thorp (died 1880), later vicar of Ellingham, and five surviving daughters. Four of the daughters married clergymen, two of whom were Durham graduates. 
At Ryton, Thorp helped establish the first savings bank in the north of England, and in 1818 he delivered a sermon to a Gateshead friendly society which led to the formation of a successful savings bank at Newcastle. The sermon, which contained statistical information, was published as 'Economy, a Duty of Natural and Revealed Religion' (1818). In 1829 he was presented to the second prebendal stall in Durham Cathedral, and in December 1831 he was appointed archdeacon of Durham, declining the living of Easington which was thereupon detached from the archdeaconry. He served on the royal commission to inquire into ecclesiastical revenues and patronage in 1832-5, as a representative of capitular interests. As prolocutor of York convocation Thorp led a long and acrimonious struggle to secure the restoration to that body of the right to debate church affairs, finally succeeding in 1861. He was the author of many published sermons and charges; some, dealing with the duties of parochial clergy, were printed and circulated at his own expense and enjoyed wide popularity. Thorp was elected FRS in 1839. He was interested in natural history, being active in protecting the birds of the Farne Islands from egg collectors, whom he abhorred. He was a keen bibliophile and patron of the arts with a valuable gallery of ancient and modern masters, including copies by Verrio, commissioned by William III, of Raphael's cartoons at Hampton Court, of which he was particularly proud. 
The great achievement of Thorp's life, for which he has never received full credit, was the founding of Durham University in 1832. If not the sole projector he was, with Bishop Van Mildert, the prime mover in its establishment. Both feared the Church of England to be in imminent danger of attack once the 'Reform Bill' of 1832 was passed and they sought to retain its extraordinary wealth in Durham. A university there would pre-empt a mooted 'infidel' college in Newcastle upon Tyne and benefit the Anglican cause. Bishop and chapter made considerable financial sacrifices, and the first students were admitted in October 1833 with Thorp as warden and master of University College. Thorp had ambitions to become dean of Durham, and when the deanery fell vacant in 1840 some of his colleagues unsuccessfully petitioned Melbourne to that effect on the grounds that if future deans were to be wardens of the university when Thorp vacated the post then he as incumbent warden ought to be made dean. 
Modelled to some extent on Christ Church, Oxford, with dean and chapter as governors, and pioneering the external examining system to maintain Oxford standards for its degrees, the university initially flourished, providing under Henry Jenkyns a better theological training than was available elsewhere. Teaching expanded to include civil engineering in 1837 and the medical school in Newcastle became affiliated in 1852. At its peak the university had one college and two halls of residence in Durham and another in Newcastle. However, its Anglican ethos, while ensuring that 90 per cent of Durham students became clergymen, deterred members of other denominations. As the city of Durham, bypassed by the railway, became ringed by coal pits and coke ovens the university entered a period of decline. Thorp, who could not endure criticism of his beloved university, failed to perceive the need for reform, and despite advancing years and ill health was unwilling to delegate responsibility to colleagues. The consequence was a statutory commission of inquiry, set up in 1862, which found severe faults in management. Too ill to give evidence, Thorp finally offered to retire on a pension and was in the process of resigning his wardenship when he died at Ryton rectory on 10 October 1862. He was buried in the family vault at Ryton church on the 15th. His wife died in 1879. 


@@@@@


doc= 27374


Robert Thorp (1736-1812), Church of England clergyman, was born at Chillingham in Northumberland, where his father was vicar, on 18 December 1736, the second and only surviving son of Thomas Thorp (1698-1767) and his wife, Mary Robson (died 1786) from Egglescliffe, near Stockton-on-Tees. He was educated at Durham School and Peterhouse, Cambridge, graduating BA in 1758 as senior wrangler, MA in 1761, and DD in 1792, and was elected fellow in 1761. He was ordained deacon in 1759, succeeded his father at Chillingham in 1768, and became perpetual curate of Doddington in 1775 before moving to be rector of Gateshead in 1781. In 1792 he was appointed archdeacon of Northumberland, and in 1795 he was presented to the rectory of Ryton, co. Durham, which he resigned in favour of his son in 1807. Besides several sermons and charges, Thorp published excerpts from (1765), and a translation of, Newton's 'Principia' (1777; 2nd edn, 1802). He died at Durham on 20 April 1812 and was buried in Ryton church. 


@@@@@


doc= 27375


Thorpe, Benjamin (1781/2-1870), Old English scholar, is of obscure origins. Nothing is recorded of his parentage, birth, early life, or education. Contemporaries refer only to his works, which are self-effacing. Having decided to study early English antiquities, then much neglected in Great Britain, Thorpe set out about 1826 to Copenhagen, attracted there chiefly by the fame of the great philologist Rasmus Christian Rask, who had recently returned from the East and been appointed professor of literary history at the Danish University. While he was living in Copenhagen he made the acquaintance of Mary Anne Otte, whom he married. In 1830 Thorpe published at Copenhagen an English translation of the second edition of Rask's 'Anglo-Saxon Grammar' (a second edition of this translation appeared at London in 1865). He took his wife and her daughter, Elise Charlotte Otte (1818-1903), back to England in this same year. Thorpe taught Elise several languages, perhaps launching her lifelong interest in linguistics, but apparently their pedagogic relationship grew more taxing as time went on, and the increasing strain is certainly cited by Edmund Gosse as one of the reasons for Otte's departure for the United States in 1840, though E. S. Day denies the severity of Gosse's interpretation (Gosse, 15; Day, 83). 
In 1832 Thorpe published 'Caedmon's metrical paraphrase of parts of the holy scriptures in Anglo-Saxon; with an English translation, notes, and a verbal index'. This was hailed at the time as one of the best Old English texts yet issued. It was followed in 1834 by 'The Anglo-Saxon version of the story of Apollonius of Tyre, upon which is founded the play of 'Pericles'' and by 'Analecta Anglo-Saxonica', a useful anthology of Old English texts, which was promptly adopted by the Rawlinsonian professor of Old English at Oxford (Robert Meadows White). In this Thorpe sought to promote 'the study of the old vernacular tongue of England, so much neglected at home, and so successfully cultivated by foreign philologists' (Preface, iv). The 'Analecta' was praised with discrimination by his peer John Mitchell Kemble, and up to 1876, when Henry Sweet's 'Anglo-Saxon Reader' appeared, though beginning to be dated, it remained, with Vernon's 'Anglo-Saxon Guide', the chief book in use. 
In 1835 appeared 'Libri psalmorum versio antiqua Latina; cum paraphrasi Anglo-Saxonica... descripsit et edidit B. Thorpe' and then in 1840 Thorpe's well-known 'Ancient Laws and Institutes of England', which formed two volumes of 'supreme value to the student of early English history' (Adams, 474; cf. 'QR', 281). Two more volumes were published by Thorpe in 1842, 'The Holy Gospels in Anglo-Saxon' and 'Codex Exoniensis: a Collection of Anglo-Saxon Poetry, with English Translation and Notes'. Next came, for the AElfric Society, 'The Homilies of the Anglo-Saxon Church', with an English translation, published in ten parts between 1843 and 1846). In recognition of the importance of all this unremunerative work, in 1835 Thorpe was granted a civil-list pension of $160, which increased on 17 June 1841 to $200 per annum. 
As early as 1834 Thorpe had begun a translation of J. M. Lappenberg's works on old English history, but had paused, feeling the inadequacy of his own knowledge. By 1842 better informed, he began another version, with numerous alterations, corrections, and notes of his own. This was published in two volumes in 1845 as 'A History of England under the Anglo-Saxon Kings'. It was followed in 1857 by a translation and revision of the same writer's 'History of England under the Norman kings... from the battle of Hastings to the accession of the house of Plantagenet'. The literary introduction to both these works, though valuable, was largely superseded by the works of Kemble, and other later Anglo-Saxon scholars. Of more lasting importance was Thorpe's two-volume edition of Florence of Worcester, issued in 1848-9 as 'Florentii Wigorniensis monachi Chronicon ex chronicis ab adventu Hengesti', collated and edited with English notes. In 1851, after a long negotiation with Edward Lumley, Thorpe sold to him for $150 his valuable 'Northern Mythology... from Original and other Sources' (3 vols.), a work containing meticulous notes and illustrations. Continuing in the same vein of research, he produced in 1853 his 'Yule Tide Stories: a Collection of Scandinavian and North German Popular Tales and Traditions', which appeared in Bohn's 'Antiquarian Library'. For the same library he produced in 1854 'The Life of Alfred the Great', a translation from the work by R. Pauli. In 1855 appeared Thorpe's 'Anglo-Saxon Poems of Beowulf', with translation, notes, glossary, and indexes. Kemble's literal prose translation had appeared in 1837, and Wackerbarth's metrical version in 1849, but Thorpe's text was collated with the Cottonian manuscript before Kemble's; and as the scorched edges of that manuscript, already 'as friable as touchwood', suffered further detriment very shortly after his collation, a particular value attaches to Thorpe's readings, which vary in many respects from those of his predecessor. In 1861 Thorpe gained the lasting gratitude of historical students by his 'excellent edition' for the 'Rolls Series' of 'The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, According to the Several Authorities'. Volume 1 prints synoptically the Corpus Christi, Cambridge, the Bodleian, and the various Cottonian texts, with facsimiles and notes; volume 2 provides a translation (cf. 'The Athenaeum', 1861, 1. 653). Four years later, through the liberality of the antiquary and collector Joseph Mayer of Liverpool, Thorpe was enabled to publish his invaluable supplement to Kemble's 'Codex diplomaticus aevi Saxonici', entitled 'Diplomatarium Anglicum aevi Saxonici: a Collection of English Charters, 605-1066'. His last work, done for Trubner in 1866, was 'Edda Saemundar hinns froda: the Edda of Saemund the Learned, from the Old Norse or Icelandic', with a mythological index and an index of persons and places, issued in two parts. 
Thorpe, who was an FSA and a member of the Royal Academy of Sciences at Munich and of the Society of Netherlandish Literature at Leiden, spent the last twenty years of his life at Chiswick. He died at The Mall, Chiswick, aged eighty-eight, on 19 July 1870. Of his own generation he was the great exception to Kemble's charge against English scholars of apathy in relation to Anglo-Saxon literature and philology. His widow was granted a civil-list pension of $80 in 1872. 


@@@@@


doc= 27376


Thorpe, Francis (bap. 1594, d. 1665), judge, was baptized on 1 October 1594 at Leconfield, Yorkshire, the eldest son of Roger Thorpe (died 'c'.1626), of Birdsall, Yorkshire, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of William Danyell of Beswick. He was born into a cadet branch of a long-established East Riding family, the Thorpes of Thorpe. His father, a Gray's Inn lawyer, was one of James I's gentleman ushers and quarter waiters, and he served as a JP and as sewers commissioner for the East Riding. Thorpe was admitted to Gray's Inn on 12 February 1611 and to St John's College, Cambridge, on 8 November following (graduating BA in 1614). He was called to the bar at Gray's Inn on 11 May 1621. By the mid-1590s Thorpe's family had moved to Leconfield, and in 1624 Thorpe was elected recorder of the nearby borough of Beverley, where he took up residence. He married Elizabeth (died 1666), daughter of William Oglethorpe of Rawdon, and widow successively of Thomas Wise and Francis Denton. Thorpe was appointed an ancient of Gray's Inn in 1632, a bencher in 1640, and an autumn reader in 1641. 
During the course of his legal practice Thorpe fell foul of Thomas, Viscount Wentworth (the future earl of Strafford), president of the council of the north. About 1630 Wentworth had Thorpe removed from the East Riding bench, and then detained in London for failing to pay 'knighthood money', although the real reason, according to Thorpe, was his use of writs of prohibition, which Wentworth saw as a slight to conciliar authority (Rushworth, 8.142). With the help of George, Lord Goring, Thorpe obtained Wentworth's permission to leave London, but back in Yorkshire he was made to kneel in submission before the council. Thorpe was a witness at Strafford's trial in 1641, giving evidence on the first article, that Strafford had exercised an arbitrary power in the north. Strafford's hostility towards Thorpe was not shared by his friend Algernon Percy, tenth earl of Northumberland, who retained Thorpe as one of his counsellors-at-law. Northumberland owned considerable property in Leconfield, and Thorpe's father had served as an estate officer to the Percies. It was possibly on Northumberland's recommendation that Thorpe had been appointed recorder of Hull in 1639. 
Thorpe seems to have remained in London for much of the civil war, and in 1643 he served as a legal assistant to the Lords. On 20 October 1645 he was elected as a 'recruiter' MP for the North Riding borough of Richmond, although he was apparently more assiduous in serving Hull's interests at Westminster than those of his constituents. He was probably returned on the recommendation of northern peer and ally of Northumberland, Philip, Lord Wharton, who enjoyed considerable influence in the borough. Thorpe was closely aligned at Westminster with the independent faction, of which Northumberland and Wharton were leading members. He was named to several committees for drawing up the Newcastle peace propositions (which struck at the Scots' confederalist terms for settlement), and was instrumental in introducing legislation over the winter of 1646-7 to recompense Viscount Saye and Sele for losing the mastership of the recently abolished court of wards. Saye was a leading independent, and the leveller John Wildman claimed that the scheme to recompense the court's officers was part of a design by Oliver Cromwell and Henry Ireton to enrich their political allies. Thorpe's letters to Hull corporation during the mid-1640s reveal that he shared the Independents' distrust of the king, and their desire to impose a stringent settlement upon him. He also emerges as a friend of the Hull preacher John Shawe -- a moderate Independent divine who probably favoured an Erastian presbyterian church with limited toleration. 
During the second civil war Thorpe played a leading role in organizing parliament's forces in the north, and was rewarded with the stewardship of the duke of Buckingham's sequestered estates in Yorkshire. In October 1648 parliament appointed Thorpe a serjeant-at-law, Lord Wharton acting as one of his sponsors. Thorpe retained his seat at Pride's Purge, and was seen by William Prynne and others as a firm adherent of the pro-army 'junto' (W. Prynne, 'A Brief Memento to the Present Unparliamentary Junto', 1649, 10; 'Remonstrance and Declaration of Severall Counties, Cities and Burroughs', 1648, 4-8). Nevertheless, although named as a commissioner to try the king, Thorpe took no part in the trial proceedings, and he did not make his dissent to the vote on 5 December until after the king's execution. Evidently trusted by the Rump Parliament, he was appointed in February 1649 to ride the northern circuit. In his charge to the grand jury at York in March he justified the establishment of the Commonwealth, arguing that although the people, under God, were 'the original of all just power', the only proper agency of such authority was the Rump ('Harleian Miscellany', 2.2-3). In April he was thanked by the house for his 'great services done to the Commonwealth in the last circuit' ('JHC', 6.187). On 1 June he was made one of the barons of the exchequer, an office reputedly worth $1000 per annum, but he was obliged to resign his recorderships. On 1 April 1650 he was named one of the commissioners in the act for establishing a new high court of justice. 
Although Thorpe was active under the Rump Parliament, particularly in a legal capacity, several commentators alleged that he became disaffected to the republican interest. A royalist agent described him in 1650 as mistrustful of the army and willing to comply with its supporters only to avoid exciting their suspicion. However, Thorpe's commitment to the Rump Parliament was sufficient to make him exchange 'a gown for a sword' ('Mercurius Politicus', 14-21 Aug 1651, 1001) in 1651 to help resist the invading Scots. In the elections to the first protectorate parliament in 1654 Thorpe was returned for Beverley. In November 1654 he was appointed one of the judges on the western circuit and the following March he became a commissioner for trying the insurgents in Penruddock's rising. After proceeding against the western rebels he was ordered by Cromwell to sit in judgement on their Yorkshire counterparts. He and Sir Richard Newdigate, however, protested against dispensing with the usual lapse of fifteen days before acting upon a newly issued commission, and objected to trying men without evidence of treasonable intent. The two judges's delay in proceeding was rightly interpreted as a refusal to serve, and they were removed from office on 3 May. In the elections to the second protectorate parliament in 1656 Thorpe was returned for Beverley again, but was prevented from sitting -- probably as an opponent of the major-generals -- and he signed the remonstrance of the excluded members. In November 1657, in a petition to Cromwell for his arrears of salary, he acknowledged that he had incurred the protector's displeasure, but hoped that since he had now returned to private practice his petition would be allowed. A warrant was issued for payment of his arrears on 8 February 1658. At the start of the second session in January 1658 Thorpe was allowed to take his seat in the Commons. He spoke against the Cromwellian upper house, arguing that although the 'old constitution, by Lords and Commons' was best, it was dangerous to give the peers or their replacements a negative voice ('Diary of Thomas Burton', 2.447). 
Thorpe resumed his seat when the Rump Parliament was restored in May 1659, and in the summer of that year rode the northern circuit with John Parker. He was reinstated as one of the barons of the exchequer by the Rump on 19 January 1660 and ordered to ride the northern circuit for the Lent assizes. He was one of only three judges whose patent of office was not renewed at the Restoration. In May 1660 he petitioned the king for a special pardon, avowing that he had opposed the regicide, had never purchased crown lands, and had refused to try the Yorkshire royalists in 1655. He was among those named in the Commons on 13 June for exclusion from the 'Act of Indemnity' and, having been accused of detaining $25,000 as receiver of public money in Yorkshire, William Prynne desired that Thorpe might suffer death, like the Judge Thorpe who had been executed in 1350 for taking bribes. However, several members spoke in Thorpe's defence and he was given the benefit of the act. Thorpe died intestate (leaving a personal estate of about $9000) and without surviving children at his country seat of Bardsey Grange, near Leeds, and he was buried at Bardsey church on 7 June 1665. His widow died on 1 August 1666 and was buried with him. 


@@@@@


doc= 27377


Thorpe, John, first Lord Thorpe (c.1270-1324), baron and administrator, was the son of Robert of Thorpe or Ashwellthorpe, a village south-west of Norwich, and his wife Matilda. His father, who had died by 1304, was a landowner in Norfolk and Suffolk; his mother's parents are unknown, but she was the niece of Richard of Eye, parson of Fundenhall, Norfolk, making it likely that John was of East Anglian descent on both sides. He had a sister Alice and brothers Philip and George. A tenant of the Bigod earls of Norfolk, John Thorpe is first recorded in 1291 as serving the king in Scotland. Some time before 1304 he served in Gascony, and he was regularly summoned to fight in Scotland between 1309 and 1323. He possessed legal and administrative skills as well as military ones. A knight of the shire for Norfolk in 1305, in that year and in 1307 he was a trailbaston justice there and in Suffolk, while from 1299 he was regularly an oyer and terminer commissioner in both shires. He was also employed in assessing and collecting taxes and in organizing food supplies for the king's armies. Moreover he was 'persona grata' at court, becoming on 23 May 1307 steward of the king's household, a position he held until the death of Edward I on 7 July following. 
Thorpe had no similar employment under Edward II, but he was among the justices summoned to the latter's first parliament, while on 4 March 1309 he received an individual summons and is regarded as having thereby become Lord Thorpe. In 1310 he received custody of the lands of Roger (IV) Bigod, now in the possession of the crown, to administer them on behalf of two of the king's half-brothers. He went overseas in the king's service at least twice, and also acted as a justice of assize and gaol delivery, as well as continuing to receive numerous commissions, almost always in East Anglia. In December 1311, for instance, he was appointed to enforce the 'Statute of Winchester'; a year later to assess a tallage; in 1317 to investigate a dispute between the count of Hainault and the men of Yarmouth; and in 1320 to deal with official malpractices in four counties. Regularly a keeper of the peace in Norfolk, he was appointed sheriff of Norfolk and Suffolk on 7 June 1320, but was replaced on 12 July. Possibly Thorpe's loyalty to Edward II's regime was becoming suspect. On 30 November 1321 he was ordered to levy the men of East Anglia against rebels, but earlier in the month he had been forbidden to attend the earl of Lancaster's assembly at Doncaster, and in the following June he was briefly arrested as an associate of the rebel Sir William Trussell. But it seems unlikely that he was seriously disaffected, for he continued to be summoned to councils and parliaments, and to Scottish campaigns, probably until his health failed. His last commission was issued on 15 November 1323, and he died on 15 or 16 May 1324. His wife survived him, dying some time before 1346. 
John Thorpe married twice. His first wife, named Agnes, who was the mother of his children, died in 1300 or 1301, and by 28 July 1301 he had remarried; his second wife was Alice, widow of William Mortimer of Attleborough, who brought him a number of manors and portions of manors in East Anglia. Thorpe acted alone in 1311 when he endowed a modest chantry at Ashwellthorpe, but in 1322 he and Alice together gave lands to Pentney Priory. However, Thorpe is more often recorded acquiring property than giving it away. The family cartulary records numerous purchases from 1290 onwards. Some represent significant additions to his estates, as when he paid $40 in 1290 for lands, rents, and serfs in three vills in Norfolk and Suffolk, and 220 marks in 1299 for everything two vendors owned in Wreningham. But many were on a very small scale, 30died for a yearly rent of 3died from lands in Tittleshall, for instance, and properties of just an acre or two, suggesting that Thorpe was as concerned to consolidate his possessions as to extend them. At his death he was recorded as the lord of sixteen manors or half-manors in East Anglia, with outlying estates in Northamptonshire and Yorkshire. 
John Thorpe's heir was his eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 27378


Thorpe, John (1564/5-1655), surveyor and architect, was born into a family of masons in the quarrying village of Kingscliffe, Northamptonshire. He was the second son of Thomas Thorpe (died 1596), who worked as master mason on the building of Kirby Hall, Northamptonshire, for Sir Humphrey Stafford, where the infant John symbolically laid the first stone in 1570. His grandfather, also Thomas, was a mason and his younger brother, another Thomas, had a successful career as a mason and a stone supplier on various royal works from 1603 onwards and as one of the principal contractors for Blickling Hall, Norfolk, between 1619 and 1624. The family was armigerous and descended from the Thorpes of Ashwellthorp, near Wymondham, Norfolk. 
John Thorpe does not appear to have been trained in the family craft and he first entered the building world at about eighteen years of age in an administrative capacity. From 1583 to 1601 he worked as a clerk in the office of works at Richmond, Greenwich, Whitehall, and various other royal houses. During this lengthy period of public service he exhibited a notable talent as a draughtsman and developed a circle of useful connections both with patrons and with influential officers of the works, many of whom lived in an area around St Martin-in-the-Fields, where Thorpe had a house in Little Church Lane next to Thomas Fowler, the comptroller of the works. On 15 September 1592 he married Rebecca Greene ('b'. 1575), the daughter of a woodmonger originally from Brampton in Huntingdonshire, some 20 miles from Kingscliffe; this union produced a family of five sons and seven daughters. Thorpe played an active role in parish affairs, serving as a vestryman for more than thirty-five years and providing his professional expertise whenever it was required. In common with other members of the central works team he was able to carry out private commissions in addition to his official employment. Thus in 1600 his unsuccessful suit for the reversion of one of the senior posts in the organization was supported by Sir Henry Neville, ambassador in Paris, for whom he had prepared plans for extending his country seat at Billingbear in Berkshire. In the following year, possibly as a result of this setback to his ambitions, he left the office of works and set up on his own in the emerging profession of surveyor, offering a service that covered both land and buildings. 
It was an opportune moment and Thorpe rapidly built up a successful practice in response to the increasing demand for accurate estate surveys stimulated by the land transactions of the new king and his court. He took a major share of this new business and his commissions included Holdenby, Hatfield, and Theobalds for the crown, as well as many surveys for the duchy of Cornwall, the prince of Wales, and other private clients. As a land surveyor he must be counted among the two or three most eminent practitioners of the period. It brought him sufficient income to invest in land and property and in 1611 he was awarded an annuity of $20 for life when he re-entered government service as one of the two assistants to Robert Treswell, the surveyor-general of woods south of Trent. 
The surveying side of his practice must have kept Thorpe exceedingly busy around the Jacobean court, but at the same time he was forging a reputation as a designer of buildings, the enigmatic legacy of which is contained in his manuscript volume of house plans and elevations, rediscovered by Horace Walpole in 1780 and now preserved in Sir John Soane's Museum. It contains a collection of more than 150 plans, mainly of country houses but also including some architectural details and exercises in perspective. Sir John Summerson's careful analysis, published for the Walpole Society in 1966, has demonstrated that the genesis of the collection was a group of thirteen plans inherited from Thorpe's father at his death in 1596. The rest of the book is made up of surveys of existing houses, copies of designs made by others, and projects for new houses, not all of which were executed. Together with the roughly contemporary collection of drawings made by the Smythson family, it is a key text for an understanding of the processes of design, the circles of patronage, and the architectural influences which shaped the distinctive domestic architecture of the late Elizabethan and Jacobean elite. 
The collection continues to present problems in distinguishing those plans which are original designs by Thorpe himself from the many commissioned surveys of extant buildings which he also carried out but for which he had no design responsibility. Late twentieth-century research extended the attributions made by Summerson to include Thornton College, Lincolnshire ('c'.1607-1610), for Sir Vincent Skinner, possibly Dowsby Hall in the same county ('c'.1610) for Richard Burrell, the outer court of the earl of Suffolk's magnificent mansion at Audley End, Essex ('c'.1615), and Aston Hall, Warwickshire (1618-35), for Sir Thomas Holte. It is probable that a number of other buildings could be added to the corpus of his original work if only the documentation could be found. His designs are not as innovative as those by Robert Smythson, but they show a similar delight in the manipulation of geometrical forms and patterns of fenestration and a growing interest in the development of the house plan away from its medieval outline towards the more compact silhouette which was to dominate the remainder of the seventeenth century. 
Thorpe was an accomplished linguist and it is clear from his drawings that he was conversant with a number of continental publications, including those of Palladio, Vredeman de Vries, Giacomo Vignola, and Jacques Perret. A particularly powerful influence was the Frenchman Jacques Androuet du Cerceau: Thorpe copied a number of illustrations directly from du Cerceau's 'Le premier volume des plus excellents bastiments de France' (1576), as well as incorporating elements from the same book in his own designs. The curious design for a house based on his own initials is presented in perspective using a method derived from du Cerceau's 'Lecons de perspective positive' (1576), and Thorpe's own copy is in the Bodleian Library interleaved with a manuscript translation partly in his own hand. The evidence suggests that he was preparing the book for publication, and had the project gone ahead it would have been the first book in English on the subject of perspective. 
The manuscript translation is not dated but it is probable that John Thorpe was the IT who translated Hans Blum's Latin treatise on the orders (1550) on its English publication as 'The Booke of Five Collumnes of Architecture' in 1601. If this assumption is correct, he enjoyed moderate success as a translator, with a second edition coming out in 1608. Evidence of his knowledge of Latin is provided by the epigram that he contributed to the 1612 edition of Henry Peacham's 'The Gentleman's Exercise', where he was described as an 'excellent Geometrician and Surveiour... not onley learned and ingenuous himselfe, but a furtherer and favorer of all excellency whatsoever, of whom our age findeth too few' (p. 172). 
The latest architectural drawings in Thorpe's book date from the 1620s. In 1625-7 he was supervising building works at Belvoir Castle, Leicestershire, for the earl of Rutland, and he seems to have retired shortly afterwards. He continued to live in his London house until about 1651, when he moved to Egham, Surrey, where he owned some land. He died in 1655 at nearly ninety years of age and was buried in the churchyard of St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 14 February of that year. His name is inscribed on the Thorpe family monument which was erected in 1623, long before his death, in the parish church of Kingscliffe. In the absence of his will, Peacham's character study can stand as his obituary. He was one of a group of men who expanded the vocabulary of English architecture in the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries and helped to establish the nascent professions of surveyor and architect. In the metropolitan world, where he spent most of his long life, he was a respected professional who helped to disseminate continental learning and a conscientious public servant both to his adopted parish and to the state. His collection of drawings remains as a graphic testimony to his achievements as both a recorder and a creator of some of the most important buildings of the age. 


@@@@@


doc= 27379


Thorpe, John (1682-1750), physician and antiquary, eldest son of John Thorpe, landowner, and his wife, Ann, sister and coheir of Oliver Combridge, of Newhouse, Penshurst, Kent, was born at his father's house, Newhouse, on 12 March 1682. His father owned a good estate in the Kentish parishes of Penshurst, Lamberhurst, Tonbridge, and Chiddingstone. He attended the grammar school at Westerham, where the master was Thomas Manningham, afterwards bishop of Chichester. On 14 April 1698 he matriculated from University College, Oxford, whence he graduated BA at Michaelmas 1701, MA on 27 June 1704, MB on 16 May 1707, and MD in July 1710. Elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 30 November 1705, he was then living in Ormond Street, London, near his friend Richard Mead, the physician. For some years he assisted another friend, Sir Hans Sloane, in publishing the Royal Society's 'Philosophical Transactions', which included on 24 July 1704 a letter to Sloane on worms in the heads of sheep. 
On 5 May 1715 Thorpe married Elizabeth, daughter of John Woodhouse of Shobdon, Herefordshire, at St Benet Paul's Wharf, London. In the same year he settled as a physician in Rochester, where he and his wife lived within the precincts of the cathedral. He developed a considerable practice and gave free medical aid to the poor in his district. He was noted in the 1740 medical diary of Dr Jeremiah Cliff of Tenterden. In 1734 he became a freeman of the city of Rochester. Devoting himself to the study of the architecture, antiquities, and the history of the county of Kent, he made numerous manuscript extracts relating to Kent from central archives; his papers eventually made their way to the Society of Antiquaries. The Scotgrove chantry, part of the long defunct manor of Scotgrove, in the parish of Hartley, was rescued from oblivion by Thorpe's enquiring mind in 1728. His collections were published posthumously in 1769 by his son, John Thorpe, in folio, under the title of 'Registrum Roffense'. The book contains numerous charters (all given in full), monumental inscriptions, and other historical materials. 
Thorpe was generous in his historical assistance to Thomas Hearne, Browne Willis, and other scholars, and he edited the 'Itinera Alpina Tria' of Scheuchzer. He improved the management and finances of Rochester Bridge in his role as a warden and assistant of the bridge from 1731 until his death, serving as senior warden in 1733 and 1742 and as junior warden in 1746. In 1731 he published 'A List of the Lands Contributory to Rochester Bridge'. He compiled the earliest surviving record of its archives, had the accounts bound in leather, and presented to the Bridge Chamber a splendid set of chairs and staves suitable for the senior and junior wardens. In a useful report he examined in detail repairs to the bridge undertaken during the previous three centuries. A mass of material about the bridge occupies four volumes in the Thorpe MSS in the library of the Society of Antiquaries. In 1733 he published a collection of statutes of Richard II, Henry V, Elizabeth, and Anne, concerning the bridge. Thorpe died on 30 November 1750 at Rochester and was buried in the church of Stockbury, Kent, in which parish he had purchased a house and land called Nettlested, once owned by the family of the antiquary Robert Plot. 


@@@@@


doc= 27380


Thorpe, John (1715/16-1792), antiquary, was probably born in Rochester, Kent, the only son of John Thorpe (1682-1750), physician and antiquary, and Elizabeth Woodhouse. He was educated nearby at Luddesdown under the Revd Samuel Thornton, and at the age of sixteen matriculated from University College, Oxford, on 22 March 1732, graduating BA in 1735 and MA in 1738. In 1746 he married Catharina (died 1789), daughter of Laurence Holker, physician, of Gravesend, and Katharine Allen; they had two daughters, Catharine and Ethelinda. 
Thorpe commenced the study of medicine but abandoned it, and, like his father, devoted himself to antiquarian research. In 1755 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. In 1769 he published, with the assistance of John Baynard of the Navy Office, his father's 'Registrum Roffense', a collection of materials relating to Rochester. In 1788 he supplemented the work by publishing the 'Custumale Roffense' from the original manuscript, adding other memorials from the cathedral. For this purpose he used his father's papers and, like other antiquaries, undertook visits to Darenth church (1768), Scotgrove chantry (1769), Higham Priory (1776), the lost village of Merston (1776), Horsted (1777), Manor Farm, Ruxley, and Shorne. He wrote the 'Custumale Roffense' while residing at Highstreet House, Bexley, from where, after the death of his first wife on 10 January 1789, he moved to Richmond Green, Surrey, and then to Chippenham, Wiltshire. Catharina's grave is in the churchyard adjoining Highstreet House. On 6 July 1790 he married his second wife, Mrs Holland, his housekeeper and 'the widow of an old collegiate acquaintance'. Thorpe also contributed 'Illustrations of several antiquities in Kent which have hitherto remained undescribed' to the first volume of the 'Bibliotheca Topographica Britannica'. A letter from him to Andrew Coltee Ducarel in which he argued, contrary to Daines Barrington, that the cherry is indigenous to England, was published in the 'Philosophical Transactions' of the Royal Society (1771, 152). He frequently made contributions on antiquarian subjects to the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. He was a friend of the great Kent historian Edward Hasted, with whom he corresponded and to whom he lent family manuscripts, as Hasted recorded in 'The following Notes, Coats of Arms, Drawings of Monuments and churches were copied by me from a curious MS in the possession of John Thorp ['sic'] of Bexley, Esqr. in the year 1768' (BL, Hasted MSS, Add. MS 5479 D.IV). As a great Kent antiquary Thorpe followed in the footsteps of his father, being prominent among many who rendered advice and assistance to Hasted. Thorpe died at Chippenham on 2 August 1792 and was buried in the churchyard of the neighbouring village of Hardenhuish. 


@@@@@


doc= 27381


Thorpe, Robert of (d. 1291/2), justice, was probably born some years before 1250. His surname was derived from Thorpe Acre near Garendon in Leicestershire; the names of his parents are unknown. He studied at Oxford University and by 1271 had already gained a degree; in 1274 he was a party to the peace treaty between the scholars of the north and the scholars of the south which put an end to several months of violent disturbances between the two groups and their allies. By 1281 he had probably entered the service of Master Jordan of Wimborne, the archdeacon of Chester, as he was appointed one of his general attorneys when he went abroad. In the Oxfordshire eyre of 1285 he was among those presented as having been involved in the killing of an Irish tailor, probably during the course of the student disturbances of 1273-4, but when he surrendered to gaol after the eyre was over a jury cleared him of any part in the killing. At the end of 1286 Thorpe was summoned into the king's service in Gascony, and for most of 1287 acted as leader of a group of 'inquisitores', probably those inquiring into the misconduct of the late seneschal, Jean de Grailly. When most of the justices of the common bench were dismissed in early January 1290, Thorpe was pressed into service as a junior justice, though there is no evidence of his having any previous expertise in the common law. His final term as a justice of the court was Michaelmas term 1291, and it is likely that he died during the following vacation. His heir was his brother Serlo; he was probably also survived by a second brother, John. 


@@@@@


doc= 27382


Robert Thorpe, second Lord Thorpe (1293/4-1330), who was aged thirty when his father died, and had been married since at least 1316 to Beatrice, daughter of Thomas Hengrave. He was several times employed as a diplomat. On 18 January 1323 he was granted protection to go to the papal court at Avignon, while in March 1324 he was about to go to Gascony with the earl of Kent. Possibly delayed by his father's death, he had arrived by 1 September, and was briefly mayor of Bordeaux following the death of Sir Robert Shirlaund. Following a number of peace-making missions within the duchy he went to Aragon, under a commission of 16 February 1325, to treat for the marriage of Prince Edward to the Infanta Iolanta. The mission failed, and as he returned Thorpe was captured by the Seigneur d'Albret on 11 May, and not released until 16 February 1326. He was back in England by 23 June following, when he was sent on embassy to Scotland. But his captivity may have ruined his health, for he was not employed again, and he died on 8 April 1330. His heir was his fourteen-year-old son, John, whose wardship was granted to the Suffolk magnate Sir Oliver Ingham. Robert was long outlived by his wife, who died on 4 July 1361. 


@@@@@


doc= 27383


Thorpe, Sir Robert (d. 1372), justice, was the son of Sir Robert Thorpe of Orton Waterville, Huntingdonshire, steward of the liberties of Peterborough Abbey, and his wife, Margaret. He has often been confused with a contemporary who was the second master of Pembroke College, Cambridge. The Thorpe family produced a number of prominent lawyers, and Robert's relative, Sir William Thorpe, chief justice of the king's bench, may have been influential in guiding him towards a legal career. Robert was created a serjeant-at-law in 1339 and was king's serjeant between 1345 and 1356. He served regularly on commissions of assize, gaol delivery, and oyer and terminer, and as justice of the peace, in Cambridgeshire, Huntingdonshire, Norfolk, Suffolk, Bedfordshire, and Buckinghamshire. His local connections are illustrated by the generous pensions and fees paid to him from 1352-3 onwards by Ramsey Abbey. He also built up his landed base in the region, gaining life interests in estates in Northamptonshire, Cambridgeshire, and Hertfordshire. 
On 27 June 1356 Thorpe was appointed chief justice of the court of common pleas and assumed knighthood, and on 1 October he was awarded a grant of $40 a year from the exchequer to support his new rank. His influence in the courts was recognized by both the Black Prince and John of Gaunt, who appointed him to their councils. In 1365 he was involved in an important debate on the relative status of ordinances and statutes. Appointed a trier of petitions in every parliament between 1362 and 1371, he took part in the parliamentary trial of Sir John de la Lee, steward of the king's household, in 1368, and in 1371 he was a member of the committee of royal judges appointed to inquire into the embezzlement of ransoms collected for the king by Sir William Latimer. 
In the parliament of 1371 an anti-clerical movement forced the crown to dismiss the chancellor, treasurer, and keeper of the privy seal and replace them with laymen. Thorpe was appointed to succeed William Wykeham as chancellor on 26 March, though he did not formally vacate his judicial post until 14 April. The circumstances of his appointment suggest that he was in good political standing with the Commons. His tenure of office was, however, brief. On 29 June 1372, at the house of Robert Wyville, bishop of Salisbury, in Fleet Street, London, being very ill, he put the great seal out of commission by having it enclosed in a bag sealed with his own seal and the seals of Sir John Knyvet, the chief justice of the king's bench, and others. At the same time he made a will by which his executors, who included Knyvet, were empowered to sell all his moveable property and use the proceeds for the benefit of his soul. He died the same night. 
In 1367 Thorpe had acquired a licence to alienate property in mortmain for the provision of prayers for himself, his parents, and benefactors in the chapel of St Mary, Maxey, in Northamptonshire. On 24 March 1373 his executors received a similar licence to found a chantry in Helpston church (also in Northamptonshire), served by three chaplains, to celebrate divine service for the king, the souls of queens Isabella and Philippa, and those of Thorpe and his parents. Thorpe, who evidently never married, was buried with other members of his family in Peterborough Abbey; a commemorative brass depicting him in his judge's robes was destroyed during the civil war. 


@@@@@


doc= 27384


Thorpe, Thomas (d. 1461), administrator and speaker of the House of Commons, was of unknown parentage, but was almost certainly a native of Northamptonshire, where he later acquired the manor of Barnwell All Saints. He obtained employment in the exchequer, where by about 20 July 1437 he was a summoner. He probably owed his subsequent advancement to the patronage of the Beauforts, perhaps mediated through John Somerset, physician to the king and also chancellor of the exchequer, with whom Thorpe was associated in the grant of a wardship in 1443. On 4 February 1444 he became lord treasurer's remembrancer, at first during good behaviour, but on 16 September for life. On 8 January 1446 he was granted an annuity of 50 marks for life. Promotion brought riches, and Thorpe was able to buy estates at Great Ilford in Essex, and a house in the parish of St John Zachary in London. In 1448 he became a JP in Essex and Northamptonshire, and was appointed to an important commission to inquire into concealments of royal revenues in Middlesex. In October 1449 he was elected a knight of the shire for Northamptonshire, and a year later was MP for Ludgershall, Wiltshire. 
His associations with government did not bring Thorpe popularity and good repute. In 1450 he was denounced by Kentish rebels as a supporter of the duke of Suffolk, and was nearly dislodged from his post in the exchequer by the new treasurer, Lord Tiptoft. But he held on, and on 2 December 1452 was made third baron. He was returned for Essex to the parliament that met at Reading on 6 March 1453, and on 8 March was elected speaker of the Commons. The first two sessions were easily managed on the government's behalf; a grant of taxation was made for the recovery of Gascony, and Thorpe was rewarded by the king with a gift of $200. He also became a royal councillor during the summer, no doubt on the strength of his understanding of finance and his parliamentary experience. 
In November 1453, however, Thorpe's career was threatened in a way that had lasting repercussions for him. Reportedly acting on the king's orders, he attached chattels belonging to the duke of York, who promptly sued Thorpe in the exchequer, securing damages of $1000 and the defendant's imprisonment in the Fleet. When parliament reassembled for a second session in February 1454, the Commons petitioned for their speaker's release. But notwithstanding their claim of privilege, the Lords ruled against them, and a new speaker was chosen. Thorpe himself came to terms with York in July, but was hardly reconciled with him, and was thereafter consistently associated with the duke's enemies. Resuming his administrative career, on 24 March 1455 he became chancellor of the exchequer, but shortly afterwards was again embroiled in politics. In attendance on the king when the court confronted York at St Albans on 22 May, he was later charged, along with the duke of Somerset and one William Joseph, with having twice intercepted messages from York to King Henry which might have prevented the battle. Somerset was killed there, and Thorpe was among those subsequently accused of having fled 'and left her harneys behynde hem cowardly' ('Paston Letters', 1.331). 
York, who was now clearly set upon ruining him, proceeded to blame Thorpe in parliament for causing the battle, and secured his dismissal from all his offices. An attempt to have him imprisoned was thwarted by the king, but York was able to secure payment of all the damages awarded against Thorpe in 1454. However, as the court recovered control of government from 1456, Thorpe returned to favour. On 16 November 1457 he was made keeper of the privy wardrobe in the Tower of London for life, and on 12 September 1458 he was appointed second baron of the exchequer. At the Coventry parliament of November-December 1459 he secured revenge upon York, by helping to draw up the bill of attainder declaring York and his leading followers to be traitors. 
On 9 April 1460 Thorpe secured a life grant of $40 per annum, charged upon the estates of the duke of York and the earl of Salisbury. But he did not enjoy it for long. In July he was captured after the battle of Northampton, and brought back to London a prisoner. Once more deprived of his offices, he escaped from prison, but was recaptured and sent to the Tower. Yet again he escaped, and on 17 February 1461 tried to make his way out of London, presumably to join the Lancastrian army which had just won the second battle of St Albans. But he was caught at Harringay by a party of Londoners, and beheaded forthwith. His estates were subsequently forfeited. Not until 1485 did Roger Thorpe, the son of Thomas's marriage to a woman named Joan (who had died in 1453), achieve a partial restitution. 


@@@@@


doc= 27385


Thorpe, Thomas (1571/2-1625?), bookseller, was born in Barnet, Middlesex, the son of Thomas Thorpe, innkeeper. On 24 June 1584 he was apprenticed as a stationer for nine years to Richard Watkins, co-holder of the patent on almanacs and prognostications, and he was admitted as a freeman of the Stationers' Company on 4 February 1594. On 19 March 1597, giving his address as St Faith's parish and his age as twenty-five, Thorpe testified that the previous autumn he had been in Madrid as a guest of the fugitive Jesuit Father Robert Persons, and had stayed in the house of the recently deceased Catholic fugitive Sir Francis Englefield. 
In 1600 Thorpe surfaces as the author of a dedication addressed to his 'kind and true friend', the publisher Edward Blount, attached to Christopher Marlowe's translation of the first book of Lucan's 'Pharsalia'. The rights to this translation had previously passed through four other stationers, including Blount, but Thorpe's is the earliest known edition. In the dedication Thorpe depicts Marlowe as a ghost haunting St Paul's Churchyard through his posthumous publications, and also humorously instructs Blount how to be a literary patron, telling his friend to 'sweat with the invention of some dry jest or two', but in the end, 'give nothing' (Marlowe, 261-2). 
The first three publications with Thorpe's name on the title-page, all dated 1603, include two pamphlets about the East India Company (reflecting his long-standing interest in exploration) and a speech by Richard Martin. Two of these were originally entered in the Stationers' register to William Aspley, and all were sold in Aspley's shop, in which Thorpe may have worked. Aspley had previously published several plays (including two by Shakespeare), and in partnership with Thorpe he published two which became best-sellers: John Marston's 'The Malcontent' (1604), and 'Eastward Ho!' (1605), by Marston, Ben Jonson, and George Chapman. On his own, Thorpe subsequently published many important dramatic texts by Marston, Jonson, and Chapman. These included Marston's 'What you Will' (1607) and 'Histriomastix' (1610); Jonson's 'Sejanus' (1605, with Blount), 'Hymenaei' (1606), 'Volpone' (1607), and 'The Character of Two Royal Masques' (1608); and Chapman's 'All Fools' (1605), 'The Gentleman Usher' (1606), and 'Charles, Duke of Biron' (1608). For the most part these are excellent texts, almost certainly authorized by the playwrights. The survival of two presentation copies of 'Sejanus', plus the fact that the notoriously demanding Jonson used the quarto text virtually unchanged in his 1616 folio 'Works', show how satisfied he was with Thorpe's work. 
In 1609 Thorpe published the work for which he is known to posterity: 'Shake-speares Sonnets'. Despite the claims of commentators uncomfortable with the sequence's homoeroticism, there is no indication that the volume was surreptitious or unauthorized. It was entered normally in the Stationers' register on 20 May, and it fits well with the authorized volumes Thorpe published for other theatre people. It was published during a plague outbreak which closed the theatres, as Shakespeare's narrative poems had been, and is structurally similar to earlier published sonnet sequences by Sidney, Spenser, Daniel, and Lodge, as Duncan-Jones demonstrates. Like earlier sonnet sequences by Barnabe Barnes, Henry Constable, and others, it also contains a dedication written by the stationer (Thorpe) rather than by the poet. This epigraph, addressed by Thorpe to 'the onlie begetter of these insuing sonnets Mr. W. H.' (sig. A2'r') has occasioned volumes of speculation on the identity of W. H., but no consensus. Some critics have taken 'begetter' to mean the 'procurer' who brought the manuscript to Thorpe, but none of the various candidates has attracted widespread support. Others have taken 'begetter' to mean 'inspirer', or the young man addressed in the sonnets; here the two main candidates have been Henry Wriothesley, earl of Southampton, and William Herbert, earl of Pembroke, the latter notably championed by Duncan-Jones. Others have found none of these solutions satisfactory. Foster points out that 'begetter' always meant 'author' in dedications of the time, and suggests that Thorpe was addressing Shakespeare, with 'our ever-living poet' being God. 
On 18 January 1609 Thorpe entered in the Stationers' register 'A Discovery of a New World', John Healey's translation of Joseph Hall's 'Mundus alter et idem', but he later transferred the rights to Edward Blount and William Barret, who published it with the earl of Pembroke's financial assistance. The following year, Thorpe, Blount, and Barret jointly published Healey's translation of 'Epictetus his Manuall and Cebes his Table'. For this volume Thorpe wrote a dedication to John Florio in which he praises Pembroke's earlier generosity to Healey, and asks for Florio's help in securing Pembroke's support for 'a greater body of Saint Augustines', to which the present volume is merely a 'hand-maide' (sig. A3'v'-A4'r'). 
The 'greater body' was Healey's translation of St Augustine's 'City of God', which Thorpe published later in 1610 in an elaborate folio edition. Thorpe dedicated the volume to Pembroke in his characteristic witty and punning style, telling him that before departing for Virginia 'your late imaginery, but now actuall Travailer' (Healey) had asked Thorpe to deliver the book 'to your Honours humbly thrise-kissed hands' (sig. A3-A3'v'). In 1616, after Healey had died in Virginia, Thorpe published a second edition of 'Epictetus his Manuall' with Healey's translation of Theophrastus' 'Characters' added, and with an apologetic and self-deprecating dedication to Pembroke replacing the earlier dedication to Florio. 
Between 1610 and 1615 Thorpe published several more religious works, alongside lighter fare such as the collection 'Odcombian Banquet' (1611) and works by Thomas Nashe, John Taylor, and Humphrey King. In 1612 he published 'A Funerall Elegy for Master William Peter' by W. S., a poem which Foster argued was written by Shakespeare but which is now generally accepted as the work of John Forde. Over the last decade of his career Thorpe's publications were mostly of a religious nature. Three of these contain unsigned prefaces almost certainly written by Thorpe: Arthur Dent's 'Hand-Maid of Repentance' (1614), John van Oldenbarneveld's 'Apology' (1618), and Theophilus Field's 'A Christian's Preparation' (1622). In late 1623 Thorpe began receiving a pension from the Stationers' Company poor fund, indicating that he had fallen on hard times. His last publication was in 1625, and at the end of that year he stopped receiving his pension, presumably because he had died. 
Thorpe may be the Thomas Thorpe who married Susan Hack on 12 July 1609 at St James Clerkenwell, London, and who had a son Robert baptized there on 17 August 1616. He may also be the Thomas Thorpe who had a son Thomas baptized at St Stephen, Coleman Street on 11 May 1610. However, he is probably the Thomas Thorpe of St Olave, Southwark, London, whose wife Dorcas was granted administration of his estate on 30 July 1625. 


@@@@@


doc= 27386


Thorp, Sir William (d. 1361), justice, was of obscure origins. He first appears as a clerk of the king's bench in 1315, and in that status was assaulted in 1318 by enemies who caught him on the way to court, trampled upon him, and contemptuously urinated on him. He is quoted in two cases during the eyres of 1329-31. At this time an apprentice, he was created a serjeant-at-law in Michaelmas term 1339, while on 20 January 1341 he became a king's serjeant, an office he held until 1344. He was elevated to justice of the king's bench on 20 May 1345, and was knighted at the same time. Promotion to chief justice of the king's bench came soon after, on 16 November 1346. 
Venality may have been a constant companion to Thorp's judicial skill, and helps to explain how he came to hold a considerable collection of estates in several counties, particularly in Lincolnshire. An ordinance of 1346 prohibited justices from taking fees and robes from anyone but the king, and from giving advice in any matters relating to the king's affairs. Thorp took this oath in an impressive gathering attended by the king, prelates, and magnates; the king pointedly and personally warned him about the penalties for breaking the oath, namely, death by hanging and confiscation of all goods. The stringencies of the new oath were balanced, however inadequately, by an additional annual fee of 50 marks provided for each justice. However, Thorp persisted in his older and more profitable ways, maintaining close relationships with the town of Cambridge, the abbot of Glastonbury, and especially the abbot of Ramsey, from whom he accepted a retaining fee within a year of the ordinance, and by whom he was feed in 1347-50, 1354-5, and 1361-2. As he later admitted, he took bribes amounting to $100 (probably at Lincoln sessions, Easter term 1349) for respiting the exigent against five men who appeared before him. 
Thorp was arrested on 25 October 1350 and imprisoned in the Tower of London. He was tried on 4 November by an imposing panel (the earls of Warwick, Arundel, and Huntingdon, the steward of the royal household, and the king's chamberlain). After he confessed his receipt of bribes, the judges ordered confiscation and sought the king's will. An angry Edward III, apparently seeing Thorp's misdeeds as a rebellious breaking of the personal bond between justice and sovereign, told his judges to proceed; they decreed hanging and confiscation of Thorp's considerable wealth -- his moveables were deposited in no fewer than eight monastic houses. Yet by a privy seal letter issued the same day the king pardoned Thorp his life. The imprisonment continued, however, as did the seizures of land and goods. On 24 November the records of the case were sent into chancery, and a new investigation into all aspects of Thorp's judicial proceedings was also ordered. Thorp was released before Christmas, for he and his household spent that holiday as guests of his old friend, the abbot of Ramsey. In the parliament of February 1351 the entire proceedings in the case were laid before the magnates, who approved the sentence. 
On 10 March 1351 Edward (citing compassion and appreciation for Thorp's previous good service) provided him with a full pardon and restoration of goods and lands. On 24 May 1352 Thorp was appointed second baron of the exchequer, and he soon was named to a variety of judicial commissions, although he was never returned to the king's bench. Along with other royal justices he was formally excommunicated in 1357 for his failure to appear at the papal court in Avignon in the case of Thomas Lisle, bishop of Ely (died 1361). His last judicial service seems to have been an oyer and terminer commission for several counties in 1359. He remained on the books of Ramsey Abbey as recipient of a fee until his death, which occurred on 27 May 1361. He appears to have had a son, William, who was pardoned in May 1356 for killing a servant in the New Temple, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 27387


Thorpe, William (fl. 1381-1407), Lollard preacher, seems to have been a Yorkshireman. Documentary evidence concerning his life is scant, but in a letter of the north-country heretic Richard Wyche, written 'c'.1402 but surviving only in a Bohemian copy, there is mentioned a sister 'domini Wilhelmi Corpp' resident at that time in Topcliffe in the North Riding of Yorkshire; 'Corpp' may reasonably be identified with Thorpe, whose origins were probably in the same area. In March 1395 a William Thorpe was instituted to the vicarage of Marske in Cleveland, a living in the gift of the Augustinian canons of Guisborough, by Thomas Arundel (died 1414), then archbishop of York. The identification is not entirely certain, but a more secure link is provided by the six charges of erroneous preaching in London brought against a William Thorpe by three priests before Bishop Robert Braybrooke some time between January 1382 and June 1386. The outcome is unclear, though Thorpe's reply to the charges survives; a later note states that he was excommunicated because of his failure to recant. Later evidence for Thorpe is provided by a recently discovered writ, dated 16 June 1407, requiring the bailiffs of Shrewsbury to produce him before the chancellor, Archbishop Thomas Arundel, at Westminster; Thorpe, together with an associate, John Pollyrbache, had been imprisoned following his preaching of three conclusions (listed on the schedule attached to the document, and covering images, pilgrimages, and the withholding of tithes) at St Chad's Church in Shrewsbury on 17 April. 
Beyond these documentary details, the chief source for Thorpe's life (though its bias is clear, and its reliability can only be ascertained in part) is the account, claimed to be autobiographical, of an informal examination of Thorpe by Arundel on 7 August 1407. No record of this, or of any case against Thorpe, appears in Arundel's register, though the date is compatible with the evidence for Thorpe's arrest. According to Thorpe, after forceful persuasion by family and friends to continue his education for the priesthood, he went, apparently before mid-1381, to Oxford to join John Wyclif (died 1384) and his adherents; there he enthusiastically embraced their radical views. When he left Oxford is not made clear. Allusion is made to a period of preaching in the north; this could indicate that the incumbent of Marske was indeed the same man. Arundel, in Thorpe's story, reminds him that he had been arrested by Bishop Braybrooke, and that he had been set free on Arundel's own exile in 1397; Thorpe maintains that he had been released because no valid charge against him had been found. The date of Braybrooke's arrest of Thorpe is unspecified; difficulties arise over the chronological relation of this episode to the Marske institution. 
Thorpe's conversation with the archbishop, in his account, dealt with five errors alleged against him by the Shrewsbury officials: the three mentioned in the legal document, together with the error of maintaining that bread exists after the consecration in the eucharist and that oaths are unlawful. The encounter, according to Thorpe, ended with his own implacable resolution to stand by his views, without judgment from Arundel, though with Thorpe's relegation to the archbishop's prison. How Thorpe's account was put into circulation is entirely obscure: one early fifteenth-century English copy survives, together with two Bohemian copies of a Latin version. The English text was known to Lollard suspects from the 1490s to the 1520s, before it was put into print 'c'.1530 (probably from the Antwerp press of Hans Luft, 'STC 1475-1640', no. 24045). At the end of this appears 'The testamente of William Thorpe', dated 20 September 1460; there are obvious chronological difficulties in accepting this, and the otherwise impersonal document may originally have had no connection with Thorpe. The other works later ascribed to him by John Bale reflect Bale's deductions from references within Thorpe's autobiography, and not direct evidence. 
The views that Thorpe was accused of holding in the 1380s, and that he defended then and in 1407, are typical of early Lollardy and for the most part derive directly from Wyclif's own teaching. They cover the eucharist, images, pilgrimages, oaths, tithes, scripture, preaching, oral confession and sacerdotal absolution, and the right of the laity to correct erring clerics. In the autobiography Thorpe's admiration for Wyclif's learning and for his upright life is undiminished, and is accompanied by strong deprecation for the turncoat activities of Philip Repyndon and Nicholas Hereford. The picture given of Archbishop Arundel -- often angry, frequently obtuse himself, and outwitted by the ever reasonable and ingenious Thorpe -- makes the account of their conversation an unusually lively and attractive piece of Lollard propaganda. 


@@@@@


doc= 27388


Threlkeld, Caleb (1676-1728), physician and botanist, the third son of Thomas Threlkeld (1646-1712) and Bridget Brown ('c'.1654-1712), was born on 31 May 1676 at Keibergh, Kirkoswald, Cumberland. By 1696 he was enrolled as a student in the University of Glasgow; he matriculated into the third class (logic) that year, but did not graduate. He married, on 7 March 1698, Elizabeth Dalrymple, whose father was described as the feudatory laird of Auchin Houry, near Glasgow. He was home in Cumberland by 1699, where John, first of their six children born in England, was baptized on 1 May 1699 in Kirkoswald parish church. From 1700 Threlkeld served as minister at Huddlesceugh Independent Chapel, near Kirkoswald, until his dismissal by chapel elders in November 1712 (TNA: PRO, RG4/566, p. 8). Meanwhile he also studied botany and medicine, collecting and observing plants in Cumberland and elsewhere -- for example, during 1707 he botanized around Newcastle upon Tyne. 
In 1712 Threlkeld applied to the University of Edinburgh for the degree of doctor of medicine. Having been examined by the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh, he was admitted to the degree, the third awarded by the university, and graduated on 20 January 1713. On 26 March 1713 he left Cumberland for Dublin; it is uncertain when his wife and family joined him, but a daughter, Mary, was born in Dublin and died there in February 1715, aged three. In Dublin he practised as a physician and was greatly respected by poorer members of the community. He also preached on Sundays in a conventicle. 
Threlkeld botanized about Dublin, collecting specimens and compiling what its title-page defined as the 'first essay' on the native flora of Ireland, published in Dublin on 27 October 1726; two subsequent issues are known (Dublin, 1727; London, 1727). 'Synopsis stirpium Hibernicarum' contained records of over 500 flowering plants, gymnosperms, ferns, and various other cryptogams; 119 plants were recorded from specified localities and over 400 vernacular Irish names were noted. 
Threlkeld was accused of plagiarism by Johann Jacob Dillenius (1684-1747), editor of John Ray's 'Synopsis methodica stirpium Britannicarum' (3rd edn, 1724). This accusation is difficult to maintain. A botanical author frequently relies on the works of his predecessors and Threlkeld acknowledged at least four separate sources for 'Synopsis': his own collections, a manuscript attributed to the Revd Richard Heaton ('fl'. 1633-1666), notes supplied by Dr Thomas Molyneux (1661-1733), and previously published works. Only seventy-five records of Irish native species could have been gleaned from works published before 1726, and most of the alleged lavish, unacknowledged borrowing from John Ray was translated textual material such as accounts of medicinal properties. 

'Synopsis stirpium Hibernicarum', which, 'inter alia', contained the earliest printed account of the myth of St Patrick's sermon on the Holy Trinity illustrated by a shamrock, has provoked many contrary opinions. William Sherard (1658-1728) called it 'a wretched piece' (Nichols). Nathanial Colgan (1851-1919), author of 'Flora of the County Dublin' (1904), described the same book as a 'piquant medley of herbal and homily in which this medical missionary from Cumberland delivers himself of his opinions on botany, medicine, morals, theology, witchcraft and the Irish question' (Colgan, xx). The publication of 'Synopsis stirpium Hibernicarum' provoked a letter from 'Hibernicus' (Francis Hutcheson), printed in the 'Dublin Weekly Journal', lambasting Threlkeld's remarks on the political implication of the introduction of the potato into Ireland. 
Threlkeld died on 28 April 1728, probably in his home at Mark's Alley, Francis Street, The Coombe, Dublin, and is reported to have been buried in the Cabbage Garden cemetery, near Kevin Street, Dublin. His herbarium -- 'From twelve Years Observation I collected Specimens for an 'Hortus Siccus'' ('Synopsis stirpium Hibernicarum', preface) -- has not survived intact, although possible fragments are in Trinity College, Dublin. 

'Threlkeldia', a genus of shrubs in the beet family, endemic in Australia, was named by Robert Brown after Threlkeld. 


@@@@@


doc= 27389


Thring, Edward (1821-1887), headmaster, born at Alford, near Castle Cary, Somerset, on 29 November 1821, was the third son and fifth child of John Gale Dalton Thring (1784-1874) and his wife, Sarah (1790-1891), daughter of John Jenkyns, vicar of Evercreech, near Alford. His father was squire and rector of Alford; his mother was sister to Richard Jenkyns (1782-1854), master of Balliol College, Oxford. Edward's four brothers included Henry Thring and Godfrey Thring. 
Thring attended a private classical school, Ilminster grammar, before going on to the Eton College of Dr Keate and Dr Hawtrey, where he eventually became captain of the collegers. His early experience in Long Chamber, the collegers' dormitory, and his previous harsh experience at Ilminster influenced his later thinking on educational reform. As captain of Eton collegers he was one of the last to benefit from the ancient custom of Montem, a day given over by the school for the pecuniary benefit of the college captain before he departed for university. Thring went to Cambridge in 1841 as a scholar of King's College, winning the Porson prize for Greek iambics in 1844 and graduating BA in 1845 and MA in 1848. He was a fellow of King's from 1844 to 1853. 
In 1846 Thring was ordained and appointed to the curacy of St James's parish in Gloucester, the city where Robert Raikes developed the Sunday school movement in the 1780s. During a year's teaching in a national school in Gloucester, Thring encountered an educational problem and also devised a solution: the use of different teaching techniques in the education of less able or culturally deprived children. Throughout his pedagogic career Thring was convinced that a school needed the most skilful teachers for the less able or elementary classes, a principle he tried to apply later at Uppingham. He was in Gloucester for only a year, having suffered a breakdown in health. He became a private tutor in Marlow, Buckinghamshire, for two years and then spent the following two years as curate at Cookham Dean, Berkshire, during which time he was an examiner at Rugby and Eton and for the classical tripos at Cambridge. He had already developed a strong belief in the analytical teaching of English grammar as the best foundation for language teaching, publishing 'The Elements of Grammar Taught in English' (1851; 3rd edn, 1860) and 'The Child's Grammar' (1852). On 10 September 1853, at the age of thirty-one, Thring was elected headmaster of Uppingham School, which was to be his life's work. Shortly afterwards, on Christmas day 1853, he married Marie Louise (died 1907), daughter of Carl Johann Koch of Bonn, commissioner of customs for the Prussian government. He had been sent abroad by his father to stop the marriage of his younger brother to Marie Koch and, a dutiful son, achieved this by marrying her himself. Subsequently Thring's methods showed the mild influence of German educational theories. 
During thirty-four years as head Thring refounded this small midland grammar school, founded originally by Archdeacon Robert Johnson in 1584, and turned it into a leading mid-Victorian public school. Thring always claimed that when he arrived at the school there were only twenty-five boys; within ten years he had raised the numbers to over 300. He could have recruited even more boys but preferred, much to the chagrin of his housemasters, to keep the school relatively small: one of his guiding principles for the conduct of Uppingham was that a headmaster should know all his boys. A major event in Thring's career at Uppingham was 'the flight to Borth' in 1875/6 when the school was temporarily closed because of typhoid fever arising from the town's poor drainage. In this hour of crisis Thring showed great leadership and arranged for the school to stay largely in a hotel and a few other houses at Borth, on the Welsh coast, near Aberystwyth. He saw the year's exile as a rejuvenating process, restoring some of the school's original ideals. Moreover the school's return to Uppingham in 1876 caused him to be regarded as a returning hero by the townsfolk, with whom Thring did much to foster good relations. 
As well as knowing all his pupils, Thring applied at least five other principles in his conduct of Uppingham School. His egalitarian nature led him to acknowledge secondly that 'every boy was good for something' and it was the task of the teacher to discover what that 'something' was. In order to do this a wide curriculum and a range of extra-curricular subjects were required. He expanded the Uppingham curriculum to enable boys not only to engage in academic subjects other than the classics, such as English composition, French, German, and chemistry, but also to experience subjects which were normally considered outside the average school curriculum: drawing, woodwork, art, and music. He was particularly concerned that music be well established in the school under the master of music, Paul David. About a third of the boys learnt to play a musical instrument and several well-known Victorian musicians, including Sir William Sterndale Bennett, Sir Charles Villiers Stanford, and Herr Joseph Joachim, visited the school. The 'Almighty Wall' was a third principle of Thring. Like Vittorino da Feltre, the Renaissance educator, Thring believed in the educative value of fine surroundings to encourage learning. During his headship he converted his modest provincial grammar school into a fine architectural example of a handsome English public school. 'Machinery, machinery, machinery' was a fourth principle in which he took pride. He felt that Uppingham, which he sometimes likened to a ship, was so well organized that, if needs be, it could run well without his presence. 
'Manliness', a common enough Victorian value, was fully taken on board by Thring. As an ordained clergyman and a good games (cricket and fives) player, Thring was himself an outstanding example of a muscular Christian. As such he was totally dedicated to the concept of manliness and was supportive of the games ethic within the school. But an even more overarching notion governed his thinking: a fifth, visionary, principle of 'True Life'. The phrase 'True Life' was constantly on his lips and was the principle to which he appealed daily in the governance of his school. Manliness ('thymos') was part of this principle of True Life, but only a part. Thring's True Life was similar to the old Greek aristocratic notion of 'arete' or virtue, a notion shared by the Greeks, Romans, and men of the Renaissance. For Thring, education was training for True Life. It was because his ultimate loyalty lay with True Life, which held connotations of the Platonic concept of balance and harmony, that in his later years at Uppingham he began to take a restrictive view of organized games and athleticism, believing their undue prominence gave an imbalance to school life. In short, they militated against his master principle, which in the long term made the boys responsible for their own behaviour. 
During his headship of Uppingham, Thring pioneered a number of educational innovations: the school was, in 1859, the first public school to possess a gymnasium. In 1869 it was the first public school also to set up an educational mission in the East End of London (north Woolwich). Further, Thring is the acknowledged founder, in 1869, of the powerful Headmasters' Conference in collaboration with his close colleagues John Mitchinson of King's School, Canterbury, and H. D. Harper of Sherborne School. Among his fellow public school headmasters Thring stood out as a champion of girls' secondary education and invited the leaders of the girls' public school movement in 1887 to hold their annual conference at Uppingham. 
Thring's influence was greatest in the wider pedagogical world, where his writings on education were highly regarded. His 'Theory and Practice of Teaching' (1883) was a popular textbook in training colleges in Britain and was read widely in America. Between 1883 and 1912 it was reprinted sixteen times, being the vade-mecum of many a training college student. Thring regarded teachers as his co-workers or 'skilled workmen' in a very important field of human endeavour, and they were attracted by his suspicion of bureaucratic control of education. He differentiated, as many have done before him and since, between teaching and 'pumping' or cramming. Thring's 'Theory and Practice of Teaching' is written in his very idiosyncratic style, with colourful imagery, pithy aphorisms, and egalitarian earnestness, especially where he expounds his 'Legs not wings' theory. Thring wrote several other books in the context of education, including 'Education and School' (1864), a much less successful book than 'Theory and Practice', though significant since it contains a major exposition of Thring's concept of True Life, which could be equated with moral education. 
Thring died at Uppingham on 22 October 1887 and was buried in the nearby churchyard under a large Celtic cross which lies beyond the school walls. His wife, three daughters, and a son survived him. Sometimes compared with Thomas Arnold in his educational achievement, Thring was the greatest public school headmaster during the second half of the nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 27390


Throckmorton, Francis (1554-1584), Roman Catholic conspirator, was the son of Sir John Throckmorton ('c'.1518-1580) of Feckenham in Worcestershire and his wife, Margaret (died 1591), daughter of Robert Puttenham. The Throckmorton or Throgmorton family first emerged from relative obscurity in the early part of the fifteenth century, when the lawyer John Throgmorton (died 1445) rose to the office of chamberlain of the exchequer, or under-treasurer of England. This John married an heiress who brought Coughton in Warwickshire into the family, and his great-grandson Sir George Throckmorton took them further up the social ladder by becoming an esquire of the body to Henry VIII, flourishing in spite of his outspoken disapproval of the king's divorce from Katherine of Aragon. He married the daughter of Lord Vaux of Harrowden and produced a numerous family. Sir John, father of Francis, was the fifth of seven sons and, like his forebear and namesake, was trained to the law. Following the break with Rome several of the Throckmorton brothers adopted the new reformed religion, but John, possibly influenced by his wife, remained a staunch Catholic and consequently did well under Queen Mary, who rewarded his loyal service with the office of puisne justice of Chester. By 1565 he had risen to become vice-president of the council in the marches of Wales and was knighted by Queen Elizabeth, which means that he must have conformed, outwardly at least, to the established church, but his sons Francis and Thomas were certainly brought up as Catholics. 
Little seems to be known about Francis Throckmorton's early life, although he was described by William Camden as 'a gentleman well-educated and of good wit' (Camden, 846). He matriculated from Hart Hall, Oxford, in 1572 and four years later he was entered as a student of the Inner Temple. At about this date he married Anne, also known as Agnes, Sutton ('c'.1554-1605), daughter of Edward Sutton, fourth Baron Dudley, and his first wife, Catherine Brydges; though the marriage contract is dated 3 June 1571, the precise date of the marriage -- which produced a son, John (died in or after 1604) -- is unknown. In 1578 the family's Catholic sympathies began to get them into trouble, when the headmaster of Shrewsbury School affirmed before Justice George Bromley that Lady Throckmorton and others had heard mass in the house of her brother-in-law; 'that one Hughes was the chief sayer and came from beyond the sea'; that he taught the son of Sir John Throckmorton; and that these priests distributed 'certain Beads called Pardon Beads and another monument called Agnus Dei' (Strype, 'Whitgift', 2.83). As a result Francis was committed to the custody of the dean of St Paul's to be examined on suspicion of 'being present at exercises of religion contrary to present practices' ('APC', February 1578). But his protestant cousins interceded for him and he was freed after a month. 
In 1579 John Throckmorton, now chief justice of Chester, was accused of having shown undue partiality in a case before him. Suspended from office, fined and disgraced, he died a year later a broken man. By this time Francis was already dabbling in treason. He and his brother Thomas had gone abroad at some time prior to their father's death and Francis had become involved with the English Catholic expatriates gathered at Spa in the Low Countries, discussing with them 'the altering of the state of the realme here; and how the same might be attempted by forraine invasion' ('A discovery', 191). He had had 'sundrie conferences' on this dangerous topic with Sir Francis Englefield, once a member of Queen Mary's privy council, and had been put in touch with Thomas Morgan in Paris. His brother stayed on in France, but Francis Throckmorton was back in England by the early 1580s to join the small but growing band of idealistic young Catholic laymen eager to serve the cause of Rome and the captive queen of Scots. 
In April 1583 Francis Walsingham received a report from Henry Fagot, his agent inside the French embassy, that Francis Throckmorton had dined with the ambassador, having recently sent the Scottish queen the sum of 1500 crowns, 'which is on the ambassador's account' ('CSP Scot.', '1581-3', 432). A month later Fagot wrote again with the information that 'the chief agents for the Queen of Scots are M. Throckmorton and Lord Henry Howard. They never come to bring things from her except at night' (Bossy, 200). This, together with further reports of 'what secret resorts he had to the French ambassador, what long and private conferences at seasons suspicious' (ibid., 203), was enough for Walsingham to set a watch on Throckmorton and in November he was arrested at his London house. He just had time to destroy a letter he was in the act of writing to the queen of Scots and send a maidservant with a casket of incriminating documents to the Spanish ambassador, Bernardino Mendoza, but among his seized papers was a list of the names of 'certain Catholic noblemen and gentlemen' and also details of harbours 'suitable for landing forraine forces' ('A discovery', 192). Confronted with these Throckmorton at first 'impudently' denied they were his, saying they must have been planted by the government searchers, but later admitted they had been left in his chamber by a man named Nutby who had since fled the realm. When he refused to say any more he was put on the rack and 'somewhat pinched', but 'continued in his former obstinacy and denial of the truth' (ibid., 191). He managed to smuggle a message out to Mendoza, written in cipher on the back of a playing card, saying he would die a thousand deaths before he betrayed his friends, but, racked a second time, he broke down and 'yielded to confess anything he knew' (ibid.). 
Walsingham had long suspected the existence of some 'great hidden treason' involving Mary, queen of Scots, her friends in Scotland, the Jesuits, and either France or Spain -- perhaps both. Now Throckmorton revealed that it was Mary's formidable kinsman, the duke of Guise, who had been preparing to lead an invasion of England with the declared objective of releasing the queen of Scots and forcing Elizabeth to grant the Catholics a measure of toleration. The real intention, however, was to remove Elizabeth from her crown and state. The foreign forces were ready, the king of Spain would bear half the cost, while Francis Throckmorton and his brother (who had returned secretly to England during the summer), together with the Spanish ambassador, were to organize a welcoming committee of Catholic gentlemen at the port of Arundel in Sussex, which had been chosen by Guise for his landing. Throckmorton's confession did not tell the whole story -- his had always been a subordinate role -- but Walsingham now knew that it was the Spanish rather than the French ambassador who had been abusing his diplomatic privileges. He was also now able to make some further arrests, although most of those in the plot, including Thomas Throckmorton, had had time to make their escape and in the end it was only Francis who suffered the death penalty. 
Francis Throckmorton remains a somewhat shadowy figure, but an anonymous correspondent was to write of 'the good partes wherewith he was indued, and of the pleasant humour that for the most part did possesse him when hee came in companie of friendes' ('A discovery', 191). He was undoubtedly sincere in his convictions. After first making his confession he had exclaimed in obvious distress: 'Nowe I have disclosed the secrets of her who was the deerest thing to me in the worlde (meaning the Scottish Queene)... and sith I have failed of my faith towards her, I care not if I were hanged' (ibid., 195). At his trial he attempted to retract the matters he had confessed because the rack had forced him to say something to ease the torment. He was executed at Tyburn on 10 July 1584 and was reported to have died 'very stubbornly', refusing to ask for the queen's forgiveness. He was survived by his wife and son. Anne Throckmorton subsequently married Thomas Wilmer (died 1628), barrister, with whom she had two sons and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 27391


Throckmorton, Job (1545-1601), politician and religious pamphleteer, was the eldest of the seven sons (and brother of seven daughters) of Clement Throckmorton ('c'.1515-1573) of Haseley, Warwickshire, third son of Sir George Throckmorton of Coughton, Warwickshire, and of his wife, Katherine Neville, the eldest daughter of Sir Edward Neville, courtier, and the sister of Sir Henry Neville ['see under 'Henry VIII, privy chamber of]. Haseley was acquired after the attainder of John Dudley, duke of Northumberland, when Michael Throckmorton, Clement's uncle and secretary to Cardinal Pole, secured the property from the crown and sold it to his nephew. The numerous Throckmortons were divided in religion. Sir George was a conservative opponent of Henry VIII, and his eldest son, Sir Robert, followed in that tradition, as did a younger brother John, father of Francis Throckmorton, the traitor executed in 1584. But the fourth of Sir George's sons, Sir Nicholas Throckmorton, the diplomat, was a protestant, while the commitment of Job's father, Clement, to the evangelical cause was more pronounced. He was close to his Warwickshire cousin, the hot protestant courtier Edward Underhill, and a friend of the Essex gentleman, courtier, and Marian martyr Thomas Haukes. In 1567 Clement was one of the midland gentry who administered funds to maintain 'preachers of the Gospel' in Warwickshire under the terms of a patent procured by the earl of Leicester. It was this tradition that Job Throckmorton inherited, and it must have been reinforced by Oxford, where he graduated BA in February 1566. His college is unknown, but two of his sons and two grandsons were at Queen's. Throckmorton may have proceeded to the inns of court, but of this there is no record, although two brothers and two sons were at the Middle Temple. 
When Clement Throckmorton died on 13 December 1573, Job inherited a debt-burdened estate. He was never a county magnate, and but for the cause of religion would be a historical nonentity. He was returned to parliament for East Retford in 1572 (the earl of Rutland, a relative, would have seen to that), but there is no evidence that he spoke or sat on committees. January 1584 witnessed his only recorded intervention in local politics which concerned, significantly, Catholicism. Under an order from the privy council Throckmorton investigated the activities of William Skynner, a recusant supporter of Mary, queen of Scots, and 'a deadely enemye to the gospell'. Throckmorton expressed his frustration at the reluctance of witnesses to testify: 'Our papistes heere are woondrous cunning' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/167/21). Yet, as is revealed by the diary kept by his cousin, Sir Nicholas's son Arthur Throckmorton, blood was thicker than religious bile when it came to social civilities within the confessionally divided Throckmorton clan. 
In October 1586 parliament met at a moment of extraordinary interest to all earnest protestants. Its primary purpose was to decide the fate of Mary Stewart in the aftermath of the Babington plot. But England was now effectively at war with Spain in the Netherlands, which for hot protestants was a war of religion. And the organized puritan movement saw an opportunity to renew its agitation on behalf of the godly preaching ministry, and even to bring about a presbyterian revolution in the church. Job Throckmorton prepared speeches on all three topics. But first he had to find a parliamentary seat. The way in which this was contrived makes the most remarkable story in Elizabethan electoral history, for Throckmorton was returned for Warwick by means of what can only be called a conspiracy. Backed by powerful outside interests (which must have included the earl of Leicester, who had made Thomas Cartwright master of his hospital in the town), and threatening to exploit the popular franchise, which he treated at a 'solemn dinner' for as many as eighty voters, this blatant carpet-bagger enforced his adoption as a burgess, even while it was well known that his motive in seeking election was not to serve the interests of the borough 'but for the parliament, where peradventure some friends of yours... may have some causes in handling' (Kemp, 390, 394). 
Copies of Throckmorton's extraordinary parliamentary speeches are preserved in the Pierpont Morgan Library in New York. On 4 November 1586 he denounced Mary Stewart as 'the daughter of sedition, the mother of rebellion, the nurce of impietie'. On 27 February he spoke on the presbyterian bill and book and echoed Peter Wentworth's speech of 1576 in a call for the widest possible definition of parliamentary free speech, offering a vigorous defence of what was called puritanism. 'I feare me we shall shortly to this, that to doe God and her Majestie good service shalbe coumpted puritanisme'. But his greatest offence was offered four days earlier, when Throckmorton launched a gratuitous attack on England's 'popish' neighbours, including the obnoxious 'litter' and 'brood' of Queen Catherine de' Medici, the 'idolatrous' and 'lycentious' king of Spain, and even 'the younge impe of Scotlande', his mother's son. 'No hope of Spayne, no trust in Fraunce, colde comforte in Scotlande' (Hartley, 229, 314, 280, 285). Lord Burghley had to apologize for this speech to James VI's London agent, and promised to clap Throckmorton in the Tower. But the offender made himself scarce, lying low in his sister's house in Hillingdon, whence he wrote a letter of grovelling submission to the lord treasurer. 
In the autumn of 1588 the radical puritan cause found a new voice in the rollicking, seditious satire of the Marprelate tracts. There is copious evidence that Throckmorton was up to his neck in this literary conspiracy. Most of the tracts were printed in Warwickshire, and Throckmorton was involved at every stage in their production. Comparison of the Marprelate tracts with his parliamentary speeches and with the only printed pamphlet to which he put his name ('The Defence of Job Throkmorton Against the Slaunders of Maister Sutcliffe', 1594) has persuaded modern critical opinion that if these satires had a single author, that author was Throckmorton. The case is almost clinched by the attribution to Throckmorton of a tract called 'Master Some Laid Open in his Coulers', for whoever wrote that was surely Martin. Leland H. Carlson overstated the case by using somewhat shaky stylistic evidence to link Throckmorton with the authorship of as many as thirty anonymous puritan pamphlets, from 1572 onwards, which would make him almost a monopolist of radical puritan print. But Throckmorton may well have been responsible for a Martinesque 'Survey of the state of the ministry in Warwickshire', linked to the parliamentary campaign of 1586, with its characterization of the curate of Grafton, who may have married Shakespeare: 'His chiefest trade is to cure hawks that are hurt or diseased' (Peel, 2.167). 
Although he stood trial in 1590 for his role in the Marprelate affair, and was widely suspected to be Martin, Throckmorton's social position and legal technicalities saved him from punishment, which for his co-conspirator, the Welsh pamphleteer John Penry, meant the gallows. Throckmorton's protestations 'I am not Martin, I knewe not Martin' (J. Throckmorton, 'The Defence', sig. Eii) were equivocations, for Martin did not exist. 
Throckmorton's polemical pen remained active for a few more years, but he eventually reverted to an obscure and private life. The story that Throckmorton ended his days at Canons Ashby, Northamptonshire, undergoing treatment from the spiritual therapist John Dod, and that thirty-seven years of doubting his salvation culminated in an edifying deathbed performance, is apocryphal and arises from a confusion of identity. Throckmorton died suddenly, intestate, at Haseley in February 1601, survived by his wife, Dorothy, daughter of Thomas Vernon of Houndhill, Staffordshire. He was buried at Haseley on 23 February. His son Clement and grandson Clement were both in their times MP for Warwickshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 27392


Throgmorton, John (d. 1445), landowner and administrator, was the eldest son of Thomas Throgmorton (d. 1411) ['see under 'Throgmorton family] of Fladbury, Worcestershire, and Agnes (died after 1428), daughter and coheir of Alexander Besford of Besford, Worcestershire. His father had served Thomas Beauchamp, earl of Warwick (died 1401), as had his Besford grandfather, and it is probable that it was through this connection that in 1409 John was married to Eleanor, daughter and coheir of Guy Spine of Coughton, west Warwickshire, a marriage that considerably enhanced his landed position and brought him lands in Warwickshire. However, after a training in the law, Throgmorton's first employer was Sir John Phelip of Kidderminster. Phelip having died at Harfleur in 1415, Throgmorton was serving Richard Beauchamp, earl of Warwick (died 1439), by late 1416. The tie with Warwick was close: Throgmorton was a life retainer and councillor, especially important to Warwick when the earl was overseas, was often in his household, and travelled extensively on his behalf, at least twice to France. He was a key member of the Warwick-dominated gentry network in west Warwickshire and Worcestershire, acting on numerous occasions as feoffee and witness, often with other followers of the earl. As a lawyer connected to the most powerful local nobleman he was a frequent local officer, notably in Worcestershire. His offices there included JP from 1414 until his death, MP in 1414, 1420, 1422, 1432, 1433, and 1439, escheator in 1418-19, and under-sheriff -- an office held under the Beauchamps, hereditary sheriffs -- in 1416-18, 1419-20, and 1430-31. He played little role in Warwickshire local government until the 1430s, when he was JP from 1433 until 1439, and Worcestershire remained the family's principal sphere of interest until the 1470s. 
It was through the earl of Warwick that Throgmorton entered the king's service; he held the Beauchamp chamberlainship of the exchequer from 1418 to his death, and was under-treasurer from 1433 to 1443. Various royal grants followed, including custody of the temporalities of the see of Worcester in 1433, which he shared with some of his Worcestershire friends. The office of under-treasurer brought him into close association with Ralph, Lord Cromwell (died 1456), the treasurer, and, from at least the early 1420s, he was associated with the lords Ferrers of Chartley, a family of growing importance to Warwick in midlands politics at that time. His various employments brought him the wealth and connections to acquire extensive further property in Warwickshire and Worcestershire, as well as a better title from the bishops of Worcester to the family estate in Fladbury. 
Throgmorton was named as an executor of Warwick's will and, after Warwick's death in 1439, was made keeper of the lands of Henry Beauchamp (died 1446), the earl's under-age heir, and feoffee to Isabel, Warwick's widow. Among his fellow feoffees was Ralph Boteler, Lord Sudeley (died 1473), a rising power at court, who became Throgmorton's last patron and, with his close associate, John, Lord Beauchamp of Powick, the patron of several other men formerly associated with the earls of Warwick. In Throgmorton's will Sudeley was named as overseer, 'for grete affians and trust pt I haue hadde in his Lordeship' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/3, fol. 248'v'). 
Throgmorton died on 12 April 1445, asking that restitution be made to all those he had harmed in his career. At his death he had two sons and six married daughters, his sons-in-law nearly all from prominent midland gentry families, some from within the Warwick connection. He was buried at Fladbury, where he requested a marble stone to dignify the graves of his parents, as well as those of himself and his wife. In 1448 his widow was licensed to found a chantry there, which was eventually established in 1460. In reflection of the family's connection with the crown at both dates, it commemorates Throgmorton's service to Lancaster rather than to Warwick. Throgmorton's widow died some time after May 1449. 


@@@@@


doc= 27393


Throckmorton, Michael (d. 1558), agent for Cardinal Reginald Pole, was a son (perhaps the youngest) of Sir Robert Throgmorton or Throckmorton (c.1451-1518) of Coughton, Warwickshire, and Katherine, daughter of William Marrow or Marrowe of London. The family was well connected and Michael's elder brother Sir George Throckmorton (c.1489-1552) often sat in parliament. Michael Throckmorton was a cousin of William Peto and of Queen Katherine Parr. Although he may have enjoyed Cardinal Wolsey's patronage along with John Helyar, nothing certain is known of him before he appears in Padua in 1533 as a student of law; he was in Venice two years later, perhaps already in Reginald Pole's service. He may have carried Pole's 'Pro ecclesiasticae unitatis defensione' to Henry in 1536 and was certainly in service with Pole in 1537. Thomas Cromwell tried to capitalize on his position and use him as a spy on Pole. Throckmorton, however, either deliberately manipulated Cromwell, or came to believe that Pole was right in his controversy with Henry; and when Cromwell discovered this in mid-1537, the minister threatened Throckmorton's family with ruin. Meanwhile, Throckmorton had played a key role in Pole's legation of 1537 intended to aid the Pilgrimage of Grace; his special remit seems to have been Pole's personal safety. 
At the reorganization of the English Hospice in Rome in 1538 Michael Throckmorton was among its members, the following year serving as auditor when he was identified as Pole's secretary. On 19 May 1539 he was attainted, second on a list beginning with Pole. He appears regularly in the hospice's records as auditor until 1551, but only once as 'camerarius' ('chamberlain'). He accompanied Pole to Viterbo, and during at least some of the 1540s probably also served as his agent in Rome. At the end of the decade Throckmorton along with Richard Hilliard acted as intermediaries between Protector Somerset and Pole, and they may actually have gone to England in 1549; at least a passport for them was issued on 15 February 1549. In 1551 Peter Vannes described Throckmorton as Pole's principal servant. To Throckmorton fell the honour of carrying to Queen Mary in 1553 Pole's bull of appointment as legate to England. He left Maguzzano on 28 August. There were difficulties over his admission to the country, but he seems finally to have secured entry and thereafter to have shuttled back and forth to Pole throughout the first nine months of 1554. In return for services rendered, Mary I granted him a pardon and restored the family manor of Coughton (which was then conveyed to a cousin). Throckmorton apparently did not accompany Pole to England, instead going to Mantua where he seems to have remained for the rest of his life. This move may have been planned by Pole, who relied heavily on Mantuan agents in his diplomatic manoeuvres and on the support of the regent Cardinal Gonzaga. The fact that Throckmorton continued to identify Pole as his master supports this supposition. Then again, Throckmorton had married Agnes Hyde in Mantua, probably in 1553 when the papal licence for the ceremony identified him as living in the Roman curia. After his death he was described as having lived in Mantua 'for many years' (Archivio di Stato, Mantua, 'Registrationi notarili anno 1558', fols. 94'v'-97'v'). Once Throckmorton reached Mantua (before June 1555), he assisted the voluntary exile to Italy Edward Courtenay, lending him money and inviting him to visit. They certainly met in Verona. In 1557 Luigi Schiffanoia forwarded an English report of the victory of St Quentin, suggesting that the duke's secretary have 'our' Throckmorton translate it (Archivio di stato, Mantua, Archivio Gonzaga, b. 578, Inviati Inghilterra/Scozia, fols. 169'r'-170'v'). 
Throckmorton has been incorrectly identified as the author of or translator responsible for 'A copye of a very fyne and wytty letter sent from the ryght reverende Lewes Lippomanus byshop of Verona in Italy', apparently identical copies of which were published in Emden and London in 1556. The book is really a protestant satire as Throckmorton's identification on the title page as 'Curtigiane of Rome' indicates, together with the dedication to Pole accusing him of 'propping up prelacy' and trying to seduce the English nobility. Throckmorton is supposed to have died on 1 November 1558, leaving in Mantua a son, Francis, from a previous, undocumented, marriage. A herald's visitation of 1619 incorrectly recorded Michael Throckmorton and a brother killed at Pavia in 1525. 


@@@@@


doc= 27394


Throckmorton, Sir Nicholas (1515/16-1571), diplomat and member of parliament, was the fourth of the seven sons of Sir George Throckmorton (c.1489-1552) of Coughton, Warwickshire, and his wife, Katherine, daughter of Nicholas, first Baron Vaux of Harrowden, and his wife, Elizabeth Parr. Nicholas always regarded Katherine Parr as his first cousin. His birth date is based on John Foxe's statement that Throckmorton was thirty-five at the time of the trial of Stephen Gardiner, bishop of Winchester, in January 1551. 
When Sir George Throckmorton died in 1552 Coughton passed to his eldest son Robert. As a younger son, Nicholas could expect little in the way of patrimony. A biographical poem, written some years later by his nephew Thomas, provides some details of his youth; the poem is demonstrably unreliable at some points, but is at least plausible here. It relates that as 'a brother fourth' he was 'far from hope of land', so 'by parents' hest [he] served as a page to Richmond's Duke' (Rowse, 9). This was Henry Fitzroy, duke of Richmond and illegitimate son of Henry VIII. Sir William Parr was Richmond's steward, and it is likely that Throckmorton's parents secured this post for him. In 1532 he accompanied the young duke to France, for Henry VIII's meeting with Francois I at Boulogne. He stayed abroad for nearly a year, 'and learned the tongue, though nothing readily' (ibid.). After Richmond's death in 1536 Throckmorton entered the service of the Parrs. He served on the Scottish borders in 1543. Then, when the king married Katherine Parr later that year, he joined her household at court, along with his brother Clement. He returned to France in 1544 as a captain in the army that captured Boulogne. He began to acquire lands in Hertfordshire, and was granted an annuity from revenues that had formerly belonged to Pipewell Abbey. Other members of his family remained staunch Catholics, but he and his brothers Clement, Kellam (or Kenelm), and George began to move in the evangelical circles favoured by Queen Katherine. He visited the protestant martyr Anne Askew in prison and was present at her execution on 16 July 1546. 
The influence of Queen Katherine was probably also behind Throckmorton's entering parliament. With few intervals he was an MP during four reigns, being first returned in 1545 for the Essex borough of Maldon, where the queen was a major landowner. His connections and his religious stance helped him to continue to gain favour during Edward VI's reign. In 1547 he served under Protector Somerset in the Scottish campaign which culminated in the battle of Pinkie, and brought news of the English victory to the young king afterwards; for this he was granted an annuity of $100 and knighted in what the poem describes as an irregular ceremony performed by Edward in high spirits. No official record of this knighthood survives. The same source describes Throckmorton becoming a personal favourite of Edward's: '
The King fancied me more and more, 

For as his years so did my favour grow. 
(Rowse, 15)' About 1549 Throckmorton married Anne, daughter of Sir Nicholas Carew of Beddington. The Carews, like the Throckmortons, had long-standing court connections. 
After the fall of the duke of Somerset in autumn 1549 Throckmorton was appointed a gentleman of Edward's privy chamber and given the lucrative office of treasurer of the mint. His promotion suggests that he was already 'persona grata' with John Dudley, earl of Warwick. In April 1551 he was a member of the retinue which accompanied the marquess of Northampton on embassy to France, while after his return Throckmorton, according to Edward's 'Chronicle', was one of the gentlemen who escorted the dowager queen of Scots to Hampton Court in October, after a storm had forced her fleet to land at Portsmouth. He was involved in the king's progressive introduction to government business, and is said to have suggested that William Thomas, a humanist scholar who was also one of the clerks of the council, should prepare papers discussing political issues for Edward's consideration. As part of the government's peace-keeping policy he was licensed in 1552 to retain a small force of twenty-five men. In the previous year he had exchanged his annuity for the Northamptonshire manor of Paulerspury and additional lands in several counties. He had remained an MP, representing Devizes in the parliament that sat from 1547 to 1552 and Northamptonshire in that of March 1553; it was a measure of his continuing favour with Dudley, now duke of Northumberland, that his return for the latter seat should have been supported by the council. 
Throckmorton apparently supported the attempt to crown Lady Jane Grey after Edward VI's death. He was one of the signatories of the letters patent of mid-June 1553 designating her the rightful successor, and his wife, Anne, deputized for Jane when the latter agreed to be godmother to Edward Underhill's son. According to contemporary reports Throckmorton tried to prevent Sir Thomas Tresham from proclaiming Mary Tudor as queen at Northampton, and barely escaped with his life. It is possible, however, that his objection was to Tresham's usurping his own role as sheriff, rather than to Mary's accession, for there are signs that he tried to hedge his bets; he is said to have been one of those who sent word to Mary of Edward's death, warning her not to fall into Northumberland's hands, and he was certainly among those appointed to escort her to London. 
Throckmorton remained a member of the Commons, sitting in Mary's first parliament (October 1553) for the borough of Old Sarum rather than for Northamptonshire. His fellow burgess was his brother John, and it is likely that they secured their seats through the patronage of their kinsman William Herbert, earl of Pembroke. Nicholas Throckmorton appears to have opposed the queen's restoration of Catholicism -- his name is on a list of those who 'stood for the true religion' during this session. But although he recalled hearing Sir Richard Southwell speak against Mary's Spanish marriage -- 'I did see the whole realm against it', he wrote (HoP, 'Commons, 1509-58', 3.460) -- there is no record of his having spoken against it himself. 
Whether or not it was because of his behaviour in parliament, Throckmorton soon came under suspicion, and on 1 January 1554 he was bound over in $2000 to be of good behaviour. Despite this, on 20 February, nearly three weeks after the surrender of Sir Thomas Wyatt, Throckmorton was committed to the Tower and charged with treason for supporting Wyatt's attempt to prevent the queen's marriage to Philip of Spain. The indictment at his trial, on 17 April 1554, went so far as to say that he was 'a principal, deviser, procurer and contriver of the late Rebellion; and that Wyatt was but his minister' ('State trials', 892). The judges, as always, favoured the crown, but Throckmorton gave a bravura display of eloquence and learning to run rings round his accusers, quite possibly with the assistance, in spite of official prohibitions, of a sympathetic legal adviser. He poured ridicule on the prosecutors' attempts to find him guilty by association, and repeatedly caught them out on points of law, to the extent that Serjeant Stanford observed ruefully that 'If I had thought you had been so well furnished with Book Cases I would have been better provided for you' (ibid.). He was helped in this by the fact that the Henrician treason statutes had been repealed, and that his own alleged activities were arguably not treasonous under the statute of 26 'Edward III'. Addressing himself at least as often to the jury as to the judges, Throckmorton also played the patriotic card for all it was worth, making no effort to conceal his distaste for the queen's marriage, only denying that there was anything treasonable about this: 'It was no treason, nor no procurement of treason, to talk against the coming hither of the Spaniards' (ibid., 893). His strategy worked, and the jury acquitted him. 
The London populace rejoiced, and Wyatt's head was stolen that night, but the jurors were taken into custody, most of them having to pay heavily to be released. Throckmorton himself was kept in gaol until January 1555, in the expectation that further charges would be brought against him. After his release on a bond of $2000 he retired to his home in Northamptonshire, but in June 1556 he fled to France, fearing that he would be suspected of complicity in Henry Dudley's conspiracy. He protested his innocence, however, and Mary came to believe him, allowing his wife to send him money and then pardoning him and allowing him to return to England in May 1557. She also restored property confiscated at the time of his flight. Shortly before Mary's death Throckmorton served in the army fighting in France under the earl of Pembroke, and he also began a correspondence with Princess Elizabeth. 
At the time of Elizabeth's accession Throckmorton sent her a list of suggested political appointments. Although his choice for secretary, Sir William Cecil, was indeed appointed, Throckmorton's advice was probably of little consequence; his other recommendations were ignored. He had suggested that Nicholas Heath, the Catholic archbishop of York, should remain lord chancellor and that some further members of Mary's council might also be retained. Sir Richard Morison had characterized Throckmorton as a 'Machiavellist', and some of his advice to the queen validated the description. 'It shall not be meet', he wrote, 'that either the old [councillors] or the new should wholly understand what you mean, but to use them as instruments to serve yourself with' (HoP, 'Commons, 1509-58', 3.497). 
Throckmorton had not sat in Mary's latter parliaments, but he was returned for Lyme Regis in 1559 and for Tavistock in 1563. The journals do not record any speeches by him in the Commons, but in the 1566 session he was a member of committees dealing with law reform and the succession, and on 5 November he was one of thirty members summoned to court to hear the queen's message regarding the succession. 
Throckmorton's chief employment under Elizabeth was as a diplomat. He was well served by his intimate knowledge of public affairs and his flair for gathering intelligence. Like many of Elizabeth's advisers, he was preoccupied by fear of a continental Catholic conspiracy to unseat the queen and restore the old faith. He was eager to support the Huguenots in France, a policy to which Elizabeth was not yet converted. In May 1559 he was sent to France on his first embassy. He was given a magnificent allowance of plate with which to impress the French but had to borrow $1000 to meet his living expenses. His goals were to terminate French influence in Scotland and to regain English control of Calais, which the French had seized just before Mary's death. His correspondence with Cecil reveals the religious difficulties he had to face: when he refused to kneel at the elevation of the host he was ordered either to conform or to absent himself from services. In 1560 the Guises accused him of being involved in the conspiracy of Amboise. He overestimated the strength of the Huguenots, urged the queen to accept their offer of Le Havre in exchange for military aid, and berated Cecil for indecision. When Cecil negotiated the treaty of Edinburgh guaranteeing that Scotland would ally with England, not France, Throckmorton was given the task of securing its ratification by Mary, queen of Scots, and her husband, the French king, Francois II. He also had to bear the scandalous reports of Elizabeth's romance with Sir Robert Dudley (later earl of Leicester); there were nasty speeches which, he said, 'my ears glow to hear' ('CSP for.', '1560-61', 348). 
When Queen Mary decided to return to Scotland following her husband's death in 1561, she sought permission to travel through England. Throckmorton was not able to obtain it, so in the end she sailed directly from France to Scotland, not without some resentment at her treatment. In 1561 Throckmorton asked to be allowed to return to England himself, but the queen, troubled by a lack of competent diplomats, ignored his pleas. Lady Throckmorton did go home in 1562, and on her urging Elizabeth told Sir Thomas Smith to prepare to succeed Throckmorton as ambassador. But although Smith went to France, Catherine de' Medici, the French dowager queen, refused to grant Throckmorton permission to leave and, after the English accepted Le Havre from the Huguenots, imprisoned him. Moreover Smith and Throckmorton quarrelled, it having become clear that Smith was Cecil's man, whereas Dudley was Throckmorton's patron. In France Throckmorton came to be hated by both the Catholic Guises and the Huguenots. Finally in 1563 he succeeded in negotiating the treaty of Troyes, which settled little and spelt the end of English hopes of regaining Calais. 
In 1564 Throckmorton was at last allowed to return to England. Compensation for some of the expenses of his embassy came in the form of appointment to two lucrative offices, those of chamberlain of the exchequer and chief butler of England. He was soon sent to Scotland, with instructions to prevent Mary Stuart's marriage to Lord Darnley and if possible encourage her to marry Dudley, who had been created earl of Leicester. Success was hardly to be hoped for, and Throckmorton came home empty-handed. In 1567, after Darnley's murder and Mary's abdication and imprisonment, he returned to Scotland seeking Mary's release from captivity and a concord between her and the rebel Scottish lords. This too was unachievable. On Elizabeth's orders he declined to attend the coronation of James VI; having once again alienated both sides, he was recalled in September 1567. 
His unsuccessful diplomatic career now ended, Throckmorton attempted to avoid public life. But in 1569 he was charged with advocating the marriage of Queen Mary to the fourth duke of Norfolk. After a brief imprisonment at Windsor he remained under house arrest until the spring of 1570. He died in London of what was called 'a peripneumonia' on 12 February 1571. Leicester wrote to Walsingham: 'We have lost on Monday our good friend Sir Nicholas Throckmorton, who died in my house, being there taken suddenly in great extremity on Tuesday before; his lungs were perished, but a sudden cold he had taken was the cause of his sudden death. God hath his soul, and we his friends great loss of his body. (HoP, 'Commons, 1558-1603', 3.499)' The rumour that he had eaten a poisoned salad is unlikely to be true. 
Sir Nicholas Throckmorton was buried in the chancel of the parish church of St Katharine Cree in Aldgate, near his London residence, a mansion that had belonged to the abbey of Evesham. He had never been able to build a country house on his land at Paulerspury; instead he and his wife, who survived him, used her family home at Beddington, Surrey, when they found it possible to enjoy country life. In his will, dated 8 February 1571, Throckmorton confirmed an earlier deed in which he left a life interest in his properties in Northamptonshire, Buckinghamshire, and Oxfordshire to his wife, who was named his executor, with reversion to their eldest son William, then aged about eighteen. Lands in Worcestershire were to go to their second son Arthur, with reversions to his younger brothers Robert, Thomas, Nicholas, and Henry. (In the event William, who was a lunatic, did not inherit the eldest son's share, which went to Arthur.) Thomas was to have the London house, and Throckmorton's daughter Elizabeth, together with her brothers Nicholas and Henry, were to receive $500 each. Further bequests were made to Throckmorton's brothers Kellam and Clement, his cousin Margaret Butler, his niece Katherine Throckmorton, and several of his servants. The earl of Leicester, Sir Walter Mildmay (chancellor of the exchequer), Sir John Throckmorton, and Francis Carew were among those named to supervise the execution of the will and were left such mementoes as standing gilt cups and bowls adorned with rosemary branches. Throckmorton showed his protestant convictions in his stated desire that his funeral sermon should be preached by either Thomas Sampson or Thomas Lever, both leading puritan divines, as well as in his gift of 40's'. to the Dutch church in London. His relative Job Throckmorton, the likeliest author of the Martin Marprelate tracts, was left a coat, a cloak, and a sword. Throckmorton's daughter Elizabeth, who was only eight when he died, later married Sir Walter Ralegh. 
Throckmorton's large Renaissance tomb may still be seen at St Katharine Cree, where his head lies on his helmet, tilted towards the viewer. A fine anonymous portrait of him is preserved in the National Portrait Gallery, London. Most of his personal papers came into the possession of Sir Henry Wotton, who gave them to Charles I; they are now in the Public Record Office, London. Despite his involvement in many of the crucial episodes of the mid-Tudor period, Throckmorton never established himself as a diplomat or politician of the first rank. In intellect he was no match for Cecil, Walsingham, or Mildmay, and he lacked Leicester's charisma and connections. His Machiavellian qualities enabled him to ingratiate himself, if only temporarily, with both Mary and Elizabeth, but all too often served only to complicate his conduct of business. He seems, indeed, to have been an obsessive conspirator, who always did things in a roundabout way, when a straightforward approach might in fact have served him better. Consequently his greatest interest for posterity is arguably as a representative of the protestant side of the prolific Throckmorton family, perhaps less well known than their Catholic kinsmen but abler and more interesting. 


@@@@@


doc= 27395


Throsby, John (1740-1803), antiquary and artist, was born in the parish of St Martin's, Leicester, on 21 December 1740, the eldest son of Nicholas Throsby ('bap'. 1700, died 1782), a tailor and alderman of Leicester who was the younger son of Robert and Ann Throsby of Anstey, Leicestershire. His mother was his father's second wife, Martha Mason ('bap'. 1701, died 1797), daughter of Anthony Mason of St Nicholas's, Leicester. He was baptized at St Martin's, Leicester, on 13 January 1741 and remained in Leicester all his life, for a large part resident in the High Street. 
Educated at the free grammar school, Throsby was apprenticed as a woolcomber on 29 September 1754 and admitted as a freeman of Leicester on 29 September 1760, during his father's mayoralty. He was married by licence at St Martin's, Leicester, on 29 October 1761 to Ann Godfrey ('bap'. 1743, died 1813), daughter of Richard and Ann Godfrey of that parish. They had seventeen children, although at least six of these died in infancy. The struggle to maintain such a large family was to be a constant preoccupation. When on 24 September 1770 he was appointed parish clerk of St Martin's, a post he was to hold until his death, Throsby was first able to indulge his taste for writing. 
Throsby's first work, 'The Memoirs of the Town and County of Leicester', appeared in six volumes between 1777 and 1778, and contained a historical account from pre-Roman times onwards, drawn from previous antiquarian writings and his own research. In 1789 he raised sufficient subscriptions to commence issuing in twelve parts 'Select views in Leicestershire from original drawings containing the seats of the nobility and gentry, town views and ruins', in which he published his own drawings with an accompanying historical account and description. One part of the series appeared every two months but delays in printing the plates meant that the last part was not issued until 1792. His supplementary volume, entitled 'A Series of Excursions in the Year 1790 to the Villages and Places of Note in the County', also appeared in 1792. 
There followed, again in parts, Throsby's 'The History and Antiquities of the Ancient Town of Leicester', which he intended to be completed in 1791, as the title-page suggests, but which was actually finished in 1793. A portrait of the author aged fifty appeared as a frontispiece. Also between 1790 and 1797 he worked upon a new edition of Robert Thoroton's 'Antiquities of Nottinghamshire' (1677). The portion dealing with Nottingham, containing also 'all that is valuable in Deering', appeared first in 1795. In 1797 this volume was reprinted as part of a three-volume series entitled 'Thoroton's History of Nottinghamshire Republished with Large Additions', illustrated again with Throsby's drawings. 
As a collector and antiquarian, Throsby followed with interest the unearthing of archaeological remains. In 1793 he published an open letter to the president of the Society of Antiquaries entitled 'Letter to the earl of Leicester on the recent discovery of the Roman cloaca or sewer at Leicester with some thoughts on the jewry wall'. Reporting in detail on the discovery of Roman remains, he urged a closer investigation. Among other pamphlets, in 1795 he published 'Thoughts on the provincial corps raised and now raising in support of the British constitution at this awful period, by a private in the Leicestershire regiment', drawing on his own experience of service with the Loyal Leicestershire volunteer cavalry. 
In later life Throsby suffered a lingering illness and impoverished circumstances, and was supported by the efforts of friends who raised money by subscription. He died on 5 February 1803 and was buried on 8 February at St Martin's, where a tablet in his memory was erected over the old vestry door. 
A man of humility and integrity, Throsby enjoyed great respect locally, although he suffered from the prejudice of other scholars owing to his relative poverty and lack of education. John Nichols incorporated much of his work in his own history of the county, particularly relating to Leicester, and purchased the copperplates for Throsby's Leicester volume after his death. Although he recalled Throsby as 'a man of natural genius' (Nichols, 'History and Antiquities', 1.602), Nichols, in emphasizing the difficulties suffered by Throsby in later life, effectively belittled his achievements. Throsby deserves fuller credit both for his own research and for his drawings. 


@@@@@


doc= 27396


Dorothea Ann Thrupp (1779-1847), writer, was born on 20 June 1779 in London, the eldest daughter of Joseph Thrupp and his first wife, Mary Burgon (died 1795). She contributed under the signature Iota to juvenile magazines edited by Caroline Fry. She wrote several hymns; one, 'A Little Ship on the Sea', was a great favourite with children. She also published some manuals, including 'Songs by the Way' and 'Thoughts for the Day' (1836-7), and translations from Pascal and Fenelon. She died at Hamilton Place, St John's Wood, London, in November 1847. 


@@@@@


doc= 27397


Thrupp, Frederick (1812-1895), sculptor, was born on 20 June 1812 at Paddington Green, Middlesex, the youngest son of Joseph Thrupp (died 1821), a coachmaker, and his second wife, Mary Pillow (died 1845). The family had been settled for many years near Worcester, but Joseph Thrupp moved to London about 1765, and from 1774 managed a coach factory in George Street, near Grosvenor Square. Frederick went to the Revd W. Greenlaw's school at Blackheath, Kent, and then attended Henry Sass's academy in Bloomsbury. In 1829 he won a silver medal from the Society of Arts for a chalk drawing from a bust, and on 14 June 1830 he was admitted to the Royal Academy Schools. Thrupp first exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1832, when he showed 'The Prodigal Returned', and thereafter he exhibited there regularly until 1880. He also showed at the British Institution between 1837 and 1862. 
On 15 February 1837 Thrupp started for Rome, accompanied by James Uwins, nephew of the painter Thomas Uwins, and arrived there on 17 March. He soon involved himself in the international community of artists in the city: he made the acquaintance of the Danish sculptor Bertel Thorvaldsen and formed lasting friendships with the British sculptors William Theed (1804-1891) and R. J. Wyatt and the painters Joseph Severn, Penry Williams, and Edward Lear. He also received advice and encouragement from the sculptor John Gibson, who is said to have admired his statue 'Ferdinand' (1837) and who obtained several commissions for him. 
Thrupp returned to London in October 1842 and bought a house at 232 New Road, where he built a large gallery and studio. He remained at the family home, 15 Paddington Green, until his mother's death in 1845, after which he moved with two of his sisters to New Road. In 1844 he showed two works at the exhibition held in Westminster Hall to choose sculptors to design statuary for the new houses of parliament: three years later he received commissions for two figures of Robert, earl of Oxford, and Robert Fitzwalter for the chamber of the House of Lords, which he executed in electroplated zinc. In 1846 he had been commissioned to produce the marble statue of Sir Fowell Buxton in Westminster Abbey. Thrupp's success, however, was marred by rumours of favouritism following the competition held for the monument, as one of the judges was the sculptor's close friend, the painter George Richmond. His most prestigious public commission was the Wordsworth memorial (marble; 1854), also for Westminster Abbey. His design was chosen from a field of forty-two competing entries, though this decision too courted controversy, for according to the 'Art Journal' his model was removed from the competition 'as soon as the decision was declared, without the other competitors having had an opportunity of seeing it' ('Art Journal', 13, 1851, 222). In 1855 he executed a marble figure, 'Timon of Athens', one of a series of statues illustrating national history and literature installed in Mansion House, London. His church monuments included those to Jane, Lady Coleridge (marble; 1879), at St Mary's Church, Ottery St Mary, Devon, and the effigy of Canon Hugh Pearson (marble; 1883) at Sonning church, Berkshire. 
Thrupp made a speciality of sculpture in relief, the subjects of which he often conceived in series or cycles following Renaissance models. His pair of bronze doors with ten panels illustrating 'The Pilgrim's Progress' (exh. RA, 1868) was purchased by the ninth duke of Bedford and in 1876 presented to the Bunyan Chapel in Bedford. Another pair of doors with bronze panels illustrating George Herbert's poems (exh. RA, 1878) is in the Divinity School in Cambridge. 
Many of Thrupp's ideal works reflect his deeply held Christian beliefs, including 'A Magdalene' (exh. RA, 1841), 'The Good Shepherd' (marble, 1861, Torre Abbey, Devon), and 'St John Blessing Little Children' (exh. RA, 1875). Others treat themes from classical mythology, for example, 'Arethusa' and 'Hebe and the Eagle', and English literature, as in 'Ariel'. Although many of these were never made in permanent form (marble or bronze), their appearance is known from the large collection of the sculptor's plaster models, terracotta maquettes, and drawings which are now preserved at Torre Abbey, Torquay, Devon. These preliminary designs are a rare survival, and they show that Thrupp was a skilful draughtsman and modeller of form with an eclectic and often highly original approach to his subject matter. His drawings and clay sketches from life and his studies of animals are particularly sensitive and well observed. 
Late in life, on 11 July 1885, Thrupp married Sarah Harriet Ann Frances (1845-1916), the eldest daughter of John Thurgar of Norwich and Algiers. He spent the winter of 1885-6 in Algiers and in the following year stayed at San Remo, Italy, and visited the Pyrenees. In 1889 he visited Antwerp, Brussels, and Cologne. In 1887 he had left London and moved to Torquay. He had a house in Upton, Devon, and frequented the art school at the Vivian Institute. The years 1892-4 were spent in negotiations for the ultimate disposal of the works from his studio. He loaned a large part of his studio collection to the corporation of Winchester in 1894 and on 8 November a Thrupp gallery was opened in the eighteenth-century Abbey House. 
Failing eyesight, followed by paralysis agitans in 1893, compelled Thrupp to abandon active work. He died of influenza and pneumonia at Thurlow, Torquay, on 21 March 1895 and was buried on 26 March in Torquay cemetery. He bequeathed to his wife all his property, including his remaining works, which, in accordance with his wishes, were presented to the city of Winchester. In 1911, however, the works were returned to the sculptor's widow, who presented the collection, in two instalments in 1911 and 1916, to Torquay corporation. The collection was subsequently stored and parts of it displayed in various locations in the town (including the Free Library and the Marine Spa) until it was transferred to Torre Abbey in 1930-32. 
In addition to his work as a sculptor, Thrupp designed and engraved an edition (1879) of Milton's 'Paradise Lost' and illustrated in lithography Coleridge's 'The Ancient Mariner' and Byron's 'The Prisoner of Chillon'. He was the author of 'The Angelic Nature' (1879) and 'The Antient Mariner and the Modern Sportsman' (1881), two essays in which he discussed his Christian beliefs in relation to art, poetry, and cruel sports. 
Frederick Thrupp's half-sister 


@@@@@


doc= 27398


Thrupp, John (1817-1870), historian, was born on 5 February 1817 at Spanish Place, Manchester Square, London, the eldest son of John Augustus Thrupp (1785-1844), coach maker, and his wife, Caroline Esther, 'nee' Cutmore. His father was the eldest son of Joseph Thrupp of Paddington Green and his first wife, Mary Burgon. The sculptor Frederick Thrupp was his uncle, and Joseph Francis Thrupp, religious writer, was a cousin. Thrupp was baptized on 2 January 1818 at St Marylebone, and was educated at Dr Laing's school at Clapham. He was articled in 1834 and admitted a solicitor in 1838; he practised afterwards at Bell Yard, Doctors' Commons. He married, on 5 October 1843, Mary (1816/17-1852), daughter of Jonas Hall Pope, surgeon. 
Thrupp's first book, 'Historical Law Tracts' (1843), demonstrates his early fascination with both history and the origin and evolution of laws, particularly those relating to marriage and parental authority, but also to slavery, property, and criminal jurisprudence. 'The history of a nation', he contended, 'is in its laws' (p. 5). His book was well received and, after the death in 1844 of his father who left him a competency, he became a regular correspondent on a wide range of historical, judicial, and cultural themes in 'Notes and Queries'. He was a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society and the Ethnological Society, and wrote for the journal of the latter. Through his interests in chess and the history of civilization he became an associate of the better-known Henry Thomas Buckle. 
Thrupp's second book was 'The Anglo-Saxon home: a history of the domestic institutions and customs of England from the fifth to the eleventh century' (1862), in which he credited the assistance of his friend and fellow historian Thomas Wright. Concerned to 'give a true picture of the domestic life of our Anglo-Saxon forefathers', and 'to trace the gradual development among them of the domestic affections and of the morals and manners of private life' (p. 1), Thrupp reviewed a vast quantity of 'laws and legal documents', which he regarded as 'by far the most trustworthy and valuable evidence' (p. iii), though he also used archaeological sources to underline his conclusion that 'the social history of the Anglo-Saxons exhibits a state of moral and domestic improvement, and that this advance may be mainly traced to the influence of the Christian religion, and of Roman laws and literature, and to the adventurous self-reliant spirit of the Anglo-Saxon race' (p. 407). The work is of its time, and is seldom now consulted. 
Following the death of his first wife Thrupp married Sarah Maria (died 1856), the younger daughter of Edward Crowley of Lavender Hill, Wandsworth, on 21 September 1854. He married, thirdly, on 26 July 1860, Susan (1820-1912), daughter of William Eley. He had no children. He evidently suffered from illness, possibly of a neurological kind; he gave up chess in 1856 on the advice of his doctor, and ceased professional practice in 1867. He died of 'paralysis' (d. cert.) at his home, Sunnyside, Falkland Road, Dorking, on 20 January 1870. All his personal effects passed to his third wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 27399


Thrupp, Joseph Francis (1827-1867), Church of England clergyman, was the only son of Joseph William Thrupp, solicitor, and Ruth Louisa, daughter of Thomas John Burgoyne. He was born in Guildford on 20 May 1827. Frederick Thrupp was his uncle. He was educated at Winchester College from 1840 to 1845 (where he was head prefect) and also at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1849 as seventh wrangler and eleventh classic, proceeding to an MA in 1852. He was a fellow at Trinity College from 1850 to 1853 and also travelled in Palestine. He was ordained a deacon at Ely and then a priest in 1852, and in the same year accepted the small college living of Barrington, Cambridgeshire. On 12 April 1853 he married Elizabeth Bligh, fourth daughter of the Revd John David Glennie of St Mary's, Park Street. 
While at Royston, Thrupp wrote 'Ancient Jerusalem' (1855) and an 'Introduction to the Psalms' (2 vols., 1860), which was well regarded at the time, but which did not become a classic. He also wrote a translation of the 'Song of Solomon' (1862). He was a member of the board of theological studies at Cambridge for a time, and in 1865 was select preacher. He was also a contributor to the 'Speaker's Commentary' and to Smith's 'Dictionary of the Bible'. He died at Ewell Road, Kingston, Surrey, on 24 September 1867, and was buried at Merrow, also in Surrey. His wife, who survived him, paid for commemorative windows to be placed in Trinity College chapel and in Barrington church. 


@@@@@


doc= 27400


Thurcytel (d. 975?), abbot of Crowland, is known almost entirely from a life attributed to his kinsman and successor but one, Abbot Egelric the younger, but preserved only as part of the history of Crowland fabricated in the late middle ages. Parts of it may represent authentic early tradition and were also reported by Orderic Vitalis in the early twelfth century. Stripped of its worst anachronisms, the Crowland tradition was that Thurcytel was a wealthy kinsman and leading adviser of kings Edward the Elder and AEthelstan, fought at 'Brunanburh' in 937, and led embassies abroad. A friend of the leaders of the Benedictine reform movement, he refounded Crowland in 948 with the support of King Eadred, whose service he left to become abbot. He gave Crowland six of his manors, recovered others by purchase from Eadred's ealdormen, and had King Edgar confirm them in 966. Crowland tradition also held that he had rebuilt the ruined abbey church, given gold and silver plate, drawn up a monastic rule supplementary to the rule of St Benedict, and had the abbey's earlier history written down. According to the history he died on 28 June 975. 
Perhaps the same Thurcytel was in 971 abbot of Bedford, where he buried his kinsman Archbishop Oscytel of York. According to Ely tradition he was later expelled from Bedford and bargained for a fraternity with the canons of St Paul's in London, where he had first been a priest, by leaving them a manor after his death. Historians since Orderic have identified the two Thurcytels, but the case is not clear-cut. 


@@@@@


doc= 27401


Thirkleby, Roger of (d. 1260), justice, was the son and heir of Thomas of Thirkleby, a man of no great importance who took his name from a hamlet of that name, in the parish of Kirby Grindalythe in the East Riding of Yorkshire. It is not clear how Roger came to work in the courts, only that by Michaelmas term 1230 he was a clerk of the bench, and by the end of 1231 he was the clerk of the bench to justice William of Raleigh. A clerk called Roger who worked for William of York was probably Roger of Whitchester rather than Roger of Thirkleby, but it is nevertheless a possibility that Thirkleby owed his introduction to the royal service to William, a fellow Yorkshireman. In 1235 or 1236 he renounced his clerical orders and married Letice, daughter of Peter of Edgefield of Norfolk, and widow of William de Roscelin. 
Thirkleby apparently remained as a clerk until Trinity term 1242, when he was promoted to justice. However, he was mentioned as a justice in a single final concord of the previous term, and had already served as an eyre justice, on the circuit of William of York, and as a puisne justice on eyres held between January 1240 and November 1241, after which he undertook gaol deliveries in Norfolk and Suffolk before receiving his promotion. He continued as a puisne bench justice until 1249, although he spent much of his time away on eyre in the counties. He was chief justice on three eyres in the south-west in 1243 and 1244, and then from 1245 to 1252 he and his colleague Henry of Bath were the leading eyre justices. He led groups of justices on the brief circuit of 1245, the major country-wide visitation of 1246 to 1249, and a brief circuit of 1251 to 1252, before withdrawing from eyres to concentrate on work at the bench. He had succeeded Bath as senior justice there early in Michaelmas term 1249, remaining until Trinity 1251, except for a visit to the continent with Richard, earl of Cornwall, and others in Hilary term 1250, after which he went on eyre. He returned to the bench, again as senior justice, in Michaelmas term 1252, receiving a salary of 100 marks p.a. In Hilary 1256, however, he again returned to eyres to complete work on a lengthy country-wide circuit which had been begun in 1252, taking over a group of justices earlier led by Simon of Wauton. The eyres were brought to an end in 1258, first by famine and then by political uncertainty. Thirkleby returned as senior justice of the bench in Michaelmas term 1258, remaining in that office until his death, which occurred shortly before 13 June 1260, when his name suddenly disappeared from the feet of fines (though the 'Flores historiarum' incorrectly says that he lived until about 24 August). In all he took part in fifty-one eyres, in thirty-eight of them as chief justice. Many of his eyre rolls have survived, including thirteen from the eyres of 1246 to 1249, the most impressive group of eyre rolls to survive for any justice up to that time. His service as a justice of assize is also reflected in two assize rolls of his, covering the years from 1249 to 1260, which have likewise survived, as have a number of his bench rolls. His clerk, by 1257, was Robert of Beverley, from his native East Riding of Yorkshire. 
It is difficult to assess the work and influence of a justice living at a time from which no law reports survive, but it is clear from contemporary opinions and the length of his career that Thirkleby was a great judge. The death of Matthew Paris a year earlier than Thirkleby has denied us his obituary of a man with whom he was personally acquainted, but the author of the 'Flores historiarum' considered him to be second to none in the kingdom in justice and the laws of the land. His judgements are mentioned in a number of thirteenth-century treatises, including the 'Summa magna' attributed to Ralph Hengham. Paris records Thirkleby's disapproval of the introduction of a particular legal principle from the church courts into the lay civil courts, likening it to the pollution of a stream with a poison. He is not known to have taken a significant part in politics, although in 1252 a speech reported by Paris shows his resentment of the power of the Poitevin faction at court, and he was able to work with the reformers who were in power after 1258, since in 1259 he was one of those appointed to sell the king's wardships and choose sheriffs. 
As a man of property Thirkleby's first recorded action was in 1233, when he secured exemption from suit of local courts and service on juries in respect of his lands in Thirkleby, Kirby Grindalythe, Newton, and Swaythorpe in the East Riding of Yorkshire. In the course of his career he added to his ancestral estates in the county, mainly in the area of the upper Derwent valley and the wolds, in such places as Wintringham, North Duffield, Knapton, East Heslerton, Gilling, Helperthorpe, Rudston, Weaverthorpe, Lowthorpe, East Lutton, and Sledmere, and also at Paull, Ottringham, and Keyingham in Holderness. In 1247 and 1250 he received grants of free warren over his demesnes in Thirkleby, Helperthorpe, and Duffield, and in 1253 the grant of a weekly market in Driffield. Thirkleby's marriage gave him life interests in Norfolk to which he added by lease and purchase, acquiring property in Erpingham, Pulham St Mary, Caister St Edmunds, Tuttington, Mattishall, Bodham, and Heckingham. Like his close colleague Henry of Bath, he also came to have interests in the Holland area of Lincolnshire, then being reclaimed from the fens, at Gedney, Fleet, Whaplode, Sutton, and Holbeach; his holdings included much marsh land. Among minor interests was property in Leicestershire, at Hallaton, and he had town houses in Bury St Edmunds and Westminster. The heir of Thirkleby's wife was Thomas de Roscelin, the son of her first marriage; she and Roger seem to have had no surviving children, since his ultimate heir was his brother Thomas who, although he held no administrative office, often witnessed royal charters and was therefore probably a royal counsellor. As his executors Thirkleby appointed Simon, abbot of Langley, Thomas of Heslerton, and Master Roger of Heslerton. 


@@@@@


doc= 27402


Turges (d. 845), viking leader, led raids into Ireland in the early ninth century and for a time was successful in the north-east. The name Turges given to him in the Irish records suggests that his real name was Thorgest (Porgestr) or Thorgils (Porgils). Nothing is known of his ancestry, although the Icelandic historian Snorri Sturluson, in his 'Heimskringla', seems to have confused Turges with a son of the Norwegian king Harald Harfagri (Harald Finehair). The most complete account of his career in Ireland is found in the tract 'Cogad Gaedel re Gallaib' ('The war of the Irish and the Foreigners') in the 'Book of Leinster'. 
Although vikings had been raiding Ireland and Britain since the late eighth century, in the second quarter of the ninth century the raiders began to use systematically the interior waterways of Ireland, and they began the establishment of permanent bases that would lead eventually to the Hiberno-Scandinavian towns. In 832 vikings plundered the monastery of Armagh three times in one month. 'Cogad Gaedel re Gallaib' claims that Turges led the raids; and at some point the abbot, named Forindan, was replaced as abbot by Turges, who assumed the office for a period of time. Those actions need not have been anti-Christian, but rather an indication of an awareness of the important connection between ecclesiastical support and political power in Ireland. He took control of the viking companies in Ireland and maintained fleets on Lough Neagh and in Louth. He also established a fleet on Lough Ree in 845, whence his troops plundered Meath and Connacht, with destruction of the monasteries of Clonmacnoise, Clonfert, Lough Derg, Terryglass, and Lorrha (Tipperary). This campaign seems to have given Turges control of the monastery of Clonmacnoise, the important midland ecclesiastical centre. His wife, Ota, put it to her own uses by giving audiences while seated on the altar of the church. This seems to have been a ceremony of divination. Also in 845 a viking force, possibly led by Turges, was defeated by the high-king Niall Caille mac Aeda at Mag Itha. Turges's supremacy ended in that year when he was captured by the king of Clann Cholmain and future high-king, Mael Sechnaill mac Maele Ruanaid, and drowned in Lough Owel (Westmeath). 
The career and death of Turges became part of Irish literature. In the eleventh century the Irish historian Gilla Coemain mac Gilla Samthainne included his drowning as a chronological marker in the versified chronicle 'Annalad anall uile'. By the twelfth century Gerald of Wales was claiming that Turges was responsible for leading the vikings into Ireland, and he gives an interesting, and apparently fictitious, story of the circumstances of his death. In that tale Turges asked for the hand of the daughter of Mael Sechnaill, who publicly agreed to the union, but secretly disguised fifteen warriors as his daughter and her retinue. When the viking came to claim his bride, Turges and his company were slain by the decoys. 


@@@@@


doc= 27403


Thorkell the Tall, earl of East Anglia (fl. 1009-1023), viking leader, magnate, and regent, was, according to saga tradition, the son of Strut Harald, earl of Sjaelland, and the brother of Sigvaldi, the supposed leader of the Jomsvikings. He may have been married to a daughter of AEthelred II the Unready, whom sources variously name as Edith or Wulfhild. In August 1009, after an adventurous early career in Scandinavia, Thorkell arrived off the coast of Sandwich with a large fleet intent upon pillage. He immediately joined forces with other viking chieftains then operating in England, including his brother Hemingr, and for the next three years plundered towns and villages in Kent, Essex, East Anglia, Wessex, and the eastern midlands. The English response to the threat, which included a programme of public prayer and penance, proved ineffectual and in 1011 King AEthelred II agreed to pay $48,000 to the raiders as tribute ('gafol'), in return for peace. In September 1011, however, while the money was being raised, Thorkell's forces seized Canterbury and took its archbishop, AElfheah, captive. The archbishop's refusal to pay ransom led to his martyrdom on 19 April 1012 at the hands of his enraged, drunken captors, despite Thorkell's strenuous efforts to protect him. When the tribute was finally paid and oaths of peace were sworn, the viking fleet dispersed, but Thorkell chose to remain in England and, in a remarkable turnabout, entered the service of AEthelred II with forty-five ships, promising to defend his country in return for food and clothes. 
Thorkell fought for AEthelred II against Swein Forkbeard, king of Denmark, when the latter, inspired and perhaps goaded by Thorkell's success, invaded England in 1013 and he was with the English king in London during Swein's unsuccessful first siege of the town. But Thorkell proved almost as costly an ally as enemy: despite demanding and receiving payment and provisioning, his forces still 'ravaged as often as they pleased' ('ASC', s.a. 1013, text C). When London finally submitted late in 1014, Thorkell abetted King AEthelred's flight to Normandy to join his wife and children in exile at the court of his brother-in-law Duke Richard (II). From 1014 to 1016 Thorkell disappears from the pages of the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle'. For these critical years historians are forced to rely upon cryptic skaldic poetry and the dubious authority of the 'Encomium Emmae Reginae' and the later Norse sagas, which present conflicting traditions about his relations with King AEthelred, Edmund Ironside, and their great opponent, Cnut. Thorkell apparently helped restore AEthelred to his throne in the spring of 1014, a month or two after Swein's sudden death, but how long he remained loyal to the English king is questionable. The favour that Cnut showed Thorkell in 1017 suggests that he had switched his support to the Danish victor at a most opportune moment. According to the 'Encomium Emmae', this occurred even before Cnut's invasion. The encomiast reports that Thorkell, regretting that he had remained in England without Cnut's permission after the death of King Swein, sailed to Denmark with nine ships to make amends. There he renewed his fealty to Cnut and pledged him the aid of thirty-nine ships for his planned conquest of England. A later Scandinavian tradition asserts that Thorkell defected in response to the death of his brother Heming, who was supposedly treacherously killed in a massacre of Swein's 'thingmen' engineered by Ulfcytel and Edmund Ironside. But it is more likely that Thorkell remained loyal to AEthelred for some months following Cnut's arrival in England. He may have commanded the fleet of forty ships which, according to the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', Eadric Streona 'seduced' and brought over to Cnut in late 1015. Thorkell distinguished himself fighting for Cnut in the battle of Sherston in the summer of 1016 and, according to the 'Supplement to 'Jomsvikinga saga'', preserved in the late fourteenth-century 'Flateyjarbok', avenged his brother by slaying Ulfcytel (here called Snilling) during the battle of 'Assandun' on 18 October 1016. This same source also claims that he married Ulfcytel's widow, Wulfhild, the daughter of King AEthelred, and was instrumental in arranging Cnut's marriage to AEthelred's widowed queen, Emma. 
King Cnut rewarded Thorkell's services handsomely, bestowing upon him the earldom of East Anglia, one of the four great provinces into which England was now divided. Between 1017 and 1021 Thorkell was the most powerful secular magnate in England, his name invariably appearing first among the earls in the witness lists of Cnut's surviving charters. He probably served as regent during Cnut's sojourn in Denmark in 1019-20, since he is the only earl Cnut addresses by name in his letter to the English people ('English Historical Documents', 1, no. 48) and is explicitly charged in that text with enforcing royal authority and law. In 1020 he was present with Cnut at the dedication of a minster at 'Assandun' and in that same year supported Bishop AElfwine of Elmham's replacement of clerics with monks at Bury St Edmunds. 
In November 1021 Thorkell, for reasons not explained in the sources, fell out with Cnut and was outlawed. He returned to Denmark and may have resumed his old profession of marauder. Just as mysteriously, two years later he and Cnut met together in Denmark and were reconciled. Cnut entrusted Denmark and the care of his son to Thorkell and Thorkell gave Cnut his own son to take back with him to England. How Thorkell achieved this stunning reversal of fortune is unclear, but his activities in Scandinavia after his exile may have persuaded Cnut that it was more dangerous to have him as an enemy than a friend. After 1023 Thorkell disappears from the historical record. When and how he died is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 27404


Thurland, Sir Edward (1607-1683), lawyer and politician, was born at Reigate, Surrey, on 22 February 1607, the eldest son of Edward Thurland (died in or before 1644) of Reigate and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1642), daughter and coheir of Richard Ellyott, also of Reigate. Although his family originally came from Nottinghamshire, both his grandfather and father were London merchants. Thurland matriculated as a pensioner from Clare College, Cambridge, at Easter 1624, but then entered the Inner Temple on 20 October 1625, being called to the bar on 15 October 1634. He was elected to the Short Parliament for Reigate on 20 April 1640, but played no discernible part in its affairs or in the ensuing civil wars. Following the decease of his father, in August 1644 he was assessed at $2000 by the committee for the advance of money. By 1647 he had married Elizabeth (died 1676), daughter of Lionel Wright of Buckland, Surrey. They had one son, Edward, who was fifteen in 1663. 
During the 1640s and 1650s Thurland appears to have kept a low profile, quietly going about his legal practice. He returned to public affairs in 1659, being returned to parliament for Reigate and accepting local office as a Surrey JP. He was re-elected to the Convention of 1660, and following the Restoration, which saw the duke of York granted the manor of Reigate, he was named on 17 June as solicitor-general to the duke. Thurland was named to several parliamentary committees on ecclesiastical issues, and Lord Wharton felt that he might be friendly towards a church settlement embodying a form of modified episcopacy. In the event Thurland opposed the incorporation of the Worcester House declaration into law. Re-elected to the House of Commons again in 1661, he proved to be a supporter of the court and of the interests of the duke of York. In 1661 he became recorder of the Surrey boroughs of Reigate, Kingston, and Guildford, and was named a commissioner for corporations in that county in 1662. On 14 April 1665 he was appointed a king's counsel, saving for his office of solicitor to the duke, and on 22 April he was knighted. Thurland made strenuous efforts to delay the attack on the earl of Clarendon in 1667, and that same year Andrew Marvell characterized him as a one of 'the lawyers mercenary band' of court supporters ('Poems and Letters', 1.145). On 12 May 1670 Thurland became attorney-general to the duke of York. He was still considered a member of the court party in 1671. 
In December 1672, following the furore over the declaration of indulgence, a decision was taken in the committee for foreign affairs of the privy council that Thurland would be made a judge. In January 1673 Thurland became a serjeant-at-law, his sponsors being the dukes of York and Monmouth. On 24 January he was made a baron of the exchequer. Thurland retained his judgeship until 29 April 1679, when it was revoked, officially on the grounds of ill health, but the times were then unpropitious for an adherent of the duke of York. Thurland died on 14 January 1683 and was buried at Reigate. His will exhibited some distrust of his son and heir, Edward, making legacies specifically for the use of his daughter-in-law and her children, but instructing that his chambers be sold to pay his son's debts and that his law books be kept for the use of his grandson, also Edward, who eventually served as MP for Reigate. 


@@@@@


doc= 27405


Thurloe, John (bap. 1616, d. 1668), government official, was baptized on 12 June 1616, the only son of Thomas Thurloe ('bap'. 1578, died 1633), rector of Abbess Roding, Essex, and his wife, Sarah (died 1637), widow of a Mr Ewer, with whom she had three sons, including the regicide Isaac Ewer (d. 1650/51). 
Thurloe's father, who was probably from Landbeach, Cambridgeshire, matriculated from Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, about 1593, and graduated BA in 1598 and MA in 1610. He was presented to Abbess Roding in 1612 but died in November 1633. Administration of the estate was secured to Sarah Thurloe in January 1634 by their son. John Thurloe's first marriage, in or before 1636, was to a member of the Peyton family, possibly related to Sir Robert Peyton of Wisbech. She died soon afterwards and their two sons died in infancy. His second marriage was to Ann Lytcott or Lycott ('b'. 1620, died after 1674), daughter of Sir John Lytcott and nephew of Sir Thomas Overbury; they had four sons and two daughters. 
Thurloe's first patron, the lawyer and politician Oliver St John, claimed that he was 'bred from a youth' in his service. He was sponsored through Furnival's Inn by St John, who employed him as 'a sort of personal assistant' (Aubrey, 9). He appears as a witness in St John's legal business from 1637. In the 1630s he was a trustee for Oliver Cromwell's aunt, Lady Joan Barrington, as well as legal agent for St John, the husband of a favourite cousin of Cromwell, so his relationship with the latter probably dates from this period. In January 1645 he acted as secretary to St John and the other parliamentarian commissioners at the abortive peace negotiations at Uxbridge. He was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 6 July 1646 for a fee of $3 10's'., and acted for St John as a legatee of the earl of Essex. In June 1647 he was one of Richard Cromwell's sureties at Lincoln's Inn. In March 1648 he became clerk or receiver of the cursitors' fines (fees), a post under the commissioners of the great seal. He later claimed, with regard to the king's death, that 'he was altogether a stranger to that fact, and to all the counsels about it, having not had the least communication with any person whatsoever therein' (Thurloe, 'State papers', 7.914). In February 1650 he was made one of the treasurers of the company set up to drain the fens, in which capacity he assisted in draining the south level near Ely, one of the smaller drainage channels being named after him. He was allotted 500 acres of drainage land and became deputy governor of the company in 1656. In October 1650 he appeared on Cromwell's behalf before the admiralty court and in January 1651 delivered a petition to the committee for compounding to recover Monmouthshire rents for him. In 1652 his association with St John led to his acting as a trustee of the Buckinghamshire estates of Cromwell's late son-in-law, Henry Ireton. 
St John and Walter Strickland were sent to the United Provinces in early 1651 to negotiate an alliance and possibly a federal union on behalf of the English republic, and Thurloe accompanied them as secretary. In April he was sent back to London to secure an extension of the time allowed the ambassadors for their negotiations and immediately on his return wrote to the states general informing them the ambassadors would stay but warning of the need to redress assorted affronts the English believed themselves to have suffered. Cynical about Dutch goodwill, he informed Walter Frost, secretary of state, that the Dutch seemed to have learned from the Scots and the French to profess much but perform nothing, except as to their own advantage. Though the mission returned empty-handed, his career prospered. 
Thurloe's reliability in the Netherlands was probably the main reason for his appointment as secretary to the council of state on 29 March 1652 in succession to the late Walter Frost, with a salary of $600 p.a. and 'convenient lodgings' in Whitehall. On 1 December 1652 he took over as clerk to the committee for foreign affairs and on 8 July 1653 (after the fall of the Rump Parliament) was given direction of the intelligence service, replacing Thomas Scot, with his salary now set at $800 p.a. On 22 December 1653 he 'took his place at the [council] board, being thereunto called by the Council', in effect, 'a full Councillor in all but name' (Aubrey, 37), though not appointed to the council of state in his own right until July 1657. He held the crucial co-ordinating role connected to the central organ of government from March 1652 to May 1659. Though he retained chambers at Lincoln's Inn (where he became a bencher in February 1654), was elected MP for Ely for 1654-5 and 1656-8, and was named a governor of the Charterhouse (November 1657) and chancellor of Glasgow University (February 1658), his time was devoted to his Whitehall affairs. From November 1655 he also had total control over the dissemination of news, with the banning of all printed newsbooks except the government controlled 'Mercurius Politicus' and 'Public Intelligencer'. His agents had the right to open all letters, providing him with a mass of information to assess. From 3 May 1655 he was postmaster-general, and from 1657 farmed the Post Office revenues for $1000 p.a. He recruited a number of assistants including William Jessop for foreign affairs and Philip Meadowes to assist Milton with Latin translation. Samuel Moreland and the younger Isaac Dorislaus assisted with deciphering royalist codes. 
Thurloe's intelligence work was crucial to the regime, given the extent of disaffection and the royalist threat, coupled with the possibilities of invasion, particularly from France. He took over and extended a large network of government informers and occasional correspondents, keeping watch on domestic disaffection, the movements of exiled royalists, and the intentions of foreign governments. His task was made easier not merely by his command of the state's resources, but by the amateurishness of the royalist plotters, while each of his cumulative successes dissuaded potential plotters as they added to the myth of the 'all seeing little secretary' (Marshall, 24). But his vigilance, ability to assess gossip and confessions, and repeated round-ups of suspects hamstrung most serious plots. Thus in January 1655 he broke up the midland arms network of the royalist 'action party', pursuing the investigation of their planned series of risings and thereby unravelling the series of planned conspiracies which in the end produced only Penruddock's revolt. He correctly reckoned that the royalist failure in spring 1655 would limit active resistance in future and discourage foreign meddling. Thereafter a number of double agents on the continent like Sir John Henderson and Henry Manning enabled him to keep watch on the court of Charles II and pre-empt further risings. Most notably, by November 1656 he had suborned Sir Richard Willys, or Willis, one of the leaders of the 'sealed knot'. Henderson and Willys even visited London to meet Thurloe in secret, though Manning was detected by the royalists and shot in 1655. His information allowed him to arrest royalist plotters in southern England in the spring of 1658, plans for a London rising being 'allowed... to mature until its leaders had been given rope enough to hang themselves' (Underdown, 227). But small groups of dedicated men had always remained undetected and, most notably, he failed to stop Miles Sindercombe, who managed to plant incendiary materials in the chapel at Whitehall on 8 January 1657 before capture, having disregarded Jean-Baptiste Stouppe's warnings. The regime's formulation of foreign policy also depended on the accuracy and loyalty of his informants. Pepys later reported statements that Cromwell had allowed him $70,000 p.a. 'and thereby carried all the secret of all the princes of Europe at his girdle' (Pepys, 'Diary', 9.70-71). Official payments to him for intelligence work rarely met his expenditures, and by May 1659 he was owed $1665 3's'. 2died But his expenditure was nowhere near some post-Restoration estimates, and his successor, Morrice, put his resources at $1200-$2000 p.a. 
Thurloe played a central role in foreign affairs in his time as secretary. He corresponded not only with unofficial agents across Europe but also with English ambassadors abroad, beginning with Bulstrode Whitelocke, in Sweden, early in 1654, and drafted instructions for the various missions. He developed a lucid and relaxed style of correspondence, but insisted on being comprehensively informed of useful news. He also received and dealt with the ambassadors of lesser powers, though one such, the Venetian envoy, Paulucci, reckoned him 'most difficult of access and with scant knowledge of foreign affairs'. Numerous committees on matters of foreign policy had 'Mr Secretary to assist' (Venning, 31). He took part in negotiations with the Dutch ambassadors in autumn 1653 and thereafter was the council's conduit to the resident ambassador, Nieupoort, and part of the negotiating team for the maritime treaty. He claimed, to Henry Cromwell, that the Dutch intended 'no goodwill to this nation or indeed to the Protestant cause, however they profess the contrary'. From April 1654 he assisted the councillors delegated to negotiate simultaneously with rival French and Spanish ambassadors. According to Ellis Leighton he headed the council faction which was not fixedly pro-France or pro-Spain but sought to keep England free of formal treaty commitments to promote domestic stability and to keep France and Spain at war, though the French ambassadors' reports indicate that they believed him to be hostile. In negotiations with the Swedish ambassador, Count Bonde, in spring 1656 he was the tough talker who insisted that Sweden cease supplying pitch, tar, hemp, and flax to Spain, as they were of use in war. Bonde said that they were principal exports, and he retorted that in that case they could easily find new outlets. Thurloe formally joined the council of trade only in autumn 1656, and the Jamaica committee in October 1657. His brother-in-law Martin Noell, for example, was the government's principal supplier for the Caribbean expedition. 
As with the council Thurloe's real influence was behind the scenes. His access to information and the range of his duties allowed him to develop a broader and more informed view than most of his colleagues. As to his views, he believed that Cromwell should become the 'caput et dux feoderis protestantis'. But in his summary of protectoral foreign policy, written for Clarendon about 1660, he understandably chose to downplay the importance of protestant links as against strategic considerations. English policy, he claimed, was based on a fear of royalist invasion and of France as its principal promoter. Accordingly, Spain, the weaker power, was a less dangerous enemy. Thus England sought to contain France by aiding rebels in 1654-6, and thereafter to tie it into alliance, but only when convenient to England. The acquisition of Dunkirk in 1658 was designed both to aid European protestants and to threaten France and the Dutch. 
Thurloe took a greater role in Cromwell's second parliament than in its predecessor, being called upon to set forth government policy on various issues. On 25 December 1656 he spoke in favour of continuing the decimation tax on royalists, and may also have delivered a speech in January 1657 denouncing pre-1642 royal arbitrariness and religious oppression. On 7 March 1657 he announced the levying of more troops. He orchestrated the government's efforts in the spring to get all legislation passed since 1642 ratified and on 28 June he and other councillors recommended that Cromwell create a union of foreign protestants. But he is reckoned to have 'performed poorly in parliament and was out of his depth in the rough and tumble of the Commons' (Marshall, 66). With a commitment to conservative, constitutionalist politics and a lack of sympathy for the military, he took a leading role in encouraging Cromwell to take the crown, a debate which dominated his time in the spring of 1657, later complaining that Cromwell did not follow his instincts enough. 
Thurloe's effectiveness was limited by bouts of serious ill health, one of which, in early 1658, indisposed him for weeks. Business was paralysed in his absence. As the Venetian ambassador, Giavarina, reported, 'all must pass through the hands of this Secretary, who alone attends to and superintends all the most important interests of State' ('CSP Venice', '1655-6', 188). Cromwell placed complete trust in him: according to George Downing only Thurloe also knew the 'scheme of things' (Thurloe, 'State papers', 6.856) while in 1657 Bulstrode Whitelocke named him as one of the few intimates with whom Cromwell would 'lay aside his greatness' and both discuss policy and relax to smoke a pipe and make verses ('Diary of Bulstrode Whitelocke', 464). Successive chief governors of Ireland, Charles Fleetwood and Henry Cromwell, relied on him for information and assistance. Outside commentators held a similar view: the 1656 satire 'A Game of Picquet' depicted him watching Cromwell's advisers and proposing to 'stand behind a chair and make and shuffle the cards with which you are to play the next game'. 
Thurloe had not abandoned hopes of reviving the kingship proposals as late as July 1658. When Cromwell lay dying he took the lead in persuading him to nominate his elder surviving son, Richard, as heir and subsequently acted as Richard's principal adviser. A serious rift arose between civilians such as Thurloe and senior army officers and another illness afflicted him that autumn. He was returned to Richard Cromwell's parliament in January 1659 for Huntingdon, Wisbech, and Cambridge University and chose to sit for the university. He probably drafted Richard's opening speech and on 1 February tackled disaffection head on by proposing a bill of recognition to legalize Richard's position and stop any reassertion of the Commons' powers, which he called tyranny. The government's principal business manager in parliament, he also gave a masterly analysis of their Baltic policy on 19 February, explaining the need for even-handedness between Sweden and Denmark to keep the sound open and castigating Dutch machinations. He somewhat desperately maintained that with God's help the protectorate could survive the hostility of the senior officers and the Commonwealthsmen in parliament. He alone advised Richard not to dissolve parliament as the army leader Desborough insisted. 
Following the Rump's recall on 6 May, Thurloe was dismissed by the new council of state and Thomas Scot recalled. He refused to communicate his ciphers to Scot, calling him a 'noisy windbag'. Turned out of his Whitehall lodgings to bystanders' jeers, he retired to John Upton's house at Hammersmith. He was approached in the summer of 1659 to assist the Restoration but refused. He also had to face a civil lawsuit claiming $10,000 for wrongful imprisonment, and on 11 October 1659 parliament annulled his Post Office contract. He still kept up some correspondence abroad, and had leave to travel in and out of London without hindrance, taking new lodgings at Dial Court, Lincoln's Inn. He may have received support from his wife's relative, Colonel John Clarke, a member of the committee of safety from October 1659. 
Thurloe's position improved with Monck's arrival in London, and on 2 February 1660 he began an attempt to reclaim about $3000 for disbursements on intelligence and other matters. Monck secured his reappointment as joint secretary of state on 27 February and his Whitehall lodgings were restored. Monck also recommended him, unsuccessfully, as MP for Bridgnorth in the Convention. Unfortunately since the summer of 1659 his assistant, Moreland, had been secretly passing on his intelligence to the royalists. According to Moreland, Willys approached him on the king's behalf, but he replied 'I prefer to go the nation's pace, no faster' (Aubrey, 159). Preferring a limited protectorate, in May 1660 he was still working with St John and Pierrepoint to obtain Richard Cromwell's restoration, putting principle before safety. On 14 May the Convention House of Commons resolved that 'Mr Secretary Thurloe, being accused of high treason, be secured' and that a committee examine him ('JHC', 8.26). According to rumour he had boasted that he had 'a black book which should hang half them that went for Cavaliers' if he was prosecuted ('Fifth Report', HMC, 208). Whether or not he managed to blackmail the new government, on 27 June he was released and on 29 June the Commons resolved that he should have liberty to attend the secretaries of state, presumably to pass on his expertise. He was supposed to have met Clarendon, and his memoranda on foreign policy may be a result. On 8 August the Lords committee considering the 'Bill of Indemnity' struck out the clause referring to him. 
Thurloe retired into obscurity, living partly at Lincoln's Inn and partly at Great Milton in Oxfordshire. Apart from testifying to St John's innocence of regicide he kept out of politics, though in January 1661 some of his property was seized when Upton's house was searched. He was removed as governor of the Charterhouse in January 1661, along with Whitelocke, whose house at Anvills, Hungerford, he considered buying in 1667. On 22 May 1667 Whitelocke met him and his fellow ex-councillor Sir Charles Wolseley at a Greenwich conventicle where John Owen preached. His health declined quickly thereafter and in January 1668 he had a severe attack of the stone at Lincoln's Inn. On 21 February he had dinner at his chambers in Dial Court with his fellow ex-councillor Philip Jones, requested him to withdraw while he took some medicine, and as he returned collapsed into his arms 'but never spake word and immediately died', probably of a heart attack (Aubrey, 210). He was buried in Lincoln's Inn chapel. He was survived by his second wife, who lived until at least 1674. John, the eldest of his three sons, was admitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1672, acquired the manor of Astwood, Buckinghamshire, in 1674, and died in 1682. 
Giavarina wrote spitefully that from a 'mere lawyer's notary' Thurloe had 'amassed a heap of gold' and had shown 'utter absence of gratitude' ('CSP Venice', '1659-61', 17). He does not appear to have been notably corrupt, but he did make financial gains, and could afford to build a grandiose new house -- possibly designed by John Webb -- at the confiscated Wisbech Castle. He had obtained the manors of Wisbech Barton, Elm, and Tydd St Giles during the 1650s, all previously episcopal property and all, like Wisbech Castle, repossessed by the bishop of Ely at the Restoration. In Richard Cromwell's parliament he was accused of receiving $1000 p.a. from the farmers of the London ale and beer excise to keep them from lawsuits by the brewers. He did propose a giant fee farm for all duties except ale and beer, and a separate one for them, in 1657 but it was dropped. He was also accused of making excessive profits as postmaster-general and confidently prepared his accounts, but this was not pursued either. The only visible evidence is of two unsuccessful attempts to corrupt him -- Richard Wylde offered him $500 p.a., a share in pearl fisheries, and a diamond for his wife if he secured the Surat consulship in the new East India Company -- he did not -- and the intelligencer Joseph Bampfield offered to divide the pre-emption of tin from Cornwall. Thurloe occasionally tried to exert influence on behalf of his relations, and Broghill in Scotland rebuked him concerning his intervention on behalf of his relative by marriage Colonel Lydcott in 1655, but not to an excessive extent, and Thurloe was more often the recipient of such requests for favours. 
The importance of the 'little secretary' to the protectoral regime cannot be exaggerated, both through his indispensability as central co-ordinator of government activity and his roles as chief of intelligence and resident expert on European affairs and royalist machinations. Like many intelligencers, his success owed much to luck and guesswork, and was mingled with failures, but he has been considered 'one of the forefathers of espionage and intelligence gathering in England' (Marshall, 304). He has been described as 'no radical, let alone revolutionary, but... a highly efficient and... honest public servant', but one 'out of his depth as a political and parliamentary leader' (Aylmer, 258-9). Government policy coincided with his known views, but his dominance in input, under Richard Cromwell, was brief. His appetite for work, ability at assimilating information, shrewd judgement, and commitment to the protectorate are as evident as his quiet ruthlessness. His fate in 1659-60 testifies both to his limited hold on power and his loyalty to his principles. Thurloe's papers, of major value for the history of the protectorate, were hidden behind a false ceiling in the garret of his chambers, discovered there in the reign of William III, sold to lord chancellor Somers and eventually presented to the Bodleian Library, Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 27406


Thurlow, Edward, first Baron Thurlow (1731-1806), lord chancellor, was born at Bracon Ash, Norfolk, on 9 December 1731, the eldest son of Thomas Thurlow ('bap'. 1695, died 1762), a Church of England clergyman who held a series of small livings in Suffolk and Norfolk, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 'c'.1736), the daughter of Robert Smith of Ashfield, Suffolk. The roots of his father's family at Burnham Overy, Norfolk, went back at least to the sixteenth century. It was characteristic of Thurlow's inverted snobbery that, in later life, he claimed descent not from Oliver Cromwell's secretary John Thurloe, but from a (possibly invented) humbler ancestor, 'Thurloe the carrier'. He had two sisters and three brothers, of whom Thomas Thurlow (1737-1791) became successively bishop of Lincoln and of Durham and John Thurlow (died 1782) became an alderman of Norwich. 
Thurlow was for his first few years educated at home, but at the age of nine he was sent to Tacolneston, Norfolk, for two years under the tutorship of one Mr Browne. Then he studied under a Mr Brett at a small school at Seckars, Scarning, from approximately 1742 until 1747. He quickly acquired, and never lost, a reputation for recalcitrance and rudeness which was probably as well deserved as the recognition of his intellectual abilities. Later in his life, when attorney-general, Thurlow is said to have rebuffed a greeting from his former schoolmaster Brett with the words 'Am I bound to recollect every scoundrel who recollects me?' (Gore-Browne, 4). Thurlow's last school was King's, Canterbury, where he spent a year under the tuition of the formidable headmaster Robert Talbot. Here he showed more amenability, and he subsequently spoke of Talbot with appreciation. On 5 October 1748 he was admitted as a pensioner to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, where he was a Perse scholar from 1748 to 1751. His conduct at university was, by all accounts, ill-mannered and rebellious in the extreme, and his idleness and sardonic wit brought him into constant conflict with authority. Only John Smith, his tutor, earned his approval. In 1751 Thurlow withdrew from Cambridge without a degree; according to the tactful obituary notice in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' 'the vivacity of his conduct obliged him to leave' ('GM', 1st ser., 76, 1806, 882). Thurlow had determined to study for the legal profession, and on 9 January 1752 he was admitted a member of the Inner Temple. He worked as a pupil in the offices of Chapman, a solicitor in Holborn, where he formed a lifelong friendship with a fellow pupil, the poet William Cowper. Although Cowper recorded that he and Thurlow spent their time 'giggling and making giggle instead of studying the law' (Gore-Browne, 7), it is clear that Thurlow worked diligently, albeit irregularly, at his studies; he also spent much of his time in witty conversation at Nando's Coffee House in Fleet Street, which was to play an important part in his private as well as his professional life. 
Thurlow was called to the bar on 22 November 1754, took chambers in Fig-Tree Court, and began to practise on the western circuit. Although he established firm professional friendships with Lloyd Kenyon and John Dunning, his early years at the bar were not marked by success. His earnings were meagre, he was severely chastised by Lord Mansfield when defeated in a suit over a marriage settlement, and in 1762 he appears to have contemplated quitting the legal profession. But there were achievements as well. In 1758 he made a powerful impression when he resisted, and repaid with interest, the aggressive tactics of Sir Fletcher Norton in the case of Luke Robinson versus the earl of Winchilsea. He also received favourable attention when appearing for the defence of the publisher Jacob Tonson in a copyright suit in 1761. His forensic techniques depended on massive if rather unsystematic knowledge, the ability to master a brief very quickly, and a courtroom manner which could switch rapidly from the ferocious to the sardonic. He cultivated an image of rough, undeferential integrity. His success, though delayed, was substantial. He was elected a bencher of the Inner Temple in 1762 and took silk later in the same year. 
By this time Thurlow's oratorical abilities had come to the attention of politicians, and he became friendly with Lord Weymouth, a leading figure among the followers in parliament of the duke of Bedford. In June 1765 Weymouth was briefly appointed to the lord lieutenancy of Ireland and proposed to make Thurlow his chief secretary. Although in August Weymouth had to yield the lord lieutenancy to a Rockinghamite successor, he admired Thurlow sufficiently to bring him into parliament as member for the Staffordshire borough of Tamworth in December 1765. In the House of Commons Thurlow quickly established himself as the legal authority, and prominent speaker, of the Bedford group. He associated himself fully with that group's strong advocacy of British authority over the North American colonies and with its opposition to the domestic radicals, whose current champion was John Wilkes. Further honours now came Thurlow's way; in 1769 he became reader at the Inner Temple, and in the same year was elected recorder of Tamworth. 
It seems that Thurlow never married, but in 1759 or 1760 he became acquainted with Catherine (Kitty) Lynch (died 'c'.1760), the daughter of John Lynch, the dean of Canterbury, and his wife, Mary Wake. A romantic affair quickly developed, but it is not clear whether they were married, or, if they were, when and where the ceremony took place. There is evidence, however, that Kitty Lynch gave birth to a son in 1760, that she died in childbirth in so doing, and that the paternity of Thurlow was widely acknowledged. In 1769 the 'Town and Country Magazine' referred to Kitty Lynch's brother William Lynch ('c'.1730-1785), MP for Canterbury, as Thurlow's brother-in-law, while the entry of Charles Thurlow at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, in 1785 is recorded by Venn. In 1788 the 'European Magazine' noted the death at Canterbury of 'Mr Thurlow of Bennett College, Cambridge, son of the Lord Chancellor' ('European Magazine', 13, 1788, 463), and the 'Gentleman's Magazine' of that year made a similar comment. The claim that 'Kitty Lynch and Edward Thurlow, however impetuous their courting, were married before her untimely death' (Gore-Browne, 22) is plausible but cannot be confirmed. Later Thurlow formed a public but non-marital relationship with Polly Humphries, the daughter of the keeper of Nando's Coffee House. He purchased a comfortable, although not ostentatious, residence at Knight's Hill, near Dulwich, and lived with Polly Humphries in domestic tranquillity for the rest of his life. Their first child was stillborn in 1771; later they had three daughters. 
Thurlow's legal career was considerably advanced by his role in the celebrated Douglas case. There is no reason to reject the tradition that he became involved in the lawsuit concerning the disputed succession to the duke of Douglas's estates through a chance meeting in Nando's Coffee House with lawyers representing the Douglas claimant, Archibald James Edward Douglas. The court of session in Edinburgh had in 1767 decided by a narrow majority in favour of the rival Hamilton claimant. Thurlow, in animated conversation with a friend, is reported to have denounced the verdict and, in vehement terms, to have upheld the Douglas claim. He was promptly engaged by the Douglas party to represent them in the appeal before the House of Lords. On 16 January 1769, immediately before the case was heard, Thurlow was involved in a duel at Kensington Gravel Pits with the leading agent on the Hamilton side, Andrew Stuart. According to one account, 'One ball went through Mr T.'s wig, and T's ball went through S.'s coat, whereupon the seconds interfering, both parties were reconciled' ('Town and Country Magazine', 1, 1769, 53). It was characteristic of Thurlow that his sardonic attacks upon Stuart, which had provoked the duel, were followed by a warm friendship between them. The Douglas case was heard before the House of Lords in February 1769, and, although speaking on the opposite side from his fellow Bedfordites, Thurlow helped to persuade the Lords to reverse the judgment of the court of session and to uphold the claim of the Douglas candidate. The case did not make Thurlow famous overnight -- he had already attained a reputation for competence in court and in parliament -- but it greatly enhanced his prestige. Lord John Campbell's verdict, that 'by his admirable pleading he showed what excellence he might have reached, and what solid fame he might have acquired, if his industry had been equal to his talent' (Campbell, 5.494), was somewhat ungenerous. 
At the time of Thurlow's entry to the House of Commons the principal issue was the Rockingham administration's move to repeal the 'Stamp Act' that had been passed by the Grenville ministry in 1765. Some of Thurlow's earliest interventions in debate and parliamentary votes were directed against the repeal. Later he attributed the rebellion of the colonies to 'a want of connection and dependance in the form of their government upon the mother country' (Ditchfield, 'Lord Thurlow', 66) and to a lack of ministerial firmness in 1766. With the entry of the Bedford group into the Chatham ministry in 1767-8, Thurlow's career advanced further. He assisted in the prosecution cases against John Wilkes and, in June 1770, against John Almon, the publisher of Junius's 'Letter to the king' of 19 December 1769. When the Bedfordites extended their support into the administration of Lord North, Thurlow achieved major office for the first time. He became solicitor-general in March 1770 and attorney-general in January 1771. As a leading law officer he was frequently called upon to pronounce in the Commons on the legality of the government's position, and in that capacity he became one of the most powerful spokesmen in favour of coercing the colonies. He reacted strongly to the colonial seizure of the revenue ship the 'Gaspee' in 1772; according to John Pownall, under-secretary to the Board of Trade, Thurlow considered the incident to be of 'five times the magnitude of the 'Stamp Act'' ('Dartmouth MSS', 2.91). He warmly advocated the punitive legislation of 1774. His direct and bluff manner won him the respect, if not the affection, of the Commons, a large majority of whom supported North's American policy, while Thurlow's impatient disdain for dry pedantry distinguished him from many MPs who were lawyers. Grafton acknowledged Thurlow's status as 'a speaker of the first rate, as well in Parliament as at the Bar', but complained that 'his principles leaned to high Prerogative' ('The Autobiographical and Political Correspondence of the Duke of Grafton', ed. W. R. Anson, 1898, 229). Thurlow himself argued that he was the advocate of a ministerial policy which sought to uphold the authority of parliament and thus to defend, not to subvert, the letter and spirit of the settlement of 1688-9. 
By the later 1770s Thurlow's opinions and political effectiveness commended him to George III. It is noteworthy that what the king might have been expected to perceive as moral failings did not prevent the growth of a personal friendship between them. After the surrender at Saratoga in 1777 and the French entry into the war the following year, the ministry of Lord North required a measure of stiffening, both internally and to fend off its increasingly numerous parliamentary critics. The need for intellectual reinforcement in the House of Lords led George III personally to arrange for Thurlow's promotion: 'I want an able Chancellor and therefore have pitched on Mr Thurlow', he wrote on 3 April 1778; five days later he added, 'I cannot begin to form any plan untill Mr Thurlow is in possession of the Great Seal' ('Correspondence', ed. Fortescue, 4, nos. 2272 and 2284). On 3 June Thurlow was created Baron Thurlow of Ashfield, Suffolk, and became lord chancellor. At the same time he was sworn of the privy council. He took his seat in the House of Lords on 14 July 1778, in time to preside over its prorogation at the end of the session. 
As lord chancellor Thurlow was meticulous in attending the House of Lords. In his first full session (1778-9) he was present on each of the 121 days of its duration; for the rest of his two terms in that office his level of attendance rarely fell below 90 per cent. His aggressive domination of debate caused the opposition peer Lord Pembroke to write in 1781: 'Mon Chancelier is a clever fellow, but his wings must be clipped, or La Chambre Haute had better be shut up' (G. M. Ditchfield, 'The House of Lords in the age of the American revolution', in 'A Pillar of the Constitution: the House of Lords in British Politics, 1640-1784', ed. C. Jones, 1989, 216-17). An early manifestation of his ascendancy was his contemptuous dismissal in March 1779 of the duke of Grafton's sneer at his undistinguished social origins; asserting that 'the peerage solicited me, not I the peerage', he retorted by describing the duke as 'the accident of an accident' (Ditchfield, 'Lord Thurlow', 66). Thurlow's nicknames in the court of chancery -- Tiger, or sometimes Lion -- indicate a similar fierceness, although he was recognized to be above any hint of corruption. For all his skill in equity cases, Lord John Campbell, an admittedly hostile whiggish commentator, was exaggerating only slightly when he ascribed delays in chancery to Thurlow's 'want of industry and exertion' and observed 'he was not patient or pains-taking... he did little in settling controverted questions or establishing general principles' (Campbell, 5.521-2, 528). What Campbell called his 'awe-inspiring manners' contributed more to his authority than any depth of learning. 
Thurlow saw himself primarily as the king's servant rather than as a party man. He remained in office when the remainder of the Bedfordite group, including Gower and Weymouth, resigned from North's ministry in 1779, and he took part in the confidential negotiations to reconstruct the ministry that autumn. He grew increasingly impatient with the indecisiveness of North's ministry in its latter years and irritated some of his colleagues by his reluctance to conceal his impatience. For his part, North complained of Thurlow's indecision: 'in the Cabinet he opposed everything -- proposed nothing -- and decided nothing' (Farington, 'Diary', 1.175). It is true that Thurlow at times spoke out in the Lords against measures which had government approval. Lord Sandwich in 1781 lamented that 'The Chancellor has made a Point of opposing most Bills that have lately been brought up to the House of Lords, and has usually been backed by the whole Opposition' (Ditchfield, 'Lord Thurlow', 70). On the other hand, allegations that he was secretly planning a coup whereby a Bedfordite would gain control of the ministry were wide of the mark, and on key items, such as the attacks on Sandwich's conduct of the naval war (1779) and Shelburne's attempt to censure the ministry over Ireland and over public expenditure (1780), he was prominent in his loyalty. While he was no pro-Catholic, he accepted the 'Catholic Relief Bill' introduced by Sir George Savile, with ministerial support, in 1778, and strongly resisted the efforts of the Gordon rioters to secure its repeal two years later. His brother Thomas, by then bishop of Lincoln, narrowly escaped death at the hands of the rioters. 
After the defeat at Yorktown, North's ministry lost its majority in the House of Commons (although not in the House of Lords) and Thurlow was one of the king's most trusted advisers as he tried desperately, and unsuccessfully, to avoid the Rockinghamite alternative. When Rockingham formed his second ministry, in coalition with Shelburne, in March 1782, he was reluctantly obliged to retain Thurlow as lord chancellor. It was an uneasy arrangement. Thurlow opposed the ministry's economical reform proposals, notably the 'Contractors' Bill', and after Rockingham's death, on 1 July 1782, Thurlow grew rather more at ease in the new ministry headed by Lord Shelburne and purged of most of its Rockinghamites. Although not on close personal terms with Shelburne, and without any illusions that the ministry would last, he gave it loyal support. When in February 1783 Shelburne's ministry was defeated in the House of Commons over the peace preliminaries with America, Thurlow's speeches helped to ensure that Shelburne was not defeated in the Lords. Shelburne none the less resigned, and the king again turned to Thurlow as confidential adviser. On the accession to office six weeks later of the Fox-North coalition, George III contemplated abdication and Thurlow was deprived of the great seal, which was placed in commission. His chagrin was increased by the appointment of his great rival, Alexander Wedderburn, Lord Loughborough, as one of the commissioners. 
Thurlow stiffened George III's resolve to resist, and, if possible, to overthrow the Fox-North coalition. He alone of the king's leading servants -- unlike Grafton, North, and Shelburne -- had not deserted him in his hour of need. He was involved in the arrangement whereby the king, via Lord Temple, encouraged members of the House of Lords to vote against the coalition's 'India Bill' in December 1783 and whereby the younger Pitt would form a ministry following its consequent dismissal. In the debates Thurlow spoke powerfully against the 'India Bill', denouncing in particular the proposed transfer of the East India Company's patronage to commissioners nominated by the coalition government. Should the king give the royal assent to the bill, Thurlow declared, he would 'take the diadem from his own head, and place it on the head of Mr Fox' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 24.125). On 23 December 1783, four days after Pitt's appointment as prime minister, Thurlow became lord chancellor for the second time. His return to the woolsack gave the insecure new ministry essential leadership in the House of Lords -- especially important after Temple's enforced resignation on 22 December. Pitt's ministry, surviving early setbacks in the House of Commons, was secure in the Lords, and in March 1784 Pitt felt sufficiently confident to dissolve parliament. At that moment the great seal was mysteriously stolen from Thurlow's house in Great Ormond Street, an event which, though the subject of much amusement to caricaturists and satirists, had no political consequences. At the ensuing general election Pitt secured a Commons majority of well over one hundred, and Thurlow embarked upon his most harmonious period of high office. 
Before Pitt fully established his ministry and became less dependent on the king, Thurlow provided vital ballast. He used all his eloquence to promote ministerial proposals, including those which were unpopular. Of his support for Pitt's Irish trade proposals in 1785 Charles Jenkinson wrote: 'In carrying the business through the House of Lords, the chancellor is the most firm and able person that government has, and I can assure you he is very zealous and steady' ('Buckinghamshire MSS', 187). In 1788 the archbishop of Canterbury, John Moore, believed that all Thurlow's ill humour must be tolerated, since 'without him the House of Lords would be a wretched, insupportable place' (Ditchfield, 'Lord Thurlow', 72). The elevation of Thomas Thurlow to the see of Durham in 1787 cemented Thurlow's relationship with his cabinet colleagues. Even his opposition to mild measures of parliamentary reform in the House of Lords and his private criticism of the possibility of military intervention in the Netherlands in 1787 caused no serious friction. Bearing in mind that the ministry was divided over the abolition of the slave trade and never sponsored abolition officially, Thurlow's vehement denunciations of abolition were not inconsistent with cabinet membership. 
The causes of Thurlow's political decline lie in the Regency crisis of 1788-9 and in the impeachment of Warren Hastings. In the former, there is little doubt but that Thurlow was willing to compromise with the opposition, in the event of the king's permanent incapacity or death, in order to retain the great seal (and to deny it to Loughborough). He had a genuine sympathy with the prince of Wales's claim to an immediate regency; later on in his life he became a trusted confidant and adviser to the prince over the latter's debts and unhappy marriage to Princess Caroline. But in 1788-9 the verdict of Sir Gilbert Elliot that 'The Chancellor has been the whole of this time playing a shabby trimming game, keeping himself open to both parties till one should be completely victorious' ('Life and Letters', 1.249-50) was uncomfortably accurate. By nominating Lord Grenville to the House of Lords in 1790 Pitt showed that he no longer had confidence in the lord chancellor's reliability. Although Grenville took care to consult Thurlow over important matters of policy, it was not long before the latter began to complain vigorously of neglect by the prime minister. His choleric outbursts and open criticisms of ministerial policy caused his relations with Pitt and Grenville to become increasingly strained. When he strongly (and abusively) attacked the 'Sinking Fund Bill' in May 1792, Pitt and Grenville presented George III with an ultimatum: either Thurlow was to be dismissed, or Pitt would resign. If this was bluff, George III could not afford to call it, and, after vainly seeking a compromise through the mediation of Henry Dundas, he reluctantly consented to Thurlow's dismissal. This took place at the end of the session, in June 1792, and was sweetened by the grant of the barony of Thurlow of Thurlow, Suffolk, with a special remainder to his nephews; his pension was increased and he retained the tellership of the exchequer, which he had held since 1786. The news was greeted with disbelief, and at least one London newspaper, 'The Oracle', predicted his rapid return to office. He remained on friendly, if more distant, terms with George III, who commended his advice to the royal princes. 
As lord chancellor Thurlow had presided over the opening years of Warren Hastings's impeachment in Westminster Hall, which began in February 1788. He formed a close personal friendship with Hastings, asserted his innocence, sought to nominate him for a peerage, and worked diligently on his behalf. Following his dismissal from office Thurlow continued to attend the Lords regularly, and he was among the majority of peers who voted for the acquittal of Hastings on 23 April 1795. Although he told his friend Lord Kenyon that he did not wish to waste his breath in a 'vain opposition' (Ditchfield, 'Lord Thurlow', 76), Thurlow did not hesitate to criticize the policies of his former cabinet colleagues, notably over the restrictive measures of 1794-5. As late as the session of 1801-2 he was present on more than half of the days when the Lords were in session, and he attacked the peace of Amiens. Though his latter years were soured by the elopement of his daughter Caroline, he lacked neither means nor convivial company, encouraging younger lawyers he admired, including the future lord chancellor John Scott, Lord Eldon. He spent much time in spas and seaside resorts. He died at Brighton on 12 September 1806, one day before Charles James Fox, and was buried on 25 September in the Temple Church, London. 
Thurlow's physical appearance was impressive. His features were dark and stern, and the ferocity of his demeanour could inspire respect, and sometimes fear. It occasionally gave rise to allegations that he was acting: Fox observed, 'It proved him dishonest, since no man could 'be' so wise as Thurlow 'looked'' (Campbell, 5.661). Many anecdotes surround his profanity of language and his unconcealed neglect of religious observance. As lord chancellor, however, he controlled considerable ecclesiastical patronage; according to 'Drewry's Derby Mercury' of 2-9 December 1784 he disposed of church livings worth a total of $80,000 per annum. His preference was consistently exercised in favour of clergymen whose theological orthodoxy was not in doubt, and one of his ecclesiastical proteges was the ultra-orthodox Samuel Horsley, who became bishop of St David's in 1788. He could be a very loyal friend, personally kind (as to the ageing Samuel Johnson in 1784) and ready to forgive old enmities; one of his close friends in later life was the radical John Horne Tooke, with whom he shared classical and literary interests. Although he was caricatured as an inveterate reactionary in the age of the French Revolution, his opinions were far from predictable. He regarded military intervention in Europe with caution, and his public support for Pitt's bellicose stance towards Russia over Ochakov in 1791 was accompanied by private warnings. 
Thurlow exploited his role as an outsider and preferred to stress aggressively, rather than to conceal, his relatively humble origins. Many observers emphasized the intimidatory power, as opposed to the intellectual depth, of his forensic and parliamentary skills. Charles Butler described him as 'a kind of guarda costa vessel, which cannot meet every turning and winding of a frigate that assails her, but, when the opportunity offers, pours a broad-side which seldom fails of sinking the assailant' (Butler, 201). He left no written legacy of legal wisdom; 'his way was to decide, not to reason', opined Lord Brougham (Brougham, 88). Holdsworth noted his 'imperfect mastery of principle' (Holdsworth, 'Eng. law', 12.323) but allowed that he made some contributions to the administration of equity law, notably in the protection of married women from undue pressure from husbands and other interested parties to use their powers of disposition unwisely. Campbell, who heard him speak on a divorce bill in the House of Lords on 20 May 1801, described him as 'this great imitator of GARAGANTUA' (Campbell, 5.476). He was one of the most eminent legal practitioners, if not theorists, of his age, and was the last of the great eighteenth-century lord chancellors. 


@@@@@


doc= 27407


Thurlow, Edward Hovell-, second Baron Thurlow (1781-1829), poet, was born on 10 June 1781 in the Temple, London, the first son of Thomas Thurlow (1737-1791), bishop of Durham, and his wife, Anne (died 1791), daughter of William Bere of Lymington, Hampshire. He was educated at Charterhouse School and at Magdalen College, Oxford, matriculating in 1798, and graduating MA in 1801. He succeeded his uncle, Lord Chancellor Edward Thurlow (1731-1806), to the barony of Thurlow in 1806, but did not take his seat in the House of Lords until 1810. In tribute to his grandmother, he took the additional name Hovell by royal licence on 8 July 1814. 
In accordance with a custom frequent at this time, on 30 December 1785, then aged four, Thurlow was made one of the principal registrars of the diocese of Lincoln, and in 1788 he was made clerk of the custodies of idiots and lunatics. Later, he was appointed clerk of the presentations in the petty bag office (1796), patentee of commissions in bankruptcy (1803), and clerk of the Hanaper (1821). He retained all of these positions until his death. 
On 13 November 1813 Thurlow married an actress, Mary Catherine (died 1830), eldest daughter of James Richard Bolton, attorney; they had three sons, of whom Edward Thomas (1814-1857) succeeded his father in the title. 
Hovell-Thurlow was a great admirer of Sidney, and his first publication was a private edition of the 'Defence of Poesy'. His original poetry was published in several collections, along with some classical translations (1814) and an attempt to continue Shakespeare's 'Tempest' in 'Angelica, or, The Rape of Proteus' (1822). The reception of his work tended to be lukewarm or hostile. The 'Edinburgh Review' (1814) lamented: 'his Lordship... loves the Muse with a warmth which makes us regret that the passion is not mutual', and Byron parodied him cruelly. On the other hand, Lamb praised his sonnet 'To a Bird, that Haunted the Waters of Lochen, in the Winter', which ends: '
Nature is always wise in every part. 

' Hovell-Thurlow died on 4 June 1829 in Regency Square, Brighton. 


@@@@@


doc= 27408


Thurlow, Thomas (1737-1791), bishop of Durham, was born at Ashfield, Suffolk, the second son of Thomas Thurlow ('bap'. 1695, died 1762), rector of Little Ashfield, and his wife, Elizabeth Smith (died 'c'.1736). Edward Thurlow, first Baron Thurlow, was his elder brother. Thomas matriculated from Queen's College, Oxford, on 13 July 1754, and was a demy of Magdalen College from 1755 to 1759, when he was elected a fellow. He graduated BA on 11 April 1758, and proceeded MA on 9 March 1761, BD on 13 April 1769, and DD on 23 June 1772. In 1771 he became rector of Stanhope in Durham, and in the following year was appointed master of the Temple, a post held until 1787. On 2 November 1775 he was nominated dean of Rochester, and on 30 March 1779 he was consecrated bishop of Lincoln. On 13 March 1782 he became dean of St Paul's, but he resigned the office in 1787 on being translated to the see of Durham. He died in Portland Place, London, on 27 May 1791, and was buried in the Temple Church. He and his wife, Anne, daughter of William Bere of Lymington, Hampshire, who died in August the same year, left three daughters and two sons, Edward Hovell-Thurlow (1781-1829), who in 1806 succeeded his uncle as second Baron Thurlow, and Thomas ('b'. 1788). 
In 1780 Thurlow was in London during the Gordon riots and was among those attacked. He was rescued in a fainting state by a young law student who obtained refuge in a neighbouring house, from which he escaped over the roof wearing women's clothes. Thomas published a few sermons, but like many of his contemporaries was an indifferent preacher, although his elocution was excellent. He owed his advancement in the church to the advocacy of his brother, who overshadowed him, rather than to his own ability. He had business acumen in matters such as tithe, but diocesan affairs were left mostly in the hands of officials, of whom his second son, Thomas, became one in the Durham court of chancery. His income from the Durham palatinate and bishopric estates was considerable. He was, however, said to be a zealous patron of literary merit but there is no firm evidence of this. He was a persistent seeker of recipients for benefactions in his Lincoln diocese. Although retiring in manner in public, he was well liked in his private encounters and was a devoted and affectionate husband. No original portrait of him has been traced, and none exists either at the Temple or in the gallery of Durham bishops at Auckland Castle; but an anonymous engraving was done when he was bishop of Lincoln. 


@@@@@


doc= 27409


Thurmond, Sarah (d. 1762), actress, was born at Epsom, Surrey. Her first recorded appearance on stage was in 1711, with Pinkethman's troupe at Greenwich, where John Thurmond (died 1754) was a dancer and choreographer. The couple are said to have married in 1713; the baptism of Lewis, the son of John and Sarah Thurmond, on 28 October 1712 at St Martin-in-the-Fields may refer to a different family, but their two daughters, Mary and Catherine, were baptized in London in 1727 and 1732 respectively. Between 1712 and 1715 Mrs Thurmond was in Dublin, where her husband's parents, John and Winifred Thurmond, were also on the stage. Confusion between the two John Thurmonds and the two Mrs Thurmonds is inevitable, but it seems likely that Sarah Thurmond acted at the Smock Alley Theatre. In 1715 all the Thurmonds returned to London, where Sarah's husband was announced to be dancing at Lincoln's Inn Fields on 2 June 1715. On 23 June Sarah, 'who never acted on this stage', appeared there for the first time, as Cosmelia, in Newburgh Hamilton's 'The Doting Lovers, or, The Libertine Tamed'; she also spoke the epilogue. She played major roles in a variety of works that season, among them Portia in Lord Lansdowne's 'The Jew of Venice' and Julia in Aphra Behn's 'The False Count'. She remained at Lincoln's Inn Fields for four years, where her parts included the title role in Thomas Shadwell's 'The Woman Captain', Belinda in John Vanbrugh's 'The Provoked Wife', and Calista in Nicholas Rowe's 'The Fair Penitent'. 
In 1718 the Thurmonds moved to Drury Lane, where John became the dancing-master and, on 8 September, Sarah gave her first performance, as Aspasia in Beaumont and Fletcher's 'The Maid's Tragedy'. She remained at that theatre until 1732. Among her later roles were Desdemona, Lady Macduff, Isabella in Richard Steele's 'The Conscious Lovers', and the title role in Rowe's 'Jane Shore'. Her salary for the 1729 season was $166 plus benefit money. The range of her roles made her a 'lady utility' (Doran, 2.60). At the beginning of the 1732-3 season, she moved to Goodman's Fields Theatre, and made her debut there on 18 October 1732 as Almeria in Congreve's 'The Mourning Bride', a role she had played previously at Drury Lane. She took with her some of her Drury Lane roles, and added others, including Polly in John Gay's 'The Beggar's Opera'. Mrs Thurmond was joined at this theatre by her husband in December; they appear to have left Drury Lane because of a disagreement with the management there, and the following season many of the company moved elsewhere, returning only when the conflict was settled early in 1734. Here she extended her repertory to include Marcia in Joseph Addison's 'Cato', Lady Brute in 'The Provoked Wife', and the Queen in Dryden's 'The Spanish Fryar'. Her last appearance was on 5 May 1737, as Lady Wronghead in Vanbrugh's 'The Provoked Husband'. 
John Thurmond died in 1754, leaving half of his estate to Sarah and one-quarter each to their two daughters, Mary and Catherine. Sarah Thurmond died in London in 1762, and was buried on 18 May at the church of St Paul, Covent Garden. Her will, dated 13 July 1761, left everything to Catherine, with instructions to look after her sister, Mary Jackson, and her children. Catherine married John Addy in May 1762 and had died by 6 June 1764, when her husband took over the administration of Sarah's estate. 
Contemporary comments on Sarah Thurmond's performances are scarce. In 1729 several oblique references were made to her appearing drunk on stage. Aaron Hill described her as having an affected style of delivering poetry, ''whining' out good Verses, in a 'Drawl' so unpleasantly extended' ('The Prompter', 27 Dec 1734), but W. R. Chetwood thought she had 'an amiable person and a good voice', and commended her retirement from the stage: 'in her full and ripe performance, and, at that time, left behind her but few that excelled her' ('DNB'). 


@@@@@


doc= 27410


Thurnam, John (1810-1873), psychiatrist and ethnologist, was born on 28 December 1810 at Lingcroft, near York, the son of William Thurnam, manufacturer, and his wife, Sarah Clark. He belonged to a Quaker family. After a private education, which included study in London at Dermott's school of anatomy, Soho, and the Westminster Hospital, Thurnam became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1834. He also became a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians in 1843, a fellow in 1859, and graduated MD at King's College, Aberdeen, in 1846. 
Having served as resident medical officer at the Westminster Hospital from 1834 to 1838, Thurnam was appointed medical superintendent of the Friends' Retreat in York, of which his father had been a director. He held this post until 1849. At that time the Wiltshire County Asylum was being built and Thurnam was appointed superintendent. It opened in 1851 and he remained in active charge until his death. On 18 June 1851 he married Frances Elizabeth, daughter of Matthew Wyatt, a barrister, and sister of Sir Matthew Digby Wyatt (1820-1877). They had three sons. 
In 1843 Thurnam published 'Observations and Essays on the Statistics of Insanity, and on Establishments for the Insane', the work for which he is best-known. This monograph contained a reprint of the 'Statistics of the York Retreat', first issued in 1841, together with a historical sketch of that institution. Thurnam's appointment as resident medical officer was instrumental in breaking the tradition of lay therapists started by William Tuke, and mirrored a wider national trend of medical practitioners' taking over control of the care of the insane. 
Thurnam was a founder member of the Medico-Psychological Association in 1841, and remained a committed member of the association, twice serving as president. Unusually for an asylum superintendent, Thurnam found time to research and publish. While at Westminster Hospital he had gained some reputation for his observations on aneurysm of the heart, and at the York Retreat he developed an interest in phrenology. He gave a paper entitled 'Scientific cranioscopy of Professor Carus' at the British Association for the Advancement of Science in September 1844, and began to apply phrenological assumptions to his care of patients. As with James Cowles Prichard, another psychiatrist from a Quaker background, this area of study appears to have kindled an interest in ethnology and comparative craniology. 
After moving to Wiltshire, Thurnam developed this enthusiasm, and with Joseph Barnard Davis published in 1865 a work in two volumes called 'Crania Britannica'. In the same year he wrote an important paper, 'Two principal forms of ancient British and Gaulish skulls', which was reprinted from the 'Memoirs' of the Anthropological Society of London (1, 1865). Thurnam was indefatigable in exploring ancient British barrows, and reported his findings to the Society of Antiquaries (of which he was a member) in 1869. During the later years of his life he collected a large number of skulls and objects of antiquity. The former were transferred to the University of Cambridge, the latter are in the British Museum. Although much of the craniometric and anthropometric data generated by men like Thurnam, and later in the nineteenth century by the Italian psychiatrist and sociologist Cesare Lombroso is now discredited as attempting to support theories associating biological race with levels of cultural and intellectual development, Thurnam made a significant contribution to racial typings. 
Contemporaries considered one of Thurnam's papers to be particularly important, 'Synostoses of the cranial bones regarded as a race character' ('Natural History Review', 1865). Thurnam believed he had recognized the obliteration of the sutures of the skull, which he had observed in the long-headed crania of the Stone Age, but not in the short-headed crania of the Bronze Age, believing this to be a racial characteristic. Thurnam was noted to be an efficient and zealous man beloved of his patients, who was described as dapper and professional by colleagues. He died at the Chapelry of St James, Bishop's Cannings, near Devizes, Wiltshire, on 24 September 1873. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 27411


Thurstan (c.1070-1140), archbishop of York, was the son of a married priest from the Bessin named Anskar (Anger), and his wife, Popelina, and was born in the Bessin area of Normandy. 
Thurstan may have received his education at Caen, or in the Bayeux of Bishop Odo, from where a number of aspiring clerics crossed the channel. His own family moved to England during the time of Bishop Maurice of London (1086-1107) from whom Anskar obtained the prebend of Kentish Town in the cathedral church of St Paul, while his sons came to hold prebends in the same church: Audoin (later bishop of Evreux) succeeded to his father's prebend of Kentish Town when he died some time after 1104, and Thurstan acquired that of Consumpta-per-Mare. The brothers also held positions as chaplains of Henry I, Thurstan being first mentioned in this capacity in 1103. For his service to the king he held the churches and chapels of Tickhill Castle, Stoneleigh, Shorne, and Cobham. Apart from his occasional attestation of royal charters, and the possibility (suggested by John of Hexham) that he was associated with Archbishop Thomas (II) in the foundation of the Augustinian priory of Hexham in 1113, the only recorded event of Thurstan's life before 1114 was his visit (date unknown) to Cluny, where he made a vow that he would at some time in his life take the habit of a Cluniac monk. It was a pledge that he was to fulfil in his final days. 
Thurstan was still in subdeacon's orders when, at Winchester on 15 August 1114, six months after the death of Thomas (II) in February 1114, Henry I appointed him archbishop of York. This was done without reference to the chapter of the cathedral, but no opposition was forthcoming. Thurstan was ordained deacon by William Giffard, bishop of Winchester (died 1129), some time between September and December 1114 and in December was enthroned archbishop at York by the bishop of Coventry. In the weeks that followed he began to learn something of his new diocese. According to Hugh the Chanter he visited Durham, where he met Turgot, bishop of St Andrews, during his final illness, although as Turgot died in August 1115 Hugh may have conflated the events of two summers. He also visited Hexham, and on his return to York conferred with the chapter about the matter of the profession of obedience to Canterbury. He declined an invitation from Ralph d'Escures, archbishop of Canterbury (died 1122), to journey to Canterbury to be ordained priest and consecrated archbishop, and instead crossed to Normandy on Christmas day, intending to ask permission of the king to go to Rome to put his case before the pope. Thurstan had no intention of accepting ordination from the archbishop of Canterbury or any of his suffragans lest this should prejudice his case when the question of the primacy of Canterbury was raised, as he anticipated it would be. Therefore, with the king's permission, he accepted ordination as priest from his own suffragan, Ranulf Flambard, bishop of Durham (died 1128), at Bayeux on 6 June 1115, although his request to go to Rome was denied. In September that year Thurstan was present at the king's council in Westminster, and complained to the king of the delay in receiving consecration. Henry ordered Archbishop Ralph to consecrate Thurstan, and in the presence of witnesses who included the archbishop of Rouen and the bishops of Lisieux and Durham, Thurstan made his request. Ralph agreed to consecrate him, provided that he make profession of obedience. This Thurstan refused to do. 
The opposition of Thurstan to the claims of Canterbury to primacy over York dominates Hugh the Chanter's highly favourable account of Thurstan, as indeed it dominated the first five years of Thurstan's pontificate. Thurstan had made his opinion quite clear to the king: it was unheard of elsewhere for one metropolitan to profess obedience to another, and this he was not prepared to do. Thurstan asked the king's leave to appeal to Rome, but Henry refused. Moreover, Henry was incensed when the chapter of York sought and obtained a papal letter confirming their election of Thurstan, forbidding him to make profession, and permitting him to accept consecration from his own suffragans. The king now lent his backing to the archbishop of Canterbury, and, seeing that he lacked royal support, Thurstan resigned during a council held at Salisbury in March 1116. However, despite Henry's support for Canterbury's case the king did not wish to see Thurstan resign, and for the next eighteen months Thurstan accompanied the royal court and continued to be addressed as archbishop. The king continued to refuse to allow Thurstan to go to Rome, fearing that he would be consecrated by the pope. Both the archbishop of Canterbury and the chapter of York appealed to papal authority, and in response to a letter from Paschal II, Henry took the decision to restore Thurstan to the see of York. 
In January 1118 on the death of Paschal II, who had supported the York cause, Thurstan returned to Normandy to ask the king's permission to seek the advice of the new pope, Gelasius II, but Henry again refused. The letters dispatched by Gelasius show him too to have been sympathetic to York's cause, but he died on 28 or 29 January 1119, and it was his successor, Calixtus II ('r'. 1119-24), who took steps to end the uncertainty. He summoned Thurstan to his council at Tours on 22 September 1119, which Thurstan attended with the king's permission, and on 19 October he consecrated him archbishop at Rheims, two days before the opening of his council there. The English and Norman bishops who arrived the following day too late to object to the consecration refused to communicate with Thurstan. Pope Calixtus bestowed the pallium on Thurstan on 1 November. Henry's anger at Thurstan's disobedience -- according to Eadmer he had forbidden him to accept consecration should the pope offer it -- led him to forbid Thurstan to return to York. Henry and the pope met at Gisors in November 1119 but Henry refused to pardon Thurstan, and on his return to England confiscated his estates. 
Thurstan remained in the entourage of the pope from his consecration until March 1120, during which time he assisted Calixtus, and secured papal bulls of confirmation for religious houses in his diocese. He also attempted to placate Henry I by arranging a treaty of peace between him and the king of France. Thurstan parted from the pope at Gap on 6 March, and spent the remainder of the year in France. He was present when Adela, countess of Blois, the mother of the future King Stephen, made her profession as a nun at Marcigny in April. Henry I, now finding Thurstan useful in negotiating with the king of France, was softening towards him, and in May he agreed to allow Thurstan to enter Normandy provided he did not return to England before the king made his final judgment. Thurstan's presence is recorded at the Council of Beauvais held by the papal legate in October 1120. Early in 1121, in response to a papal threat to place England under an interdict should Thurstan's exile be prolonged further, Henry took the decision to recall Thurstan, and in February 1121, seven years after his appointment as archbishop, he was able to enter York as a consecrated archbishop. He marked his return by celebrating the feast of St Peter's Chair (22 February) and by remitting chrism payments from the diocese, and in the following month with Bishop Ranulf Flambard of Durham he heard the claims of the monks of Durham to Tynemouth church. 
This was not, however, the end of the primacy question. A new archbishop of Canterbury, William de Corbeil (died 1136), was elected, on the advice of Thurstan, in February 1123. But Thurstan refused to consecrate him when he insisted on being recognized as primate of all Britain, and William was consecrated on 18 February 1123 by his suffragans. Both William and Thurstan journeyed to Rome to put their case before the pope. It was on this occasion, according to Hugh the Chanter, that the Canterbury party resorted to producing forged charters in an attempt to prove their case. Thurstan made a second journey to Rome, in October 1125, and eventually Canterbury's claim to primacy was overruled, and its archbishop compensated with a papal legation. This marked the end of the most bitter phase of the Canterbury-York dispute, although at the Christmas court of 1126 in London the archbishops quarrelled again over Thurstan's right to have his cross borne aloft before him in the southern province. 
It was not just in relation to Canterbury but also in Scotland that Thurstan had to define his authority. In 1119 and again in 1121 he obtained papal bulls addressed to all the Scottish bishops enjoining them to profess obedience to him, orders the pope repeated in 1122. John, bishop of Glasgow (died 1147), consecrated by the pope at Thurstan's request, refused to profess obedience to York, something about which Thurstan complained during his visit to the papal curia in October 1125. Robert (died 1159), prior of the Augustinian house of Scone, was named by Alexander I ('r'. 1107-24) as bishop of St Andrews in late 1123 or 1124, but his consecration was delayed by the dispute over the demand for York's profession to Canterbury. At the instance of Pope Honorius II ('r'. 1124-30) the question of Robert's consecration was discussed at a meeting between Alexander's successor, David I ('r'. 1124-53), and the papal legate Giovanni da Crema at Roxburgh in late 1125, and John of Glasgow was sent as David's envoy to the papal curia to seek metropolitan status for St Andrews. The matter seems to have been settled by compromise, and Thurstan consecrated Bishop Robert at York in the spring or early summer of 1127 without obtaining a profession of obedience, but without prejudice to the church of York. In July of that year Thurstan was at Roxburgh with King David when Bishop Robert, in their presence, released the priory of Coldingham from the payment of certain dues. Thurstan revived the ancient Scottish see of Galloway (Whithorn), whose bishop, Gilla-Aldan, he consecrated in York in 1125. 
It was perhaps the difficulties he encountered in Scotland that encouraged Thurstan to develop a further diocese in the north of England. In 1133 he received papal permission for the creation of a see at Carlisle. Plans had evidently been long in the making. An Augustinian priory was planted in the city in 1122, and it may have been that the idea for a new bishopric in an area where Scottish bishops had from time to time exercised authority was discussed in 1126, when Henry I and King David of Scotland met to ask Thurstan to request the pope to adjourn the hearing of the case of the Scottish bishops. It is from 1126 that Thurstan appears to have dropped his claims to metropolitan authority over Scotland. As first bishop of Carlisle, Thurstan appointed Athelwold 
(Athelwulf; died 1156/7)
, prior of the prestigious Yorkshire Augustinian house of Nostell. It was a shrewd choice: Athelwold was a former royal chaplain, and it was the patronage of Henry I that had raised Nostell to its position of pre-eminence in the diocese. Athelwold continued to hold the priorate of Nostell in plurality with the bishopric, thus enabling the revenues of his priory to shore up the financial position of the new see. The creation of the bishopric of Carlisle was a real success for Thurstan, even though it was not until the early thirteenth century that the see became firmly established. 
As archbishop of York, Thurstan was an energetic churchman. He continued the consolidation of the chapter of York by creating two prebends: that of Bramham comprised three churches granted by Robert Fossard, and was assigned to the priory of Nostell; that of Salton was held by the canons of Hexham. Thurstan issued decrees confirming the status of the lands of deceased canons of York, and granted the cathedral school 100's'. a year, 40's'. to be drawn from the archdeaconry of the East Riding and 30's'. from the Romescot, or Rome penny, of the archdeaconry of Nottingham. He did not neglect the collegiate churches of the diocese, and restored lands to the church of Ripon, assigning them for a prebend there, and created a further prebend at Southwell. 
However, it is for his encouragement of the monastic orders within his diocese that Thurstan is perhaps best known. He was himself the founder of two religious houses, and of a small hospital, that of St Mary Magdalen, Ripon. At a date between 'c'.1125 and 1133 he established the first post-conquest nunnery in the north, that of St Clement's, situated just outside the walls of York. He attempted, unsuccessfully, to persuade Christina of Markyate to become its first prioress. The foundation of St Clement's appears to have acted as a catalyst, for the establishment of further houses for religious women followed in quick succession. Thurstan's second monastic foundation was less carefully planned, and came about as a result of Thurstan's intervention, in his capacity as ordinary of the diocese, in affairs at St Mary's Abbey, York. The arrival of the Cistercian monks in the city of York, on their way from the king's court to the site of their first northern plantation at Rievaulx, in March 1132, exercised a profound effect on some of the black monks of St Mary's. They began to demand reform in their own house, on the lines of Cistercian austerity. The abbot refused to listen, and the reforming party within the abbey turned to Archbishop Thurstan for advice. Thurstan was familiar with Cistercian reform, having been associated with Henry I and Walter Espec (died 1158) in the foundation of Rievaulx. In October 1132 Thurstan conducted a visitation of the abbey, evidently intending to act as mediator. However, Abbot Geoffrey had summoned to his side the abbots and priors of other Benedictine houses, and far from bringing reconciliation the archbishop's visit ended with the ejection from the abbey of a party of thirteen monks, including the prior. 
Thurstan took the monks into his household, and after spending Christmas on the archiepiscopal manor of Ripon, he provided them with land on which to settle. This was the site in the valley of the River Skell of what was to become the Cistercian abbey of Fountains. Thurstan was clearly sympathetic to the aspirations of the new orders. Not only did he encourage the foundation of Rievaulx, and some years earlier that of the Savigniac house of Furness, but he wrote personally to Roger de Mowbray asking him to afford protection to the monks of Furness who were to found Byland Abbey on Roger's estates. Historians have debated the likelihood that Thurstan was the author of the fierce, anti-Cluniac, invective enshrined in the so-called 'Letter of Thurstan'. This exists in several copies, including two dating from the late twelfth century and deriving from Cistercian houses -- Fountains itself and its daughter house of Sawley -- and was incorporated into the fifteenth-century manuscript of the 'Narratio de fundatione' of Fountains Abbey. The letter is a polemic, designed to explain and justify the actions of the St Mary's monks in demanding reform. Many features, including its address to the archbishop of Canterbury and the criticism of the Cluniac monks whom Thurstan would choose to join in his final days, have led some historians to judge the letter a fabrication. The matter is not easily resolved, but the critical role played by Thurstan in the foundation of Fountains and the dispersal of the Cistercians in the north cannot be doubted. 
Thurstan's major contribution to the monastic settlement of the diocese was less spectacular than the events of late 1132. From his early years in the north he encouraged the barons of the region to found and endow monastic houses, and priories of Augustinian canons found special favour with him. Charters of foundation bear witness to Thurstan's endeavours in this respect. He and Henry I were closely involved in the transformation of the hermitage of Nostell into an Augustinian house, and under his guidance barons established Augustinian canons at Guisborough, Kirkham, Bolton, Drax, and Worksop. The regular canons were then in fashion, and particularly favoured by bishops, since as monk-priests they might serve in parish churches. Thurstan's hand may have also been behind the type of endowment that the Yorkshire Augustinians received, for their founders and patrons conveyed to them the patronage of a large number of parish churches. Thurstan doubtless looked on the foundation of religious houses by the laity as something to be encouraged for its own sake; but in promoting the cause of the canons he was also securing for himself a way of bringing order and discipline, as well as pastoral care, to a large and unwieldy diocese. It was this that led him to associate the Augustinian priories of Nostell and Hexham with prebends in York Minster, and to appoint the Augustinian prior of Nostell as first bishop of Carlisle. He clearly took a personal interest in Hexham, making gifts of relics, books, vestments, candlesticks, and ornaments. His 'acta' bear witness to his concern to strengthen the possessions and privileges of the northern religious houses by issuing charters of confirmation, and in addition he took the opportunity, when he was in Rome, to secure papal confirmation and privileges for them. 
Thurstan's activities were not confined to his own diocese, for he was a figure of European standing. He acted as a papal judge-delegate, hearing the case between the bishops of St David's and Llandaff (1132). In 1138 he wrote to the pope to advise against the election of Abbot Anselm of Bury St Edmunds (died 1148) as bishop of London, and indeed urged his deposition as abbot; and in 1139 after the death of his brother, Audoin, bishop of Evreux, he wrote to the canons of Evreux requesting them to allow Gilbert the Chamberlain to continue to reside in the house that Thurstan had purchased for the canons. 
Thurstan came to be regarded as the leader of the north. His negotiations with David I in 1137 helped to prevent a Scottish invasion of Northumbria, and when in 1138 the truce disintegrated and the men of Scotland turned south to invade, it was Thurstan who assembled the northern barons at York to plan their defence of the shire. Although too weak to appear on the field of battle -- by this time illness compelled him to be carried in a litter -- he handed over the banner of St Peter to the English army, and placed by their side against the Scots his suffragan Ralph Nowell, bishop of Orkney. The army inspired by Thurstan defeated the Scots at the battle of the Standard, on Cowton Moor near Northallerton, in August 1138. 
By 1138 Thurstan was approaching seventy years of age, and ill health prevented his attending the peace conference in Carlisle in November and the legatine council in December. Just over a year later, on 25 January 1140, before the altar of St Andrew in his cathedral church, he resigned his office. If Richard of Hexham is to be believed, he had been trying to secure the succession to York of his brother Audoin, using as an intermediary at Rome Richard, abbot of Fountains. However, Audoin died first, having become an Augustinian canon at Merton in July 1139. Thurstan retired to the Cluniac priory of Pontefract, and in accordance with his youthful vow he took the habit of a Cluniac monk. He died on 6 February and was buried in the priory church of St John the Evangelist, Pontefract, before the high altar. 
Thurstan was in one sense a member of the 'old order', the son of a married priest, and member of an ecclesiastical dynasty. He secured the appointment of his nephew, Osbert de Bayeux, to the archdeaconry of Richmond, and may have sought to pass on the diocese of York to his brother. He was appointed archbishop by the king with no reference to the chapter of York. And, in the tradition of Thomas (I) of York (died 1100), he was a vigorous champion of the cause of York against Canterbury. But Thurstan also stepped over into the new world of the twelfth century. He was not afraid to appeal to papal authority over that of the king. His long period of office saw the consolidation of the chapter of York, and those of the collegiate churches of his diocese, and the remarkable spread and growth of the monastic orders in which Thurstan himself was a prime force. John of Hexham praised his steadfastness, his sense of principle, his devotion to the cause of religious women, his frugal life, his generosity in alms-giving, and pastoral care. Thurstan achieved and retained the affection and respect of the king whom he opposed, the barons of the north whom he inspired in battle, and the church of York which he served. 


@@@@@


doc= 27412


Thurston, John (1774-1822), draughtsman, was born at Scarborough and educated at the Hornsey Academy. He commenced his career as a copperplate-engraver working under James Heath, whom he assisted on two of his chief plates, 'The Death of Major Peirson', after J. S. Copley, and 'The Dead Soldier', after Joseph Wright of Derby. Later he took up wood-engraving, and eventually he devoted himself exclusively to designing book illustrations. In this he was highly successful, and most of the editions of the poets and novelists published during the first twenty years of the nineteenth century, especially those issued by the Chiswick Press, were embellished by his pencil. Many of Thurston's drawings were engraved on copper for Sharpe's and Cooke's classics and similar works, but the bulk of them, drawn on the block, were cut by Luke Clennell, Robert Branston, Charlton Nesbit, John Thompson, and other able wood-engravers. Among his designs of this class are the illustrations to James Thomson's 'Seasons' (1805); James Beattie's 'Minstrel' (1807); J. Thomas's 'Religious Emblems' (1809), a much admired work which was reissued in 1816 and published in Germany in 1818; Shakespeare's works (1814); Somerville's 'Rural Sports' (1814); James Puckle's 'The Club' (1817); and William Falconer's 'The Shipwreck' (1817). 
Thurston's drawings, outlined in pen or pencil and tinted with India ink, were pleasing though somewhat stiff affairs. They were admirably adapted to the wood-engraver's art, which was carried to its greatest perfection under his influence. Thurston was for a time 'the principal artist in London who had any repute as a designer on the wood' (Redgrave, 'Artists', 431), and he made a significant contribution to the formation of a modern school of wood-engraving. He was elected an associate of the Society of Painters in Water Colours in December 1805 but contributed only to the exhibition of 1806, sending five Shakespearian groups; he was also an occasional exhibitor at the Royal Academy from 1794 to 1812. Being of a delicate constitution and retiring nature, Thurston was personally little known; he died at his house at Holloway, London, in 1822, his life being shortened by overwork in pursuit of his art. He had two sons, G. and J. C. Thurston, who practised as artists and occasionally exhibited at the Royal Academy. 


@@@@@


doc= 27413


Thurston, Sir John Bates (1836-1897), colonial governor, was born in London on 31 January 1836. He was the eldest son of John Noel Thurston (1802-1847) and Eliza, 'nee' West (1807-1873), both from Bath, the short-lived father sprung from a family long established at Thornbury, the mother a painter; and he was brought up latterly in Jersey until on 20 April 1849, fatherless and poor, he went to sea as an apprentice for Liverpool shipowners. 'I began life at sea', he once warned a Melbourne luncheon gathering of investors in Fiji who were disappointed by his refusal to allow alienation of Fijian land or open access to Fijian labour, 'and I prefered stormy to fine weather' (Scarr, 'I, the Very Bayonet', 5). 
Thurston had made voyages to India and Australia. An unsuccessful foray in 1853-4 to the goldfields was followed by return to the sea, first as mate in a Sydney schooner trading to the Pacific islands, next in a brig to Mauritius. Then a botanical voyage to Rotuma in 1864-5 ended in shipwreck. Rescued and, bound south for Sydney, arriving 'en route' in Fiji again in June 1865, he found the British consul there in need first of a clerk and then of a successor, who would be faced with much more than mere consular duties. Coincidentally, Thurston acquired in Fiji, on 20 July 1867, a wife much older than himself, the formidable, twice-married, Mauritius-born Marie Valette Olsson, 'nee' Prince (died 1881), with whom he had no children. His second marriage, on 14 January 1883, was to Amelia Murray, 'nee' Berry, with whom he had two daughters and three sons; when it took place he had long justified the nickname, given him by the high chief Ratu Seru Cakobau, of 'Na Kena Vai' -- the Spearhead, the Very Bayonet. Fiji's hierarchical socio-political structures rendered the archipelago very capable of creating an independent political identity in the eyes of the world, but already the islands were on the verge of becoming a crypto-European colony through the influx of cotton planters, mostly without much capital or knowledge of cotton culture either, whose general attitude by 1871 was profoundly racist. 
Thurston's opposition to the settlers' argument that all power passed from Fijian chiefs along with the land they were selling to Europeans appeared in the 'Fiji Times' when he was establishing a new plantation himself; and he was actually recruiting labour for it in the New Hebrides, when settlers formed the Cakobau government under the, in their intention, nominal kingship of the 'vunivalu' of Bau, Ratu Seru Cakobau. Thurston first mocked but then, at the 'vunivalu's' request, joined this government, as a means of averting racial war. He turned government's focus toward securing Fijian sovereignty and equality before the law, tried to bring a vacillating but interfering Britain to decide between annexation and 'de jure' recognition by sending London a question that was misinterpreted there as an offer of cession such as Fijians by now were unwilling to make, and then protected Fiji's 'de facto' independence against the resulting British commissioners. One of them, Commodore J. G. Goodenough RN, had a bankrupt brother-in-law among the pro-annexation planters' leaders. 
Thurston succeeded in making the first offer of cession in early 1874 a conditional one, with safeguards for Fijians. He made it plain the clause ruling Fijian landownership in the final document of 10 October 1874 would have to be interpreted liberally; and then, by force of character, knowledge, and initially through support of the first governor, Sir Arthur Hamilton Gordon, he startled the local white and adjacent Australasian colonial world by surviving and ruling. 
Since from about 1871 Thurston never changed, his administration as colonial secretary and then (from 1888) as governor was conducted on the principle that Fiji was not a 'white man's country', and neither was the rest of the western Pacific. The necessity of finding more labour than the health of Fijian society would permit for the nascent sugar industry in Fiji made the colony, from 1879, increasingly an Indian country, however, at Gordon's instance; but the main influx of Indian indentured labour took place after Thurston's premature death and, given his view of Fijians' own interests, would never have been countenanced by him. If, through successive international commissions and conferences during the 1880s, he could have made high commission policy binding on France, Germany, and America, too, white settlement and the extension of colonial power in the western Pacific would have stopped with the annexation of Fiji. In a system there which looked seriously oppressive only to interested Europeans and uninformed theoreticians of a later age, Fijian self-rule was conducted, with threats of Fijian revolt when it was done otherwise, through a tier of local councils ascending to the 'boselevuvakaturaga' or great chiefly council, which itself always had room for able commoners and in Thurston's day actively encouraged them. In the high commission territories of the western Pacific, sale of alcohol, arms, and dynamite by British subjects to islanders was forbidden, much as labour recruiting for plantations there under no colonial government was restricted; and by the early 1890s, as high commissioner, Thurston would have forbidden all labour recruiting, in islanders' interests, if the French, Germans, and Queenslanders could have been brought to agree. 
A man short in stature, surrounded by commonly tall Fijians, Thurston was sometimes opprobriously represented by Europeans as an especially great friend to the chiefs, one of whom was his foster son; and he would respond by drawing attention to frequent and savage lectures he read chiefs in government office on their liking for other men's wives or personal attachment to public moneys. His understanding of Fijian societies was not to be lightly challenged; he stood between the indigenous community and exploitation, and without his continued precedence through the 1870s, 1880s, and 1890s Fijians might very well have ended up as subdued as the Maori, whose subordination to white settlers' rule he denounced as an object lesson in bad imperial policy. The well-educated and soldierly twentieth-century Fijian leader Ratu Sir Lala Sukuna, who as a child knew Thurston, looked back to his time as something of a golden age. Men of most races knew there was a power in the western Pacific then -- principled, tenacious, uncommonly well informed, and inimitably sardonic. Thurston, who was made a KCMG in 1887, died in harness, at sea, of some form of muscular collapse beyond the diagnostic science of his day, while leaving Fiji for treatment, on 7 February 1897. He was buried on 11 February in the Melbourne general cemetery in what was intended by his foster son Ratu Josefa Lalabalavu to be a temporary grave preparatory to a return to Fiji, which was never to be made. 


@@@@@


doc= 27414


Thurtell, John (1794-1824), murderer, born on 21 December 1794, was the eldest son in the large family of Thomas Thurtell (1765-1846), merchant (and in 1828 mayor of Norwich), and his wife, Susanna. The family home was at Lakenham, Norwich, and Thurtell may have received the rudiments of education at Norwich grammar school. After five years as a second lieutenant in the Royal Marines he became in 1814 a bombazine manufacturer, but went bankrupt in 1821 and moved to London. His venture of running a public house in Long Acre soon failed. He then acted intermittently as a trainer and backer of pugilists. Robustly built and muscular, he was an amateur boxer and had already been prominent in prize-fighting circles in his Norwich days. George Borrow's 'Lavengro' (1851) gives a memorable account of him at one such fight. His downward progress continued as he lost heavily at gambling. In June 1823 he and his brother Thomas, in the teeth of the evidence indicating arson, were awarded $1900 in their action against the County Fire Office over a warehouse fire. Payment was, however, withheld pending an indictment for conspiracy to defraud. Thurtell's desperate financial situation was aggravated by continued gambling, in which he was no match for crooked adversaries. Among these was William Weare of Lyon's Inn, a former waiter and professional gamester against whom Thurtell bore a grudge for cheating him of $300 at cards. He persuaded Weare to accompany him out of London on 24 October 1823. He may have been seeking revenge for the lost $300; he may have been hoping that Weare would be carrying a sizeable sum of money. For whatever reason, he was determined on murder. 
Thurtell had two accomplices, William Probert and Joseph Hunt. It was to Probert's cottage in Gill's Hill Lane, near Radlett, Hertfordshire, that the gig carrying Thurtell and Weare headed. Probert and Hunt followed on behind. Once in the lane Thurtell shot Weare at point-blank range with a pistol, but the bullet glanced off the victim's cheekbone. He then cut Weare's throat and jammed the pistol into his skull. Probert and Hunt arrived shortly afterwards and helped to dump the body in a pond in Probert's garden, but later it was transferred to a more distant pond. Thurtell had mislaid the pistol and knife, which were discovered by two labourers. An investigation soon led to the arrest of the three suspects, and Hunt, against a promise of his life, lost no time in disclosing where the corpse was. The magistrates' examination touched off an outburst of sensation-mongering, making the case the first trial by newspaper and the most notorious of the decade. Liberal use of engravings secured the future of illustrated crime journalism; broadsheets, chapbooks, and ballads flooded the streets. The case was also taken up on stage, even before the trial, with a play called 'The Gamblers', in which appeared the very horse and gig used by Thurtell. 
Probert turned king's evidence. In accordance with the custom of the time the accused men had to defend themselves. No confession of guilt entered Thurtell's measured speech. The best passages were of his own composition; the judge described them as 'eminently manly, energetic, and powerful'. Hunt could utter no more than one sentence before having his plea read for him. Both were found guilty and sentenced to death. Thurtell showed remarkable sang-froid throughout. One full day elapsed between sentencing and hanging. During it, Thurtell was anxious to learn the result of the big prize-fight of the day before, and repeatedly assured Hunt that he was forgiven. He appeared just as self-possessed on the scaffold outside Hertford gaol on 9 January 1824. The inglorious Hunt had his sentence commuted to transportation to Botany Bay. 
The Gill's Hill murder took powerful hold of the popular imagination, despite its bungling brutality. The fever aroused by press and pamphlets was heightened by Thurtell's studied composure during his final week and his perceived fall from respectability through evil acquaintance. Relics were much sought after. Bits of Thurtell's corpse disappeared when it was dissected in front of a throng at St Bartholomew's Hospital. Memorabilia were preserved in several museums. The skeleton eventually passed to the Royal College of Surgeons of England, where the skull was displayed. The case was manna from heaven for the moralists of post-Regency England, who inveighed against the twin evils of gambling and pugilism. Magistrates cracked down on the ring. The card-playing, prize-fighting, horse-racing, and cock-fighting set known as the Fancy faded away. The affair was treated by a remarkable array of authors: De Quincey, Borrow, Bulwer-Lytton, Carlyle, and Dickens all made use of it; Lamb, Thackeray, FitzGerald, and Browning were intrigued by it. Walter Scott made a detour on the way from London to Scotland in 1828 to visit the scene of the crime, and revelled in the lines ascribed to William Webb (which Browning also admired): '
His throat they cut from ear to ear, 

His brains they battered in, 

His name was Mr William Weare, 

Wot lived in Lyon's Inn. 

' 



@@@@@


doc= 27415


Thwaites, Edward (bap. 1671, d. 1711), Anglo-Saxon and Greek scholar, was born at Crosby Ravensworth, Westmorland, and baptized there on 15 November 1671, the son of William Thwaites, a resident there. He attended a school in Kendal, before being admitted a batteler at Queen's College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 22 October 1689, aged eighteen; he graduated BA in 1694 and MA in 1697. At Queen's he quickly came under the influence of the enthusiasm for Anglo-Saxon studies promoted by George Hickes, who came to live at Gloucester Green, in Oxford, in 1696 and encouraged Thwaites to undertake the publication of texts in Old English. Hickes suggested that he prepare an edition of the Alfredian Orosius (a project in fact undertaken by William Elstob), while Humfrey Wanley had earlier proposed for him an edition of parts of the 'Bible' in Old English, which Thwaites realized with his edition of the 'Heptateuch' in 1698. 
In the same year, 1698, that he was ordained priest (2 January) Thwaites was admitted fellow of Queen's (31 October) and designated Anglo-Saxon preceptor. His letters to Hickes and Wanley during the years 1697-1703 reveal how quickly he learned Old English, how busy he was with his own work and his teaching, and how, with his efficient and brisk approach, he acted as project manager for a major co-operative enterprise in Anglo-Saxon studies that was to eventuate in 1703-5, under Hickes's name, as the 'Thesaurus linguarum septentrionalium'. It was Thwaites -- as one learns from his businesslike and sometimes brusque letters urging Wanley to hurry up with his copy, and his sending material to Hickes as the latter moved between safe houses -- who kept the 'Thesaurus' on track and ensured its publication. He also took his teaching duties very seriously, recognizing that the necessary textbooks, dictionaries, and grammars of Old English were lacking or unsuitable for beginners, and setting out, with the help of others, to supply that want himself. In 1699 he was appointed dean of Queen's, and attempted to improve college discipline. By all accounts he was a good-humoured, energetic man and rather handsome. Elizabeth Elstob represented him as St Gregory within the initial G that begins the Old English text of her 'English-Saxon Homily on the Birthday of St. Gregory' (1709, p. 1) with her own portrait in the initial of the first word of the adjacent column. 
In addition to his work on the 'Thesaurus' and his dedicated and inspirational teaching of Old English, Thwaites's most important contribution to Anglo-Saxon studies was his 1698 edition of hitherto unedited parts of the 'Old Testament' in Old English, including 'Genesis', 'Exodus', 'Leviticus', 'Numbers', 'Deuteronomy', 'Joshua', 'Judges', and the book of 'Job', together with the apocryphal 'Judith' and the 'Gospel of Nicodemus'. Several colleagues, among them Hickes, Wanley, Gibson, and Nicolson, showed an active interest in the project during its preparation. Although some of his contemporaries criticized Thwaites's edition -- partly because it included apocryphal material, partly for its lack of a Latin translation and notes -- it was for its time a ground-breaking enterprise and one that was not repeated until 1922, when S. J. Crawford edited the 'Heptateuch' afresh, using a different base manuscript. Thwaites's edition had been based on Bodleian MS Laud misc. 509, and his text was reprinted, with some emendations, by C. W. M. Grein in 1872. Thwaites dedicated his edition to George Hickes, at that time still proscribed as a nonjuror, and this caused some political embarrassment to the vice-chancellor, who threatened to suppress the edition unless Thwaites cut out the dedication. He bluntly refused -- and prevailed. 
Thwaites published two other works in the Old English field, 'Notae in Anglo-Saxonum nummos' (1708) and 'Grammatica-Anglo-Saxonica ex Hickesiano Linguarum septentrionalium thesauro excerpta' (1711). The second of these, as its name suggests, was an abridged and simplified version of the Old English grammar in Hickes's 'Thesaurus', for student use. In addition Thwaites was probably the main contributor to the Anglo-Saxon dictionary printed in 1701 that bears the name of Thomas Benson. This was a revised but abbreviated version of Somner's dictionary, and Thwaites's copy of Somner, with his additions and annotations revealing his wide reading in Old English texts, is extant as Bodleian MS Ballard 51. Two projects that Thwaites began but never finished were an edition of the Old English 'Pastoral Care' and a gospel harmony. 
Besides his work in Old English, Thwaites evidently had considerable expertise in Greek. His first published work was an edition of 'Dionysii orbis descriptio' (Oxford, 1697). In 1704 he was appointed university lecturer in moral philosophy, in 1707 regius professor of Greek, and in 1708 Whyte's professor of moral philosophy. In 1709 he published another Greek text, the works of St Ephraim the Syrian: 'Ephraem Syrus, Graece e codicibus manuscriptis Bodleianis' -- an edition that has not been superseded. Although some, like Thomas Hearne, had a rather poor opinion of Thwaites's performance in these offices his alleged neglect of them is likely to have been influenced by the worsening state of health that afflicted him from at least 1705 until his death. He suffered from tuberculosis, which first affected his right leg at the knee, causing him such pain that he was moved to have his leg amputated above the knee by Queen Anne's surgeon, Charles Bernard. There are several graphic descriptions by contemporaries of Thwaites's courage and determination during this operation, which he survived. Queen Anne is said to have been so impressed by Bernard's account of Thwaites's behaviour that she granted him $200 and probably influenced his appointment to the chair of Greek. The disease later spread to his lungs and reduced him to 'a meer Sceleton' ('Remarks', 3.287). In the last year of his life he retired to Littlemore, near Oxford, where he died on 12 December 1711. He was buried, at about 5 pm on the day of his death, in Iffley church, 'where a small black slab upon the altar-floor marks the spot of his interment' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 4.147) and gives his age at death, erroneously, as forty-four. He died intestate -- survived by his mother, his father having predeceased him -- and, as Hearne confirms, his college laid claim to his possessions, his books being sold at Oxford in May 1712. 


@@@@@


doc= 27416


Thwaites, George Henry Kendrick (1812-1882), botanist and entomologist, was born at Bristol on 9 July 1812. Nothing is known of his childhood. He worked as an accountant, but devoted his leisure to entomology and the microscopical botany of cryptogams (flowerless plants). In 1839 he became Bristol secretary of the Botanical Society of London, and was soon appointed by Dr William Benjamin Carpenter to revise the second edition of his 'General Physiology' (1841). An acute observer and expert microscopist, his most important observations at this period were those on the mode of propagation and the algal nature of diatoms, which organisms had been previously regarded as animals. This discovery led J. Francois Camille Montagne in 1845 to dedicate to him the algal genus 'Thwaitesia'. Thwaites was so isolated in England in his expertise in microscopical botany that many of his discoveries were overlooked and subsequently attributed to later continental workers. 
Thwaites was not solely interested in cryptogams. He contributed to Hewett Watson's 'Topographical Botany', listing the flowering plants within a 10 mile radius of Bristol, and was an early contributor to the 'Gardeners' Chronicle'. One of the first of his discoveries having a direct bearing on horticulture was the raising of two distinct varieties of fuchsia from the two embryos in a single seed. In 1846 he was lecturer on botany at the Bristol School of Pharmacy and afterwards at the medical school, and in 1847 he applied unsuccessfully for a chair of natural history at the Queen's colleges in Ireland. 
In March 1849, on the death of George Gardner, Thwaites was appointed superintendent of the botanical gardens at Peradeniya, Ceylon, where he adopted a programme of progressive clearance and supported both economic and informal ornamental planting. His duties were at first mainly scientific, and, turning his attention to the flowering plants, between 1852 and 1856 he contributed numerous descriptions of Sinhalese plants to Hooker's 'Journal of Botany', including twenty-five new genera. However, from 1857, when the title of his post was changed from superintendent to director, he became more and more engrossed by the duties of investigating the application of botany to tropical agriculture. In 1858 he began the printing of his only major work, the 'Enumeratio plantarum Zeylaniae', which was published in five fascicles (1858-64). In this he was assisted by J. D. Hooker and William Ferguson. In the preface he announced his adherence to the Darwinian view of the nature of species. On the completion of this work he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, on 1 June 1865, and received the degree of doctor of philosophy from the Imperial Leopoldo-Carolinian Academy, and in 1867 Hooker dedicated to him the beautiful genus of Sinhalese climbing plants 'Kendrickia'. 
However, Thwaites himself never considered his work as other than a prologue to a complete flora and a catalogue of the extensive sets of dried plants which he communicated to the chief herbaria. In 1860 he established the cinchona nurseries at Hakgala, the success of the cultivation of these plants in Ceylon being largely due to his efforts. His successive official reports deal also with the cultivation of vanilla, tea, cardamoms, cacao, and Liberian coffee. In 1869 he sent the Revd Miles Joseph Berkeley the first specimens of 'Hemileia vastatrix', the coffee-leaf fungus, and his reports from 1871 to 1880 deal with it and the suggested preventives. After the completion of the 'Enumeratio' he returned to the study of cryptogams, sending home more than 1200 fungi, which were described by Berkeley and C. E. Broome ('Journal of the Linnean Society', 11, 1871, 494-572), besides mosses, which were published by William Mitten in 1872, and lichens, some of which were described by the Revd William Allport Leighton in 1870. Thwaites's health began to fail in 1867; Dr Henry Trimen arrived in 1879 to take his place, and Thwaites resigned in February 1880 and retired on a pension, purchasing a pretty bungalow named Fairieland above Kandy. 
Thwaites became a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1854, and was made a companion in the Order of St Michael and St George in 1878. He died following a few weeks' illness, unmarried, in Kandy, on 11 September 1882; his funeral took place at the Mahaiyawa cemetery, Kandy, on the following day. In addition to official reports, Thwaites contributed some thirty papers to scientific journals, among others to the 'Transactions of the Entomological Society', to the 'Phytologist', and to the 'Annals and Magazine of Natural History'. He also contributed to Frederick Moore's 'Lepidoptera of Ceylon' (3 vols., 1880-89). According to his successor, Henry Trimen, Thwaites 'suffered all his life under the enormous drawback of a delicate and excitable organisation and constantly feeble health; and continually found it necessary to spare himself fatigue and worry' (Trimen and others, 79). 


@@@@@


doc= 27417


Marmaduke (III) of Thwing, first Baron Thwing (d. 1323), played a leading role at the battle of Stirling in 1297, but in 1299 was taken prisoner and ransomed by the Scots. By writ of summons issued in 1307 he is considered to have become the first Baron Thwing or Thweng. In 1312 he joined Thomas, earl of Lancaster, in the attack upon Piers Gaveston, and in 1321, at the time of Lancaster's great rebellion, his loyalties were the subject of suspicion by the crown. He died in 1323 and was succeeded in the barony by his three sons -- William, Robert, and Thomas -- all of whom died childless. On the death of Thomas in 1374 the barony fell into abeyance, and the Thwing estates were partitioned among various of Thomas's sisters and nieces. St John of Bridlington (c.1320-1379), sometimes called John Twenge or Thwing, author of caustic, prophetic verses against the government of Edward III, may have sprung from the same family. 


@@@@@


doc= 27418


Thwing, Sir Robert (III) of (d. 1245x57), knight, was the son of Marmaduke (I) of Thwing (d. in or after 1234) ['see under 'Thwing family]. Robert makes his first appearance in 1229, suing Richard de Percy ('fl'. 1181-1244) for customs and services in Kilton and Kirkleatham, land that he had acquired by his marriage to Mathilda, widow of Richard de Autrey and niece and heir of William of Kilton. In 1231 he became conspicuous for his opposition to the Roman and Italian clergy who had received papal provision to churches in England. With the assistance of the archbishop of York, an Italian had been intruded to the church of Kirkleatham, the advowson of which Robert and his wife had recovered in 1230 following litigation against the prior of Guisborough. Robert adopted the alias William Wither, literally 'William the Angry'; he placed himself at the head of an armed agitation against the foreigners and about Easter 1232 pillaged their corn and barns and distributed the spoils among the poor. In response to complaints from the pope Henry III ordered the arrest of various leading courtiers who were implicated in these disturbances, including Hubert de Burgh (died 1243), the chief justiciar, who is said to have lent tacit support to the 'Withermen' out of anger at a papal inquiry into the legality of his marriage. Thwing is later to be found witnessing a charter of Hubert's son, John de Burgh, but in 1232 there is nothing to suggest that Hubert and Thwing were in any way close associates. Thwing himself was sent by the king for absolution in Rome. In 1239 he made a second visit to Rome, carrying with him a general letter of complaint from the English barons. Perhaps through the influence of Richard, earl of Cornwall, to whose household Thwing had attached himself, he obtained letters from Pope Gregory IX ('r'. 1227-41) protecting the rights of lay patrons against papal provision. Early in the following year Thwing set out with Earl Richard on crusade. In September 1240, from Marseilles, he was sent as an envoy to the emperor, Frederick II ('r'. 1212-50), with information about the pope's attempts to delay the crusade. As a result, he may never have reached the Holy Land. In 1244 he was accused of making a violent attack upon a clerk of the archbishop of York in the king's hall at Windsor. His lands were seized, but restored the following year. The date of his death is unknown, but he was probably dead by 1257 when his eldest son and heir, Marmaduke (II) of Thwing, had control of the chief family estates. 
Confusion arises between Sir Robert of Thwing and at least two other namesakes: his grandson, also named Robert, who was still a minor in 1266, and another Robert, perhaps an illegitimate son of Sir Robert, who married a woman named Hugolina, participated in negotiations with the Scots, and from 1262 was employed as a knight of the royal household. Marmaduke (II) of Thwing (died 1282x4), son and heir of Sir Robert, had by 1242 married Lucy, sister of Peter de Brus and heir to part of the barony of Skelton, with whom he had several sons. Robert, the eldest of these, died without male children before 1283 and was succeeded in the Thwing estates by his brother Marmaduke, who was prominent in the Scottish wars of the reign of Edward I. 


@@@@@


doc= 27419


Thyer, Robert (bap. 1709, d. 1781), librarian and literary editor, was born in Manchester and baptized at Manchester collegiate church on 20 February 1709, the son of Robert Thyer ('bap'. 1672), a silk weaver or barber, and Elizabeth Brabant, who married on 25 August 1703. Educated at Manchester grammar school, he won an exhibition in 1727 to Brasenose College, Oxford, whence he graduated BA on 12 October 1730. On returning to his native town he was elected librarian of Chetham's Library in February 1732, and continued in that office until 3 October 1763. 
Thyer, the first man not in holy orders to be elected to the librarianship, brought about a modernization of the library. He abandoned the practice of chaining books, increased the storage capacity, introduced a new classification system derived from that set up by Conyers Middleton at Cambridge University Library, and commenced work on a new catalogue based on subject access. His diligence was certified by the library's trustees on his retirement, and by his successor, in the Latin preface to the Chetham's Library catalogue of 1791. During his librarianship the library became a focus for religious and philosophical debate, centred on a series of informal seminars held by Thyer and a group of friends. 
On 9 December 1741 Thyer married Silence Leigh (1714-1753), daughter of John Wagstaffe of Glossop and Manchester, and widow of John Leigh of Middle Hulton in Deane, Lancashire. Through his marriage he became close friends of the Egertons of Tatton, Cheshire; Samuel Egerton MP left him an annuity of $200 on his death in 1780. Thyer was also an intimate friend of his fellow townsman, the poet John Byrom, and many of his letters, as well as a specimen of his verse, are printed in Byrom's 'Literary Remains'. 
Thyer was a keen literary scholar and he supplied notes to Thomas Newton, later bishop of Bristol, for his edition of Milton's 'Paradise Lost'. In 1755 he published a proposal for a new annotated edition of Samuel Butler's 'Hudibras' and in 1759 he published his edition of 'The Genuine Remains in Verse and Prose of Samuel Butler, with Notes', in two volumes, which was praised by Dr Johnson, but condemned by Bishop Warburton. Warburton's criticisms are at best uncharitable. Thyer was a diligent if pedantic scholar, more suited to editorial work than original thought, but his edition of Butler was both accurate and scholarly and Johnson's view is a fairer assessment of his work. 
Thyer died on 27 October 1781 in Long Millgate, Manchester, and was buried with his ancestors in Manchester collegiate church. His wife and all their children had predeceased him. 


@@@@@


doc= 27420


Thynne, Francis (1545?-1608), herald and antiquary, came of a family which also sometimes used the name Boteville, claiming descent in the early seventeenth century from a Ralph Botevile of Church Stretton, Shropshire. The only son of William Thynne, the editor of Chaucer, and his wife, Anne Bond, Francis was probably born at Erith, Kent, in 1545, the year before his father's death. He spent some of his early years at Longleat House, Wiltshire, built by his cousin Sir John Thynne. Francis studied at Tonbridge School under John Procter. He was admitted a member of Lincoln's Inn on 23 June 1561, but there is no evidence of his staying there very long. He did, however, form lasting friendships with William Lambarde, with whom he collaborated in collecting Anglo-Saxon chronicles, and Thomas Egerton, afterwards lord keeper and lord chancellor. He may have become an attorney, but there is no record of his legal practice. In 1564 he married Elizabeth (died 1596), daughter and coheir of Thomas de la River of Brandsby, Yorkshire. There were no children of the marriage. 
From his earliest years Thynne was devoted to the collection and study of alchemy, heraldry, medieval history, and antiquities. These activities centred on the transcription and translation of Latin and English Anglo-Saxon chronicles and homilies, lives of the saints, and monumental inscriptions from Kent churches. His earliest work, however, was on alchemy, whose poetical side he pursued as a 'lover of wisdom' (Carlson, 205), aiming to collect rare knowledge in the natural sphere that would complement his antiquarian researches into history. His occult emblems and poems were impractical, however, in the sense that they pursued rare knowledge rather than wealth through the transmutation of metals, and in any case did not reach the level of John Dee's. Thynne's longest alchemical verse, 'A Discours uppon the Philosopheres Armes' (1573), was allegorical, referring to biblical and mythological alchemists with numerous coloured illustrations. Since alchemy was an expensive pursuit, it contributed to his early financial problems. Although he maintained his interest in the occult, his last alchemical collection dates from April 1578. 
Thynne lived for a time in Poplar, Middlesex, and by 1573 was in Bermondsey Street, Surrey. Now facing severe financial difficulties, he sold off some of the twenty-five Chaucer manuscripts that he had inherited from his father. In January 1574 he also tried to obtain money from his mother's estate. None the less he was imprisoned in the White Lion, Southwark, shortly afterwards for a debt of $100. On 13 March 1576 he wrote an impassioned letter from there to Lord Burghley, requesting help in his distress. His adversaries were his own kinsmen, who under the colour of providing for the assurance of his wife's jointure had withheld from him 200 marks a year over four years. He wrote another long letter to Burghley on the 19th, stating that he was famished and destitute of clothing and means of subsistence. Eventually released, he returned to Longleat to live with Sir John Thynne, having missed the chance to accompany his fellow Kentishman William Brooke, tenth Lord Cobham, as ambassador to Flanders in summer 1578. Following Cobham's return Thynne presented him with a discourse respecting ambassadors dated 8 January 1579. In the meantime he had written again to Burghley in October 1578, begging for employment, and was later evicted from Longleat when his cousin died in 1580. By 1588 he was living on Clerkenwell Green, Middlesex, where he appears to have remained for the rest of his life. 
After the death of Raphael Holinshed in 1580, Thynne, together with Abraham Fleming and John Stow, was employed by John Hooker, who acted as editor, to continue Holinshed's 'Chronicles'. His contributions to this massive undertaking of revision and original work were begun in the period 1579-81. Thynne was responsible for the sections on Scotland, and his most original work consisted of large lists of office-holders. His thirteen substantial articles included 'The annales of Scotland, 1571-1586', 'A collection concerning the high constables of England', 'The protectors of England collected out of ancient and modern chronicles', 'The cardinals of England', 'The discourse and catalog of all the dukes of England', 'A treatise of the treasurers of England', and 'The chancellors of England'. Sections of four other contributions -- 'A discourse of the earles of Leicester', 'The lives of the archbishops of Canturburie', 'A treatise of the Lord Cobhams', and 'The catalog of the lord wardens of the Cinque Ports' -- were excised by order of the privy council, owing perhaps to their political sensitivity but more likely because of their tedious length. They were included in the 1728 and later editions. The value of Thynne's work, however, was recognized by the council when it ordered the publication of his critique of Holinshed and of his 'Annales of Scotland' (1587). 
Thynne became a member of the Elizabethan Society of Antiquaries in 1591. He read seven papers at its meetings, including discourses on heralds, the antiquity of shires, and the offices of high steward and earl marshal that were published in Hearne's 'Collection' (2nd edn, 1771). Thynne was a central figure in the society, though he often relied on his fellow members for access to the materials he copied. These included William Camden, Sir Robert Cotton, Joseph Holland, Charles Howard, earl of Nottingham, Lord William Howard, William Lambarde, and John Stow. During this period Thynne, whose father had published an edition of Chaucer in 1532, prepared notes for a commentary on the poet's works. He abandoned it in 1598 when Thomas Speght published an edition. He did, however, criticize Speght's production in a letter of 'Animadversions' (1599), and afterwards assisted Speght in producing a revised edition (1602), himself contributing a short poem 'Upon the Picture of Chaucer'. 
The patronage of Burghley, Egerton, Lord Cobham, and Gilbert Talbot, seventh earl of Shrewsbury, together with the strength of his scholarly reputation, led to Thynne's being appointed Lancaster herald upon Egerton's nomination by the privy council on 22 April 1602. The support of the council may have owed something to the de luxe, illustrated manuscript editions of Thynne's revised Holinshed contributions that were presented to some of its members -- 'England's treasurers' to Burghley in 1594, 'England's chancellors' to Egerton in 1596, and 'Lords Cobham and lords warden of the Cinque Ports' to Cobham in 1598. His work on Anglo-Saxon and medieval chronicles was solid and factual, based on his firm belief in the accuracy of the original manuscripts. The council must have been impressed with the strong protestant bias in his writings, and after 1603 by his criticisms of the disgraced Sir Walter Ralegh's histories as 'conjectures' (Smith Fussner, 97). He demonstrated his loyalty to the crown when on 2 April 1605 he dedicated his 'Plea betwene the advocat and the ant-advocat' on the antiquity of royal creations of knighthoods to James I. When Augustine Vincent began his work on England's baronage, he considered Thynne's collections indispensable. 
Thynne became a herald at a critical time in the history of the College of Arms, when rife corruption among its members contributed to a flood of fraudulent claims for grants of arms in a period of rapid social mobility. His most widely circulated discourse, and also his last, was a 'Discourse of the dutye and office of an heraulde of arms' written in March 1606 for Henry Howard, earl of Northampton, to help him reform the college's practices. He produced a table of its faults along with remedies to resolve them, urging an extension of the legal powers of the earl marshal. 
While honours only came to Thynne near the end of his life, they never provided material relief. He spent his life in libraries and his study, and relations with his wife were not good. He wrote later that 'thy wife allwaies is but a needefull ill, and best is bad', and observed that marriage is best when the husband is deaf and the wife blind ('Emblemes and Epigrames', 59, 78-9). No less personally, in his discourse on heralds he refers to 'That cruell Tyrante the unmercyfull Gowte [which] paynefully imprisoned me in my bedd, mannacled my hands, fettered my feete to the sheetes' for nearly three months ('Discourse', 230). In June 1606 he wrote to his cousin's grandson Thomas Thynne asking for money to ease his financial difficulties. He died at Clerkenwell Green in November 1608. 
Thynne left some 52 works in manuscript, of which 28 were eventually published, and more than 100 copies of medieval texts. His transcript of a valuable account of the peasants' revolt was printed in the 'English Historical Review' in 1898. His 'Catalogue of the lord chancellors of England' came into the possession of Robert Glover, Somerset herald, and Thomas Talbot, clerk of the records in the Tower, and was used by John Philipot, Somerset herald, for his 'Catalogue of the Chancellors of England' (1636). It had been dedicated to Thynne's friend Sir Thomas Egerton, as were several other manuscript works from the 1580s and 1590s. Most of Egerton's history of Britain in his famous judgment of 1607 on 'Colvin's Case', concerning the status in England of persons born in Scotland after the accession of James I, was taken from Thynne's 'Comentaries of Britayne' (1587). Both men converted from Catholicism to protestantism in the 1570s. 
Thynne's significance lies in the manuscripts he collected, transcribed, and translated. His massive collections, full of lists and catalogues, were later dispersed, to find their way into the Cottonian, Lansdowne, and Stowe collections in the British Library, the Ashmolean in the Bodleian Library, and the Ellesmere in the Huntington Library. His method was one that made his intellectual pursuits of alchemy and antiquarianism complementary. The acquisitive, archaeological approach to recover and understand 'the arcana of nature and the arcana of the past' enabled future alchemists and antiquaries to construct new interpretations (Carlson, 215-16). It was no less so for forward-thinking contemporaries like Sir Francis Bacon. 


@@@@@


doc= 27421


Thynne, Sir John (1512/13-1580), estate manager and builder of Longleat, was born in Church Stretton, Shropshire, the eldest son of Thomas Thynne of Church Stretton, and Margaret, daughter of Thomas Eynns, also of Church Stretton. He was a nephew of William Thynne, and was probably encouraged to move to London by his uncle's well-established position in the royal household of Henry VIII; there is no evidence, however, that he was ever in the king's service himself, and he first appears in 1535 as one of the household of Lord Vaux of Harrowden. In 1536 he entered the service of Edward Seymour, Viscount Beauchamp. He served as Seymour's steward from 1536 to 1552, and his fortunes rose with those of his master. He accompanied Seymour on his northern and Scottish expeditions in 1542 and 1544, and was knighted after the battle of Pinkie in 1547. His main activities, however, were in London and the west, where Seymour built up enormous estates following his rise to power as lord protector and his elevation to the dukedom of Somerset in 1547. In London Thynne became a freeman of the City, a member of the Mercers' Company, and Packer of Stranger's Goods, all in 1547, and in 1549 he allied himself to the most powerful of City and Mercer families by his marriage to Christian, daughter of Sir Richard Gresham and sister of Sir Thomas Gresham. 
In 1549 Sir William Paget expostulated that 'there is no one thing whereof his Grace hath need to take such heed as that man's proceedings' (Paget to William Petre, 22 July 1549, Tytler, 190), but in fact little has come to light to suggest that Thynne was anything except a hard-working servant of his master, though far from averse to feathering his own nest in the process. On the basis of his stewardship, and his commercial interests in the City, he commenced the building up of large estates, mainly in the west and centring on the former Carthusian priory at Longleat, which he bought from Sir John Horsey in 1540. 
The fall of Somerset in 1549 brought Thynne two sessions in the Tower of London, confiscation of a substantial portion of his estates, and the imposition of a large fine. He survived, however, retired to Longleat, and kept a low profile under Mary. The accession of Elizabeth, the return to office of his old friends and colleagues William Cecil, Thomas Smith, and others, and the continuing importance of Thomas Gresham assured him position and prosperity. He consolidated and expanded his estates, not without arousing resentment among longer-established neighbours. When he made his will in 1580, the year of his death, he possessed property in Wiltshire, Somerset, Gloucestershire, Oxfordshire, London, Bristol, and Westminster. In 1566 or 1567 he had married, as his second wife, Dorothy (died 1616), daughter of Sir William Wroughton, of Broad Hinton, Wiltshire, with whom he had five sons. With his first wife, Christian Gresham, he had three sons and three daughters. His descendants by his first wife were successively elevated to a baronetcy in 1641, to a viscountcy, as Viscounts Weymouth, in 1682, and to a marquessate, as marquesses of Bath, in 1789. 
Thynne was elected member of parliament for Marlborough (probably in 1539 and 1542 as well as 1545), Salisbury (1547), Wiltshire (1559, 1571), Great Bedwyn (1563), and Heytesbury (1572). He was a conscientious member, who sat on various committees, but he never played an important role at Westminster or in national politics. His hostile neighbour William Darrell satirized Thynne as 'infecting his master's head with plots and forms and many a subtle thing', and made the house of Longleat complain: 'but now see hym that by these thirty years almost with such turmoil of mind hath been thinking of me, framing and erecting me, raising many a time with great care and now and then pulling down this or that part of me to enlarge sometimes a foot or some few inches, uppon a conceit, or this or that man's speech, and by and by beat down windows, for this or that fault here or there. ('Records of the Building of Longleat', 3.213, Thynne Archives, Longleat)' This, though written in no friendly spirit, in fact expresses fairly enough Thynne's main claim to fame: less as the servant of the Protector Somerset and the founder of a dynasty than as a patron of architecture whose obsessive and restless perfectionism produced the great house at Longleat, deservedly acclaimed by John Summerson as representing 'as no other building does, the momentary High Renaissance of Tudor architecture' (Summerson, 62). 
There is documentary evidence for Thynne's supervision of Somerset's huge house at Bedwyn Brail in Wiltshire, which never got beyond its early stages, and he was almost certainly closely involved with the design and building of Somerset House in the Strand. The design of Somerset House related closely to contemporary classical architecture in France, and was stylistically in advance of anything else being built in England at the time. But in his own house at Longleat, Thynne, at the end of a thirty-seven-year process involving constant rebuilding, rethinking, and enlargement, and interrupted by a serious fire in 1567, developed the forms to be found at Somerset House into a far more integrated classical whole, a compact unity, in which a consistent design based on superimposed Doric, Ionic, and Corinthian pilasters was carried round all four external facades, and given modelling, strength, and rhythm by the constant repetition of rectangular bay windows. 
Although Thynne was capable of making drawings to show what he wanted, his buildings resulted from a combination of his own search for perfection and his employment of a succession of often gifted craftsmen. In its final form the design and detailing of Longleat owed much to a French mason, Alan Maynard, who arrived in 1563, and an English mason, Robert Smythson, who arrived in 1568. Because of the many craftsmen who worked there during its long gestation and moved on elsewhere, Longleat became the seat of a school of building which had repercussions all over the west country and, to a lesser extent, all over England. Thynne died on 21 May 1580 and was buried in the church at Longbridge Deverill, Wiltshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 27422


Thynne, John Alexander, fourth marquess of Bath (1831-1896), diplomatist and politician, born in Westminster on 1 March 1831, was the eldest son of Henry Frederick Thynne, third marquess of Bath (died 1837), and Harriet, daughter of Alexander Baring. He succeeded his father on 24 June 1837. Bath was educated at Eton College and matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 31 May 1849. He soon began to take an active part in county business, being appointed a deputy lieutenant of Somerset in 1853, and of Wiltshire in 1860. He was also active in the volunteers and yeomanry. In 1889 he was appointed lord lieutenant of Wiltshire and chairman of the county council. 
In May 1858 Bath was sent to Lisbon as ambassador-extraordinary and plenipotentiary, when he received from Pedro V the order of the Tower and Sword. Nine years later, in July 1867, when ambassador-extraordinary on a special mission at Vienna, he received from the emperor Franz Josef the grand cross of the order of Leopold of Austria. A keen Anglo-Catholic and a violent enemy of the 'Public Worship Regulation Act' of 1874, Bath, though in general conservative in politics, played an active role in 1876-8 in the campaign against the 'Bulgarian atrocities' and Disraeli's handling of them. Longleat, Bath's house, became a centre for meetings and consultations attended by Gladstone and others. In 1880 he published 'Observations on Bulgarian Affairs'. He was appointed trustee of the National Portrait Gallery in 1874, and of the British Museum in 1883. He was a member of the Academy of Belgrade in 1884. He also served on the Historical Manuscripts Commission. 
Bath married, in August 1861, Frances Isabella Catherine Vesey (died 31 Oct 1915), eldest daughter of Thomas Vesey, third Viscount de Vesci. They had three sons and three daughters. He died on 20 April 1896 at Venice and was buried at Longbridge Deverill, Wiltshire. His first son, Thomas Henry, succeeded to the title. 


@@@@@


doc= 27423


Thynne, Thomas (1647/8-1682), landowner and murder victim, was the only surviving son of Sir Thomas Thynne (1609/10-1669?) of Richmond, Surrey, and his wife, Stuart or Stuarta, daughter of Walter Balcanquhall (c.1586-1645). He matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 14 December 1666, aged eighteen, and was admitted to the Middle Temple in 1668. Following the death in 1670 of his uncle, Sir James Thynne, he succeeded to the estate of Longleat in Wiltshire. His nickname, popular at the time, derived solely from his wealth and his love of extravagance. Thynne was an active parliamentarian, being a member for Wiltshire from 1670 to 1682. At first he appeared to favour the court in his politics and was fairly intimate with the duke of York and his friends; only later did he express those country and whig views that led him into opposition. By 1674 he had become an opposition leader in Wiltshire, as well as a deputy lieutenant and a colonel in the local militia. Depicted as 'Issachar, his wealthy western friend' in John Dryden's notorious satire 'Absalom and Achitophel' (line 738), Thynne was a close associate of the duke of Monmouth. Sir John Reresby too claimed that Thynne was one that had opposed the court's interest and 'engaged himselfe in that of the Duke of Monmouth' (Geiter and Speck, 243). 
Thynne would not have been averse to holding government office, but he was not noted for his intellectual abilities. In the event he became an exclusionist in the early 1680s. Indeed on 22 January 1680 Thynne, Sir Walter St John, and Sir Edward Hungerford presented a petition from Wiltshire to the king for the sitting of parliament, to which Charles II replied that Thynne was an 'Impertinent foole to meddle with what did not concerne him' (Knights, 235). Undeterred, Thynne also entertained Monmouth during his western tour of 1680, but in the latter stages of the exclusion crisis he appeared to begin to shift his political position. He was associated with Ralph Montagu and tried, in vain, to obtain the office of the secretary of state. 
It was in his personal life that Thynne gained most notoriety. Thynne was noted as one always 'very civill [to the ladies] and allways courteuse & debonnaire' (BL, Add. MS 37047, fol. 244). Like most of his companions he was a man of loose character and notoriously seduced Miss Trevor, one of the queen's maids of honour, with promises of marriage. As a consequence he was involved in a duel in the spring of 1678. In July 1681 he married Elizabeth, countess of Ogle (1667-1722), daughter and heir of Josceline Percy, eleventh earl of Northumberland (1644-1670) and widow of Henry Cavendish, earl of Ogle, having paid a goodly sum of money to her guardians, since she was only fourteen years old. The marriage was never consummated, for Elizabeth, who continued to be known as Lady Ogle, having first taken the advice of Lady Temple, fled to the Netherlands. Thynne took legal action to ensure that he held onto her estate and that she be returned to Longleat. But his actions in marrying Elizabeth had also raised the jealousy of Count Karl Johann Konigsmark, one of her more unsuccessful suitors. It was later claimed that Thynne had merely ignored the many challenges sent by the count and even sought to rid himself of the count and his 'ancient', Captain Christopher Vratz, by hiring some men to kill them. An attack apparently took place, but failed and left Vratz wounded and burning for revenge against Thynne. Vratz subsequently recruited Lieutenant John Stern, another professional soldier, into his plans. There is little doubt that Vratz was also in communication with Konigsmark over the affair. The latter was lying low in London, ostensibly recovering from a venereal disease. It was Konigsmark who ultimately supplied the man who would kill Thynne: Charles George Borosky, alias the Polonian. 
On Sunday 12 February 1682 Vratz informed Borosky that he had a quarrel with an English gentleman, had sent him two challenges, and had been ignored; and that as Thynne had attempted to have both himself and Konigsmark murdered he was bent on revenge. He gave Borosky a musquetoon and reassured him that, as in Poland, servants were never held responsible for carrying out the orders of their masters. The pair soon joined Stern, who informed them that Thynne was out in his coach, and all three rode off in pursuit. They caught up with Thynne just after he had dropped off his passenger, the duke of Monmouth, at Hedge Lane and was proceeding up St James Street towards the countess of Northumberland's house. While Stern moved in front of the coach, Vratz and Borosky came up alongside. Vratz called on the coach to stop and as it came to a halt Borosky fired his weapon into it. Five or six shots hit Thynne in the stomach and hip, mortally wounding him. The trio then rode off in some haste. Thynne was taken home, where after 'languishing all night... between five & six in the morning' of 13 February he 'expired' (BL, Add. MS 37047, fol. 244). His body was subsequently embalmed, and buried in Westminster Abbey on 9 March. It was placed under a large and rather pompous tombstone that depicted his murder, but whose original inscription, firmly placing the blame for his death on Count Konigsmark, was suppressed by the dean of the abbey. Thynne's cousin Sir Thomas Thynne, later first Viscount Weymouth, went on to 'possess all his estates... [but] not his good nature' according to one contemporary (ibid.). 
In the aftermath of the killing Charles II was fearful that the whigs would attempt to make some political capital out of it; given the presence of Monmouth in Thynne's coach only moments before the murder this was highly likely. However, Vratz, Stern, and Borosky were soon arrested. Konigsmark attempted to flee the country, but was captured while trying to escape on a vessel bound for Sweden. Brought back to London he denied any complicity in the murder and claimed to have only left London because he feared the rage of the mob. He was committed to Newgate, but Charles II was not keen to see the young man suffer too much for his crime. Indeed at the subsequent trial, having bribed some of the jury, Konigsmark escaped punishment, while Vratz, Stern, and Borosky were all found guilty and went to the gallows on 10 March 1682. 
Thynne's death, and his wealth, were ultimately the most remarkable things about the man. As a whig plutocrat of some note on the Wiltshire scene he at least believed himself worthy of higher office. Yet, although his association with Monmouth was central to his later career, there are hints that problems in his personal life, particularly those with his wife, led not only to heavy drinking but also to a potential political change of heart. At length, while whig propagandists sought to use Thynne's murder for political ends, and so tried to revive the heady days of the Popish Plot, this, like Tom of Ten Thousand's final reputation, was soon dissipated. 


@@@@@


doc= 27424


Thynne, Thomas, first Viscount Weymouth (bap. 1640, d. 1714), politician, was baptized on 8 September 1640, the first son of Sir Henry Frederick Thynne, first baronet (1615-1680), landowner of Kempsford, Gloucestershire, and his wife, Mary ('bap'. 1619), daughter of Thomas Coventry, first Baron Coventry of Aylesborough. Thynne was educated at Kingston grammar school. From a staunchly Anglican and royalist family, in the 1650s he was taught by ejected Anglican clergymen such as Thomas Triplett, corresponded regularly with Henry Hammond, and was 'one of the prize pupils' tutored privately by ejected Anglican dons at Oxford (Seaward, 65). He did, however, eventually go to Christ Church, Oxford, matriculating on 21 April 1657, but was not awarded a degree. While at Oxford he befriended his Christ Church tutor Thomas Ken, later bishop of Bath and Wells, and acquired the extensive manuscript collection of William Burton, his former teacher. Thynne's lifelong interest in manuscripts and coins earned him recognition from the Royal Society, which elected him a fellow in 1664. 
In 1664 Thynne was supported by the duke of York in a by-election at Salisbury, but he had little prospect of success against the other candidate, Edward Hyde, who had been put up by his father Lord Chancellor Clarendon, the city's high steward, and Thynne probably withdrew before the poll. In 1666 he was appointed a groom of the duke's bedchamber, a post he held until 1672, and was sent as an envoy to Sweden from 1666 to 1669. In or before 1673 he married Lady Frances ('bap'. 1650, died 1712), daughter of Heneage Finch, third earl of Winchilsea. They had three sons, who all predeceased their father, and one daughter. Thynne's new connections enabled him to enter parliament in 1674, when he was returned for Oxford University after a by-election caused by the promotion of the incumbent MP, Heneage Finch, later first earl of Nottingham, to the lord keepership. Thynne's success may be attributed as much to his connection with Finch as to the large sums expended upon entertaining the electorate, for the constituency normally returned only former members of the university. Thynne had no degree, his contribution to the work of the house during this parliament was slight, and he notably made no attempt to have the clergy exempted from the hearth tax, an issue of some concern to the colleges, and consequently there was little scope for his re-election for the university in 1679. His recent marriage had, however, brought him a substantial estate at Drayton Bassett, Staffordshire, and a strong interest in nearby Tamworth, which borough elected him to both parliaments of 1679. He shortly afterwards became high steward of the town, a post he held until his death. In parliament Thynne supported the 'Comprehension Bill' and a measure to remove Roman Catholics from the capital, but acted against attempts to exclude the duke of York from the succession, telling against committing the first 'Exclusion Bill' on 21 May 1679. His personal ambition was checked by his failure to secure nomination from the Levant Company as ambassador to Turkey. On 6 March 1680 Thynne succeeded his father as second baronet, and two years later, following the sensational assassination of his cousin, Thomas Thynne, he came into the extensive Somerset and Wiltshire estates centred upon Longleat. His 32-year tenure at Longleat was spent redesigning much of the house's interior, rebuilding a number of rooms, and completing the chapel, while the gardens were laid out with fashionable contemporary formality. On 11 December 1682 Thynne's steadfast opposition to exclusion was rewarded with a peerage, when he was created Baron Thynne and Viscount Weymouth. He deferred taking his seat in the Lords, however, until 1685. Although he was not sounded on the repeal of the 'Test Act' and penal laws against dissenters, he was known as an opponent of James II's religious measures. In December 1688 he was named as one of four emissaries sent to ask William of Orange to summon a free parliament. In the Lords he voted for a regency, and though he took the oaths to the new monarchs he supported the nonjurors, and offered his old friend Bishop Ken private apartments at Longleat as well as the family chaplaincy. Weymouth's membership of the new missionary Society for the Propagation of the Gospel from 1701 may be a testament to his religious devotion. 
Weymouth was a vocal opponent of the government, and legislative measures which he sought to undermine included the 'Triennial Act' and the 1697 bill for regulating elections. He refused to sign the 1696 association for the defence of William III after the discovery of an assassination plot. Certainly a high tory, he was soon suspected of also being a Jacobite, but is not known to have intrigued actively with the exiled James II. In June 1702, soon after the accession of Queen Anne, Weymouth was appointed a privy councillor, keeper of the Forest of Dean, and the first lord commissioner of trade and plantations. In 1711 he was reappointed 'custos rotulorum' of Wiltshire, a post which he had held almost continuously since 1683 before being displaced by the whigs in 1706. 
Weymouth's wife died on 17 April 1712 and was buried on 3 May at Longbridge Deverill, Wiltshire. Two years later, on or shortly before 28 July 1714, Weymouth himself died, probably at Longleat; he too was buried in the family vault at Longbridge Deverill. In his will, made in November 1709, he confirmed an annuity to Bishop Ken and bequeathed $40,000 to four granddaughters and $1000 to build a church in East Woodlands, Frome. Paintings by Van Dyck and Antonio di Cortena were bequeathed to the earls of Rochester and Nottingham. Thynne's titles and the bulk of the estate were devolved on his great-nephew Thomas Thynne, second Viscount Weymouth and father of the first marquess of Bath, on the condition that he confirmed his Anglicanism. 


@@@@@


doc= 27425


Thynne, Thomas, third Viscount Weymouth and first marquess of Bath (1734-1796), courtier and politician, was born on 13 September 1734, the eldest son and heir of Thomas Thynne, second Viscount Weymouth (1710-1751), landowner, and his second wife, Louisa (died 1736), the second daughter of John Carteret, Earl Granville. He seems to have been educated by his family and then at a school in Market Street, Hertfordshire, before matriculating from St John's College, Cambridge, in Lent 1752. He received his MA in 1753 and subsequently undertook a grand tour on the continent. In January 1751 he had succeeded his father, becoming the third Viscount Weymouth. The young aristocrat devoted considerable time and money to improving the family seat at Longleat in Wiltshire, employing Capability Brown, who from 1757 onwards and at considerable cost created the modern gardens and park which surround the house. But Weymouth's principal activities, then and in the future, were the common aristocratic pursuits of gambling and dissipation. In 1757, when his gambling losses were the talk of the court, George II expressed concern that Weymouth 'could not be a good kind of man, as he never kept company with any woman, and loved nothing but play and strong beer' ('Correspondence of John, Fourth Duke of Bedford', 2.231). Two years later, on 22 May 1759, Weymouth married Elizabeth Cavendish (1735-1825), the eldest daughter of William Bentinck, second duke of Portland, and his wife, Margaret Cavendish Harley ['see 'Bentinck, Margaret Cavendish, duchess of Portland (1715-1785)]. 
This aristocratic marriage was central to Weymouth's rise. When George III became king the following year, Weymouth was appointed a lord of the bedchamber (1760-63), while his wife became first a lady of the bedchamber to Queen Charlotte (1761-93) and subsequently mistress of the robes (1793-1818). These positions at court, and the support of the ruler to which they led, were important during two decades when George III played an active role in government and ministerial politics. Weymouth attached himself to the duke of Bedford and was named master of the horse when the duke's followers joined George Grenville's ministry in spring 1763. The family finances, however, were unable to bear the costs of the third viscount's lifestyle, and by 1765 he was on the point of fleeing his creditors and travelling to France. Court and ministerial favour provided temporary salvation with the appointment (April-July 1765) as lord lieutenant of Ireland; at the end of May Weymouth was sworn of the privy council. This appointment was accompanied by the usual grant of $3000 for equipage, though Weymouth never crossed the Irish Sea to take up his post and resigned within three months. 
Aristocratic birth, political connections, and royal favour were still sufficient to secure entrance to the highest level of government. Weymouth possessed all three and, with a rising reputation as a speaker in the House of Lords, by the mid-1760s he was on the brink of a public career. In January 1768, when the duke of Bedford's followers finally joined the ailing Chatham-Grafton administration, he became secretary of state for the northern department at the unusually early age of thirty-three, though he wholly lacked experience of either diplomacy or government office. At this period formal control of British foreign policy was divided on a geographical basis. In the following October, Weymouth requested and received the senior southern secretaryship. He remained at that post until December 1770. Five years later, in November 1775, he returned to the southern department, acting as secretary of state until November 1779, when he resigned. The seven years during which he was involved in the running of Britain's foreign policy made him one of the longest-serving secretaries of state in the age of the American War of Independence, in spite of his notorious personal failings which troubled his contemporaries and flawed his career. 
Weymouth was notoriously lazy, devoted to the gaming table, and given to dissipation and drunkenness: shortly after he entered office Junius sneered about the northern secretary and 'the bewitching smiles of Burgundy' (Francis, 31). He was not without ability, and his correspondence contains periodic flashes of high intelligence and real political insight, while on occasions he was a spirited and effective government spokesman in the House of Lords. This was aided by his tall and handsome appearance and patrician demeanour. In private he could charm and enchant by his conversation and lively mind. He was capable of occasional bouts of activity, not always with beneficial consequences, and these interspersed his habitual indolence. This was a crucial failing: the secretaries of state were the key executive agents of British government, responsible for turning cabinet decisions into precise orders to government agents at home and abroad. The smooth running of foreign policy depended upon the maintenance of regular communications with diplomats, and this Weymouth consistently failed to do. Instead he depended heavily, during his first period in office, on his loyal under-secretary, Robert Wood, to transact official business. While this did something to disguise Weymouth's chronic laziness, it carried an additional price, since Wood himself was widely suspected by contemporaries of abusing his position, and the inside information which it provided, to speculate in the financial markets. 
Weymouth's two periods as secretary of state provoked a series of thinly disguised complaints and even overt protests by members of Britain's diplomatic corps that they had found themselves without specific instructions or even general guidance from London at crucial moments. In nine months during 1779, at a critical period for Anglo-Russian relations, James Harris in St Petersburg received only one letter, which was both belated and very general. Early in his ministerial career Weymouth expressed a very odd sentiment for a secretary of state, that British ministers 'should 'hear' as much and 'say' as little as possible' ('SIRIO', 12.369), and he himself reinforced precept by example. His taciturnity and evasiveness towards the foreign diplomatic corps were notorious and widely and correctly interpreted as an attempt to cover up his ignorance of European issues, on which he remained badly informed even towards the end of his spell in office. His relations with his ministerial colleagues were equally frosty: the neglect of his duties, together with the limited impact which he had on wider government policy, was accompanied by evident ambition and periodic ruthlessness in pursuit of personal advancement. The shrewdest assessment was that offered by Sir Nathaniel Wraxall, who remarked that Weymouth's 'application to business by no means kept pace with his abilities, nor was he ever a popular Minister' (Wraxall, 2.198). 
British foreign policy during Weymouth's months at the northern department in 1768 was dominated by an Anglo-French confrontation over the Mediterranean island of Corsica. France's leading minister, the duc de Choiseul, secretly concluded a treaty with the declining Italian republic of Genoa to purchase the island, at a bargain price. Its acquisition would strengthen France's position in the western Mediterranean and provide protection for her important southern naval base at Toulon; it would also boost her flagging prestige after the severe defeats in the Seven Years' War (1756-63). When a Franco-Genoese agreement was suspected in spring 1768, the southern secretary, the earl of Shelburne, together with the effective leader of the ministry, the duke of Grafton, Lord Camden (lord chancellor), and Sir Edward Hawke (first lord of the Admiralty), argued within cabinet for a vigorous response and were prepared to fight if necessary. They were opposed by Weymouth, along with Lord Gower (lord president of the council), Lord North (chancellor of the exchequer), and the earl of Hillsborough (American secretary). Weymouth had long been a follower of the duke of Bedford, the leading Francophile in British public life, and seems to have been taking his cue from him. The divisions within the cabinet were known to the French government and undermined Britain's position over Corsica. It was further weakened by Weymouth's calculated indiscretions to members of the foreign diplomatic corps, to the effect that the Grafton ministry would never fight over the French annexation of the island. Shelburne's policy had been wrecked by his brother secretary -- with whom he was already on bad terms -- and in the summer of 1768 France's take-over went ahead, Britain doing nothing to resist it. 
In the autumn Shelburne resigned and was replaced by a career diplomatist, the earl of Rochford. But the latter, despite his relevant experience as an ambassador to Spain and France, was consigned to the northern department. This was because Weymouth requested and received the southern secretaryship, still recognized to be the senior province: had he not switched departments, Rochford's appointment would have appeared to slight him. As far as Weymouth was concerned, it was a matter of political prestige, not any new-found zeal for the business of government. From autumn 1768, for almost two years, he exhibited little interest in British diplomacy, being content to allow the hard-working Rochford to shape policy. Weymouth exerted real influence only on two areas of government activity during this spell in office. He acted vigorously to restore order in the capital during the riots in London in spring 1768 and the unrest associated with the Middlesex election. His actions were prompted by George III and strengthened his links with the king. Weymouth long remained an advocate of firm measures against John Wilkes. In 1769 he intervened decisively but without immediate consequences in the affairs of the East India Company, setting a precedent for taking unilateral action behind the back of his cabinet colleagues, which was to be so important in 1770 over the Falkland Islands. 
The context to this confusing episode was the expansion of the company's territorial power and economic influence in the subcontinent during and after the Seven Years' War. At times it could act independently of the government in London over important issues of strategy in India, which had implications for Britain's wider policy. In 1768-9 disquiet had arisen over the East India Company's annexation of Balambangan without apparent approval from the Grafton ministry. On this occasion Weymouth, again prompted by George III, expressed disquiet to the governors of the company. When in 1769 the company's military problems with Haidar Ali led it to seek government support, Weymouth seized the opportunity to raise the question of ministerial control. His efforts, including an unprecedented appeal to the general court, were unsuccessful, at which point he calmly issued secret instructions -- which contradicted his public orders -- to Sir John Lindsay, who was dealing with problems on the spot in India. Nothing came of this attempt to weaken the East India Company's independence, and the episode is interesting primarily for the light it sheds on Weymouth's personality and character. 
In the second half of 1770 Weymouth's influence upon British foreign policy returned, and during these months his involvement was at its peak. The occasion was a revival of an earlier Anglo-Bourbon confrontation over the Falkland Islands in the distant south Atlantic. In 1766-7 there had been a sharp dispute over a British settlement at Port Egmont on West Falkland, which Madrid claimed as Spanish territory. On that occasion a compromise had been patched up, with both sides wanting to avoid war. But the issue had been shelved rather than solved, and it re-emerged three years later when Spain adopted a much firmer stance. In June 1770 a Spanish force evicted the tiny British garrison from Port Egmont. 
In September word of the expedition against Port Egmont reached London. Britain's response was the responsibility of Weymouth, who now demonstrated greater vigour than at any point in his career. The southern secretary, being one of the principal executors of government policy, possessed considerable freedom of action under the prevailing constitutional conventions. This, together with the absence from London of North (now leader of the ministry) and his brother secretary, Rochford, enabled him to determine Britain's initial response. From the first Weymouth was determined to force Spain to fight or to surrender, believing that British naval superiority could achieve this. Without consulting his cabinet colleagues he set in motion a substantial naval mobilization and adopted an intransigent and bellicose attitude in the diplomatic exchanges with Madrid. By the closing months of 1770 a war over the Falklands appeared very likely, as it was assumed in both London and Madrid that France would support her Spanish ally. 
Weymouth's motive for seeking hostilities with Spain was to achieve political supremacy for himself. North, slowly consolidating his own government, was the main obstacle to his dominance. He calculated -- perhaps acting at Wood's instigation -- that war would bring down the ministry and restore to power the legendary architect of British victories in the Seven Years' War -- William Pitt, now earl of Chatham. But Chatham would only be a figurehead in any new ministry, given the extent of his physical and mental collapse, and so Weymouth might expect to wield effective authority. This naked bid for power proved stillborn. George III, whose oversight of the official correspondence enabled him to monitor the southern secretary's actions, realized that the scale of naval preparations would bring about hostilities and acted to preserve peace: in company with most members of the ministry, he wanted a firm stance towards Spain, but he did not wish to force her to fight. Together with North, the king orchestrated cabinet opposition to Weymouth's actions and reassured Bourbon diplomats in London that Britain did not wish a war. During late November and early December the southern secretary's policy was overturned, to his unconcealed fury. After a stormy cabinet meeting on 7 December, Weymouth resigned. North, Rochford, and George III supervised a settlement with Madrid, finally concluded in late January 1771. 
One mysterious dimension of Weymouth's resignation in late 1770 is that at some point he received an assurance from the king that he would one day be restored to the southern department. Barely six months after he left office Weymouth, who had not joined the opponents of North's ministry, was mentioned as a possible lord privy seal, should Grafton not accept the post. In the following year he was offered a secretaryship of state, but haughtily declined. His phoenix-like resurgence came during the first half of the War of American Independence (1775-83). In November 1775 he was restored to the southern department, where he remained until his final departure from office in November 1779. The passage of time had done little to remove the shortcomings apparent throughout his whole career. He remained indolent, aloof, and isolated within cabinet, though he acted as a government spokesman in the House of Lords and intermittently intrigued very actively against his colleagues. His earlier hard line towards the Bourbon powers did not immediately resurface after autumn 1775, when it would have been difficult to reconcile with the official policy of maintaining good relations with Versailles and Madrid. When his return to office was being considered, George III had discreetly noted -- with one eye firmly on the Falklands episode -- that 'Lord Weymouth and the Court of Spain cannot pleasantly transact business' ('Correspondence of George III', 3.283). In fact he accommodated himself for a time to the official strategy of conciliating the Bourbon powers in order to facilitate the suppression of the American colonial rebellion. 
Before long, however, the hostility towards France and Spain re-emerged. Weymouth aligned himself with the earl of Sandwich, who had also followed Bedford during his earlier career. Sandwich, who was first lord of the Admiralty, feared Bourbon intervention in the American struggle and favoured a firm diplomatic and naval response to this threat. The two men were isolated within a cabinet which advocated conciliation of France and Spain. In 1776-7, when Weymouth's attitude was diametrically opposed to the ministry's policy, he was simply bypassed by his own colleagues and by French and Spanish diplomats: the southern secretary ceased to transact relations with the two principal countries within his department, which the complacent viscount happily accepted. His influence on Britain's foreign policy during the American war was slight. Indeed, he found an ingenious way to circumvent his indolence by circulating extracts from the dispatches of the influential ambassador in Paris, Viscount Stormont, as instructions to other British diplomats. This was a unique episode in the history of Britain's eighteenth-century foreign relations and had a coda which was entirely apposite: Stormont succeeded him as southern secretary. 
By mid-1777 war with France was believed to be inevitable, and Weymouth's earlier hostility towards the Bourbons now fitted with Britain's overall policy. He could therefore return to a day-to-day role in the conduct of London's diplomacy, which he did from that summer. Yet his impact upon British diplomacy or the wider conduct of the war was minimal, and his commitment to his office no greater than hitherto. This became particularly evident in 1779. The final illness and death of the northern secretary, the earl of Suffolk, made Weymouth for the first nine months of the year 'de facto' foreign secretary, responsible for relations with countries in both departments. Edmund Burke was quick to sneer, noting sarcastically that 'The whole of the laborious and arduous correspondence of this Empire rested solely upon the activity and energy of Lord Weymouth' (Mackesy, 246). Throughout these months Britain's diplomacy was allowed to drift towards the rocks by its inattentive pilot. His principal initiative was a volcanic outburst during an interview with the Spanish ambassador in May 1779. Blending anger and menaces in equal proportions, he censured Madrid's duplicity throughout the colonial rebellion and reversed in one ill-considered outburst a year's careful diplomacy aimed at conciliating Spain. The impact was slight: Madrid's decision to intervene openly on the American side, announced in the summer, had already been made and proceeded from far more fundamental causes. But the episode once more highlighted Weymouth's shortcomings as a foreign minister, apparent throughout his final months in power. One well-placed contemporary, John Robinson, believed that this final phase of neglect proceeded from the viscount already having decided to resign, which he duly did in November when he left office for the last time. 
Weymouth and his wife were established figures at court. The extent of this royal favour was apparent in June 1778, when he was created a knight of the Garter, though he was never to be installed. In August 1789 he was created marquess of Bath. He had served as groom of the stole between March and November 1775, and was reappointed in 1782. Weymouth held the office and the substantial income of $2000 per annum which it conferred until his death, in Arlington Street, London, on 19 November 1796. He was buried at Longbridge Deverill. His eldest son, Thomas Thynne (1765-1837), succeeded to the title; two other sons and five daughters of his marriage survived him. His life was a salutary reminder that a flawed personality and manifold failings as a minister were no obstacle to a career at the highest level of government during the second half of the eighteenth century, provided they were accompanied by sufficient aristocratic pedigree and reinforced by connections at court. 


@@@@@


doc= 27426


Thynne, William (d. 1546), literary editor, is of obscure origins. His family bore the alternative surname of Botfield or Boteville and he is also cited as 'Thynne alias Boteville'. The claim that he was the younger son of John de la Inne, with his wife, Jane Bowdler, seems to lack evidence (Round, 193-5). Wood asserts that he was from Shropshire and educated at Oxford. He may be the William Thynne who is described in 1518 as 'chief clerk' ('LP Henry VIII', 2, pt 2, app. 58). He is first certainly recorded in February 1524 when he is described as second clerk of the kitchen in Henry VIII's household. By October 1526 he was chief clerk of the kitchen and the recipient of an annuity of $10. In July 1528 he became bailiff and keeper of the park of Beaudley, and in July of the following year he was appointed customer of wools, hides, and fleeces in the port of London. In October that year he was made receiver-general of the earldom of March and keeper of Gateley Park. 
Further indications of royal favour followed. In March 1532 Thynne received, with others, an annuity of 100 marks, and in May 1533 he was almoner and surveyor of the dressers at the wedding of Anne Boleyn. By April 1537 he was Henry's clerk controller. By 1543 he was one of the two masters of the household for the king, and in the year of his death he appears to have been the sole master. In 1544 he had also become one of the officers of the counting house. 
Thynne's career as a courtier was conducted simultaneously with his literary activities, particularly his interest in Chaucer, which led to the publication by Thomas Godfray of his first collected edition of 'The Workes of Geffray Chaucer' in 1532. This edition was clearly the outcome of sustained research and editing. Thynne's son, Francis Thynne, reports that his father had owned a number of manuscripts of Chaucer's works 'of whiche written copies there came to me after my fathers deathe some fyve and twentye, whereof some had moore and some fewer tales' (Thynne, 11-12). Several manuscripts survive that Thynne used in the preparation of his edition. These include a manuscript of the Middle English 'Romaunt of the Rose' (Glasgow University, MS Hunterian V. 3.7), and Longleat MS 258 which provided the source for six other poems. In addition, a copy of Caxton's edition of Chaucer's 'Boece', also at Longleat, the Thynne family seat, again contains printer's marks, which indicates that, like the manuscripts, it was used as setting copy for the 1532 edition. For other works Thynne seems to have used Pynson's 1526 editions of Chaucer as his copy-texts. It seems that in some instances he undertook careful comparison of different versions of texts to establish his own editions of Chaucer's works. 
In his 1532 edition Thynne provides the first printed editions of a number of Chaucer's major works in verse and prose, including 'The Book of the Duchess', 'The Legend of Good Women', 'Boece', 'The Treatise on the Astrolabe'. He also printed a large number of works not by Chaucer, including poems by John Lydgate, Thomas Hoccleve, Richard Roos, and Robert Henryson. The introductory materials to the edition, which include the first life of Chaucer and a genealogy, are prefaced by an unsigned dedication to Henry VIII by Bryan Tuke, the king's secretary. (Tuke's authorship is established by a note in his hand in the copy of Thynne's edition in Clare College, Cambridge.) 
Thynne evidently had more extensive literary interests. His son, Francis, reports that the poet John Skelton wrote most of his poem 'Colin Clout' at Thynne's house in Erith, Kent (Thynne, 10). Francis also records that his father had wished to include the anti-Catholic 'Plowman's Tale' (which Francis appears to confuse with a mid-sixteenth-century poem, 'The Pilgrim's Tale') in the 1532 Chaucer but was thwarted by Wolsey (ibid.). A separate edition was issued by Godfray ('c'.1533). (There is no direct evidence that Thynne himself was involved in this printing, but its publication by a printer with whom he had other associations at this time is suggestive.) The 'Plowman's Tale' was added to the 1542 reprinting of Thynne's edition of Chaucer and appeared in subsequent sixteenth-century editions of his works. 
Thynne died on 10 August 1546, and was buried in the church of All Hallows Barking by the Tower, where there is a brass to his memory. His will, dated 16 November 1540, was proved on 7 September 1546. His wife, Anne, daughter of William Bond, clerk of the green cloth, was sole executrix and chief legatee. 


