@@@@@


doc= 27427


Chidiock Tichborne (c.1558-1586) was born in Southampton, the son of Peter Tichborne and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Henry Middleton. Like his father he was a known Catholic and was interrogated in 1583 about some 'popish relics' that he had brought back from abroad, where he had gone without leave; and in June 1586 accusations about 'popish practices' were laid against his family. 


@@@@@


doc= 27428


Tichborne, Sir Henry (1581?-1667), army officer and politician, was the fourth son of Sir Benjamin Tichborne, first baronet ('c'.1540-1629), of Tichborne, Hampshire, gentleman of the privy chamber to James I, and Amphillis (died in or after 1629), daughter of Richard Weston, justice of the common pleas. Appointed a captain of foot in Ireland in 1620, he was made governor of Lifford soon afterwards and was knighted on 23 August 1623. He was appointed to commissions to investigate the plantations in Ulster, and built up Irish estates, particularly in co. Tyrone, but also in counties Leitrim, Donegal, and Fermanagh. In 1634 he represented County Tyrone in the Irish parliament. He married Jane (died 1664), daughter of Sir Robert Newcomen, with whom he had five sons and three daughters: Benjamin, William, Richard, Henry, Samuel, Dorcas, Amphillis, and Elizabeth. 
Following the outbreak of the rising of 1641, Tichborne was appointed governor of Drogheda and reached there on 4 November. Ormond thought him 'a very honest and gallant gentleman... and one that I beleeve will render a good accoumpt of it or leave his bones there' ('Irish Confederation', ed. Gilbert, 1.233). The town came under siege from the insurgents, Tichborne's successful resistance winning him lasting acclaim. The siege was abandoned in early March 1643, and he undertook a series of sorties in the vicinity, capturing Dundalk on 26 March. 
Tichborne was named to the Irish privy council on 11 May 1642 and appointed governor of co. Meath on 27 March 1643. On 31 March 1643 Charles I named him one of two lords justices, and he took up office, alongside Sir John Borlase, on 1 May, resigning power to Ormond as lord lieutenant on 21 January 1644. He later claimed that the post was 'unsuitable to my Parts or Fortune... there being a Necessity of my Obedience', and that he opposed the royal plan for a cessation with the confederate forces, which 'was... as much hindered by me, as was in my Power' ('Letter of Sir Henry Tichborne', 31), signing the ceasefire order as a military necessity. In 1644 he was summoned to the royal headquarters at Oxford to advise Charles I on the royal plans for a peace with the confederate Catholics. Again, he later claimed to have voiced his dissent, arguing that the confederate terms were 'destructive to the Protestant Religion, exceeding hurtful to his Majesty's present Service, and to the utter ruin of the 'English' Interest in this Kingdom' (ibid., 34). Returning with instructions for Ormond, he was captured at sea by the English parliamentarians on 31 December 1644, and from February 1645 was imprisoned in the Tower. He was held until September when he was exchanged for prisoners held by Ormond, and returned to his post at Drogheda. Regardless of any possible doubts, on 30 July 1646 he was one of the privy councillors who signed the proclamation of the short-lived peace between Ormond and the confederates. 
Tichborne retained his command -- 'with Chearfulness' ('Letter of Sir Henry Tichborne', 34) -- after Ormond handed his garrisons to the English parliamentarians in 1647, and served in parliament's victory at Dungan's Hill on 8 August 1647 and in further expeditions into south Ulster and north Leinster. But by April 1648 London was entertaining doubts about his reliability, as a former associate of Ormond. Aware that others with his background were being arrested he obtained permission to travel to London in the autumn of 1648. By April 1649 he had been awarded funds for past services and it was ordered that the 'test is also to be subscribed by him, and he dispatched away to his command' ('CSP dom.', '1648-9', 72). Even so there remained a 'prejudicate Opinion' of him in some quarters, and he 'therefore freely reposed my Arms, and forsook my Employment' ('Letter of Sir Henry Tichborne', 39). His wife fled from Ireland to the royalist stronghold of the Isle of Man about August 1649. 
Tichborne composed an account of his exploits, dated 1651, intended for his wife to use to secure some recompense for his past services, and which argued his reluctant acquiescence in royalist peace plans in the 1640s. He undertook a long-running campaign for payment of what he considered to be his remaining arrears and for which he sought satisfaction in the form of a grant of lands at Beaulieu, co. Louth, of which he had been awarded possession, as tenant to the state, by Cromwell. Repeated journeys to England won him the lord protector's approval but the Dublin administration stalled the award, on the grounds that land in the county had been earmarked for other uses. In the meantime he appears to have bought up rights to lands awarded to 'adventurers' (investors in the war effort) in Leinster and Ulster. 
With the restoration of Charles II, Tichborne was appointed marshal of the army for Ireland on 31 July 1660, and was elected to the Irish parliament of 1661 for Sligo borough. He continued to petition for his arrears, while one of his sons eventually secured ownership of Beaulieu. He died there in 1667 and was buried the same year in St Mary's Church, Drogheda. The confederate Richard Bellings later spoke of Tichborne as 'a man trusty to the King, valiant and moderate' ('Irish Confederation', ed. Gilbert, 1.162). Of his courage there seems little doubt, but Bellings may have overestimated Tichborne's support for the royal policy of accommodation, evidence for his stance being rendered murky by his later self-justification. The regicide John Moore spoke of him as 'so great an enemy to the rebels in Ireland, killing many hundreds of them at his own hand or standing by to see them executed' and Tichborne later admitted that there was 'little mercy shown in those times' (O'Sullivan, 65). It was for military, rather than politic or humane, virtues and abilities that Tichborne won his contemporary renown and reward. 
Tichborne was succeeded by his son Sir William (died 1694), who married Judith Bysse. Their son, 


@@@@@


doc= 27429


Henry Tichborne, first Baron Ferrard of Beaulieu (1662-1731), politician, was born in Dublin and educated there at Trinity College. He was MP for Ardee (1692-3) and for co. Louth (1695-9 and 1710-13). Knighted on 28 March 1694, he was created a baronet on 12 July 1697 and Baron Ferrard of Beaulieu on 9 October 1715. He married in July 1683 Arabella, daughter of Sir Robert Cotton, baronet, of Combermere, Cheshire, but his titles became extinct on his death from apoplexy on 3 November 1731. 


@@@@@


doc= 27430


Tichborne, Robert, appointed Lord Tichburne under the protectorate (1610/11-1682), politician and regicide, was born in London, the eldest son of Robert Tichborne (died 1644/5) of St Michael-le-Querne, London, and Cowden, Kent, a gentleman free of the Skinners' Company, and his wife, Joan, daughter of Thomas Banks, gentleman, a London merchant. He was married twice: first by licence dated 27 April 1638, when aged twenty-seven, to Mary Priest ('b'. 1614); they had two sons. His second wife was Anne, eldest daughter of William Johnson of Ingham, Norfolk, gentleman; they had two more children. 
Tichborne followed his father into the Skinners' Company, from apprentice in 1631 to his freedom in 1637, and on to common council in 1643, as a member for Farringdon Within. Having joined the Honourable Artillery Company in 1636, by 1642 he was also serving as a captain in the Yellow regiment of the London trained bands. Already well established as a wealthy Cheapside linen draper, he benefited substantially from his father's will. On the outbreak of civil war he was quick to display a militant parliamentarianism in opposition to peace campaigners in the capital and in 1643 he became lieutenant-colonel of a regiment of London auxiliaries. His militancy earned him notoriety in royalist circles as one of seven rebellious citizens believed to be chiefly responsible for London's disaffection from the king. In the spring of 1643 he joined other City militants on a London subcommittee established at Salters' Hall to raise a volunteer citizens' army. This brought him into close contact with other emerging leaders of political Independency in the City as well as a future Leveller leader, William Walwyn. When the City decided to reassert its control over the subcommittee Tichborne was one of seven Salters' Hall nominees added to the London militia committee in July 1643 as a conciliatory gesture. In the following September he saw service with his militia regiment at the first battle of Newbury. 
By the closing stages of the war Tichborne was busy establishing himself as a leader of political Independency in the City. He spoke out in common council against presbyterian attacks on the anticlericalism of the October 1645 ordinance appointing lay triers; led protest against the political presbyterian City remonstrance of May 1646; and, the next month, was a principal supporter of the London Independent petition to the Commons. City presbyterians retaliated during the attempted counter-revolution of 1647, when Tichborne and other leading Independents were purged from the militia committee, only to be subsequently restored to it after the army's intervention. When the latter occupied London in August, Fairfax paid tribute to Tichborne's political reliability by appointing him lieutenant of the Tower and colonel of a new regiment to guard it. He subsequently participated in both the Putney and Whitehall debates of 1647-8 within the council of officers, adopting a relatively radical stance on the question of the power of the king and Lords to veto legislation and that of the civil magistrate over religion, but stopping short of an endorsement of the Leveller's platform. After the second civil war, however, he took part in the Nag's Head tavern discussions held between leading City Independents and Levellers and was a member of the committee of sixteen which drew up the second 'Agreement of the People'. 
Tichborne was an active supporter of the king's trial and execution, attending all but three of the high court's seventeen meetings and signing the death warrant. He also helped organize a common council petition in mid-January 1649, calling for the execution of justice upon Charles and others responsible for the recent bloodshed ['see also 'Regicides]. The ensuing political transformation in London saw Tichborne elected alderman for Farringdon Within in July 1649 and a London sheriff and master of the Skinners' Company in 1650. His religious Independency had already brought him into close acquaintance with other prominent radicals who similarly gained commanding positions in the City after 1649. A member of George Cockayn's influential Independent congregation at St Pancras, Soper Lane, he was also on friendly terms with members of John Goodwin's church in Coleman Street. He wrote two lengthy works of spiritual devotion in early 1649, 'A Cluster of Canaan's Grapes' and 'The Rest of Faith' (dedicated to Fairfax and Cromwell respectively), and established a lectureship in St Olave, Silver Street. 
Appointments to major positions of responsibility followed from 1649 onwards, including membership of the indemnity committee, probate judge, and commissioner of customs, a post he was removed from in 1656 amid suspicions of fraud. In addition Tichborne was named a commissioner to the high courts of justice of 1650 and 1654 and, in 1651-2, was one of eight commissioners sent to Scotland to prepare for its union with England. In 1653 he was appointed to the nominated assembly, becoming one of its most active MPs, and was a member of the two councils of state elected by it. His politics now moved in a more moderate direction: he clashed with radicals over proposals for the abolition of tithes and lay patronage and was accused of having helped bring the assembly to its early end. He enjoyed further favour under the protectorate and in 1656 was elected lord mayor of London and knighted by Cromwell. A contemporary print of Tichborne on horseback wearing his full mayoral regalia is to be found in the Guildhall Library. He was made a member of the new upper house in 1657, taking his seat as Lord Tichburne; other distinctions included a directorship of the East India Company and, in 1658, appointment to the presidency of the Honourable Artillery Company. The restoration of the Rump in 1659 did not bring immediate political eclipse; this was to happen finally as a result of his brief service on the committee of safety set up by the army when it again interrupted parliament in October. 
At the Restoration he surrendered in obedience to the proclamation of 16 June and was tried for regicide in October 1660. Despite pleas of ignorance and repentance, he was formally sentenced to death, yet his life was spared as a result of the combined benefits of the 'Act of Indemnity' and reports that he had previously saved some royalists from execution. He spent the rest of his days in prison, although his wife and children were permitted to live with him during his imprisonment in Dover Castle in 1664-74. He died in the Tower on 6 July 1682 and was subsequently buried with the utmost privacy in Mercers' Chapel; he was survived by his second wife, Anne. Administration of the little that was left of his estate was granted to his eldest son, John, in September 1682. 


@@@@@


doc= 27431


Tickell, Richard (1751-1793), playwright and satirist, was a grandson of the poet Thomas Tickell (1685-1740), Addison's friend, and the second son of the three sons and two daughters of John Tickell (1729-1782) and his wife, Esther, daughter of Thomas Pierson. John Tickell was born at Dublin Castle, and was given the lease of house and demesne lands of Glasnevin by his mother on 24 October 1754. He held these until 1765, and during this time he was six clerk in chancery and a magistrate in Dublin, until he moved his family to New Windsor, Berkshire, as a result of the disturbances in Dublin. Richard is said to have been born at Bath, where he later built Beaulieu House, Newbridge Hill. In Samuel Parr's 'Works' (8.129) the editor, John Johnstone, states that Tickell was 'acquainted with Parr at Harrow', but there is no other record of this. Also unsubstantiated is Horace Walpole's assertion that Tickell had been an assistant at Eton College: his name has not been found in the archives of that school. A twentieth-century genealogical researcher, however, maintains that Tickell entered Winchester College on 19 June 1764 and Eton College on 29 May 1765 (Tickell, 62). Whatever the conflicting reports of his early education, it is certain that he was entered at the Middle Temple on 8 November 1768. He has been confused with William Tickell, a surgeon and chemist of Bath, who invented the Aethereal Anodyne Spirit elixir. 
After being called to the bar, Tickell was appointed one of the sixty commissioners of bankruptcy who were divided into twelve 'lists' of five, Tickell being in the third. Owing, as he contended, to an unjust complaint of the other gentlemen of his list, he was deprived of his place in 1778; but David Garrick, whose acquaintance he had made, successfully interceded for him with Lord Chancellor Bathurst. He told Garrick at the time that he was 'wholly dependent on his grandmother's assistance' ('Private Correspondence', 2.305). His friend William Brummell, private secretary to Lord North, thereupon obtained for him a pension of $200 for writing in support of the ministry, and the further reward of a commissionership in the stamp office, his appointment being dated 24 August 1781, and his salary $500 a year. 
On 15 October 1778 a musical entertainment by Tickell, called 'The Camp', was represented at Drury Lane 'with great success' according to Genest (4.75). Three weeks later Tickell declined to write a prologue for Garrick on the ground that he was employed in a work that would make or mar his fortune ('Private Correspondence', 2.317). This may have been the satirical 'Anticipation: containing the substance of his Majesty's most gracious speech to both h-s of p-t on the opening of the approaching session' of which the preface is dated 23 November 1778. It attracted general attention. Tickell was worried about its reception until he learned that the house had roared with laughter when Isaac Barre, who had not seen the pamphlet, used words and phrases which were attributed to him in it. Nothing, however, in the imaginary speech closely resembles the one which, according to 'The Parliamentary History of England' (1814), was spoken by Barre. Gibbon, writing to Holroyd on Tuesday night (24 November 1778), expressed the view that: 'In town we think it an excellent piece of humour... but serious patriots groan that such things should be turned to farce.' The prince of Wales, as reported by Croker, praised Tickell's talents very highly. A second pamphlet (also anonymous), with the same title, of far inferior interest, probably by another hand, appeared five days before the meeting of parliament in 1779. 'Anticipation' was reprinted in New York in 1942, edited by L. H. Butterfield, with a biographical introduction, notes, and a bibliography. 
On 25 July 1780 Tickell married Mary Linley (1758-1787), a vocalist ['see under 'Linley, Thomas (1733-1795)]. Her elder sister, Elizabeth Ann, was married to Richard Brinsley Sheridan. Tickell is said, however, already to have had a family with a mistress, Miss B., with whom he had lived (Baker, 1.714). After his marriage he had a grant of rooms in Hampton Court Palace. His opera in three acts, called 'The Carnival of Venice', was successfully produced at Drury Lane on 13 December 1781, Linley's music and some of the songs by his wife's sister contributing to the favourable impression. An adaptation of 'The Gentle Shepherd', performed on 27 May 1789, was the last of Tickell's theatrical works. 
Intimacy with his brother-in-law, Sheridan, led to Tickell's transferring his party pen to the support of Charles James Fox. After several rejections he was elected a member of Brooks's Club in 1785. Tickell was zealously engaged at the time in influencing public opinion, and wrote to Parr for 'a list of the inns in Warwickshire where farmers resort to, and of such coffee-houses or hotels as are in your county' ('Works of Samuel Parr', 8.130). He was active with his pen in denouncing the commercial treaty made with France in 1787, and he told Parr that he had written the 'Woollen-Draper's Letter on the French Treaty' and answered the 'Political Review', 'I mean the pamphlet which traduced the Prince of Wales and every one else except Hastings' (ibid., 131). He was also a contributor to the 'Rolliad'. Sheridan's sister Elizabeth, writing on 20 December 1788 from her brother's house in Bruton Street, says, 'Yesterday... Tickell and Joseph Richardson were here all day preparing an address to come from different parts of the country to counteract Mr. Pitt' ('Betsy Sheridan's Journal', ed. W. Lefanu, 1986, 136). 
Thomas James Mathias in the 'Pursuits of Literature' paid Tickell the compliment of styling him 'the happiest of any occasional writer in his day'. According to Adair, he had in private conversation a good deal of wit and was an admirable mimic. Some of his other plays and his pamphlets include: 'The Wreath of Fashion' (1778); 'The Green Box of Monsieur de Sartine', an adaptation from the French (1779); and 'Epistle from Charles Fox to John Townshend' (1779). 
Tickell was experiencing some financial difficulties in 1793; he had borrowed $1000 from Thomas Hammersley of Pall Mall by a bond dated 8 January 1793, with a promise to pay $500 within two years. The bond was called in suddenly, however, and he is recorded as having asked for a loan of $500 from Warren Hastings. On 19 May he wrote again, professing respect and gratitude for Hastings's 'spirited and noble manner in acceding to my request' ('Warren Hastings MSS', BM). On 4 November 1793, however, Tickell committed suicide. In a fit of depression, he jumped from the parapet outside the window of his rooms at Hampton Court, but owing to the efforts of Sheridan, the inquest's verdict was that of accidental death. Sheridan also took the children of Tickell's first marriage into his care, obtaining admission into the navy for Richard (1782-1805), and a writership in India for Samuel (1785-1817). R. E. Tickell maintains that the third child of this marriage was a daughter, Elizabeth Anne (1781-1860), who was unmarried when she died at her Bedford Square London home. It is certain, however, that Tickell had another daughter, Zipporah, who later married Ebenezer Roebuck, an employee of the East India Company, and became the mother of John Arthur Roebuck (1802-1879). 
Tickell's second wife, whom he had married in 1789, was Sarah, daughter of Captain Ley of the East Indiaman 'Berrington'. A beautiful girl of eighteen at the time of her marriage, she survived her husband, but her behaviour after his death gained her the censure of Tickell's contemporaries, as she was said to have had a small dowry and expensive tastes, and to have kept a coach and four while her husband's debts remained unpaid. In 1796 she remarried; her new husband was John Cotton Worthington, a major in the Sussex fencible cavalry. 


@@@@@


doc= 27432


Tickell, Thomas (1685-1740), poet and government official, was the son of the Revd Richard Tickell ('c'.1648-1692), rector of Distington, Cumberland, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Gale (died 1729). Thomas, who was sixth child and fourth son in a family of eight, was born on 17 December 1685 and baptized on 19 January 1686 at Bridekirk, his father's former parish. After his father died on 22 June 1692 at Distington the family moved to Whitehaven and Thomas was sent in 1695 to school at St Bees, under his uncle the Revd Richard Jackson. He matriculated at Queen's College, Oxford, aged fifteen, on 16 May 1701, entering the college as a 'taberer' or scholar on the foundation; he graduated BA on 7 July 1705 and MA on 22 February 1709, and was elected fellow on 9 November 1710. As he did not comply with the college statute by taking orders, he belatedly obtained a dispensation from the crown (25 October 1717) and held his fellowship until he married in 1726. 
Tickell's first publication was 'Oxford' (November 1706), a long topographical poem inscribed to his friend and fellow collegian, Richard, Viscount Lonsdale (died 1713). Next he contributed eight short amatory or complimentary poems to Tonson's 'Poetical Miscellanies' (1709), including an elegant address to Joseph Addison on his opera 'Rosamond'. In 1711 he lectured in place of Joseph Trapp, professor of poetry: his one surviving lecture, 'De poesi didactica', expresses the hope that poets of Britain will gird themselves up for the grandeur of writing didactic poetry. Meanwhile his own poetry and scholarship were disparaged by the peevish Thomas Hearne, who called him 'a vain, conceited Coxcomb' ('Remarks', 3.218) and claimed that he was the true author of an untraced short-lived weekly Oxford paper called 'The Surprise' (1711). Tickell's next traced work, a long poem, 'The Prospect of Peace', dedicated to the bishop of Bristol, a plenipotentiary in negotiations for the treaty of Utrecht, was published in October 1712; it rapidly ran into six editions, and was praised by Addison in 'The Spectator' (no. 523). 
Tickell repaid the compliment with interest in verses 'To the supposed author of the 'Spectator'' (calling Addison the 'British Virgil') in 'The Spectator', no. 532, and in 'Verses to the Author' in the seventh edition of 'Cato' and a prologue for a performance of 'Cato' at Oxford (both 1713). In April 1713 he wrote five anonymous papers on pastoral poetry for Richard Steele's 'The Guardian'. Tickell favoured a pastoral naturalized to English rustic life; he praised Ambrose Philips as the English descendant of Theocritus, but did not mention Pope, who, like Philips, had recently published pastorals. Pope resentfully responded with his ironic 'Guardian' no. 40, which occasioned his quarrel with Philips. Tickell's uncontroversial 'Guardian' no. 125 (August 1713) included a fragment of a georgic, 'Hunting'. By 1714 he had joined the group of Addison's disciples who met regularly at Button's Coffee House in Russell Street. 
Tickell welcomed the arrival of George I in verse with 'The Royal Progress' ('The Spectator', no. 620), and four more poems by him appeared in Steele's 'Miscellanies' (1714), including a specimen of his projected translation of Lucan's 'Pharsalia', begun in 1713. A subscription list for an edition of Lucan was opened but the work was never completed, perhaps because it was overtaken by Rowe's translation (1718). Tickell also never completed a translation of the 'Iliad', for which he was contracted by Jacob Tonson on 31 May 1714, two months after Bernard Lintot agreed with Pope for a translation of the same work. It seems that Tonson wanted to spoil Lintot's market by employing a better classical scholar than Pope; it is certain that Addison and fellow whigs backed Tickell, and Pope convinced himself that Addison, not Tickell, was the actual translator. The rival translations of book 1 were published in the same week of June 1715, when Tickell announced that he would not proceed with the 'Iliad' because it had fallen into an abler hand, but he hoped the public would encourage him to translate the 'Odyssey'. Each translator privately made hostile notes on the other's work, but they did not enter into direct public controversy beyond a few remarks in Pope's 'Peri Bathous' (1728, chap. 12). Pope adopted some of Tickell's lines in preference to his own in the second edition of his 'Iliad'; he was eventually reconciled to Tickell (Addison's cat's-paw as Pope believed), but was unable to forgive Addison himself for what he thought was underhand dealing. Hence his satirical character sketch, later called 'Atticus' (first published 1722), to which Tickell wrote a neat riposte which fell into the hands of Edmund Curll, who printed it without authorization in 'Cythereia' (1723), attributing it to Jeremiah Markland. 
The change of dynasty brought Addison back into government: first, in September 1714, as secretary to the lord lieutenant of Ireland, then, from April 1717, secretary of state for the southern department (responsible for relations with France, southern Europe, Ireland, and the plantations, as well as a huge variety of domestic affairs). In both offices he employed Tickell as under-secretary, against the advice of Sir Richard Steele, who observed that Tickell 'was of a temper too enterprising to be governed', which 'produced a great animosity between Sir Richard and Mr. Tickell, which subsisted during their lives' (Cibber, 5.18). Addison, his health failing, resigned the secretaryship in March 1718. Tickell's reputation and record were such that he was retained as under-secretary by Addison's successor, James Craggs, and by Craggs's successor, Lord John Carteret, who became secretary in March 1721. One of Tickell's many duties was the collection of news for the 'Gazette', but his own literary work at this time was scanty: no more than a few complimentary poems, a long topographical poem, 'Kensington Garden' (1722), and a clever anti-Jacobite epistle, 'From a Lady in England to a Gentleman at Avignon' (1717), which, according to Johnson, 'stands high among party poems; it expresses contempt without coarseness and superiority without insolence' (Johnson, 2.310). 
Addison died on 17 June 1719, bequeathing the task of editing his works to Tickell rather than his quondam closest literary associate, Steele. The edition in four quarto volumes was published in October 1721; it was thought to have earned $1350 for Tickell and certainly provoked a dispute with Tonson over copyright. Steele, too, was dissatisfied. Thinking himself belittled in Tickell's preface, he published in 1722 a new edition of Addison's 'The Drummer' (omitted from Tickell's edition) with a prefatory epistle which repeated the charge that Addison wrote the Homer translation published over Tickell's name, and complained of Tickell's 'cold, unaffectionate, dry, and barren' account of Addison. Whatever the tone of Tickell's preface, his noble elegy on Addison is anything but cold, unaffectionate, dry, and barren: Johnson, Goldsmith, and others thought it one of the finest in the language. Pope's lines to Addison, 'On Medals', also printed in this edition, signalled that poet's reconciliation with Tickell and Addison's shade. 
When Carteret was appointed lord lieutenant of Ireland in April 1724 he retained Tickell in his service as chief secretary to the lords justices, who deputized in the absence of the lord lieutenant. Tickell moved to Dublin and devoted himself to official business, not literature, though he cultivated a friendship with Swift. In the sixteen remaining years of his life he published only three short poems: his popular ballad 'Lucy and Colin' (1725), much admired by Thomas Gray and Oliver Goldsmith, 'The Horn-Book', 'written under a fit of the gout' (Lewis's 'Miscellany', 1726), and, in 1733, lines celebrating the classical rebuilding of medieval Queen's College, Oxford (to which Tickell had contributed $50). 
On 23 April 1726, in Dublin, Tickell married Clotilda Eustace (1700/01-1792), heir to a fortune of $10,000; Clotilda and her mother were old friends of Swift. By marriage Tickell became a considerable landowner in co. Kildare, but his principal residence was at Glasnevin, Dublin (later the home of the National Botanic Gardens). Tickell retained his post under Carteret's two successors as lord lieutenant, the duke of Dorset (1730-37) and the duke of Devonshire. Between 1729 and 1738 he and Clotilda had three daughters and two sons, one of whom was the father of the author Richard Tickell (1751-1793). Thomas Tickell did not live long to enjoy his family: he died at Bath on 21 April 1740, aged fifty-four, and was buried at Glasnevin. The inscription on his monument in the church there enumerates his public offices, but adds 'his highest honour was that of having been the friend of Addison'. Clotilda died in 1792, in her ninety-second year, after which her late husband's library was sold. 
Tickell's poems had a place of honour at the beginning of the first volume of Dodsley's 'Collection' (1748) and, with the occasional addition of verse unpublished in his lifetime, were included in most standard collections of English poetry down to the early nineteenth century. Some were not printed until 1931 (in the biography by R. E. Tickell). Johnson assigned Tickell 'a high place among minor poets', adding 'he is said to have been a man of gay conversation, at least a temperate lover of wine and company, and in his domestick relations without censure' (Johnson, 2.311). Tickell's nephew, the Revd Daniel Watson (1718-1804), said his uncle 'had a placid look, and yet was as waspish a cur as you would wish to meet with' (Nichols, 'Illustrations', 1.436). 


@@@@@


doc= 27433


Tidcomb, John (1642-1713), army officer, was the son of Peter Tidcomb of Calne, Wiltshire. The claim in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' that he was a servitor at Oriel College, Oxford, has now been disproved, the Oxford Tidcomb having died in 1663. During the reign of Charles II he was appointed gentleman pensioner and officiated at the coronation of James II. Gazetted captain in the earl of Huntingdon's foot on 20 June 1685, he was absent without leave in part of 1688, probably helping to co-ordinate the army conspiracy against James II. Between 14 and 16 November 1688, in company with Ensign Samuel Bonfoy, a known conspirator, Tidcomb left his post in Plymouth garrison and deserted to William's camp at Exeter. Promoted colonel of the 14th foot on 14 November 1692, he accompanied William III to Oxford in 1695 and was created DCL on 9 November. His regiment was transferred to the Irish establishment during the great disbandment following the treaty of Ryswick in 1697. In August 1701, on receipt of notice to embark for the West Indies, one company deserted from Limerick and fled into the mountains. A protege of the second duke of Ormond, he was created brigadier-general on 17 August 1702, major-general on 1 January 1704, and lieutenant-general on 1 January 1707. Tidcomb, 'while he continued a subaltern officer, was every day complaining against the pride, oppression, and hard treatment of colonels towards their officers; yet in a very few minutes after he had received his commission for a regiment, walking with the friend on the Mall, he confessed that the spirit of colonelship was fast coming upon him, which spirit is said to have daily increased to the hour of his death. ('Prose Works of Jonathan Swift', 192)' A member of the Kit-Cat Club, Tidcomb was a society figure and wit. When Mrs Manley (Mary de la Riviere) was dismissed by the duchess of Cleveland, he 'offered her asylum at his country house', but she declined his overtures (Noble, 2.199). Tidcomb is the Sir Charles Lovemore who, in Mrs Manley's memoirs, relates her story to his friend, the Chevalier d'Aumont, in the gardens of Somerset House. In the introduction he is characterized as a 'person of admirable good sense and knowledge' ('Rivella', 1). Tidcomb died at Bath in June 1713. 


@@@@@


doc= 27434


Tidd, William (1760-1847), legal writer, was the second son of Julius Tidd, a merchant of the parish of St Andrew, Holborn. He was admitted to the society of the Inner Temple on 6 June 1782, and was called to the bar on 26 November 1813, after having practised as a special pleader for upwards of thirty years. Among his pupils were three who became lord chancellors -- John Singleton Copley, Baron Lyndhurst, Charles Pepys, Earl Cottenham, and John Campbell, Baron Campbell -- and one who became lord chief justice, Thomas Denham. 
Tidd is best known for his 'Practice of the Court of King's Bench', the first part of which appeared in 1790 and the second in 1794. For a long period it was almost the sole authority for common-law practice, going through nine editions by 1828. Several supplements were also issued, which in 1837 were consolidated into one volume. The work was also extensively used in America, where one edition with notes by Asa I. Fish appeared as late as 1856. Tidd was favoured by the approval of Uriah Heep: ''I am improving my legal knowledge, Master Copperfield', said Uriah. 'I am going through Tidd's 'Practice'. Oh, what a writer Mr Tidd is, Master Copperfield!'' (Charles Dickens, 'David Copperfield', chap. 12). 
Tidd died on 14 February 1847 in Walcot Place, Lambeth. His wife, Elizabeth, survived him a few months, dying on 21 October 1847. Tidd bequeathed the copyright of the 'Practice' to Edward Hobson Vitruvius Lawes, serjeant-at-law. 
Along with the 'Practice', Tidd wrote three works on forms and procedure which were intended to supplement it. He also published an account of law costs in civil actions (1792). 


@@@@@


doc= 27435


Tidey, Alfred (1808-1892), miniature painter, was born at Worthing, Sussex, on 20 April 1808, the second son of John Tidey (1773-1849), schoolmaster, and his wife, Elizabeth Fryer (1778-1858) of Worthing. Henry Tidey (1814-1872), painter in watercolours, was his younger brother. Alfred Tidey was taught to paint by his father; there is no record of Tidey's receiving any formal training as a miniaturist. However, he received support from John Constable, whose sister Maria rejected a proposal of marriage from Tidey, and from the principal miniaturist of the period, Sir William Ross, who may have helped Tidey to gain some of his earliest commissions. Through the patronage of Henry Neville, second earl of Abergavenny, Tidey was introduced to Sir John Conroy, comptroller of the household to Victoria, duchess of Kent, and in 1836 he painted his miniature (NPG). Tidey thus became known to the duchess's daughter, Victoria, who, when queen, commissioned him in 1841 to paint a miniature of the Hon. Julia Henrietta Anson, one of her maids of honour (Royal Collection), and two copies of a miniature by Ross of Victoria, princess royal. He later painted the princess royal, when she was Empress Frederick of Germany, as well as a watercolour portrait of her daughter Princess Victoria of Schleswig-Holstein (1873). Tidey exhibited miniatures at the Royal Academy from 1831 to 1857, and watercolours occasionally from 1857 until 1887. 
In 1855 Tidey married Justina Gertrude Campbell (died 1907), one of the five daughters of Alexander Campbell of the West Indies, with whom he had three sons. After his marriage Tidey turned from miniature painting to oil portraiture and lived and worked in Jersey (1863-9), then in France, Switzerland, Italy, and Germany (1869-73). He produced only occasional portraits after his return to London in 1873 and died on 2 April 1892 at his home, Glenelg, Springfield Park, Acton, Middlesex. Examples of his work are in the Victoria and Albert Museum and the National Portrait Gallery, London, as well as in the Royal Collection. 


@@@@@


doc= 27436


Tidey, Henry (1814-1872), portrait painter, was born on 7 January 1814 at Worthing House, Worthing, Sussex, one of at least three sons of John Tidey (1773-1849), schoolmaster at Worthing House, and his wife, Elizabeth Fryer (1778-1858). He was the younger brother of Alfred Tidey (1808-1892), a miniature painter. He learned to draw at his father's school, and as a child he painted several pictures for Princess Augusta, who was staying at Worthing. He practised there for some years as a portrait painter before moving to London. Between 1839 and 1869 he exhibited sixty-seven paintings at the Royal Academy, mainly portraits, including many of children. At first he usually painted miniatures, but after the success of his watercolour portrait of Lieutenant-Colonel Pakenham of the Grenadier Guards in action at the battle of Alma (exh. RA, 1855) he turned to watercolours of historical and poetic subjects. He married, in London on 5 May 1849, Sarah Anne, daughter of Richard Thomas Hodges, a lieutenant in the Royal Navy. 
In 1859 Tidey was elected a member of the New Society of Painters in Water Colours, and his 'The Feast of Roses', a scene from Thomas Moore's 'Lalla Rookh', was bought by Queen Victoria from the 1859 exhibition of the society as a birthday present for Prince Albert. In the 1860s Tidey continued to exhibit at the New Watercolour Society. In 1860 he was awarded two medals for 'Queen Mab', and other pictures included 'The Last of the Abencerages', a scene in the garden of the Alhambra in medieval Spain (exh. 1862); 'The Night of the Betrayal', a triptych (exh. 1864); and a series of paintings of children, 'Sensitive Plants', with names such as 'Sweet William and Mary Gold' (exh. 1866-7). Sometimes known as Henry Fryer Tidey, he died suddenly on 21 July 1872 at his home, 30 Percy Street, Bedford Square, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 27437


Tidferth (d. 816x24), bishop of Dunwich, succeeded Alfhun in 798 as ninth bishop of that see. His profession of obedience to AEthelheard, archbishop of Canterbury, made either on his consecration or on his reconciliation after the abolition of the archbishopric of Lichfield, is extant. From 798 to 816 he attested at least seven genuine charters. In 798 he was present at a synod at 'Clofesho' and in 801 at another held at Chelsea. He attended the important council at 'Clofesho' in 803 and about the same time received a letter of advice from Alcuin, who said that he had heard of Tidferth's exemplary life from an East Anglian abbot named Lull. Tidferth was also present at the Council of Chelsea in August 816. After 816 there is no trace of a bishop of Dunwich until 824, by which time Tidferth was dead. He must be distinguished from a contemporary Tidfrith or Tilferd, the last bishop of Hexham, who held that see at the beginning of the ninth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 27438


Tidy, Charles Meymott (1843-1892), sanitary and analytical chemist, was born on 2 February 1843 at Cambridge Heath, Hackney, Middlesex, the third son of William Callender Tidy, surgeon, and his wife, Charlotte Meymott. After attending Hackney Church of England school, he entered the London Hospital as a student under Henry Letheby, taking his LSA and MRCS in 1864. In 1865 he entered the University of Aberdeen, graduating CM and MB with the highest honours in 1866. 
After returning to London, Tidy took up his father's medical practice in Hackney for about ten years. During this time he was joint lecturer in chemistry with Henry Letheby at the London Hospital medical college. Under Letheby's influence Tidy gradually became interested in questions of sanitary reform and public health, and became one of the first public analysts appointed under the 'Adulteration of Food Act' of 1872, being responsible for Hertfordshire, Essex, and the boroughs of Islington and Whitechapel. When Letheby died in 1876 Tidy took over as professor of chemistry, medical jurisprudence, and public health, and also succeeded him as medical officer of health for the City of London. Tidy married Violet Fordham Dobell, daughter of Horace Dobell, physician, on 5 October 1875; they had a son and a daughter. Their son, Sir Henry Letheby Tidy (1877-1960), was one-time dean of St Thomas's Hospital and an extra-physician to George VI and Elizabeth II. 
The London Hospital had a tradition of championing defendants in poisoning trials, stemming from a rivalry between Henry Letheby and Alfred Swaine Taylor, of Guy's, which dated back to the Tawell case, in Slough, in 1845. In 1881 Tidy advised the defence counsel for Dr George Lamson, accused of poisoning his nineteen-year-old brother-in-law with aconite. Tidy asked to be present at the prosecution's toxicological analysis of the victim's remains, but his request was refused. A week after the trial, in 1882, the home secretary was asked in the House of Commons whether it would not be more satisfactory for defendants to be represented professionally at such analyses. In response, the home secretary asked the royal colleges of physicians and surgeons to appoint two independent experienced men of science who could be consulted in cases of this kind. The Royal College of Surgeons appointed Tidy to be one of the first two Home Office analysts. His fees were paid by the Home Office and his independence would seem to stem from the fact that he could appear either for the defence or the prosecution. In 1889 Tidy appeared for the defence in the trial of Florence Maybrick for the murder of her husband. Cautious, modest, and precise in court, Tidy genuinely believed that James Maybrick did not die from arsenic poisoning and that only a medicinal quantity of the substance was present in the body. Tidy wrote two books on medical jurisprudence. The first, 'A Handy-Book of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology', with W. B. Woodman, appeared in 1877. The second, 'Legal Medicine', prepared from lecture notes, appeared under his sole authorship in 1882. 
Tidy was also keen to improve the health of the metropolis with a pure water supply. He published 'The London Water Supply' in 1878, closely followed by a paper on 'The process for determining the organic purity of potable waters' in the 'Journal of the Chemical Society' (1879, 46-106). This was a scholarly and painstaking analysis of monthly samples supplied by the metropolitan water companies over the previous nine years. It was followed by an equally exacting undertaking in his paper 'River water' ('Journal of the Chemical Society', 1880, 268-327). In 1881 he, together with Professor Odling and William Crookes, was appointed by the London water companies to examine the quality of the city's water. 
Tidy's position as professor of medical jurisprudence and his frequent experience in courts of law convinced him that a counsel thoroughly acquainted with medicine and chemistry was an urgent requirement. He therefore took up the study of law and was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn in 1885; he was later appointed reader in medical jurisprudence to the inns of court. Tidy received the Royal College of Physicians' Swiney prize for legal medicine in 1889. He was on the examining boards of the royal colleges of physicians and surgeons, and was a fellow of the Chemical Society, being at one time vice-president of the Institute of Chemistry. In 1888 he gave the Christmas lectures to young people at the London Institution and took as his theme 'The story of a tinder-box: the romance of science', in which he described the history of matches and firelighting methods. These lectures were published as a book under the same title in 1889. Besides the works mentioned Tidy wrote 'A Handbook of Modern Chemistry' (1878, 1887) and contributed many journal papers on chemistry, medicine, and toxicology. He died at his home at 3 Mandeville Place, London, on 15 March 1892, having suffered from cancer for the previous five years. 


@@@@@


doc= 27439


Tierney, George (1761-1830), politician, was born at Gibraltar on 20 March 1761, the third son of Thomas Tierney, a native of Limerick, sometime London merchant and prize agent at Gibraltar, and his wife, Sabina (died 23 July 1806). Thomas Tierney, a man of some affluence, spent his later years in Paris, but his wife lived in England, where their children were educated. George attended Boteler's School, Warrington; Eton College; and Peterhouse, Cambridge. He was entered at Lincoln's Inn in 1780 and called to the bar in 1784, but did not practise. On 9 July 1789 he married Anna Maria (died 1844), the daughter of Michael Miller of Bristol, with whom he had one son and three daughters. 
At the general election of 1784 Tierney unsuccessfully contested Wootton Bassett as a supporter of Pitt; but when he stood for Colchester on a vacancy in December 1788 it was as an adherent of the whig opposition. After a double return (both candidates polled the same number of votes) he was seated by an election committee in April 1789. At the general election the following year he was defeated at Colchester, against the return for which he lodged an abortive petition, and at Wootton Bassett. These electoral adventures, though partially subsidized from opposition funds, took a heavy toll of his finances. As co-treasurer of the Association of the Friends of the People, he gained the friendship of Charles (later Earl) Grey and a reputation as an enthusiast for French republican principles. At the general election of 1796 'Citizen' Tierney, financed by public subscription, contested Southwark as a supporter of peace and reform. He was defeated by his niece's wealthy husband, George Woodford Thellusson, but had the election declared void on petition. Although he was beaten by the same opponent at the consequent by-election, his petition secured him the seat in December 1796. 
Tierney, who had joined the Whig Club in 1791, went into active opposition to Pitt. He refused to countenance the Foxite secession from parliament and established himself during it as the ministry's most potent opponent in the Commons, where he excelled on financial questions, which suited his essentially practical mind. Ever the pragmatist, he retreated from his advanced position on parliamentary reform, though he remained convinced of the need for moderate change. A clash in the house with Pitt on 25 May 1798 led to their fighting a bloodless duel at Putney two days later. By flouting the secession, Tierney seriously damaged himself in the eyes of many Foxite whigs. Fox himself never had much time for him; and while Grey and Lord Holland stayed friendly, they felt that he had been misguided. Having forfeited much of the popular support on which his seat depended and alienated most of the influential whigs, he was in urgent need of political and personal security. In early 1801 he renounced all allegiance to Fox and gravitated to the Carlton House group. He responded eagerly to the advances of Pitt's successor Addington in the autumn, tempted by the prospect of becoming paymaster with $3000 a year and a house. Thwarted by the refusal of Grey and Lord Moira to join the ministry, he kept the negotiations alive for four months, but finally lost his nerve in January 1802. He was given an uncomfortable time at Southwark at the general election in July, when he was returned second in the poll. 
Convinced by a visit to France that Bonaparte was determined on renewed war, Tierney backed Addington's belligerent response in May 1803 and soon afterwards took office as treasurer of the navy. He was pleased with his bargain, but it did him little good: Pittites as well as many Foxites now held him in contempt, and his patent unease in the house gratified his enemies. Pitt would have retained him in office in May 1804, but he resigned with Addington. He acted as a go-between in Pitt's subsequent attempts to effect a reconciliation between the prince of Wales and George III, but the postponement of the royal reunion in August prompted him to decline for the moment the proffered reward of the Irish secretaryship. By working thereafter to try to separate the prince from opposition and attach him to Pitt, Tierney further angered the Foxites and Grenvillites. Aware that it would be politically suicidal to commit himself to Pitt at this stage, he turned down the secretaryship (which it was later alleged that he had wished to hold without a seat in the Commons) in November 1804. By going into desultory opposition to Pitt the following session he restored some of his credibility with the Foxites, but no place was found for him on the formation of the Grenville ministry in February 1806. He rejected offers of the governorship of the Cape and a special mission to Lisbon later in the year. The death of Fox removed a major obstacle to his advancement, and in October he was taken in as president of the Board of Control, where he proved to be highly efficient. At the general election that month he was defeated at Southwark, but he was hastily accommodated at Athlone through a government bargain with the patron. This marked the end of his career as a political freelance. 
Tierney, who had established himself as an unofficial whip and party factotum, resigned with his colleagues in April 1807. He was largely responsible for organizing the opposition effort at the ensuing general election, but was himself left without a seat, and it was not until August that the duke of Devonshire provided him with one at Bandon Bridge. He was anxious to promote the creation of an active, efficient opposition, to be remodelled from the Grenvillite right if the more unruly elements on the far left proved unmanageable. He soon grew disillusioned with the feeble Commons leadership of George Ponsonby, Grey's successor, and with Grey's laziness and reluctance to assert his overall authority. His attempts to mediate between Grey and his brother-in-law Samuel Whitbread, whose personal pique and espousal of advanced views threatened to split the party, were generally unsuccessful, though through no fault of his own. At times during the 1807 parliament, when opposition was often in a state of chaos, Tierney lapsed into hopeless despondency, and talked of giving up politics or of letting the insurgents destroy the party so that it could be reconstructed on a sounder basis. Thomas Creevey, Whitbread's mischievous henchman, gave him the nickname of 'Mrs Cole', after a brothel keeper in Samuel Foote's farce 'The Minor' who was forever proclaiming her own respectability. Yet his nervousness, pessimism, and irresolution in council were in marked contrast to his forcefulness and skill in debate, where his mastery of sarcasm and forensic argument made him a formidable parliamentarian. 
At the general election of 1812 Tierney again failed to find a seat, but at the end of the year Holland secured his return for Appleby on Lord Thanet's interest. Although he initially discounted the chances of mounting effective opposition in the new parliament, he took a bold personal line against the renewal of war in 1815, when he belatedly joined Brooks's Club. That summer his most pressing debts were paid off by a discreet party subscription, to which most of the whig grandees contributed. He obtained further relief in 1816 through legacies from a brother-in-law. He encouraged whig involvement in the popular campaign against the property tax that year, and in 1817 came out strongly in favour of moderate but significant parliamentary reform. Ponsonby's death seemed to clear the way for Tierney to replace him as leader in the Commons; but it was not until after the general election of 1818, when he was returned by the duke of Devonshire for Knaresborough (where he sat for the rest of his life) that he was installed. With many misgivings, he accepted a requisition got up by lords Duncannon and Sefton, signed by 113 members and half-heartedly endorsed by Grey. He was chosen in part 'faute de mieux'; but in the opinion of all those who mattered in the mainstream of the party, his merits marginally outweighed his defects. The left had little faith in him. 
Although Grey refused to clarify the problem of the overall leadership, which Tierney considered essential if the party was to be presented as a credible alternative government, the opposition made an impressive start to the 1819 session under his direction. On 18 May, however, he blundered by moving for inquiry into the state of the nation. His speech for once was not impressive, and, as usual on questions of confidence, disgruntled tories and waverers rallied to the ministry; the motion was humiliatingly crushed by 358 votes to 178. Tierney favoured a vigorous response to the Peterloo massacre and the subsequent repressive legislation; but during a speech in the house on 22 December 1819 he was taken ill. His health had been deteriorating for some years and, although he recovered and soldiered on as leader into the new reign, he made it clear to Grey and others that his future exertions must be on a restricted scale. He took a lead in trying to promote petitions in support of Queen Caroline at the end of 1820 and did well personally in the debates of early 1821. The failure of the whig campaign, the continued intransigence of the party's more extreme elements, over whom his authority was largely gone, his exasperation with Grey's selfish idleness, and his own unreliable health brought him formally to resign the leadership in March. Though far from being an unqualified success, he had generally performed with credit in a difficult, perhaps an impossible situation. 
Old Tierney, as he was now habitually called, though he was only sixty, was intermittently active in the Commons for the remainder of the 1820 parliament. His correspondence with Grey appears to have ceased in 1825. They fell out politically in April 1827 when, after complex negotiations, Tierney joined Lord Lansdowne and Devonshire in taking office in Canning's ministry, as master of the Royal Mint with a seat in the cabinet. On Canning's death in August he stayed on with Lansdowne under Lord Goderich, but vehemently objected to the proposed appointment of the anti-Catholic Herries as chancellor of the exchequer. After suffering agonies of indecision in the ensuing crisis, he capitulated with Lansdowne in order to save the government. His subsequent efforts to secure the neutrality of Lord Althorp and the young whigs were frustrated, but in November 1827 he persuaded Goderich to appoint Althorp chairman of the finance committee. The impasse caused by Herries's belatedly revealed hostility to this broke Goderich's nerve and destroyed the ministry. Tierney was dismissed by the duke of Wellington when he formed his administration in January 1828, but received assurances, which were honoured, that something would be done for his son George (died 1883), a minor diplomat in delicate health. His political career was effectively over, though he voted silently for Catholic emancipation in 1829. He died suddenly, of heart failure, at his London house at 11 Savile Row on 25 January 1830. He died intestate and relatively impoverished, and the government granted his widow a civil-list pension of $400 a year. 
Tierney was a man of great personal charm. Holland wrote that 'his pleasantry and easy manners shed a charm over all intercourse with him' (Holland, 266). A master of debate, he would probably have made a fortune had he opted for a career at the bar. As a working politician he could be combative and effective, but he was often indecisive and prone to enervating pessimism. A pragmatist above all, he was perhaps too much given to intrigue, though he served the whig party faithfully after expiating his earlier sins, for which some, however, never forgave him. Sir James Mackintosh recalled him as 'so shrewd and droll -- the words seemed made for him' ('Memoirs of... Mackintosh', 475). 


@@@@@


doc= 27440


Tierney, Mark Aloysius (1795-1862), historian, born at Brighton in September 1795, was sent at an early age to the school directed by the Franciscan fathers at Baddesley Green, Warwickshire, from which he was transferred in 1810 to St Edmund's College at Old Hall Green, near Ware. He completed a programme in classical studies with distinction, and in 1815, while still a student, became professor of mathematics and plainchant. In 1818 he was ordained to the priesthood, though he remained at the college as professor and procurator until 1819, when he was appointed assistant priest at Warwick Street, London. He was later transferred to Lincoln's Inn Fields. 
Because of ill health, from which he suffered throughout his life, Tierney was moved to the country mission of Slindon, Sussex, the estate of the Newburgh family, where he remained until 1824, when he became chaplain to Bernard Edward Howard, twelfth duke of Norfolk. For the rest of his life he lived at Arundel, where he had ample leisure to pursue his historical and antiquarian studies. On 7 February 1833 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London, and on 25 July 1841 a fellow of the Royal Society. He was also a corresponding member of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland. On the formation of the Sussex Archaeological Society in 1846 he became its local secretary, and in 1850 he also joined the committee. He supervised many papers for the society, and contributed in 1849 to volume 3 of its 'Proceedings' 'Notices of recent excavations in the collegiate church of Arundel', and in 1860 to volume 12 'An account of the discovery of the remains of John, seventeenth earl of Arundel'. 
For many years Tierney was a member of the old chapter of England, established in 1623, and when the diocese of Southwark was created by Pope Pius IX in 1852 he became the first canon penitentiary of the cathedral chapter. Throughout much of his life Tierney was identified with a group of Catholics who were opposed to the policies of Nicholas Wiseman, first archbishop of Westminster. The antagonism between the two men seems to have dated from at least 1837 when Wiseman, one of the founders of the 'Dublin Review', appointed his friend Henry Bagshawe as editor of the journal in spite of the fact that Tierney had served briefly in the position. Considered to represent a Gallican, or anti-Roman, position, Tierney, along with other English Catholics including the historian John Lingard, disapproved of what they judged to be undue Roman influence and practice, as well as a tendency to favour the regular over the secular clergy. In 1858 Tierney entered into public controversy with Wiseman, who denied that Lingard had been created a cardinal 'in petto' (never announced) by Pope Leo XII. Tierney expressed himself intemperately in an article entitled 'Was Dr Lingard actually a cardinal?', which was published in 'The Rambler' in 1858. When Wiseman responded in a printed but unpublished letter to his chapter, Tierney responded in kind in 'A reply to Cardinal Wiseman's letter to his chapter' (1858), also printed but not published. 
Tierney's chief work was a new edition of Charles Dodd's 'Church History of England' (5 vols., 1839-43). Because it was considered inopportune to reopen the seventeenth-century controversies between the secular and regular clergy, especially the Jesuits, Tierney was directed to discontinue his edition, which is therefore incomplete, ending with the year 1625. Most of the documents printed in the valuable notes to this edition were collected by John Kirk of Lichfield. Tierney contributed a 'Life of Dr. John Lingard' to the 'Metropolitan and Provincial Catholic Almanac' in 1854; this memoir was afterwards prefixed to volume 10 of the sixth edition of Lingard's 'History of England', published in 1855. He also assisted Edmund Cartwright with his 'History of the Western Division of the County of Sussex' (1830). 
Tierney died at Arundel on 19 February 1862, and was buried in the Fitzalan chapel in Arundel Castle. He left all his manuscripts to Thomas Grant, bishop of Southwark, and they are now housed in the Southwark Diocesan Archives. His printed books were sold by Sotheby & Co. on 1-4 December 1862. 


@@@@@


doc= 27441


Tierney, Sir Matthew John, first baronet (1776-1845), physician, was born on 24 November 1776 at Ballyscandland, co. Limerick, the eldest son of John Tierney and his wife, Mary, daughter of James Gleeson of Rathkinnon, co. Limerick. Tierney's early education is unknown, but he received his medical training at Guy's and St Thomas's hospitals in London. He then briefly practised as a surgeon to the South Gloucester regiment of militia. In 1799 he matriculated at the Edinburgh University medical school, but graduated MD from Glasgow University in 1802 with a thesis on vaccination. Tierney set up in practice again, this time in Brighton. In 1806 he became a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians. Two years later, on 8 October 1808, he married Harriet Mary, daughter of Henry Jones of Bloomsbury Square. The couple had no children. 
From this rather lowly beginning Tierney rose through patronage to become a royal physician. Early in his career he became acquainted with the earl of Berkeley, to whom he owed his appointment to the militia. Either through the influence of the earl, his own skill, or by chance (all are suggested by his biographers) Tierney was introduced to the prince of Wales's household at Brighton, and he steadily climbed up the hierarchy of royal appointments. In 1809 he was appointed physician-extraordinary to the prince of Wales, in 1816 he became physician-in-ordinary to the prince regent, and he continued to hold the post on the prince's accession to the throne. He held the same appointment under William IV. Tierney was valued for his medical skills. When the prince regent was struck down with a fever before his father's funeral, Tierney famously contradicted the advice of all the other royal practitioners and recommended bleeding -- a therapy which proved successful. In recognition of his royal service Tierney was created a baronet on 3 October 1818 and a knight commander of the Royal Guelphic Order of Hanover on 7 May 1831. On 5 June 1834 he was awarded a second patent of baronetcy with the remainder passing to his younger brother, Edward Tierney. In keeping with his new standing Tierney became a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in July 1836. 
Tierney was an early and lifelong supporter of vaccination. Through his connections with the earl of Berkeley he met Edward Jenner in 1798 -- the year in which Jenner published his discovery of vaccination -- and became a convert to the new practice. While at Edinburgh University he persuaded James Gregory, one of his lecturers, of the merits of the procedure and was subsequently invited to vaccinate his son. Tierney drew up plans for the Royal Sussex Jennerian Institution, a charity to offer free vaccination to the poor in the principal towns of the county, and he wrote a pamphlet celebrating its launch. This was reprinted in 'Observations on Variola vaccina or Cow-Pock' (1845), a brief account of his early experience of vaccination. Tierney died at his home on the Pavilion Parade, Brighton, on 28 October 1845, of an attack of gout. 


@@@@@


doc= 27442


Tiffin, William (1695/6-1754), phonetician and stenographer, was born at Crimplesham, near Downham Market, Norfolk, the son of Roger Tiffin, gentleman, of a family long settled in that area. He was educated at Downham Market under Mr Robinson, and at Norwich under Mr Pate, before matriculating aged seventeen at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, on 11 February 1713, under surety of Mr Macro. Tiffin was a scholar at Cambridge from 1713 to 1718 and graduated BA in 1716/17. On 21 September 1718 he was ordained deacon at Norwich and became curate of the parishes of Wereham and Wretten, near Downham Market. His unwillingness to subscribe to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' limited his opportunities for preferment, but in 1735 Tiffin was recommended by the Revd Thomas Pyle of King's Lynn to the Revd John Jackson, master of Wigston's Hospital, Leicester, who advanced him for the position of confrater. The place was congenial to Tiffin, a 'very worthy, modest clergyman' (Nichols, 1, pt 2, 503), for it did not require subscription. Tiffin assisted Jackson with his collations of the 'New Testament'. A son William, born to him and his wife, Margaret, was baptized at St Martin's, Leicester, on 29 April 1739. Another child, a daughter Ann, was mentioned in his will. 
In 1751 Tiffin published by subscription a shorthand textbook entitled 'A New Help and Improvement of the Art of Swift Writing'. An abject failure as a practical shorthand system -- John Nichols remarked that 'it never got on' (Nichols, 1, pt 2, 503) -- Tiffin's 'New Help' is now generally viewed as the first system constructed on a phonetic basis, a discovery made by Sir Isaac Pitman only after he had published his seminal 'Stenographic Sound-Hand' (1837). 'Tiffin was much more interested in phonetics than in shorthand, and one might claim with some justice that he was the best English phonetician before the 19th century' (Matthews, 'English pronunciation', 138). 
Acutely aware of the defects of English orthography and the lack of a 'sufficient Alphabet' (Tiffin, 32), Tiffin stated that it was his 'peculiar Intention... to suit the Alphabet to the Utterances of the Language' (ibid., 5), taking care 'to give every Character one Power of its own, in which no other Character is allow'd to interfere' (ibid., 7). 
In the lengthy appendix, Tiffin discusses vowels (recognizing nine distinct sounds) and diphthongs, articulation, and early eighteenth-century dialects. Tiffin's is perhaps the earliest study of English dialects, of which he was a keen observer, remarking on county and sometimes local pronunciations in Norfolk, Lancashire, Yorkshire, Nottinghamshire, and North Britain (Scotland). His interest in dialect for its own sake, coupled with his powers of scientific detachment and observation, suggest that he was 'unique in his age' (Matthews, 'William Tiffin', 105). Unlike many contemporary orthoepists, he was not prescriptive: 'But be pleas'd to understand, that when the Pronunciation of particular Counties, of Rustics, of the Polite, or illiterate is mention'd, it is not with Intention either to recommend or censure; but in Compliance with the Opinion of the Public; the Purpose and End of every Remark being to give the Reader Opportunity to discern the Description of his own Pronunciation. (Tiffin, 37)' Tiffin's own style is lively and colloquial but (unfortunately for prospective students of his system) diffuse and disorganized. Notably absent is the fulsome dedication to patrons that characterized shorthand textbooks of the day. 
On 15 September 1754 Tiffin made his will, bequeathing to his wife and daughter the books in which he had written their names, and disposing of properties in Norfolk for the future benefit of his wife and children. He died before 3 December when the will was proved, and was buried in the cross aisle of St Martin's Church, Leicester, under the steeple. The brass plate on his tomb containing a Latin inscription written by John Jackson was removed by the next incumbent. 


@@@@@


doc= 27443


Tighe, Mary (1772-1810), poet, was born on 9 October 1772 in Dublin, the daughter of William Blachford (died 1773?), a Church of Ireland clergyman and librarian, and his wife, Theodosia Tighe ('b'. 'c'.1740, died in or after 1810), a granddaughter of the first earl of Darnley. Theodosia Blachford, an acquaintance of John Wesley, was active in the Methodist movement in Ireland, and she gave her daughter a strict religious upbringing. On 6 October 1793 Mary Blachford married Henry Tighe (1768-1836), who was her first cousin and a member of the Irish parliament for Inistioge, co. Kilkenny, until the union of the parliaments. Relatively little is known about the Tighes' marriage, which remained childless, but it is said to have been unhappy. 
In the early years of the nineteenth century, the couple spent time in London, where Mary Tighe had some literary friends, most notably Thomas Moore, who was an early admirer of her writing. Although she began writing poetry before her marriage, Tighe published nothing until 1805, when her major work, 'Psyche' (probably begun in 1801 and completed by 1803), was privately printed. A long allegorical poem in Spenserian stanzas, 'Psyche' was admired by a number of Tighe's literary contemporaries, including Moore, who praised it in one of his own poems. Keats, even while claiming in 1818 to have outgrown his earlier admiration for Tighe's work, was influenced by 'Psyche'. 
In 1805 Tighe endured a dangerous attack of the consumption from which she had already been suffering for at least a year. According to Thomas Moore, she had 'a very serious struggle for life' in February 1805 and was still so ill in August that she was 'ordered to the Madeiras'. Moore himself was convinced that 'another 'winter' will inevitably be her death' ('Memoirs', 1.86, 90), but in fact Tighe lived for another five years, spending the last few months of her life as an invalid at her brother-in-law's estate at Woodstock, co. Wicklow, Ireland, where she died on 24 March 1810. She was buried in Inistioge church, co. Kilkenny. 
Following Tighe's death, 'Psyche' was republished in 1811 in an edition which included some previously unpublished poems, many of them laments for pleasures irretrievably lost because of illness, or poems expressing religious anxieties and fears of death. In her final poem, dated December 1809, Tighe writes that her '
soul... with agonizing grasp 

Of terror and regret, 

To all in life its love would clasp 

Clings close and closer yet. 
('Psyche, with other Poems', 308)' (An editorial note in the 1811 volume reassures readers that Tighe's 'fears of death were perfectly removed before she quit this scene of trial and suffering' (ibid., 311)). It was this edition, which was probably the one read by Keats, which established Tighe's literary reputation. While Tighe's work had, according to the 1811 preface, already circulated fairly widely and won her the admiration of readers beyond her immediate friends, the first public response to 'Psyche' appeared in the 'Quarterly Review's' article on the 1811 edition. The review combined some high literary praise (it would not 'be difficult to extract from the poem many passages as flowing and as musical as the finest in the 'Fairy Queen'') with tributes to the poet's feminine delicacy and sentimental reflections on her premature death ('QR', 5, 1811, 478). Despite the bleakness of many of the short poems in the 1811 volume, in much of the nineteenth-century writing on Tighe there is a tendency to turn her into an exemplar of patiently (and picturesquely) long-suffering femininity, a tendency exemplified most famously in Felicia Hemans's tribute to her, 'The Grave of a Poetess': Hemans concludes her meditation on her Inistioge church monument by wondering '
Where couldst thou fix on mortal ground 

Thy tender thoughts and high? 

' Besides this poem, Hemans wrote at least two other tributes to Tighe, 'Lines for the Album at Rosanna' and 'Written after Visiting a Tomb'. Another nineteenth-century admirer wrote that admiration for 'Psyche' was increased by sympathetic identification with 'the young and beautiful poetess' whose poem 'was not more tenderly beautiful to the imagination than herself' (Howitt, 282). Mary Tighe also wrote a novel, 'Selena', which is unpublished, and some other poems are included in the privately printed volume 'Mary: a Series of Reflections during 20 Years' (1811), edited by William Tighe, the author's cousin and brother-in-law. 'Psyche' went into numerous nineteenth-century editions, but like many other women poets of her generation, Tighe was almost entirely overlooked in literary criticism and histories for much of the twentieth century, until her work was republished and started to be anthologized again in the 1990s. 


@@@@@


doc= 27444


Tillemans, Peter (c.1684-1734), painter and draughtsman, was born in Antwerp, the Netherlands, the son of a diamond cutter. He was brother-in-law to the painter Pieter Casteels (it is assumed he married before leaving Antwerp) and studied painting under various masters before being brought to England in 1708 by a picture dealer named Turner. 
Establishing an exact chronology is difficult as Tillemans worked in many different styles, rarely dating his works. However, after initially working as a copyist, he seems to have rapidly made a name for himself, gaining in 1709 two prestigious commissions, 'Queen Anne in the House of Lords' ('c'.1709; Royal Collection) and 'The House of Commons' ('c'.1710; Palace of Westminster Collection). He became a founder member of the Great Queen Street Academy in 1711, describing his speciality as 'landskip', and by 1715 was painting battle scenes for the Revd Dr Cox Macro. 1717 saw a further expansion of Tillemans's repertoire, his picture of the royal family making music being exhibited at Bartholomew fair. This theatrical vein in Tillemans's work continued in the 1720s, including a collaboration with Joseph Goupy, in 1724, on scenery for the Haymarket opera house. 
Between 1719 and 1721 Tillemans worked as a topographical artist for the antiquarian John Bridges, completing about 500 drawings for Bridges' proposed history of Northamptonshire; a number of these were later published in Peter Whalley's 'History and Antiquities of the County of Northamptonshire' (2 vols., 1791). The early 1720s also saw Tillemans moving successfully into the field of horse painting and racing scenes. He produced several versions of such works, including his 'Newmarket: the Long Course' (1723; Gov. Art Coll.). It was also during this period that Tillemans painted some of his best Thames-side views. His grand panorama 'The Thames from Richmond Hill' ('c'.1723; Gov. Art Coll.) was one of three pieces done for Lord Radnor. 
A member of the Rose and Crown Club, Tillemans was recorded by Vertue as steward, for 1725, to the Society of the Virtuosi of St Luke. Vertue also noted that he was in a position of 'acquaintance amongst... people of fashion & persons of Quality' (Vertue, 3.14), much in demand as a painter of country-house and estate views. 'Chatsworth House' (1720s; Holker Hall, Cumbria) and 'Chirk Castle' (1725; Chirk Castle, Denbighshire) stand out among his best essays -- the houses situated firmly within finely painted landscapes enlivened by animals and hunting scenes. 
However, Tillemans's work at Little Haugh Hall, Suffolk, for Dr Cox Macro remains the best documented. In addition to battle scenes, landscapes, hunting pieces, and renovation work, he also painted one of his finest portraits, 'Master Edward and Miss Mary Macro' ('c'.1733; Norwich Castle Museum). Such versatility must have been a major factor in Tillemans's success and is tacitly acknowledged in 'The Artist's Studio' ('c'.1716; Norwich Castle Museum) -- a self-portrait, with Cox Macro and pupils, surrounded in the studio by a variety of works, complete and incomplete, after different masters. 
In 1733 Tillemans retired to Richmond, Surrey, and died on 5 December 1734 while staying at Little Haugh Hall. He was buried on 7 December at Stowlangtoft church, Suffolk. The auction of his picture collection, conducted by Cox on 19 and 20 April 1733, included paintings by James Tillemans -- likely to have been a son or close relative -- and Arthur Devis, who, like Joseph Francis Nollekens, was almost certainly a pupil. 


@@@@@


doc= 27445


Tillesley, Richard (1582-1624), Church of England clergyman, was born at Coventry, the son of Thomas Tillesley of Eccleshall, Staffordshire, and his wife, Katherine, daughter of Richard Barker of Shropshire. Having matriculated from Balliol College, Oxford, on 20 January 1598, he was a scholar of St John's College by 1599. He graduated MA on 26 June 1607, BD on 22 November 1613, and DD on 7 July 1617. On 25 November 1613 he was licensed to preach, and was collated by John Buckeridge, bishop of Rochester, and late president of St John's College, to the rectories of Cuxton (26 March 1614) and Stone (1 December 1615). On 9 April 1614 he was installed as archdeacon of Rochester, and on 13 June 1615 admitted to a canonry on the presentation of James I. Wood alleges that Tillesley owed his rapid preferment to his marriage with Elizabeth Buckeridge, daughter of the bishop's brother George. 
In 1619 Tillesley published 'Animadversions upon M. Seldens History of Tithes and his Review Thereof'. He was one of a number of authors who undertook to answer Selden's book: Tillesley and Richard Mountague dealt with the legal part, while Stephen Nettles and Sir James Sempill discussed the rabbinical or Judaical. Like Mountague in his 'Diatribae upon the First Part of the Late History of Tithes', Tillesley discussed the historical aspect of the controversy. Although he professed admiration for his predecessor Sempill's earlier critique of Selden (which was based on a weak grasp of the issues involved), the archdeacon wrote a much more aggressive attack on the 'History of Tithes'. Tillesley even reported, erroneously, that Selden had been compelled by the high commission to recant his views on the historical development of tithing practices; in fact, Selden had merely apologized for publishing the book. Selden's book had asserted that the clerical right to tithes, so far from having been asserted 'jure divino' since the advent of the church in England, had in fact been based on custom and precedent. Tithing practices, and indeed the very parochial organization of the church on which they were now based, had varied considerably over time. Selden had based his arguments on a rigorous philological examination of ecclesiastical documents, and in particular of medieval cartularies. Tillesley attacked this method on several fronts. First, he decried Selden's use of French philological methods to study the changing meaning of words such as 'decimae', arguing that this Latin word essentially denoted tithes, provided 'jure divino', in their current sense. Second he accused Selden of intellectual dishonesty, claiming that the latter had refused to grant him access to the same cartularies, and charging Selden with misquoting and manipulating his sources to prove a case. (He was in fact correct in that many of Selden's quotations were either inaccurate or careless). Finally, rather than denying the great weight of Selden's evidence concerning changing tithing customs, he instead asserted that such evidence was insignificant, since divine law ought to take precedence over human custom. In 1621 Tillesley published a second edition of his attack, including some additional material. Selden wrote angry replies to Tillesley and his other critics but was restrained by James I and the duke of Buckingham from publishing them; they appear in the 1726 edition of Selden's 'Opera omnia' edited by David Wilkins. 
In 1622 Tillesley became rector of Llandogo, in the diocese of St David's. Shortly after having drawn up a nuncupative will on 30 November 1624, while 'sicke in body', he died at Rochester. The main beneficiary of his will, proved on 14 December, was his widow Elizabeth; a son, John, also survived him. He was buried in the choir of Rochester Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 27446


Tilley, Sir Samuel Leonard (1818-1896), politician in Canada, was born at Gagetown, New Brunswick, on 8 May 1818, the eldest son of Thomas Morgan Tilley, a storekeeper, and his wife, Susan, the daughter of William Peters, a farmer. Descended from loyalists on both sides, he was educated at the local Church of England school and grammar school, but at the age of thirteen he moved to Saint John and became apprenticed to a druggist. In 1838 he qualified as a pharmacist, and later established one of the largest drug stores in the province. A highly respected Saint John businessman, Tilley was an enthusiastic supporter of the evangelical wing of the Church of England, taught in Sunday school, and served as the most worthy patriarch of the Sons of Temperance. After the British government ended imperial preferences in the 1840s, he became a founder member of the Railway League and of the New Brunswick Colonial Association, which supported the protection of colonial industries. He was an early advocate of a federal union of British North America. On 6 May 1843 he married Julia Ann Hanford (died 1862); they had eight children. 
In 1850 Tilley was elected to the assembly for Saint John and joined the Reformers in opposition. In 1851, however, the unity of the Reform movement temporarily disintegrated, and he resigned from the assembly and devoted his energies to campaigning for prohibition. In 1852 he was re-elected for Saint John. When the Reformers took office he became provincial secretary, and revamped the province's financial system. He also introduced a stringent prohibition bill banning the sale of alcohol, which became law on 1 January 1856. The law aroused so much opposition that Lieutenant-Governor John Henry Manners-Sutton dissolved the assembly in May. Tilley's party -- dubbed the Smashers by their opponents -- suffered an overwhelming defeat, Tilley lost his seat, and the prohibition bill was repealed. A chastened Reform Party abandoned prohibition and won re-election in 1857. Tilley returned as provincial secretary, raised the provincial tariffs to the highest in British North America, and borrowed money in London to finance an ambitious programme of railway building. In 1860 he presided over the completion of the railway, optimistically called the European and North American, from Saint John to Shediac, but the construction costs raised the debt to unprecedented levels. In March 1861 Tilley became head of the Reform government, which was re-elected later that year. 
Tilley's relations with the new lieutenant-governor, the arrogant Arthur Hamilton Gordon, were frequently uncomfortable. Although Tilley was prepared to discuss a legislative union of the three maritime colonies, to Gordon's dismay he preferred a larger confederation of all of British North America. Partly Tilley saw confederation as a means of funding an intercolonial railway to run across New Brunswick and link Nova Scotia and the united province of Canada. In 1861 and again in 1862 he went to London to try to persuade W. E. Gladstone, the chancellor of the exchequer, to give an imperial guarantee for a loan to finance the railway, but when Gladstone insisted on a sinking fund, the Canadian government withdrew from the arrangement and Tilley returned empty-handed. In 1863 he travelled to Quebec City for further negotiations, again to no avail. Although he pushed enabling legislation through the New Brunswick assembly, he faced considerable opposition from within his own party, and so in 1864 he committed the government to generous subsidies for regional railways within New Brunswick, stretching the colony's credit to its limits. 
Tilley undoubtedly saw confederation as the means to build the Intercolonial Railway and free New Brunswick from its substantial debt, but he was motivated by more than mere financial considerations. Like most pro-confederates, he viewed with alarm the growing power of the United States. In 1861 he rushed home from England to assist in the arrangements for colonial defence during the 'Trent' affair, and he was genuinely alarmed by the Fenian raids in 1866. He sincerely believed that the imperial connection could not be preserved unless the British North American colonies formed a new (but not independent) nation under the British crown. When the 'Great Coalition' in Canada in 1864 embraced confederation, Tilley abandoned his lukewarm support for maritime union and strongly endorsed confederation at the Charlottetown conference in September 1864. At the Quebec conference in October he headed the New Brunswick delegation and helped to shape the constitutional arrangements for a federal union. But when he returned to New Brunswick he found the tide running against the proposed terms of union. In February 1865 the pro-confederates were overwhelmed at the polls and Tilley was defeated. Within a year the anti-confederate administration, internally divided between those seeking better terms and those adamantly opposed to confederation, fell apart, and a second election in May 1866 brought the confederates back to power. Tilley passed the necessary enabling legislation and sailed for England to participate in the London conference, where a measure was prepared for the British parliament. Tilley was able to persuade the delegates to improve the financial terms on which New Brunswick entered confederation, and he vetoed an attempt to entrench denominational schools in the Maritimes. He is also believed to have suggested calling the new country the dominion of Canada, a title he took from 'Psalm 72'. For his efforts he was made a CB on 1 July 1867 and was created a KCMG in 1879. He married Alice Starr Chipman on 22 October 1867; they had two children. 
In the new federal administration Tilley initially held the comparatively lowly post of minister of customs. In February 1873 he was promoted to minister of finance, but only briefly held office before the government was forced to resign. In November he was appointed lieutenant-governor of New Brunswick, and so did not stand in the election of 1874, which saw the Conservatives decimated. Even though he held a theoretically non-partisan office, he helped to organize Conservative clubs across the province and to formulate the party's platform for the election of 1878, in which the Conservatives campaigned for a 'national policy' of tariff protection. As minister of finance he introduced the new policy, raising the Canadian tariff in 1879 to encourage investment in Canadian industry. The tariff structure he created remained essentially unaltered until the end of his life. As minister of finance he was less happy with the government's almost open-ended commitment to the Canadian Pacific Railway, and he became increasingly isolated in the cabinet. In 1885 he fell ill and retired as minister of finance, but was reappointed lieutenant-governor of New Brunswick in November and held the post until autumn 1893. A member of the Imperial Federation League, he opposed unrestricted reciprocity in 1891, and in 1896 he bravely published a letter defending the right of Manitoba Catholics to denominational schools. On 25 June 1896 he died of blood poisoning in Saint John, where he was then buried. 
A man with deep religious convictions but also a pragmatist prepared to abandon prohibition when its unpopularity became obvious, and to work with Roman Catholics even though he abhorred their religious values, Tilley was easily the most important New Brunswick politician of his generation. An early advocate of protection and a railway enthusiast, he laid the basis of a modern industrial economy in New Brunswick. A firm supporter of confederation, he led his province into the federal union, and without New Brunswick confederation could not have taken place. Tilley was the real architect of the 'national policy', a policy not entirely abandoned until 1988. Although less colourful than many of his contemporaries, he was one of the most important fathers of confederation. 


@@@@@


doc= 27447


Tillinghast, John (bap. 1604, d. 1655), Fifth Monarchist, was baptized on 25 September 1604 at Streat, Sussex, the son of John Tyllinghast (died 1624), rector of Streat. After attending grammar school at Newport, Essex, Tillinghast entered Caius College, Cambridge, as a pensioner on 24 March 1621. He graduated BA in 1625, and was ordained deacon and priest at Bristol on 2 April of the same year. He became rector of Tarring Neville, Sussex, on 30 July 1636, and then of Streat on 29 September 1637. In the sermon 'Demetrius his Opposition to Reformation' (1642), dedicated to the countess of Holland, Lady Beaudesert, and his uncle, the future regicide Robert Tichborne, Tillinghast stressed the need to continue the work of reformation and denounced illegal taxation, the subversion of the kingdom's fundamental laws, innovations in church and state, and Anabaptists, Familists, and other sectaries for endangering the Reformation. He also warned that dissension in the church normally led to divisions in the state. By late 1650 Tillinghast had become an Independent and joined the congregational church at Syleham, Suffolk. Called on 22 January 1651 by the Independent church at Great Yarmouth, Norfolk, to assist William Bridge, he accepted on 4 February. The Independent churches at Fressingfield and Walpole, Suffolk, also sought his services. Tillinghast left Great Yarmouth in early 1652 to accept the rectorship of Trunch, Norfolk. Shortly thereafter, he began writing the first part of 'Generation Work', which he addressed to parliament on 8 July 1653, and also to the saints, urging them to unify in order not to obstruct the work of reformation. If parliament ignored its reforming duties, he warned, God would overthrow it. 
In 'Knowledge of the Times' (1654) and the second and third parts of 'Generation Work' (both 1654) Tillinghast distinguished himself as the only Fifth Monarchist capable of systematically expounding the prophetic texts on which the group's millenarian tenets were based. He was influenced by John Owen, whose sermon to parliament on 24 October 1651, 'The Advantage of the Kingdome of Christ in the Shaking of the Kingdoms of the World' (1652), he had read. In 'Knowledge of the Times' Tillinghast laid out the chronology of the end times, averring that the papacy would collapse in 1656 and that the millennium would commence in 1701. In the second part of 'Generation Work' he interpreted the seven vials of 'Revelation' 16 in a historical context, identifying the first with Luther's reforms; the second with the Long Parliament's repudiation of episcopacy; the third with the execution of Charles, the overthrow of the Long Parliament, the Fronde, and the mid-century conflict in the Netherlands; and the fourth with the Holy Roman empire's collapse. The fifth vial would bring the fall of the Catholic church, the sixth the demise of the Ottoman empire, and the seventh the battle of Armageddon preparatory to the Jews' conversion and Christ's return. At this point, he contended, the millennium would commence, the conclusion of which would bring the last judgment. 
In a late sermon published posthumously, Tillinghast stressed that the second coming was imminent, for a key sign of the end times was 'the Defection and Apostacy of Eminent leading men in the Churches, from their first light and Principles' (J. Tillinghast, 'Mr. Tillinghasts Eight Last Sermons', 1655, 95). God's present work, he asserted, was the overthrow of 'lofty men' as well as Antichrist (ibid., 219). The attack on the government in these sermons marked a major change in Tillinghast's position, for he had dedicated the third part of 'Generation Work', with its explication of the two witnesses' prophecies in 'Revelation' 11, to Cromwell, but by June 1655 he had turned sharply against the lord protector. He was probably influenced by the leading London Fifth Monarchist Christopher Feake, who was then imprisoned at Windsor, where Tillinghast visited him. Feake likened Tillinghast to Apollo because of his interest in prophecy. Thereafter Tillinghast went to London, where the Independent minister Nathaniel Brewster took him to see Cromwell. Tillinghast reproached Cromwell for his reputed abominations, prompting cries of 'shame' from onlookers offended by his language. Cromwell reported the incident to Charles Fleetwood. Tillinghast had intended to visit other incarcerated saints, but he died in London by the end of June. Bridge's son-in-law, Richard Lawrence, succeeded Tillinghast at Trunch. 
Tillinghast's wife, Mary Flight, had died before him. In his will, dated 6 June 1655 and proved on 27 November 1655, Tillinghast left his only surviving daughter, Mary, $136 and his household goods. The will had been witnessed by his kinsman Benjamin Tillinghast and the radical bookseller Livewell Chapman, and the executors were the Suffolk Independents John Manning, rector of Sibton-cum-Peasenhall, and his brother Samuel Manning, rector of Cookley-cum-Walpole. 
Feake moved quickly to publish 'Mr. Tillinghasts Eight Last Sermons', the epistle to which he dated 2 August 1655. Among the sermons were two on signs of the times, one on the fifth monarchy, and another on the period's evils. Reflecting the appeal of Tillinghast's works beyond the Fifth Monarchists, in December 1656 the Independent ministers Samuel Petto and John Manning finished editing Tillinghast's 'Six Severall Treatises' (1657), a collection of sermons on such themes as Christ's promises, the life of faith, and Jesus' commandment to love one another. In 1658 Petto and the Congregationalist minister Samuel Habergham, a Fifth Monarchist, issued Tillinghast's 'Elijah's Mantle'. Although Tillinghast's life was marked by his mid-career embrace of Independent polity and Fifth Monarchist tenets, two key threads provided unifying themes throughout his ministry: a strong commitment to further reform and an international perspective. Sensitive in 'Demetrius' to the persecution of protestants throughout much of Europe, in his later works he urged missionary work as far afield as Turkey and India, and prophesied protestant military victories over the Catholic states, the papacy, and the Turks. 


@@@@@


doc= 27448


Tilloch, Alexander (1759-1825), journalist and inventor, was born at Glasgow on 28 February 1759, the sixth of eleven children of John Tilloch or Tulloch, tobacco merchant and member of Glasgow town council, and Elizabeth Stivenson or Stevenson. He matriculated at Glasgow University in 1771, but did not graduate. He subsequently entered a tobacco warehouse. 
Tilloch became interested in practical science and reinvented stereotyping in 1781-2, in ignorance of the work done in the Netherlands at the beginning of the century and later by the Scot William Ged. In partnership with the stationer and printer Andrew Foulis the younger in 1783-6, he published a number of stereotyped books in Glasgow, deliberately choosing cheap editions so that they did not attract the attention of other printers. Together they took out a British patent, no. 1431 of 1784, for 'Printing books by plates instead of moveable types, by which a greater degree of accuracy, correctness and elegance, will be obtained'. Seventeen years later Tilloch was to summarize their process in the 'Philosophical Magazine'. Foulis went to Chevening in Kent for eight months to show the process to Charles, third earl of Stanhope, and to the printer he employed, Andrew Wilson, for which he was said to have been paid $800. Wilson developed the process and it was widely used by the time of Tilloch's death. While still in Glasgow, Tilloch married Elizabeth Simson (died 1783) on 29 July 1780. They had one daughter, Elizabeth, who lived with her father until she married the novelist John Galt in 1812. Tilloch moved to London in 1787. 
In 1789, with a number of others, Tilloch purchased a newspaper, 'The Star', which he edited until 1821. His obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' said: 'In this respectable paper his political opinions were mild and temperate, equally remote from the violence of party, the clamours of faction, and the unmanly servility of temporizing baseness' ('GM', 277). Tilloch was deeply religious, and like Michael Faraday was a member of the Sandemanian church in Goswell Street. As Biblicus, he published in 'The Star' papers on the book of 'Revelation', which were collected as 'Dissertation on the Opening of the Sealed Book', published at Arbroath in 1819. He also wrote 'Dissertations introductory to the study and right understanding of the language, structure and contents of the Apocalypse' (1823). 
Much of the motivation for Tilloch's activities contained a philanthropic element which was of a part with his religious views. Struck by the number of executions for forgery, he invented a method for printing banknotes which he believed would make forgery impossible. Tilloch offered it to the British government about 1790, to the Bank of England in 1797, and to a royal commission in 1818: all rejected it. The French showed interest but were unable to make it work before the Napoleonic wars interrupted communication. Tilloch's process was similar to that of Augustus Applegath, which was adopted by the bank, and Tilloch unsuccessfully petitioned parliament in 1820 for some reward. He took out patents on mill machinery and a compound steam engine, but not on his method of printing banknotes. 
In 1798 Tilloch began the 'Philosophical Magazine': 'the grand Object of it is to diffuse Philosophical knowledge among every Class of Society, and to give the Public as early an Account as possible of every thing new or curious in the scientific World, both at Home and on the Continent. ('Preface', 'Philosophical Magazine', 1, 1798)' At first the magazine competed with William Nicholson's 'Journal of Natural Philosophy, Chemistry and the Arts', founded a few months earlier, before taking it over at the end of 1813. The plan of the 'Philosophical Magazine' owed much to the widely circulated 'Observations sur la physique' which Abbe Francois Rozier had begun in Paris in 1771: both appeared monthly and covered physics, chemistry, natural history, and the practical arts. They printed translations of important papers from foreign journals and their frequency enabled them to announce discoveries far more quickly than the transactions of learned academies, the main pre-existing means of communication. In 1822 Tilloch took on Richard Taylor as joint editor. In Tilloch's lifetime the 'Philosophical Magazine' was vital for the expansion of science at a time when new fields were being opened up rapidly. As the number of scientific journals grew the status of the magazine rose until by the middle of the century it was in Britain second in prestige only to the 'Philosophical Transactions' of the Royal Society. Tilloch remained interested in technical education throughout his life and with the rise of the mechanics' institutes he started the monthly 'Mechanic's Oracle' in 1824. 
Tilloch was proposed as a fellow of the Royal Society but he withdrew his name because he believed that as the proprietor of two periodicals, one of them scientific, he would be blackballed. He was, however, a member of the Royal Irish Academy, the Geological Society, the Society of Antiquaries, and the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland. 
After several months' illness Tilloch died on 26 January 1825 at the house he shared with one of his sisters in Barnsbury Street, Islington, London. 'In private life he was amiable; in conversation, acute, intelligent and communicative; few persons possessed a clearer understanding, or a warmer heart' ('GM', 281). The British Library has a catalogue of the sale of his collection of paintings, prints, coins, medals, and scientific instruments. 


@@@@@


doc= 27449


Tillotson, John (1630-1694), archbishop of Canterbury, was born at the end of September or beginning of October 1630 at Haugh End, Sowerby, Halifax, Yorkshire, the eldest of the three sons of Robert Tillotson (died 1683), clothier, and his wife, Mary (died 1667), daughter of Thomas Dobson of Sowerby. He was baptized on 10 October 1630 at the church of St John the Baptist, Halifax; his godfather was Joshua Witton (died 1674), one of the ministers ejected in 1662. His brothers were named Joshua and Israel. Robert Tillotson later was a member of the congregational church in Sowerby gathered by Henry Root, and a friend of the presbyterian Oliver Heywood. In his prayers before his consecration in 1691 the archbishop thanked God that he was 'born of honest and religious parents, tho' of a low and obscure condition', that he was born in a time and place where 'true religion was preached and professed', and that out of his small estate his father had given him a liberal education. He was also grateful that he had not inherited the loss of understanding from which his mother had suffered for so many years ('Works', 12.5510-12). 
Tillotson's reaction to his puritan upbringing was of enormous importance in shaping his subsequent views of theology and church discipline. Although he abandoned his father's beliefs he kept to the end of his life a deep sympathy with nonconformists for which his high-church enemies never forgave him. He belonged, crucially, to the generation of young men who were educated at Cambridge in the civil war and Commonwealth period and who turned against Calvinist theology, a generation so memorably described by Gilbert Burnet in his 'History of my Own Time' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 1.186-9). After a grammar school education Tillotson was admitted a pensioner at Clare College, Cambridge, on 23 April 1647 and matriculated on 1 July. His tutor was David Clarkson, subsequently ejected in 1662 from the living of Mortlake, Surrey, and described by Richard Baxter as 'a Divine of extraordinary worth' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 3.97); his fellow students Francis Holcroft, John Denton, and James Calvert themselves became nonconformist ministers, though Denton later conformed. Clarkson's fellowship had previously been held by the royalist Peter Gunning. Tillotson supported the Independents; he wrote to Root that he felt no scruple about taking the engagement (the 1650 declaration of loyalty to the Commonwealth) and referred to the college's receding hopes of obtaining as master the Independent Thomas Goodwin (who went to Magdalen College, Oxford, in 1650; Ralph Cudworth, the somewhat reluctant master of Clare since 1645, moved to Christ's in 1654). Tillotson graduated BA in 1650, proceeded MA in 1654, and was admitted to a probationary fellowship on 14 November 1650; his first pupil, John Beardmore, was put under him on 7 April 1651. About 27 November 1651 he was elected fellow in succession to Clarkson. Tillotson's conduct in college during the interregnum was much criticized for some years after his death by the nonjurors George Hickes, Charles Leslie, Bevil Higgons, and George Smith; this should not be entirely discounted, despite the indignation of Burnet, Tillotson's biographer Thomas Birch, and other supporters. Apart from unverifiable accusations, for example that Tillotson had introduced thanks for the victory over Charles Stuart at Worcester into the college grace, the principal charge was that he had illegally held the fellowship of which Gunning had been deprived, even though his immediate predecessor was Clarkson, a charge borne out by the fact that the college on Gunning's request ejected him from the fellowship after the Restoration. Tillotson thought himself unfairly treated. In answer to Hickes's accusation in 'Some Discourses upon Dr. Burnet and Dr. Tillotson' (1695) that during the interregnum the fellows had not dared oppose him because of his interest with his great masters, Denton wrote that Tillotson 'was much respected by the senior fellows'; this was confirmed by the sole surviving senior fellow from that time, James Mountain, who had himself fought for Charles I (Whiston, 1.26; Birch, 'Life', 12-14). Beardmore is explicit about the feud between the old and new fellows, but says that he 'never heard... any particular reflections upon [Tillotson] from the other party' (Beardmore, 385). 
According to Beardmore's sketch of Tillotson's methods as a tutor and his religious leanings he was 'an acute logician and philosopher [and] a quick disputant' (Beardmore, 382-5). He taught in Latin, which he spoke very well; on Sundays he examined his students in English on the sermons they had heard. He had a great faculty for ''conceived' [extempore] 'prayers'' (ibid.) and was 'a very attentive hearer of sermons' (ibid.), attending four every Sunday and the Wednesday lecture at Trinity Church, given in rotation by the best preachers in the university. Beardmore observes that most of the preachers were contra-remonstrants, that is, Calvinists, and that Tillotson regularly heard Thomas Hill, master of Trinity, who preached at St Michael's Church on Sunday mornings and at Trinity Church in the afternoons. Among young preachers 'of a freer temper and genius' (ibid.) Beardmore notes Simon Patrick, with whom Tillotson was later closely associated. It is very likely that he also heard the most influential of the anti-Calvinists, Benjamin Whichcote, then provost of King's College: in his funeral sermon for Whichcote (24 May 1683), Tillotson pointed out that Whichcote preached in Trinity Church every Sunday afternoon for almost twenty years (until his ejection at the Restoration), and 'contributed more to the forming of [Cambridge] students... to a sober sense of religion than any man in that age' ('Works', 2.154). 
It is not clear at what date Tillotson gave up his sympathy for the Calvinist doctrine and congregational discipline of his youth. Beardmore said he 'got out of the prejudices of his education, when but a very young man in 'Cambridge', divers years before the restoration in 1660, or any prospect of it' (Beardmore, 398). According to Burnet 'he happily fell on' William Chillingworth's 'Religion of Protestants', 'which gave his mind the ply it held ever after, and put him on a true scent' (Burnet, 'Sermon', 11), but the timing is unknown. In 1656 or 1657 (though still a fellow of Clare) he left Cambridge for London in order to act as chaplain to Edmund Prideaux, Oliver Cromwell's attorney-general, and as tutor to his son. There is no evidence that Tillotson was ordained at this stage. Through Prideaux he ensured that the college was financially compensated for materials seized by parliament during the civil war. He was present at the fast held in Whitehall a week after the protector's death on 3 September 1658, and in later years told Burnet of his revulsion at the blasphemous language used on that occasion by Thomas Goodwin and Peter Sterry, 'enough', Burnet said, 'to disgust a man for ever of that enthusiastick boldness' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 1.82-3). 
From the last years of the interregnum to the 'Act of Uniformity' of 1662 Tillotson maintained close links with the groups who were to become nonconformists, but moved towards the episcopal church. In London he met Ralph Brownrigg, the deprived bishop of Exeter, who was preacher at the Temple in 1659, and John Hacket, later bishop of Lichfield. After the Restoration he was present for part of the abortive Savoy conference (April to July 1661) between episcopalians and so-called presbyterians on the reform of the liturgy; Baxter, principal spokesman for the latter, describes him as one of 'two or three Scholars and Lay-men, that as Auditors came in with us' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 2.337). About this time he was ordained. The exact date is unknown: Beardmore and Birch suggest 1660 or early 1661, but if Baxter's description is accurate it must have been after the Savoy conference. However, Tillotson is said to have been recommended for a prebend at Ripon in 1660, where John Wilkins was the new dean. This implies an ordination date in 1660, and is difficult to square with Baxter's statement. (Neither Beardmore nor Birch refers to this episode.) Tillotson obtained episcopal ordination from Thomas Sydserf, bishop of Galloway, the only surviving Scottish bishop, who, according to 'Bishop Burnet's History', did not require oaths or subscriptions. The nonjuror George Smith suggested that Tillotson chose him for that reason. Charles II was initially keen to promote prominent puritan divines to high office in the church: Tillotson told Beardmore in 1661 that if Edmund Calamy had accepted the king's offer of the bishopric of Lichfield, William Bates would have been made dean and he would have been a canon. Tillotson preached his first sermon (date unknown) for his Cambridge friend Denton, at Oswaldkirk, Yorkshire. His first published sermon was a lecture delivered at short notice at St Giles Cripplegate in September 1661 on behalf of Bates, vicar of St Dunstan-in-the-West, which was subsequently included in 'The Morning-Exercise at Cripple-Gate' (1661), edited by Samuel Annesley, rector of St Giles. Denton, Bates, and Annesley were soon ejected from their livings; Tillotson, however, chose to conform to the established church. His first office, in 1661-2, was as curate to Thomas Hacket, vicar of Cheshunt, Hertfordshire. After Calamy was ejected from St Mary Aldermanbury, Tillotson was elected to fill his place by the parishioners in December 1662, but refused their offer. He did, however, accept the presentation of the rectory of Ketton, or Kedington, Suffolk, worth $200 a year, from Sir Thomas Barnardiston in June 1663, after the ejection of Samuel Fairclough. According to the historian Edmund Calamy, grandson of the ejected Calamy, 'it was no small Ease to Mr. 'Fairclough', that a man of that Worth did succeed him' (Calamy, 2.638). Hickes regarded this as another example of Tillotson taking another man's property to which he was not entitled. Fairclough's former parishioners were displeased for a different reason: they 'universally complain'd, that Jesus Christ had not been preach'd amongst them, since Mr. TILLOTSON had been settled in the parish' (Birch, 'Life', 18). Tillotson soon abandoned this unfortunate if lucrative rural experiment for far more prominent urban pulpits. 
After the ejection of the nonconformist ministers (24 August 1662) Tillotson became a popular and extremely influential preacher in London. He was an occasional Tuesday lecturer at St Lawrence Jewry (a sermon he published in 1694, 'Of the Advantages of an Early Piety', was preached at St Lawrence in 1662); on one such occasion when he was acting as a replacement preacher he was heard by Edward Atkyns, later baron of the exchequer, who used his influence to have Tillotson elected preacher to the Society of Lincoln's Inn (26 November 1663). The salary was $100 a year, paid at the end of each term, together with a chamber, commons (meals) for himself and his servant, and $24 for commons during the vacations. He thereupon resigned his Suffolk living. The post at Lincoln's Inn provided him with an audience both intellectually receptive and socially and politically important. In the following year he was elected to the Tuesday lectureship at St Lawrence. His sermons in these pulpits attracted 'crouds of auditors', including lawyers, city merchants, and especially members of the clergy: 'many, that heard him on 'Sunday' at 'Lincoln's-Inn', went joyfully to St. 'Laurence' on 'Tuesday', hoping they might hear the same sermon again' (Beardmore, 408). Tillotson steadily accumulated other pulpits and preferments which he held together with these two (St Lawrence was burnt down in the great fire of 1666 and rebuilt by Christopher Wren, 1670-86). He was invited to preach at St Paul's before the lord mayor in March 1664, and expanded the sermon the same year into his first major publication, 'The Wisdom of being Religious'. He proceeded DD in 1666. His talents were recognized by the court as well as the city: he was appointed one of Charles II's chaplains, and preached from time to time before the king at Whitehall (his first such sermon seems to have been preached on 30 June 1667) and to the House of Commons. The king gave him a prebend at Canterbury (14 March 1670; his predecessor, somewhat ironically, was Gunning, now made bishop of Chichester), and promoted him dean of Canterbury (October 1672), the latter on the separate recommendations of Archbishop Gilbert Sheldon, the duke of Buckingham, and Lord Berkeley. The king also made him a prebendary and residentiary canon of St Paul's (18 December 1675, 14 February 1678), the second of these on the recommendation of John Sharp (later archbishop of York) through the influence of Heneage Finch (later earl of Nottingham). Tillotson held the preferments at Canterbury and St Paul's jointly 'in compliance with the times, and because he would not decline what was so frankly offered him' by the king (ibid., 395). 
The vicar of St Lawrence from 1662 to 1668 was John Wilkins, the most important single influence on Tillotson's intellectual development: 'that which gave him his last finishing', said Burnet, 'was his close and long Friendship with Bishop Wilkins' (Burnet, 'Sermon', 12). Tillotson said in his edition of Wilkins's 'Sermons' (1682, sig. A3) that he did not know Wilkins before the Restoration (Wilkins moved from Oxford to Cambridge as master of Trinity in 1659, when Tillotson was in London), but they had a great deal in common. Both were firmly convinced of the rational basis of Christianity; both were conformists whose links with nonconformists were close; both regarded ecclesiastical organization and ceremonies as 'things indifferent' -- things not prescribed in scripture, that the state had the right to determine; both opposed persecution as the way to bring nonconformists into the established church, but neither really understood the reasons for nonconformity; both thought that the pulpit, in the 1640s and 1650s the principal medium of puritan thought with all the doctrinal and political conflict that implied, should be made instead the means of propagating a moderate, reasonable, reconciling religion with a stronger emphasis on morality than on doctrine (but without devaluing the latter). Their nonconformist and high-church critics derisively labelled them and their associates 'latitude men' or 'latitudinarians'. Tillotson preached at Wilkins's consecration as bishop of Chester at Ely House on 15 November 1668 (John Evelyn was in the congregation) and subsequently spent some time helping him in his diocese in 1671 and 1672. Wilkins was succeeded at St Lawrence by another of Tillotson's formative influences, Whichcote. Tillotson helped Wilkins with his 'Essay towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language' (publication was delayed until 1668 because of the great fire). On the nomination of Wilkins's friend Seth Ward, bishop of Salisbury and Wilkins's predecessor at St Lawrence, Tillotson was elected on 25 January 1672 a fellow of the Royal Society, of which Wilkins was the guiding spirit. Wilkins died at Tillotson's house in Chancery Lane on 19 November 1672. He made Tillotson executor of his will -- on 9 October 1673 the Royal Society decided it was time to call on Tillotson for Wilkins's legacy -- and left him his papers to publish at his discretion. Tillotson thus became the guardian of Wilkins's posthumous reputation. 
The two men also had a familial relationship. On 23 February 1664 Wilkins officiated in St Lawrence at the marriage between Tillotson and Wilkins's stepdaughter Elizabeth French (died 1702). (Wilkins was the second husband of Robina French, widow of Peter French and sister of Oliver Cromwell.) The Tillotsons had two daughters, who predeceased them: Elizabeth, the younger, died in 1681; Mary, the elder, married James Chadwick and left two sons and a daughter at her death in November 1687. The fact that Tillotson was related by marriage to the Cromwell family was not lost on his nonjuring critics. 
Tillotson's relations with nonconformists in the reigns of Charles II and James II remained cordial and encouraging but also cautious. He advised Beardmore in 1661 not to be sharp on them in sermons, but to win them to the church by good preaching and good living. (In this respect Tillotson was much closer to Wilkins than to his colleagues Simon Patrick and Edward Stillingfleet, who offended the nonconformists by attacking them in print and pulpit.) Beardmore was sure that Tillotson brought in great numbers of nonconformists and was the chief agent for preserving the majority of the citizens of London 'from running into extravagancies' against the government of the church (Beardmore, 400). With the apparent encouragement of Ward and George Morley, bishop of Winchester, and through the medium of Bates, in 1674 Tillotson and Stillingfleet met Baxter and drew up a draft proposal for the comprehension of nonconformists within the established church (a similar attempt made in 1668 by Wilkins and Baxter had come to nothing). But the bishops backtracked, just as Baxter had expected. Tillotson wrote to Baxter on 11 April 1675, 'I am unwilling my Name should be used in this Matter; not but that I do most heartily desire an Accommodation, and shall always endeavour it', explaining that the 'Comprehension Bill' would not pass either house without the agreement of the king and a considerable part of the bishops ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 3.157). Tillotson tried in other ways to break down the barrier between conformity and nonconformity. In 1674 he became a member of the trust (which included Whichcote, Stillingfleet, and the unitarian Thomas Firmin) formed to oversee the scheme for distributing Welsh bibles set up by the ejected minister and philanthropist Thomas Gouge; in his funeral sermon for Gouge (4 November 1681) he emphasized the contributions Gouge obtained from bishops and clergy. In his sermon preached at the Yorkshire feast in London on 3 December 1678 he urged that there should be no differences between adherents of the protestant reformed religion. Only an established national religion could be a sufficient bulwark against popery; 'little sects and separate congregations' could never do it. At the same time as arguing that the continuance of nonconformity weakened the protestant cause, he gave great offence to high-churchmen by suggesting that the governors of the church in order to achieve union would give up some 'little things... to the infirmity or importunity, or, perhaps in some very few things, to the plausible exceptions' of the nonconformists ('Works', 2.24-5). 
Tillotson's Erastian view of the established church involved him in some difficulty from both the high-church and nonconformist perspectives when he preached before the king at Whitehall on 2 April 1680. The sermon was subsequently entitled 'The protestant religion vindicated from the charge of singularity and novelty'. Hickes seized with glee on this episode. At one point Tillotson claimed that conscience did not warrant any man without an extraordinary commission confirmed by miracles, such as the apostles had, to affront the established religion of a nation, even if it were false, and to draw men off from it, in contempt of the law. All that persons of a different religion could do was enjoy the private liberty and exercise of their own conscience and religion ('Works', 2.253). This was regarded as Hobbism by a lord who heard it and told the dozing king, who immediately commanded its publication. When the nonconformist John Howe read it he expostulated with Tillotson that he had used a sermon against popery to plead the popish cause, and he reduced him to tears. Tillotson's old antagonist Gunning made the same complaint in the Lords. Evelyn thought the whole discourse incomparable. 
Despite his many London commitments Tillotson was active throughout these years in the archdiocese of Canterbury. As prebendary (1670-72) and dean (1672-89) of Canterbury he was required by statute to spend at least ninety days a year in residence, twenty-one of them continuous; according to Burnet he more than fulfilled this requirement. In 1683 he was responsible for introducing the weekly celebration of the eucharist in the cathedral. However, in some quarters it was felt that London drew him away: George Thorp, another prebendary and chaplain to William Sancroft, archbishop of Canterbury, suggested unsuccessfully to Sancroft in 1684 that Tillotson be given a living in the diocese so that he could leave Lincoln's Inn. 
Tillotson's advice to Lord Russell before his execution in 1683 for his part in the Rye House plot was to be thrown in his face after the revolution. He and Burnet, who both attended Russell in the Tower and on the scaffold, took pains 'to persuade him of the unlawfulness of taking arms against the king in any case' ('Supplement to Burnet's History', 130), even if, as Russell put it, 'our religion and rights should be invaded'. Russell was unconvinced, so Tillotson wrote a letter to the condemned man (on 20 July 1683), soon published against the writer's wishes. Here he argued that the Christian religion forbade resistance to authority; that the same law which established the Church of England also declared that it was unlawful to take up arms against authority on any pretence; and that Russell's opinion was contrary to the doctrine of all the protestant churches. Burnet tried to defend Tillotson against Hickes's accusation that at the revolution of 1688 he had apostatized from the doctrine of non-resistance with the argument that he 'was restrained by some particular considerations from mentioning... the case of a total subversion of the constitution, which he thought would justify resistance' (Birch, 'Life', 114-15). 
There was no restraint in Tillotson's repeatedly expressed hostility to Catholicism in this period. Beardmore commented 'that he scarcely ever preach'd a sermon, without some very home-blow against' popery (Beardmore, 393). He believed that Catholics had burnt the city on purpose in 1666. When Charles II complained to Sheldon in 1672 about the orchestrated preaching of the London clergy against Catholicism Tillotson suggested as an answer that 'it would be a thing without a precedent, that he should forbid his Clergy to preach in defence of a religion which they believed, while he himself said he was of it' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 1.308-9). The Catholic duke of York was so offended by his sermon 'The hazard of being saved in the church of Rome' (April 1672; privately printed, 1673) that he ceased attending the Chapel Royal. When the duke became King James II, Tillotson was one of several clergy, including Stillingfleet, Patrick, and Thomas Tenison, his successor as archbishop, who directed a 'controversial war' against Catholicism in 1686 (ibid., 1.674), and the king complained to Sancroft specifically about Tillotson, Patrick, and Stillingfleet for preaching so much on the subject. When in the following year James II forced Laurence Hyde, earl of Rochester, to have a conference about his religion in his presence with two Catholic priests and two Church of England clergy, with the object of converting Rochester to Rome, Burnet considered that 'The king did in this matter great honour to my two friends Tillotson and Stillingfleet, for he excepted against them', so Rochester chose William Jane and Patrick instead ('Supplement to Burnet's History', 224). Tillotson was a member of the conference held at Lambeth by Sancroft on 18 May 1688, which led to the decision to disobey James's order that his declaration of indulgence, aimed at Catholics as much as nonconformists, should be read in all churches. 
Tillotson had lost the favour of Charles II towards the end of his reign, and never won that of James II. He bought a house at Edmonton, Middlesex, where he could retire during this difficult period. Nevertheless he continued preaching at Lincoln's Inn and St Lawrence 'with his usual freedom, or rather with greater zeal and fervency' against Catholicism (Beardmore, 394). He had many visitors, and his conversation was much valued. Despite the loss of his remaining daughter he had the consolation of friendships kept up by letters with Robert Nelson, soon to be a nonjuror, and Lady Rachel Russell, widow of the executed whig, many of which are included in Thomas Birch's 'Life'. In the final, most public stage of his life he was to be far more isolated. 
Tillotson published six collections of his writings: four designed as a sequence, his 'Sermons Preach'd upon Several Occasions' (1671), 'Sermons Preach'd upon Several Occasions... the Second Volume' (1678), 'Sermons and Discourses... the Third Volume' (1686), and 'Sermons Preach'd upon Several Occasions... the Fourth Volume' (1694); and two other important collections, 'Sermons Concerning the Divinity and Incarnation of our Blessed Saviour' (1693) and 'Six Sermons' (1694). He also published a large number of sermons separately, and his first three volumes in revised editions. He always wrote out his sermons before delivery in the pulpit (some autograph shorthand examples survive at the Bodleian as MS Rawlinson E. 125), and he revised them meticulously for publication and between editions. His object was evidently through artful rewriting to give the reader the illusion of fluent speech. Joseph Spence noted that 'Some of the sermons of Archbishop Tillotson which seem easiest to be wrote and the least laboured, were found several of them wrote over the eighth or ninth time in his study' (Spence, 1.323, no. 794). He deliberately avoided pedantry, in the form of Latin quotations and references to authorities, and rhetorical tropes and ornaments; he set out to differentiate his practice from that of witty high-church preachers of the earlier part of the century and more recent enthusiastic puritans and nonconformists who worked on their readers' emotions. He strongly supported the theories of Wilkins and the Royal Society on the reform of prose style, which included a pronounced distrust of metaphor. Like Wilkins he thought the misuse of metaphor responsible for doctrinal error. According to Burnet he prepared himself by studying the scriptures, 'all the antient Philosophers and Books of Morality', and the works of Basil and Chrysostom. His work with Wilkins on the 'Essay towards a Real Character' 'led him to consider exactly the Truth of Language and Stile, in which no Man was happier, and knew better the Art of preserving the Majesty of things under a Simplicity of Words' (Burnet, 'Sermon', 13). Beardmore said 'his endeavour was to make all things clear, to bring truth into open light; and his arguments of persuasion were strong and nervous, and tended to gain the affections by the understanding' (Beardmore, 409). He defined his religious position in relation to four main groups: the two intellectual targets to whom he was unremittingly hostile, atheists and Catholics, and the two groups from whom he carefully dissociated himself but with whom he retained ties of friendship, the nonconformists and the Socinians or unitarians. To atheists and Catholics he stressed the rational grounds of faith and the close connection between natural and revealed religion; to nonconformists that justification included obedience and faith included works; and to Socinians that Christianity required the acceptance of mysteries incomprehensible to reason. His collections were carefully structured to lead the reader through arguments for natural religion and the advantages, both worldly and otherworldly, of practising the precepts of revealed religion, culminating in a carefully restrained exposition of its mysteries. He gave the greatest weight to Christian practice. Burnet summed up his position very fairly as follows: 'He indeed judged that the great design of Christianity was the reforming Mens Natures, and governing their Actions, the restraining their Appetites, and Passions, the softning their Tempers, and sweetning their Humours, the composing their Affections, and the raising their minds above the Interests and Follies of this present World, to the hope and pursuit of endless Blessedness: And he considered the whole Christian Doctrine as a System of Principles, all tending to this. (Burnet, 'Sermon', 31-2)' In the course of the 1660s Tillotson shifted his attack from atheism and infidelity (his target in 'The Wisdom of being Religious') to Catholicism. According to Burnet he did this because 'he saw that Popery was at the root of this, and that the Design seemed to be laid, to make us first Atheists, that we might be the more easily made Papists' (Burnet, 'Sermon', 15). In 1666 he published 'The Rule of Faith', an attack on 'Sure-Footing in Christianity, or, Rational Discourses on the Rule of Faith' (1665) by the Catholic apologist John Sergeant, who had attacked Stillingfleet's 'Rational Account of the Grounds of the Protestant Religion' (1664) in his third appendix. Tillotson dedicated his book to Stillingfleet, and included as an appendix a reply by Stillingfleet to Sergeant; he went on to make a lengthy attack on Sergeant's ironically titled 'Letter of Thanks' (1666) in the preface to his first collection of sermons (1671). 'The Rule of Faith' was a contribution to a long-running debate going back to the anti-Catholic writing of William Laud and William Chillingworth in the 1630s; its philosophical importance lies in its attempt to define the basis of certainty, the relation between reason and faith, and the grounds of assent to Christian doctrine. Tillotson further developed part of his argument in 'A Discourse Against Transubstantiation' (1684, included in the third volume of 1686). 
Later in his career Tillotson turned his attention to a completely different target, Socinianism or unitarianism (which denied the doctrine of the Trinity on scriptural grounds), but his tone here was much more accommodating. He had long been a friend of the Socinian philanthropist Firmin, who, according to Stephen Nye, knew all the London divines and had provided preachers for St Lawrence when Tillotson was busy as dean at Canterbury. In 1679-80 Tillotson preached a group of four sermons on the divinity of Christ; he published these in 1693 partly to counter the malicious accusations of nonjuring critics that he was himself a Socinian, and partly for Firmin's benefit. He thought the Socinians (unlike the Catholics, whom he held in contempt) 'a pattern of the fair way of disputing', but they had one great defect: truth was not on their side ('Works', 3.244-5). The unpersuaded Firmin engaged Nye to write an answer, 'Considerations on the... Doctrine of the Trinity' (1694); after reading it Tillotson told Firmin, ''My Lord of' Sarum [Burnet] 'shall humble your Writers'', but he continued their friendship unaltered (Nye, 17). 
Tillotson served an extremely valuable function as an editor, scrutinizer, and promoter of other men's writings. In 1675 he published what proved the most influential and popular of Wilkins's works, 'Of the Principles and Duties of Natural Religion', with a preface explaining his contribution (Wilkins had left twelve chapters prepared for the press, and Tillotson edited fourteen more) and summarizing the book's argument. In 1682 he brought out the second collection of Wilkins's sermons; his prefatory essay, 'The publisher to the reader', contains an interesting account of their author, whom he defended energetically from the attack in Anthony Wood's 'Historia et antiquitates universitatis Oxoniensis' (1674). He also acted as literary executor to Isaac Barrow. In 1680 he published Barrow's anti-Catholic 'Treatise of the Pope's Supremacy', for which Barrow gave him permission on his deathbed. He worked for ten years on Barrow's sermons, only one of which had appeared in print in his lifetime: he published a number of separate collections, and the 'Works' in a three-volume folio edition (1683-7). (The accusation by Barrow's nineteenth-century editor Alexander Napier that Tillotson extensively altered the sermons has been conclusively refuted by Irene Simon.) He also edited Hezekiah Burton's posthumous 'Discourses' (1684-5). 
In addition to acting as literary executor Tillotson read and commented on his friends' work in progress and gave them valuable advice. He was probably the 'judicious and learned Friend, a Man indefatigably zealous in the service of the Church and State' referred to by John Dryden in the preface to 'Religio laici' (1682), the friend who advised the poet to omit his bold criticism of Athanasius (Brown, 'Dryden's 'Religio laici''). He helped the nonconformist Samuel Cradock with writing his 'Harmony of the Four Evangelists' (1668), and another nonconformist, Matthew Poole, with the subscriptions for his 'Synopsis criticorum' (1669-76). The person to whom he gave most help of this kind was Burnet. Tillotson, William Lloyd (later bishop of Worcester), and Stillingfleet were asked by Burnet to read the manuscript of his 'History of the Reformation of the Church of England', a work that proved central to anti-Catholic polemic in the 1680s; Burnet thanked them effusively in his preface to the first volume (1679). Tillotson may have had a hand in Burnet's life of John Wilmot, earl of Rochester (1680). When he became archbishop he enlisted Burnet in his and Mary II's campaign for church reform. Burnet's 'Discourse of the Pastoral Care' (1692) was written at the suggestion of Tillotson and the queen; Tillotson read it in manuscript and told Burnet, 'The work is as perfect in its kind, as I hope to see any thing' (Birch, 'Life', 266). Burnet's 'Exposition of the Thirty-Nine Articles' (1699) was written as a result of a similar request; Tillotson read it in manuscript, made some alterations, and congratulated Burnet on his treatment of some very difficult theological questions. He also asked Burnet to contribute to his proposed new book of homilies, a scheme which came to nothing; Burnet, however, was to publish his contribution in 1713. A work with which Tillotson became associated in a rather different way is the 'Historia Inquisitionis' (1692) by the Dutch remonstrant theologian Philip van Limborch. Limborch wrote to their mutual friend John Locke on 17 June 1692, saying that he wanted to dedicate the 'Historia' to Tillotson. Tillotson agreed, subject to checking the text of the dedication, and a copy of the book duly reached him in November. In the dedication approved by Tillotson, Limborch praised him as chosen by providence so that under his influence the reformed churches might lay aside their disputes and unite in support of the gospel against the cruelty of Rome; it illustrates both his growing international reputation and the way in which he wanted his career to be understood. 
Tillotson felt unqualified admiration for the new monarchs, William III and Mary II. He believed that God 'in great mercy to a most sinful and perverse people' had set them on the throne of the three kingdoms 'to be our deliverers and benefactors for many generations yet to come' (prayers before his consecration, 'Works', 12.5510). They embodied his two main aims: William was to unite his protestant subjects and deliver them from popery, and Mary was to effect their religious and moral reformation by her example. He saw these hopes only partly fulfilled. Among other London clergy Tillotson was recommended for preferment to the prince of Orange by Burnet in December 1688 (he may have met the prince and princess at Canterbury in 1677, but he was not involved in the invitation extended to William). He preached before the prince at St James's on 6 January 1689, and gave 'A thanksgiving sermon for our deliverance' at Lincoln's Inn on 31 January, the official thanksgiving day. When Patrick published his own sermon delivered on the same occasion he met with such obloquy that Tillotson published his, so Patrick said, 'that I might not stand single, but they might have somebody else to rail at as well as me' ('Auto-biography', 142-3). Tillotson was soon promoted: the new king on his accession made him one of his chaplains, and on 27 April his clerk of the closet. At this time Tillotson let it be known that he did not wish to be a bishop. However, in August the chapter of Canterbury Cathedral gave him archiepiscopal jurisdiction, following Archbishop Sancroft's suspension for refusing to recognize the new monarchs, and in September William agreed to move him from the deanery of Canterbury to that of St Paul's (he was installed on 21 November), following Stillingfleet's promotion as bishop of Worcester. This was the limit of Tillotson's ambition, but William indicated that he intended in due course to make him archbishop of Canterbury. The dismayed Tillotson blamed Burnet for this arrangement (letter to Lady Russell, 19 Sept 1689; Birch, 'Life', 205-6). 
The year 1689 saw the lasting failure of Tillotson's hope for the comprehension of the nonconformists within the established church. In 1688 Sancroft had made conciliatory moves towards them as a way of making them allies against James II's attempt to tolerate Catholics, and had formed a committee, of which Tillotson was a member, with the intention of making alterations to the liturgy in order to bring the nonconformists in. According to Patrick, on 14 January 1689 Tillotson, Patrick, and others met at Stillingfleet's house to discuss the preparation of a comprehension bill, apparently with Sancroft's permission. But under William comprehension was less important to nonconformists than toleration, and it was deeply unappealing to most churchmen. After the withdrawal of the 'Comprehension Bill' and the passing of the 'Toleration Act' (24 May), William agreed that the question of comprehension should be considered by convocation (the assembly of the clergy) before it went to parliament again, and on 13 September he set up an ecclesiastical commission to prepare matters. This procedure, which Tillotson recommended to the king, proved disastrous, but Tillotson optimistically sent a list of 'Concessions, which will probably be made by the church of 'England' for the union of Protestants' to Lord Portland on the same day. The members of the commission, initially consisting of ten bishops and twenty other divines, including Tillotson, were to make recommendations concerning the liturgy and canons, the ecclesiastical courts, and clerical conduct to convocation, parliament, and king. They met regularly in October and November (Tillotson attended fourteen sessions), but many high-church members either failed to appear or dropped out. The hard core, who included Tillotson, Stillingfleet, Patrick, Burnet, Tenison, Richard Kidder, and John Williams (later bishop of Chichester), produced a revised liturgy in the form of an interleaved folio prayer book (Lambeth MS 2173, text in Fawcett), in which there were many concessions to nonconformist sensibilities. But this liturgy was never discussed by convocation, which met first in late November, and never reached parliament. Tillotson was the comprehenders' nominee for prolocutor of the lower house of convocation, but the high-church candidate, William Jane, easily defeated him. After fruitless exchanges between the two houses of bishops and clergy convocation was prorogued and dissolved (January 1690). Comprehension was now a lost cause. 
William pressured Tillotson into accepting the archbishopric partly by telling him that if he refused he would not fill any of the bishoprics held by nonjurors. Tillotson capitulated in October 1690, but succeeded in delaying his appointment until the following year. The nonjuror Henry Dodwell wrote to warn him on 12 May 1691 that by accepting he would 'make it impossible for the Catholick [which is to say, universal] Church to subsist, as distinct & independent on the State; which will fundamentally overthrow the very Being of a Church as a Society' (G. Every, 'The High Church Party, 1688-1718', 1956, 66). Tillotson was nominated on 23 April 1691 and consecrated on 31 May at St Mary-le-Bow by, among others, bishops Burnet and Stillingfleet; the sermon was preached by Ralph Barker, later his chaplain and editor. Sancroft was still living at Lambeth Palace until his ejection on 23 June. Tillotson was granted the emoluments of the see, backdated to the previous autumn; he moved into Lambeth on 26 November, having made many repairs and improvements, including the building of a new apartment for his wife. Evelyn, who was shown the house, furniture, and garden by Tillotson's successor Tenison, described them as 'all very fine, & far beyond the usual ABshops' (6 July 1695; Evelyn, 5.213). 
Tillotson told Lady Russell on 23 June 1691 that 'The Queen's extraordinary favour to me, to a degree much beyond my expectation, is no small support to me' (Birch, 'Life', 249). In his three and a half years as archbishop, with Burnet's assistance he worked closely with Mary on a programme to reform the manners of the people in general and the clergy in particular. His position gave him more privacy than before, and the opportunity to revise his sermons: though he thought 'the reformation of this corrupt and degenerate age in which we live is almost utterly to be despaired of', he published his 'Six Sermons' (1694) on family religion and education in order to help 'recover the decayed piety and virtue of the present age' ('Works', 3.395-6). Mary and he organized an elaborate series of national fasts and thanksgivings in connection with William's military campaigns. Large numbers of sermons preached at court were published, at least nine of them by Tillotson. In 1692, after meeting his bishops at Lambeth, he instructed them by letter to exercise control of clerical ordinations and residence and remove scandalous clergy, and to enforce the moral discipline of their congregations, a programme that had already been set out in a letter from the king to the bishop of London, Henry Compton, in 1690, and that was embodied in the clerical handbook Tillotson admired so much, Burnet's 'Discourse of the Pastoral Care'. In August 1694, after another such meeting with his bishops, he decided to follow Burnet's suggestion that the injunctions he had drafted should be issued by the king and queen, partly 'that their Majesties care and concernment for our religion might more manifestly appear to the general satisfaction of the nation' (Birch, 'Life', 310). The injunctions required the bishops among other things to ensure that the clergy led exemplary lives, regularly held public prayers and celebrated communion frequently, and fulfilled their pastoral duties. This scheme had the queen's approval. However, the deaths of both archbishop and queen later that year meant that the injunctions were not issued by King William until the following February. 
Tillotson presided over a divided church. Though dearly loved by his latitudinarian colleagues and many nonconformists, he was hated by some of the nonjurors (a bundle of their libels was found among his papers after his death), and distrusted by many of the clergy. Burnet was convinced that he 'was persecuted by Malice to his grave' (G. Burnet, 'Discourse of the Pastoral Care', preface to 3rd edn, 1713, sig. A9). One of Tillotson's last letters to Burnet (23 October 1694), on the latter's 'Exposition of the Thirty-Nine Articles', indicates why he was so controversial: he wrote dismissively of the Athanasian creed (which required acceptance of the doctrine of the Trinity and anathematized anti-Trinitarians), 'I wish we were well rid of it' (Birch, 'Life', 315). Yet the manner of his death shows his capacity for transcending party rancour. A few days after suffering a stroke in the chapel at Whitehall he died on 22 November 1694 in the arms of his nonjuring friend Nelson. He was buried on 30 November in St Lawrence Jewry, the church with which he had been associated for thirty years, as recorded in the monument erected by his wife. Burnet's laudatory funeral sermon was judged by Calamy not to exceed the truth (Calamy, 1.537). The king told Tillotson's son-in-law James Chadwick, 'He was the best man, that I ever knew, and the best Friend, that I ever had' (Birch, 'Life', 424). 
Tillotson spent all his income on charity and the expenses of his position. According to 'The Tatler', no. 101 (1 December 1709), after her husband's death Elizabeth Tillotson would have been left 'in a narrow Condition' (Bond, 'Tatler', 2.122) had not the copyright of his sermons brought in $2500 (Birch gives the figure in guineas). Probably no thought had been given to providing for the first widow of an archbishop of Canterbury since the Reformation. The king granted her an annuity of $400 on 2 May 1695, increased by $200 on 18 August 1698, following her son-in-law's death and representations made on her behalf by William Sherlock and Nelson. She was responsible for educating Tillotson's nephew Robert -- his brother Joshua's son, who, like his uncle, became a fellow of Clare College -- and her three Chadwick grandchildren. Birch obtained some information from Tillotson's great-nephew Joshua, his brother Israel's grandson, surmaster of St Paul's School; Sir Philip Nichols, author of the article on Tillotson in the 'Biographia Britannica', knew Robert Tillotson in Cambridge between 1722 and 1728. 
At the time of his death Tillotson seemed to his supporters to have saved the church, and to his detractors to have reduced it to an instrument of the state. His two elegists, Nahum Tate and Samuel Wesley, celebrated his triumphs over 'Gigantick 'Atheism'', ''Rome''s Dragon', and 'the 'Polish Monster'' Socinianism (N. Tate, 'An Elegy on... John, Late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury', 1695, 6; S. Wesley, 'Elegies on the Queen and Archbishop', 1695, 20-22). George Hickes, repudiating Burnet's saintly portrait, called him 'a Person of great and dangerous Example, both to present Times and Posterity' and 'a Man of all Times, and all Governments, Right or Wrong' (Hickes, sig. b'v', 52). In the century following his death Tillotson was widely read and admired, and sometimes berated, misused, and argued with; he exercised a continuing influence in many fields, the pulpit, literature, lexicography, education, philosophy, and theology. 
Burnet's account of Tillotson as preacher remained true for many years: 'His Sermons were so well heard and liked, and so much read, that all the Nation proposed him as a Pattern, and studied to copy after him' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 2.135). By the time of his death fifty-four sermons and 'The Rule of Faith' had appeared, but he left 200 unpublished; these were edited by Ralph Barker in fourteen volumes from 1695 to 1704, with a dedication to the king by Elizabeth Tillotson. According to Birch a sermon attacking the nonjurors was suppressed at this time and probably lost. Up to 1735 there were ten collected editions of the fifty-four sermons and 'The Rule of Faith'; between 1712 and 1735 there were five editions of Barker's posthumous collection of the 200 sermons; in 1728 the two collections were brought together, totalling 254 sermons and 'The Rule of Faith'. In 1752 Birch in his new edition increased the number to 255 by including Tillotson's sermon in Annesley's 'Morning-Exercise at Cripple-Gate'. Tillotson's contribution to this last collection was flagged in the second edition of 'Athenae Oxonienses' by Anthony Wood, with the ironic description of Tillotson as 'then a Nonconformist, since gainer of considerable Preferments' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2nd edn, 2 vols., 1721, 2.968). Twenty years after Birch's edition of 1752 a collection of the works was published in Edinburgh. There was no nineteenth-century collected edition. 
Country clerics found these readily available editions invaluable. In 'The Spectator', no. 106 (2 July 1711), Sir Roger de Coverley informs Mr Spectator that together with the living he presented the village parson with 'all the good Sermons which have been printed in 'English', and only begged of him that every 'Sunday' he would pronounce one of them in the Pulpit' (Steele and Addison, 1.441). The list for the year is headed by Tillotson. Other users were more subtle. The mid-century sermons of Laurence Sterne and James Woodforde, like those of so many of their colleagues, are full of echoes and borrowings from Tillotson. 
Reliance on Tillotson's works was by no means limited to the clergy. Congreve's telling comment on Dryden, first published in his dedication of Dryden's 'Dramatick Works' (1717), was regularly repeated in the biographical dictionaries: 'I have heard him frequently own with pleasure, that if he had any talent for English Prose, it was owing to his having often read the writings of the great Archbishop 'Tillotson'' (Bayle and others, 4.685, n. EE). Locke championed Tillotson as a model for clearness and propriety of language in 'Some thoughts concerning reading and study for a gentleman', first published in 1720. Nelson advised his godson George Hanger, who was going to Smyrna as a merchant, to study his works not only to learn 'true notions of religion, but also the way and manner of writing English correctly and purely; his style I take to be the best standard of the English language' (C. F. Secretan, 'Memoirs of... Robert Nelson', 1860, 199-200). This view was shared by eighteenth-century lexicographers: Joseph Addison marked phrases in the sermons Tillotson published in his lifetime for a projected dictionary, Alexander Pope included Tillotson in a list for a similar venture (Spence, 1.170 [no. 389]), and Samuel Johnson cited him over 1000 times in his 'Dictionary' (1755), far more often than Stillingfleet, Burnet, or Wilkins. 
Tillotson's presence can also be traced in guides for students published right through the century. In a letter to Richard King of 25 August 1703 (first published in 1714) Locke wrote in answer to a request for advice: 'if you desire a larger View of the Parts of Morality, I know not where you will find them so well and distinctly explain'd, and so strongly inforc'd, as in the Practical Divines of the Church of England. The Sermons of Dr. Barrow, Archbishop Tillotson, and Dr. Whitchcot, are Masterpieces in this kind. ('Correspondence of John Locke', 8.57)' Wilkins's handbook 'Ecclesiastes', as revised by John Williams on Tillotson's instructions for the seventh edition of 1693 and dedicated to him, and further revised in the eighth edition of 1704, adds the names of the major latitudinarian authors of the previous thirty years to Wilkins's reading lists, including of course Tillotson himself. The Cambridge Calvinist John Edwards objected strongly to this procedure in his own handbook 'The Preacher' (1705): complaining of the great degeneracy from Reformation doctrines in some churchmen in late times he emphasized that Wilkins's original lists consisted of orthodox Calvinist writers, and that the recent editors of 'Ecclesiastes' had 'filled it with a great deal of Trash' (J. Edwards, 'The Preacher', 2nd edn, 1705, xxii). Tillotson's name is pointedly omitted from Edwards's own 'Catalogue of some authors who may be beneficial to young preachers and students in divinity'. A much more positive view of Tillotson was taken by the high-churchman Daniel Waterland in his 'Advice to a Young Student' (first published in 1730 but written twenty-five years earlier for the use of his students at Magdalene College, Cambridge, and reissued in a revised edition in 1755). The four-year course for the divinity student is divided into three categories, philosophical, classical, and religious. In the table of religious books for the second year, only one author is recommended: Tillotson. Waterland does, however, warn the student, 'There is one or two Points of Doctrine, particularly that of Hell-Torments, justly exceptionable' (1730, 22, 24). (The reference here is to Tillotson's sermon of 7 March 1690, which caused great offence through the suggestion that hell torments might not be eternal. There is a long note on this topic in Birch's article on Tillotson in 'A General Dictionary', 9.575-6, n. N.) As a young man the dissenting educationist Philip Doddridge was unsympathetic to the mid-seventeenth-century Calvinist tradition; in a letter of 1722 he wrote, 'In practical divinity, Tillotson is my principal favourite' ('Calendar of the Correspondence of Philip Doddridge', ed. G. F. Nuttall, 1979, 2, no. 8). In his 'Lectures on Preaching' (containing lectures delivered in the 1730s and 1740s, but not published until 1804), Doddridge included an account of the writers of the established church and explained his admiration for Tillotson: 'There is such an easiness in his style, and beautiful simplicity of expression, as seems easy to be imitated; yet nothing more difficult... in controversy no man found such lucky arguments, nor represented the sentiments of his adversaries more fully, artfully, and advantageously for confutation. (1821 edn, lecture 4, 25)' A late example of the educational use of Tillotson is to be found in 'A Collection of Theological Tracts' (1785) by Richard Watson, regius professor of divinity at Cambridge. Although no work by Tillotson is included among the tracts, in the lengthy 'Catalogue of books in divinity' (appended to volume 6) Tillotson's works are recommended several times, together with Birch's 'Life', and Watson's admiration for Tillotson and his latitudinarian contemporaries is frequently stressed. 
Throughout the century many writers of different persuasions made use of or responded to specific aspects of Tillotson's arguments. Early eighteenth-century freethinkers often associated themselves with Tillotson and drew on his assumed sympathy for their views about the role of reason to bolster their positions. The third earl of Shaftesbury quotes at length from 'The Rule of Faith' in the final chapter of 'Characteristicks' in support of freethinking, nominating Tillotson together with Jeremy Taylor 'Free- 'thinking Divines'' (2nd edn, 1714, 3.329-34, 297). Anthony Collins in 'A Discourse of Free-Thinking' (1713) notoriously praised Tillotson as one 'whom all 'English Free-Thinkers' own as their Head, and whom even the Enemys of 'Free-Thinking' will allow to be a proper Instance to my purpose' (p. 171). Jonathan Swift's parody, 'Mr. C -- ns's Discourse of Free-Thinking' (1713), has been wrongly interpreted by some modern readers as supporting the same view. '[N]one better understood Human Nature' than Tillotson, claimed Matthew Tindal in 'Christianity as Old as the Creation' (1730, 64). David Hume developed the argument that Tillotson had used against transubstantiation and in defence of miracles (in 'The hazard of being saved in the church of Rome' and elsewhere) as the basis for his attack on miracles in his 'Philosophical Essays' (1748). Edmund Gibson, bishop of London, who defended Tillotson and his colleagues in his 'Second Pastoral Letter' (1730), was anxious to prevent them being misread as rationalists; Gibson emphasized in reply to Tindal that the arguments of Wilkins and Tillotson about reason and morality should be understood historically, as responses to the tradition of puritan preaching. 
Just as Tillotson's name was invoked on both sides in the debate about freethinking and the sufficiency of natural religion without revealed, so it figured in the Methodist debate about formal or nominal versus inward Christianity. In 'Three Letters from the Reverend Mr. G. Whitefield' (1740), published in Philadelphia, Whitefield defended an earlier statement ''That Archbishop' Tillotson 'knew no more about' true 'Christianity than' Mahomet' on the grounds that Tillotson 'knew of no other than a bare historical Faith: And as to... our Justification by Faith alone (which is the doctrine of Scripture and of the Church of England), he certainly was as ignorant thereof as Mahomet himself'. He claimed that he had heard this view first from John Wesley (pp. 2-3). In an early unpreached sermon, 'Hypocrisy in Oxford' (written in 1741, published in 1797), Wesley did attack Tillotson for teaching that good works were necessary to justification. However, Wesley came to take a more lenient view: in volume 45 of 'A Christian Library' (1755) he extracted two of Tillotson's sermons with the comment that he had done it for those who were unreasonably prejudiced for and those unreasonably prejudiced against Tillotson. Readers would be able to judge impartially 'that the Archbishop was as far from being the 'worst', as from being the 'best' of the English writers' ('A Christian Library', 2nd edn, ed. T. Jackson, 30 vols., 1819-27, 27.3). 
Tillotson as rationalist and moralist had his eighteenth-century supporters and detractors, and so did Tillotson the Socinian sympathizer. Locke lamented to Limborch after Tillotson's death that there was now scarcely anyone whom he could consult freely about theological uncertainties (11 Dec 1694; 'Correspondence of John Locke', 5.238). The Huguenot Jean Le Clerc published a lengthy adulatory account in volume 7, article 8, of his 'Bibliotheque choisie' (1705), with a long analysis of the hell torments sermon, and a general defence of Tillotson against the charge of Socinianism that was to be much quoted: 'accusation qu'on n'a presque jamais manque de faire contre ceux qui ont mieux raisonne, que le Vulgaire, & qui ont prefere les expressions de l'Ecriture Sainte au langage des Scholastiques' (p. 290): 'an accusation almost always made against those who have used their reason better than the vulgar, and who have preferred the expressions of Holy Scripture to the language of the scholastics'. In the later eighteenth century a prominent unitarian came forward to claim Tillotson as a forebear. In 'Vindiciae Priestleianae' (1788), a defence of Joseph Priestley against the high-churchman George Horne, the Anglican turned unitarian Theophilus Lindsey provided a particular reading of the latitudinarian tradition of Whichcote, Tillotson, and Burnet through Locke, Samuel Clarke, and Benjamin Hoadly to Francis Blackburne, Edmund Law, and William Paley, which saw it as leading inevitably to unitarianism. On the evidence partly of Tillotson's funeral sermon for Whichcote, Lindsey singled out Tillotson as a theologian like Priestley who believed that Christianity was a perpetual enquiry after truth and that the creed of a Christian could not be fixed. 
The modern reader who goes through Tillotson's works sympathetically in the light of the contemporary controversies in which he was engaged -- about the function of reason in religion, the relation between faith and works, the comprehension and/or toleration of nonconformists, the reform of the liturgy, the role of Jesus as sacrifice and example -- becomes aware that he was performing with considerable success a delicate balancing act. That this balance worked for most eighteenth-century Anglicans (and for some dissenters) is clear from Tillotson's stature as measured by the editions of his works and his literary and educational roles. To others who did not appreciate it Tillotson provided an example, depending on the interpreter's point of view, of the rationalist who did not dare to see where his rationalism led, or the moralist who had contributed to the undoing of Reformation protestantism. 


@@@@@


doc= 27450


Charles Tilney (1561-1586) was born on 23 September 1561, the son of Philip Tilney of Shelley Hall, Suffolk, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Francis Framlingham of Crowshall, Debenham, Suffolk. His paternal grandfather, Frederick Tilney (died 1541) was a first cousin to Edmund Tilney, master of the revels. Charles became a gentleman pensioner at court. 


@@@@@


doc= 27451


Tilney, Edmund (1535/6-1610), courtier, was born in 1535 or 1536 (in a chancery suit in 1599 he gave his age as sixty-three), the only son of Phillip Tilney (died 1541), an usher of the privy chamber to Henry VIII, and his wife, Malyn Chambre, a chamberwoman to Queen Katherine Howard. His paternal grandfather, Sir Philip Tilney, was closely attached to Thomas Howard, second duke of Norfolk, who married first his cousin Elizabeth and later his sister Agnes. These marriages allied the Tilneys to virtually every important family in the country, including the royal family. Malyn Tilney, however, was implicated in the scandal of Katherine Howard's adultery. She was sentenced to life imprisonment and loss of goods in 1543, but was pardoned after the principals were executed. Phillip Tilney died in debt in 1541 and was buried in St Leonard's Church, Streatham. 
Malyn and the young Edmund were perhaps taken into the household of Agnes Howard, the dowager duchess of Norfolk, since their Howard connections remained strong. There is no record of Tilney's having received formal education, but he was trained for a career at court. His later writing shows knowledge of Latin, Spanish, French, and Italian as well as history, topography, law, geography, genealogy, and government. No evidence survives of travel on the continent, but it is not unlikely. In 1568 Tilney published 'A Brief and Pleasant Discourse on the Duties of Marriage, called the Flower of Friendshippe', which he dedicated to his distant cousin the queen. An accomplished exercise in courtly taste and rhetorical skill, it adroitly advertised his suitability for employment, and went through at least five editions in his lifetime. 
In April 1569 Tilney was chief mourner at the funeral of Edward, the third son of Lord William Howard, and in 1572 he joined his cousin Charles Howard (later lord admiral) in the House of Commons as burgess for Gatton in Surrey. It was Charles who secured Tilney the post of master of the revels, first under a yearly commission from February 1578, and formally under patent from 24 July 1579. The revels office arranged entertainment at court, and there had been dissatisfaction with its costs and poor service. A 'man of credit' was sought to reform it, and Tilney was that man. His success owed much to greater reliance on professional actors, flourishing in London's new theatres. Their plays were cheaper to stage than the court's own masques and more polished than other entertainments. On 24 November 1581 Tilney received a special commission, giving him powers to impress workmen and materials at fair prices, to require actors to rehearse their plays before him (from 1586 to 1607 in his spacious quarters in St John's, Clerkenwell), and to revise them for court performance. Rivalry between nobles at court was another problem, as each wanted his own actors to perform. In 1583, and instructed by Sir Francis Walsingham, Tilney created the Queen's Men, an elite company picked from the finest performers available, who then dominated court theatricals for several years. 
On 4 May 1583 Tilney applied for a licence to marry Mary Bray (died 1604), the daughter of Sir Thomas Cotton and the widow of Sir Edward Bray, whose lands in Surrey she inherited for the term of her life. Tilney had to go to law over these, as also over the will of John Digges, of which he was executor with his cousin Phillip. Digges was employed in the revels office from 1579 to his death in 1585 and was described by those opposing the Tilneys as a thief and shifter, 'named and reputed to be one Tyllney's bastard' who died in 'Mr. Tyllney's house in St John's'. Wrangling continued into the 1590s, but Tilney eventually acquired property in Middlesex under the will. Income from Mary's inheritance bought their principal property, the largest house in Leatherhead, Surrey, where the Tilneys entertained the queen on progress in August 1593. By 1594 Tilney was the greatest landholder of the parish and a county justice, and was thereafter much involved in local affairs. 
From Tilney's arrangements with the actors at court there grew a general system of licensing plays, companies, and theatres in the London area, as reflected in Philip Henslowe's 'Diary'. The relationship had a profound effect on the development of Elizabethan drama. Progressively fewer companies were allowed in the capital, but Tilney was their protector as much as their overseer. His licences protected them from civic officials and gave their plays a kind of performance copyright. In 1592 the lord mayor of London identified him as an obstacle to eradicating the actors from the city altogether. Tilney's censorship (evident in the extant manuscript of 'Sir Thomas More') ensured that plays would not offend important people or friendly foreign powers, and that they did not openly address matters of state or religious doctrine, but he left actors creative scope to be 'the abstracts and brief chronicles of the time' ('Hamlet', II.ii). In 1598 the privy council expressly placed Tilney in control of the only companies then allowed to perform around London, the Chamberlain's Men and the Admiral's Men. In 1604 Queen Anne appointed Samuel Daniel licenser of the children of the queen's revels, but that arrangement did not last, and by his death Tilney securely controlled the London stage as well as licensing actors and other entertainers on tour in the provinces. 
Tilney was never knighted but was entitled to be marshalled with bachelor knights. Between fees for attendance at court, his salary ($100 in 1595), and his income from theatrical licensing (estimated at $50 per annum), he perhaps earned $200 per annum beside rents from his estates, making him a wealthy man. Even so, by 1601 he was in financial difficulty, and his cousin Thomas agreed to pay 50 marks per annum against the expectation of inheriting his property. Mary Tilney died childless on 20 February 1604, and her Surrey lands reverted to her first husband's grandson. In 1607 Tilney was sued by Elizabeth Cartwright, seller of the Leatherhead house, for the annuity which the deal included. Perhaps in response to financial difficulties, Tilney had for some years sought further advancement at court. In the late 1590s, to advertise his claims, he set about a confidential work of diplomatic intelligence, 'Topographical descriptions, regiments, and policies' of the eight major countries of Europe; running to a quarter of a million words, it was meant to be an aid to foreign policy. He planned to present it to the queen in a scheme backed by Lord Admiral Howard, whereby Tilney would become master of ceremonies, while the revels would go to Sir George Buck or Buc. The queen died, but Tilney revised his 'Descriptions' and added a dedication to James I. Sir Lewis Lewkenor, however, was made master of ceremonies in 1603. Tilney remained in post, and Buck received only the reversion to his office. Tilney abandoned his manuscript, which survives in two states (Folger Shakespeare Library, MS V.b. 182; University of Illinois Library MS, uncatalogued, 'c'.1603). 
Buck was a distant relative of Tilney, but there is no substance to suggestions that he was involved in the revels office before Tilney's death. Indeed there may have been tension between them: after Phillip Tilney died in 1602 the family lost land in Lincolnshire, when Buck sued as the nearest relative of Phillip's mother. From 1606 Buck began to license plays for the press, an authority not previously associated with the revels office. Tilney licensed for the press only Edward Sharpham's 'Cupid's Whirligig' in June 1607. The accounts reveal his constant attendance at court throughout his final revels season of 1609-10. On 1 July 1610 he made out his will in 'his own hand and form' and with Christian piety, settling debts, making liberal provision for the poor and bequests to friends and relatives, and leaving the promised proceeds of his house to Thomas Tilney. He died on 20 August, and was buried on 6 October at St Leonard's Church, near his father's monument. 
Edmund was related to Charles Tilney, one of the Babington conspirators, and the son of Edmund's cousin Phillip. Phillip and Edmund Tilney were bitter about the treatment Charles received; in a Star Chamber suit Rafe Bott testified that they 'thyrsted and longyd to be revengd on him', believing he had had custody of Charles in the Tower. A copy of 'Locrine' (in the Bibliotheca Bodmeriana, Cologny-Geneve) contains a note by Sir George Buck, claiming the play was written by Charles Tilney under the title 'Elstrid', and that Buck himself had written dumb-shows for it. Tilney's grandmother Margaret was Buck's aunt, so the claim is plausible, though the play as printed was probably revised by a later hand. 


@@@@@


doc= 27452


Tilney, John (d. after 1455), prior of Yarmouth and theologian, joined the Carmelite order in Yarmouth, Norfolk. He undertook his studies at Cambridge and incepted as a doctor of theology 'c'.1430. He returned to Yarmouth, where his name occurs as prior in 1435 and 1437, and he was still in office in 1455. It was probably during his time lecturing in Cambridge that Tilney wrote a commentary on the 'Apocalypse' which Bale saw and for which he recorded the incipit. Bale describes how Tilney taught that the remission of sins is due to the free grace of Christ and that his death brings reconciliation with God the Father. However, this is simply an expansion of the second half of the incipit which Bale had copied in one of his early notebooks. Bale also notes a compendium on 'The Sentences' with incipit and a collection of forty-four sermons. Later he added the usual 'Scholastic lectures'. None of these works survives, and although an exposition on 'St John's gospel', found in Cambridge, Gonville and Caius College, MS 357, has been attributed to Tilney, it also survives in an anonymous thirteenth-century copy (Bodl. Oxf., MS Bodley 20, fols. 113-153'v'), and so cannot be by him. 


@@@@@


doc= 27453


Tilsley, John (c.1614-1684), clergyman and ejected minister, was born in Lancashire, possibly near Bolton; nothing is known of his parents. He was educated at Edinburgh University, where he graduated MA on 22 July 1637. He became curate to Alexander Horrocks, vicar of Deane, Lancashire, and signed the protestation there on 23 February 1642. On 4 January 1643 Tilsley married Margaret Chetham (1621-1663) at the collegiate church in Manchester. She was the daughter of Ralph Chetham and a niece of Humphrey Chetham, the founder of Chetham's Hospital. Margaret died on 28 April 1663, two weeks after the miscarriage of her ninth child. Of their children, only four survived infancy. 
Tilsley was with Sir John Seaton's parliamentary forces when they took Preston on 9 February 1643, and he wrote an account of the affair. The benefice of Deane was given to him by a draft order of the House of Lords on 10 August 1643, his predecessor, Horrocks, being retained at Deane as assistant minister until 1648. Tilsley was appointed by parliament on 13 December 1644 as one of the ordaining ministers in Lancashire. He took the covenant and became one of the leading presbyterians in the county. In 1646 he joined with Richard Heyrick, Richard Hollinworth, and others in petitioning parliament to set up an ecclesiastical government in Lancashire as according to the advice of the Westminster assembly. Adam Martindale described Tilsley and other Manchester presbyterians as 'zealous (usually called Rigid) Presbyterians, that were for the setting up of the governance of the Church of Scotland amongst us' ('Life of Adam Martindale', 62-3). In the same year Tilsley wrote a vindication of the petition and its promoters ('A True Copy of the Petition of the Twelve Thousand, Two Hundred'). This was in answer to a pamphlet in the Independent interest entitled 'A New Birth of the City Remonstrance'. Parliament answered the petition by establishing presbyterianism in Lancashire by an ordinance dated 2 October 1646, and Tilsley became a principal member of the Bolton or second classis. In 1648 he signed the 'harmonious consent' of the ministers of Lancashire with those of London, which upheld the solemn league and covenant and fiercely condemned the toleration of sectaries, as did his assistant Alexander Horrocks. 
Tilsley refused the engagement in 1650. Humphrey Chetham, who died in 1653, made Tilsley one of the feoffees of his hospital and library, and one of the purchasers of books for the five church libraries that he founded: responsibilities which Tilsley conscientiously fulfilled. In 1655 Tilsley seemed inclined to accept an invitation to Newcastle, but pressure was brought upon him to stay at Deane church. On 13 July 1659 he subscribed to the accommodation between the presbyterian and Independent ministers of Lancashire. After ejection following the 'Act of Uniformity' in 1662, Tilsley continued to live in Rumworth in Deane parish, where he acted as trustee of a fund for the relief of the poor of Rumworth and also as a trustee of Deane School. 
In 1665 Tilsley attracted the attention of the authorities for holding conventicles, and the episcopal returns of 1669 record two or three meetings a week of 'ministers and others' in Deane parish (Turner, 1.335). In 1670 Tilsley was threatened under the 'Five Mile Act' of 1665. However, in the same year he conformed and was licensed as a lecturer at Deane. In late July 1670 John Rawlet passed on the news to Richard Baxter that Tilsley was one of three or four nonconformists, and the only one 'of Note', who had been persuaded to conform by the 'candour' and 'arguments' of Bishop John Wilkins (Keeble and Nuttall, 2.96). Thereafter Tilsley preached not only at Deane but also at Bolton and nearby Cocky chapel. However, he was prosecuted under the 'Oxford Act' in 1675 and after protracted legal proceedings (which included his opponents providing graphic accounts to the central government of his evasions of the requirements of due conformity and his local power) he was ejected from the lectureship. 
The diaries of Henry Newcome and Oliver Heywood and the autobiography of Adam Martindale show Tilsley to have been on intimate terms with those divines. According to Edmund Calamy, Tilsley 'had prodigious parts, a retentive memory which made whatsoever he read his own, a solid judgment, a quick invention, and a ready utterance' (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.402). Tilsley died at Manchester on 12 December 1684. Oliver Heywood accorded him the epitaph 'an admirable man', and recorded his age as seventy (Heywood and Dickenson, 70). Although Newcome and Tilsley had sometimes had differences of opinion, Newcome nevertheless sincerely mourned the loss of his friend and attended the funeral and burial at Deane church on 16 December. Afterwards he preached to Tilsley's surviving children as the dead man had requested. By his will, proved at Chester on 13 June 1685, Tilsley left bequests to a number of nonconformist ministers, including Newcome and Martindale. He provided for his grandchildren, and named his daughter Margaret Partington and son-in-law Richard Partington as executors. 


@@@@@


doc= 27454


Tilson, Henry (1659-1695), portrait painter, was born into a respectable Lancashire family, the son of Nathaniel Tilson, and grandson of Henry Tilson (1576-1655), the bishop of Elphin, formerly chaplain to the earl of Strafford in Ireland. He entered the studio of Sir Peter Lely with whom he also resided, and worked as his pupil and assistant until the master's death in 1680. Vertue records that before he went to Italy, Tilson painted a group portrait of his own family 'representing His Father setting leaning on his hand. his mother with her younger son [Christopher] by her. his sister standing behind & himself with his pallet in his hand.... in a masterly manner well disposed, firmly drawn & freely pencild' (Vertue, 'Note books', 2.68). In 1685 he travelled to Rome via Paris and Venice in the company of his friend the Swedish painter Michael Dahl, who painted his portrait, and made a name for himself there by doing crayon copies of the old masters. Tilson also painted a self-portrait, 'a head with a pencil in his hand. leaning on a bust very well behind it written 'H. Tilsona Roma. 1687'' (ibid.). Both this and the family portrait were formerly in the possession of Tilson's descendant Henry Tilson Shaen Carter of Watlington House, Oxfordshire, and were exhibited at the National Portrait Exhibition, South Kensington Museum, in 1867. He had returned to England by 1689, and appears to have earned enough respect as a portraitist to build up a sound practice, painting in a style somewhere between Kneller, Riley, and Dahl. He was considered one of the most able of the lesser native portrait painters of his time. Despite this growing reputation, however, Tilson suffered from both unrequited love for his patroness, a Mrs Green, and depression, and 'retir'd into his Closett. & with a pistol shot [himself] thro' the heart. aged about 36' (ibid., 1.68). He was buried on 25 November 1695 at St Dunstan-in-the-West, London. Examples of his work are in the Guildhall, London; National Galleries of Scotland, Edinburgh; and Belton House, Lincolnshire, and Dyrham Park, Hertfordshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 27455


Tilt, Edward John (1815-1893), physician, was born at Brighton on 30 January 1815, the son of John Tilt and his wife, Elizabeth. He received his medical education first at St George's Hospital, London, and then at Paris, where he graduated MD on 15 May 1839. He does not appear to have held any English qualification until he became a member of the Royal College of Physicians in 1859. During his time in Paris, Tilt learned from Recamier about the use of the speculum as an aid to diagnosis and he later encouraged its use in Britain. He acted as travelling physician in the family of Count Shuvalov during 1848-50, before settling in London about 1850, specializing in midwifery and the diseases of women. He was then appointed physician-accoucheur to the Farringdon General Dispensary and Lying-in Charity. He was one of the original fellows of the Obstetrical Society of London, which was formed in 1859, where, after filling various offices, he was elected president for 1874-5. The title of cavaliere of the Crown of Italy was conferred upon him in 1875, and at the time of his death he was a corresponding fellow of the academies of medicine of Turin, Athens, and New York. He married, at the British embassy, Florence, on 22 May 1847, Dorothy Emma (1823/4-1869), daughter of J. G. Sparrow of Gosfield Place, Essex; they had a daughter, Emaline ('b'. 1849), who later entered the Lanherne Carmelite convent in Cornwall. After his first wife's death he married, in 1877, Georgiana Charlotte ('b'. 1832/3), daughter of Thomas Hibbert, landowner, of Birtles Hall, Cheshire. Latterly he suffered from pulmonary disease, and lived mainly on the French riviera, where he formed a friendship with the physician James Henry Bennet (1816-1891), who shared his interest in gynaecology and obstetrics. He died at 16 Robertson Terrace, Hastings, on 17 December 1893. 
Tilt's works include 'On Diseases of Menstruation and Ovarian Inflammation' (1850), 'On the Elements of Health and Principles of Female Hygiene' (1852, German translation published in 1854), and 'A Handbook of Uterine Therapeutics and of Diseases of Women' (1863), translated into German (1864) and into Flemish (1866). 


@@@@@


doc= 27456


Timberlake, Henry (d. 1625/6), merchant and traveller, came from the parish of Titchfield, near Portsmouth. Although nothing is known of his parents or his early life, in 1597 Timberlake is noted as owning shares, with Francis Cherry and Edward Dartnall, in the ship 'Edward Bonaventure', which traded with Russia and the Levant. 
On 9 March 1601 Timberlake, having crossed the Mediterranean in the 'Troyan', embarked on a pilgrimage to Jerusalem accompanied by John Burrell, a merchant from Middlesbrough. When they reached the holy city on 25 March, Burrell advised Timberlake to explain to the Turkish authorities there that he was Greek, in order to be permitted entry; when he reached the west gate, though, Timberlake loudly proclaimed that he was English and was promptly gaoled. When he was visited by the Roman Catholic defender of pilgrims of the city a short while later, he refused his help stating that he would rather place his trust in the Turk than the pope. Eventually, though, he was released through the intercession of a Muslim he had previously assisted in Algiers. He was reunited with Burrell and the two men were guided through the city by a party of friars before travelling to Alexandria and returning to England. In 1603 Timberlake wrote a short account of his pilgrimage, entitled 'A True and Strange Discourse of the Travailes of Two English Pilgrimes', which was reprinted eight times in the seventeenth century. In this tract he related the topography of the Holy Land to that of London in an attempt to impress upon his readers the relative location of all the significant sites in the life of Christ. As a result, Timberlake described Bethlehem as standing in the same relation to Jerusalem as Wandsworth to London. 
Timberlake was a member of the Company of Merchant Adventurers, formed in 1612 to discover a north-west passage, and he also held stock in the East India Company until 1617. In 1615 he was one of the original adventurers for the plantation of Somers Island (Bermuda) and owned two shares in each of Smith and Southampton tribes; his holdings in the latter now comprise part of the Port Royal golf course. In his will, dated 10 July 1625, he left his lands in Bermuda and Essex to his elder son, Thomas; his younger son, Henry, received his holdings in London. After more than $1100 in legacies and gifts had been dispersed, especially to his daughter Hester Williams, formerly Mitchell, and her children, Timberlake's wife, Margaret, received the balance of his estate. The exact date of his death is unknown; his will was proved on 13 May 1626. 


@@@@@


doc= 27457


Timberlake, Henry (1730-1765), army officer in America and writer, was born in Hanover county, Virginia, the son of Francis Timberlake and Sarah Austin. He received 'almost as good an education as Virginia could bestow' on him (Timberlake, 5). His father died when he was young and, finding that his inheritance could not support him, he turned first to commerce and then to soldiering. Henry Timberlake joined the 'patriot blues' for their campaign of 1756 against the French and their Indian allies but saw no action. In 1758 he was appointed ensign and simultaneously cornet of light horse in the regiment of William Byrd III, with which he saw action against the French at Fort Duquesne. In the following year he served under John Stanwix who put him in command of Ford Burd, also called Fort Necessity, near Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. In spring 1761 he joined Byrd's regiment, which was to relieve the Cherokee siege of Fort Loudon on the Little Tennessee River. When peace had been made the Cherokee asked that an officer visit them: Timberlake volunteered and was sent in the company of Sergeant Thomas Sumter. 
They made their way by canoe down the Holston and up the Little Tennessee rivers, a difficult journey of twenty-two days through uncharted waters in territory where hostile Indians were known to move. After arriving at their goal they spent three months with the Overhill Cherokee; Timberlake was the personal guest of Ostenaca, who saw Timberlake's visit as a chance to recover some of the ground he had lost among the Cherokee to the rival leader Attakullakulla. Timberlake formed an attachment to Ostenaca's daughter Sakinney, who later gave birth to their son, Richard Timberlake. 
Ostenaca demanded to go to London to meet the king, as Attakullakulla had done some thirty years earlier. It was agreed that Timberlake and Sumter would accompany Ostenaca and two other Cherokee (Pouting Pigeon and Stalking Turkey) with their interpreter, and the party left in the summer of 1762. The party, less the interpreter who died 'en route', were feted in London and had audience with the king, after which the Indians returned immediately to Virginia, leaving behind Timberlake who, now married against his bride's father's wishes, was prevented from returning by lack of funds. Eventually the couple reached America, where Timberlake was promoted lieutenant in the 42nd regiment but put on half pay. This added to his financial woes and he was obliged to sell the land and slaves he had inherited. In 1764 Timberlake accompanied to England a second group of Cherokee who hoped to secure the king's protection against English settlers who were encroaching on their lands. This time the king refused them an audience since they were not chiefs and their mission was unofficial; in March 1765 the party returned home. 
In London in 1765 Henry Timberlake published his 'Memoirs'. His end seems to have been to raise money, but he pursued it very maladroitly. His tone is querulous and peevish as he constantly seeks to justify his actions and particularly to rebut suggestions that he profited from the visits of the Indians. This was not the way to secure sales, and the book was not reprinted in Britain, though a German and a French translation appeared in 1769 and 1796 respectively (the London edition was reissued on microcard by the perhaps appropriately named Lost Cause Press of Louisville, Kentucky, n.d.). Later authors, however, have valued his memoirs highly for his fine map of the river system of the Overhill country and his often perceptive descriptions of the Cherokee. He says, for example, of the Cherokee custom of burying the dead with their possessions: 'This custom was probably introduced to prevent avarice and, by preventing hereditary acquisitions, make merit the sole means of acquiring power, honour and riches.' He then describes how the custom was bolstered and made acceptable by being given a spiritual or, as he had it, a superstitious significance ('Memoirs', 68). He does not casually assume European superiority, writing rather enviously for example, that 'The sole occupations of an Indian life, are hunting, and warring abroad and lazying at home. Want is said to be the mother of industry, but their wants are supplied by an easier rate' (ibid., 76). Robert Southey used the memoirs in compiling his epic 'Madoc' (1805), which tells of the twelfth-century Welshman supposed to have reached America and encountered the Cherokee. 
Timberlake died in London on 30 September 1765, before his 'Memoirs' appeared. His wife survived him and in recognition of his service was in December 1765 granted a full pension despite his having been on half pay at the time of his death. They are not thought to have had children. In 1819 Henry's illegitimate son Richard Timberlake accepted a reserve in Hamilton county, Tennessee, under a treaty with the Cherokee. This treaty enabled individual Cherokee to remain on land which the nation had earlier ceded to Americans. Richard Timberlake and others who accepted the reserves became the core of the eastern band of the Cherokee. 


@@@@@


doc= 27458


Timbrell, Henry (1806-1849), sculptor, was born in Dublin, the son of James Timbrell, clerk of the ordnance, and his wife, Susanna, 'nee' Shelling. He began his studies about 1823 under the Irish sculptor John Smyth (Smith) and in 1825 entered the schools of the Royal Dublin Society, where he was awarded several prizes. Between 1827 and 1829 he also exhibited six works and won various prizes at the Royal Hibernian Academy in Dublin, showing in 1827 a figure of a Grecian warrior and in 1828 a bust of his master, John Smyth. In 1830 he went to London and worked in the studio of William Behnes, and as a pupil of Edward Hodges Baily, who continued to employ him occasionally for several years. He was at the same time a student at the Royal Academy Schools. In 1833 he exhibited 'Phaeton', in 1834 the bas-relief 'Satan in Search of the Earth' (both of which he also exhibited at the Society of British Artists in 1834 and 1835), and in 1835 'Sorrow', a monumental group. On 10 December 1835 he gained the gold medal for his group, 'Mezentius Tying the Living to the Dead', which was exhibited in 1836. On 3 February 1838 he married Susan Flather in St Pancras's, London. 
Among Timbrell's other works shown at the Royal Academy were several busts: 'Grief', a bas-relief (1839); 'Psyche' (1842); 'Hercules Throwing Lycas into the Sea' (1843). With the 'Hercules' group he won the travelling scholarship of the Royal Academy, and went to Rome in the same year. While there he completed a bas-relief for the temple at Buckingham Palace, London, and in 1845 a life-sized group, 'Instruction', which was ruined in the wreck of the ship bringing it to England. At the time of his death he was working on statues of Richard, earl of Clare, and William, earl of Aumale, for the chamber of the House of Lords in the new houses of parliament, and another in marble of 'The Lamp of the Ganges' for Queen Victoria, an engraving of which by W. Roffe appeared in the 'Art Journal' in 1855. Henry Timbrell died of pleurisy in Rome on 10 April 1849. Buried in Rome, his funeral was attended by fellow sculptors John Gibson, John Hogan, and Richard James Wyatt. A later historian noted that 'Timbrell's early death terminated a career of much promise' (Strickland, 2.448). 
Timbrell's younger brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 27459


James Christopher Timbrell (1810-1850), painter and sculptor, was born in Dublin. In 1825 he entered the Royal Dublin Society's Schools, and in 1827 sent a landscape to the Royal Hibernian Academy exhibition. In 1829 he presented one of his lithographs, 'The Scotch Fisher', to the Dublin Society. He went to London in 1830 and exhibited three paintings of figurative subjects at the Royal Academy and five at the British Institution between 1830 and 1848, including 'Summer' and 'The Fisherman's Return'. He contributed eight illustrations to 'Ireland: its Scenery and Character' (3 vols., 1841-3) by Mr and Mrs Samuel Carter Hall. He died in Portsmouth on 5 January 1850. 


@@@@@


doc= 27460


Timbs, John (1801-1875), author, was born on 17 August 1801 at Clerkenwell, London, and was educated at a private school at Hemel Hempstead. He was apprenticed to a printer and druggist at Dorking, and while there began to write, his first contributions appearing in the 'Monthly Magazine' in 1820. About that year he came to London, and was for some time amanuensis to Sir Richard Phillips, publisher of the magazine. From that time he contributed to a large number of London publications, but chiefly to the 'Mirror of Literature', which he edited from 1827 to 1838; 'The Harlequin: a Journal of Drama', which appeared between 11 May and 16 July 1829, and which was stopped by the commissioners of stamps insisting that it should be stamped as a newspaper; the 'Literary World', which he edited during 1839 and 1840; and the 'Illustrated London News', of which he was sub-editor under Dr Charles Mackay from 1842 to 1858. He was also the originator and editor of the 'Year Book of Science and Art', begun in 1839 after he left the 'Mirror'. 
Timbs's works, which run to more than 150 volumes (some appearing under the pseudonym Horace Welby), are compilations of interesting facts gathered from every conceivable quarter, and relating to the most varied subjects. They include, on subjects of domestic interest, 'Family Manual' (1831), 'Domestic Life in England' (1835), and 'Pleasant Half-Hours for the Family Circle' (1872), and, on scientific subjects, 'Popular Zoology' (1834), 'Stories of Inventors and Discoverers' (1859), 'Curiosities of Science' (1860), and 'Wonderful Inventions: from the Mariner's Compass to the Electric Telegraph Cable' (1867). He also wrote on artistic and cultural matters works such as 'Painting Popularly Explained' (jointly with Thomas John Gulick) (1859) and 'Manual for Art Students and Visitors to the Exhibitions' (1862). Through his connection with 'The Harlequin' he has been identified as the likely compiler (under the pseudonym Harold Foote) of the 'Companion to the Theatre and Manual of British Drama' (1829), which contains much valuable information on London theatres of the period. On contemporary city life his works included 'Curiosities of London' (1855), 'Club Life of London with Anecdotes' (1865), 'Romance of London: Strange Stories, Scenes, and Persons' (1865), and 'London and Westminster, City and Suburb' (1867). He also published on subjects of biographical and historical interest, including 'Schooldays of Eminent Men' (1858), 'Columbus' (1863), 'Curiosities of History' (1859), 'Anecdote Biography' (1859-60), 'Anecdote Lives of Wits and Humourists' (1862), 'Ancestral Stories and Traditions of Great Families' (1869), and 'Abbeys, Castles and Ancient Halls of England and Wales' (1869). He also edited 'Manuals of Utility' (1847), the 'Percy Anecdotes' (1869-70), and 'Pepys's Memoirs' (1871). In recognition of his antiquarian labours he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1854. He died in considerable poverty in London on 6 March 1875. 


@@@@@


doc= 27461


Timperley, Charles Henry (1794-1869), printer and writer, was born at Manchester on 28 December 1794, the son of John Timperley, calenderer. After education at Manchester grammar school he was apprenticed to an engraver and copperplate printer. In March 1810 he enlisted in the 33rd regiment of foot, was wounded at Waterloo, and received his discharge on 28 November 1815. He resumed his apprenticeship and in 1821 became a letterpress printer by indenture to Messrs Dicey and Smithson, proprietors of the 'Northampton Mercury'. In April 1828 he gave two lectures on the art of printing before the Warwick and Leamington Literary Institution and began collecting information about printers and printing. Timperley clearly moved from job to job, as was the practice with journeymen printers, and eventually became foreman to T. Kirk of Nottingham, printer of the 'Nottingham Mercury'. While working for Kirk, Timperley began editing a monthly magazine, the 'Nottingham Wreath'. He married a widow and soon after left Nottingham. 
In 1833 Timperley produced 'Songs of the press and other poems relating to the art of printing, original and selected; also epitaphs, epigrams, anecdotes, notices of early printing and printers', of which an enlarged edition of the poetry section appeared in 1845. It is still the only collection of printers' songs in English and some of the verse is by Timperley himself. In 1838 he published 'The printers' manual, containing instructions to learners, with scales of impositions and numerous calculations, recipes, and scales of prices in the principal towns of Great Britain, together with practical directions for conducting every department of a printing office'. This was followed by 'A dictionary of printers and printing, with the progress of literature, ancient and modern, bibliographical illustrations' (1839). 
Timperley had charge of a bookseller's shop owned by Bancks & Co. of Manchester, printer of his 'Printers' Manual'. The managing partner of the firm, named Hayward, made his staff accept bank bills for the firm under their own names, which were discounted on the Manchester Bank, and when the firm's crash came the concern had debts of $120,000 to the bank and a further $100,000 to the London booksellers. To pay his debt Timperley sold the stock of his publications, but the auctioneer ran off with the proceeds. The stock of these works was purchased by H. G. Bohn, who issued the two together, with twelve pages of additions, under the title of 'Encyclopaedia of literary and typographical anecdote, being a chronological digest of the most interesting facts illustrative of the history of literature and printing from the earliest period to the present time' (1842). Timperley also wrote 'Annals of Manchester, biographical, historical, ecclesiastical, and commercial, from the earliest period' (1839). 
Timperley accepted a literary engagement with Fisher and Jackson, publishers, of London, where he worked as a general editor and reader. 'Timperley was neither tall, stout, nor handsome: but there was something about him that could not but win for him respect and confidence... His dress, his address, and tone altogether bespoke the gentleman and scholar' (S. Hall, 'The Lithographer', 4.221). Described as a widower, he married, at Islington on 15 October 1842, his second wife, Mary Ann Jane, daughter of Richard Neal, cowkeeper. His health deteriorated through paralysis in his legs and severe rheumatism, which from 1846 prevented him from working. A series of successful applications for assistance from the Royal Literary Fund between 1848 and 1855 revealed his descent into immobility and poverty, and reliance on his 9died per day army pension. His wife left him in 1849, and emigrated to Geelong, Australia, in 1852. Bedridden, and with no living relatives, he spent his final years in a London lodging house, 10 Owen's Row, Clerkenwell, where he died, of paraplegia, on 1 May 1869. 


@@@@@


doc= 27462


Tindal, Matthew (bap. 1657, d. 1733), freethinker and religious controversialist, was baptized on 12 May 1657 at Bere Ferrers, Devon, the son of John Tindal, who was the minister there, and his wife, Anne Halse. He was taught by his father before entering Lincoln College, Oxford, in 1672, and there he was a pupil of George Hickes, the future nonjuror; he migrated to Exeter College, and graduated BA on 17 October 1676. He was elected to a law fellowship at All Souls College, Oxford, in 1678, taking the degrees of BCL in 1679 and DCL in 1685, after which he became a member of Doctors' Commons. He had become a Roman Catholic at Oxford, and attended mass frequently during James II's reign; he worked in his service during Monmouth's rebellion. Tindal, a great frequenter of London coffee houses, 'fell into the acquaintance of some persons, whose conversation led him into a dislike of Popery' (Lloyd, 3960), and he returned to the Church of England, taking communion from the warden of All Souls on Easter day 1688. 
A warm defender of the revolution in 1688, Tindal became an increasingly strong critic of the powers claimed by Church of England clergy, turning from Christianity to freethinking within a decade. Many of his contemporaries saw him as an opportunist in religion, having converted to Catholicism allegedly in the hope of securing the wardenship of All Souls under James II and returning to the Church of England just before the king's defeat by William of Orange. He was notoriously immoral, and was publicly reprimanded at All Souls as 'an 'Egregious Fornicator'' (Lloyd, 3960). The poet Abel Evans combined both of his principal vices when denouncing Tindal in 'The Apparation' (1710): '
In Vice and Error from his 'Cradle' Nurs'd: 

He studies hard, and takes extreme Delight, 

In Whores, or Heresies to spend the Night. 
(p. 6)' In the course of this satire, Evans has Tindal surprised by Satan in the form of a female bedmaker with whom he has previously had an affair; Satan then reverts to his true form and plots, with his 'Vassal sworn', the destruction of the Church of England in favour of atheism, Spinozism, and dissent, before obligingly disappearing up a chimney. Thomas Hearne, the Oxford antiquary, thought Evans's work ingenious, and reported that Tindal was 'dejected at it'; Hearne always kept a close eye on Tindal the 'Libertine', 'that notorious Atheist', 'that Rascal', a promoter of other 'vile, republican Rascals' ('Remarks', 2.332, 72; 3.255, 381, 439). 
Whatever his personal reputation, Tindal had made a name for himself as a lawyer in the early years of William III's reign, first in the case of an Italian count who had sought protection as a foreign subject from prosecution for murder, and second for arguing, in a controversial judgment in 1693, that followers of James II who had taken to the seas ought to be prosecuted as pirates, on the grounds that a deposed monarch had no authority to issue a commission for the high sea. He developed his case, citing Cicero and Grotius and other legal precedents, in a blatantly anti-Jacobite tract, 'An Essay Concerning the Laws of Nations, and the Rights of Soveraigns' (1694), which denounced all James's followers as either robbers or pirates. Such loyalty to the Williamite regime gained him a considerable public reputation, and, it was claimed, an annual salary of $200 from the crown. This was the high point of his legal career, and he devoted his remaining years to pamphleteering on political and religious matters, continuing to practise law at Gray's Inn and retreating regularly to All Souls, where he gathered around him a group of whig secularist lawyers opposed to the religious requirements made of fellows by the college's statutes. He enjoyed baiting college fellows on religious matters; Herbert Croft reported a characteristic remark he made about a younger fellow, Edward Young, which found its way into Johnson's life of the poet: ''The other boys,' said the atheist, 'I can always answer, because I always know whence they have their arguments, which I have read an hundred times; but that fellow Young is continually pestering me with something of his own'' ('Young' in S. Johnson, 'Lives of the English Poets', ed. G. B. Hill, 1905, 3.364). 
As his friend Edmund Curll observed, Tindal's life was to prove 'a continual Warfare in the Republic of Letters, for the Space of above forty Years' (Curll, 1). The general direction of Tindal's future thoughts on politics and religion can be traced in the first pamphlet which he devoted to these matters, 'An essay concerning the power of the magistrate, and the rights of mankind, in matters of religion' (1697). The tract was written to further Locke's arguments in his 'three incomparable Letters concerning Toleration', as Tindal emphasized that 'impartial Liberty and mutual Toleration' were the 'only way to preserve both Church and State' (p. 2). Tindal argued that the rights of the magistrate were secured from the people, not from God, so that he had no powers over religion. To enforce conformity against the pleas of individual conscience was to destroy each individual's chance of eternal happiness, and to act against God's honour: it was 'consequently the greatest and most comprehensive of all Sins whatever' (p. 67). He went on to argue for the rights of dissenters to worship as they pleased, and in favour of a nationalization act for religious refugees, which would have had, he contended, a markedly beneficial impact on trade and commerce. The chief part of religion was, he insisted, 'promoting the Publick Good' (pp. 173-4), and his defence of toleration was designed to do just that. The tone of this pamphlet was even-handed and decorous; his writings quickly became altogether more sarcastic and contentious when his battles with high-churchmanship become much more explicit in the early 1700s. 
By far the most contentious of Tindal's writings at mid-career appeared in 1706: 'The rights of the Christian church asserted, against the Romish, and all other priests who claim an independent power over it'. The enemy he identified was at least as much high-churchmanship as it was Roman Catholicism, and he adopted the apparently moderate tones of a supporter of an Anglican 'via media' in a defence of the Reformation which actually had profound implications for all styles of churchmanship. He opposed the claims for two independent powers subsisting in the same society, the one ecclesiastical, the other magisterial, condemning 'the Spiritual Babylon' promoted by high-church contenders for such a separation (p. 33). He argued that it was in the interests of the clergy to complicate religion, thereby making themselves indispensable in the religious lives of the people: their powers made the protestant call for further reformation impossible, and the interests of their church were declared to be incompatible with those of true religion. 'From this Conduct of the High-flown Clergy', he concluded, 'some have taken the Liberty to compare a High-Church Priest in Politicks to a Monkey in a Glass-shop, where as he can do no good, so he never fails of doing Mischief enough' (p. 270). He saw in this attitude of clerics a means to defend himself, noting of it that 'nothing sooner [gives] a Man the Character of an Atheist than being an Enemy to Priestcraft' (p. 415). 
Hickes, Tindal's former tutor, wrote one of the most effective replies to the work, having discovered that his former pupil had told 'a Gentleman, who found him at it with Pen in Hand, 'That he was Writing a Book which would make the Clergy Mad''. 'The Rights of the Christian Church' was denounced by Hickes as 'the Commonplace-Book of 'Atheists' and 'Deists'', as he found, 'In one word, That it is Atheistical all over' ('Spinoza Reviv'd', 1709, [1], [50], 3). William Wotton delivered an equally pugnacious reply, declaring of Tindal's book that it was written with 'Petulancy and Indecency of Stile' ('The Rights of the Clergy in the Christian Church Asserted', 1706, 3). An anonymous reply quickly appeared, denouncing both Wotton and Hickes and pointing out that Le Clerc had made admiring noises about the book in his 'Bibliotheque choisie'. Entitled 'A Defence of the Rights of the Christian Church' (1709), this reply aroused almost as much anger as had Tindal's book, and it was burnt on the orders of the House of Commons, along with its high-church analogue, Sacheverell's 'Sermons', on 25 March 1710. Dozens of replies had been made to 'The Rights of the Christian Church', and a campaign was launched against it at Oxford, where Tindal was denounced as a Lockean and an extreme whig. Hearne lamented the impact of 'The Rights of the Christian Church', 'a most Violent, poysonous Book, and levell'd against ye Church of England' ('Remarks', 2.72). Jonathan Swift was less certain of the book's impact on Christian commitment, asking ironically, 'What other Subject through all Art or Nature could have produced Tindal for an Author, or furnished him with Readers?' ('An Argument Against Abolishing Christianity', in 'The Prose Works of Jonathan Swift', ed. H. Davis, 1939, 2.36). 
Aside from sporadic contributions to the anti-clerical cause, notably 'New High-Church Turn'd Old Presbyterian' (1709), 'Merciful Judgements of the High Church Triumphant' (1710), and 'A New Catechism with Dr. Hickes's Thirty Nine Articles' (1710), Tindal reverted to politics as his main focus in the early years of the reign of George I. He censured Robert Walpole for splitting the whig party -- he had looked to him for a reform of the universities, and had particularly hoped to laicise the fellowship at All Souls -- in two tracts, 'Defection Considered' (1717) and the consequent 'Account of a Manuscript, Entitul'd, 'Destruction the Certain Consequences of Division'' (1718). This soon became a more positive relationship, as can be seen in two further tracts, 'A Defence of our Present Happy Establishment, and the Administration Vindicated' (1722) and his 'Enquiry into the Causes of our Present Disaffection' (1722). Tindal was something of a court whig, and was quick to denounce opposition whiggery, as in his critique of the polemicists John Trenchard and Thomas Gordon in 'The judgement of Dr. Prideaux concerning the murder of Julius Caesar, by the conspirators, as a most villanous act, maintain'd' (1721), where he praised England's political system as 'the best, and easiest of all Governments; where the utmost Liberty and Safety are joined together' (p. 94). 
Religious issues dominated the closing years of Tindal's life, and he was one of the principal propagandists during the anti-clerical warfare that dominated the 1730s. His first contribution to this debate was in the form of two replies to Bishop Edmund Gibson's immensely influential pastoral letters to his London clergy on the increase in freethinking and infidelity. In 'An Address to the Inhabitants of the Two Great Cities of London and Westminster' (1729; 2nd edn, 1730) Tindal voiced his shock at Gibson's defence of revelation as being, in Tindal's reading, above reason. Citing on his side a long line of rational divines, Tindal found in Gibson and his clerical allies such as Daniel Waterland an abrogation of reason which could only compromise religion; in 'A Second Address' (1730) he also pointedly adverted to West Indian slavery and bad behaviour in India as indicating the hypocrisies attendant on a merely external adherence to Christianity. Much of Tindal's language was consciously modulated in the style of latitudinarian divines, hence something of the anger of clerical respondents to his writings. This register was distilled most effectively in his final work, 'Christianity as Old as the Creation' (1731). This takes the form of a dialogue, and is essentially a detailed argument for the supremacy of natural over revealed religion. For Tindal, reason was to be employed first to discover, and then to put into practice, the obligations of morality which flow from discovering the existence of a beneficent creator. While he pays lip-service to Christianity as being what his subtitle proclaims a 'republication of the religion of nature', it is abundantly clear to the reader that natural religion effectively makes revealed religions -- Judaism, Islam, Christianity -- redundant and, as polemical distortions of natural religion, potentially dangerous. It was a notably contentious book; Tindal claimed that natural religion would bring out the 'same sentiment' in 'Men of good Sense', so that 'a Shaftesbury will say the same as a Tillotson' ('Christianity as Old as the Creation', 78), thereby eliding a freethinker with the most revered of latitudinarian divines. He blamed priestcraft as the cause of religious controversy, for the imposers of creeds had proved themselves 'the common Plagues of Mankind' (ibid., 163-4). When a Christian divine attempted to prove the superiority of revealed over natural religion, as in the writings of Samuel Clarke, Tindal saw only that 'on Pretence of promoting the Honour of Revelation, [he] is introducing universal scepticism' (ibid., 381). Though in many ways a grand summation of freethinking at mid-century, 'Christianity as Old as the Creation' is, as one authoritative commentator has observed, 'a disappointing book which deserved some at least of the scorn of its contemporary critics' (Rivers, 2.15). Scorn there was in plenty, and answers to the book encompassed a wide arc of clerical (and lay) opinion, from the nonjuror William Law to the dissenter Nathanial Lardner. In all, something like thirty replies, from pamphlets to quartos, appeared to repudiate its message. Even John 'Orator' Henley added his contribution in 'Deism Defeated, and Christianity Defended' (1731), and an anonymous poem appeared in 1730, 'Blasphemy as Old as the Creation', in which Tindal's Epicureanism was turned against him: '
This Tindal knew; and pious vow'd to quit 

Doctrines, that very seldom turn'd his Spit: 

Tir'd with a Church, whose Canons did define 

That to believe, was sweeter than to Dine. 
(p. 8)' Tindal's reputation for sensual indulgence, both sexual and at the table, was often used against him. An anonymous fellow of All Souls pitched on his 'Canine Appetite' as a recurring metaphor for his venal character in 'The Religious, Rational, and Moral Conduct of Matthew Tindal, L.L.D.' of 1735 (p. 10). Debauchery was his other great sin, and the writer referred to the 'Doctor's Amours and natural Children' (p. 22), before retelling older tales of his attempts on young women's honour, concluding of his subject that he was 'a notorious and bare-faced Factor for the Devil, a Debauchee, a Renegade, an Atheist' (p. 62). A fault of which the author made little was Tindal's abstemiousness when it came to drink. After the furore over 'Christianity as Old as the Creation', Tindal fell into a decline. Only the first thirty-two pages of the second part of 'Christianity as Old as the Creation' were subsequently printed. 
Tindal died, following complications from a gallstone, in his rooms at Gray's Inn on 16 August 1733. He was buried, as he had wished, next to the latitudinarian bishop Gilbert Burnet in the cemetery attached to Clerkenwell church, London, on 23 August. Even in death he was subject to controversy. The writer Eustace Budgell insisted that he and Mrs Price, the widow of a judge (who seems to have been Tindal's last mistress), were his only legatees, but the will so promoted was disputed by his nephew, the historian Nicholas Tindal, in whose favour the matter was resolved. Budgell claimed to have been entrusted with a copy of the second part of 'Christianity as Old as the Creation'; if so, it was never recovered, and the story that Bishop Gibson acquired it before destroying it is spurious. 


@@@@@


doc= 27463


Tindal, Nicholas (1687-1774), historical writer and translator, was born on 25 November 1687 at Plymouth, the only son of John Tindal, vicar of Cornwood, Devon, and his wife, Elizabeth Prideaux. His uncle was the deist Matthew Tindal (1657-1733), and his aunt Elizabeth was the mother of Nathaniel Forster (1718-1757). He matriculated from Exeter College, Oxford, on 6 March 1707, graduated BA in 1710, and proceeded MA in 1713. On 29 January 1710 he married Anne Keate ('bap'. 1681) of Hagbourne, Berkshire; they had three sons, John, George, and James. In 1716 Tindal was presented to the rectory of Hatford, Berkshire, and in 1722 to the vicarage of Great Waltham, Essex. 
Tindal's first published work was a translation of Augustin Calmet's 'Antiquities Sacred and Profane' (1724). Soon afterwards the booksellers James and John Knapton began to publish Tindal's translation of Paul de Rapin Thoyras's 'History of England' (originally published in French, 1723-5). His translation, with notes, appeared in fifteen octavo volumes from 1725 to 1731. Tindal began the work at Great Waltham but continued his translation while serving as a chaplain in the navy. The second volume was dedicated on 12 July 1726 to Sir Charles Wager, to whom Tindal was then acting as chaplain in the Baltic, and the fourth was dated 'on board the 'Torbay' in Gibraltar Bay, Sep. 4, 1727'. A second edition was brought out in 1732-3, and a third in 1743. 
Tindal then wrote a 'Continuation' of Rapin's 'History of England' from the revolution of 1688 to the accession of George II in 1727. The first volume was published in 1744, and the second in 1745 (numbered as the third and fourth volume of Rapin's 'History'). The work subsequently appeared in numerous forms, including an 'Abridgement' (1747) and a 'Summary' (1751). Through copious footnotes and politicized prefaces Tindal was an important contributor to the remarkable success of Rapin's 'History'. His footnotes added extra topical detail and recounted well-known legends about English history. They also incorporated political criticisms of church history and revealed religion. Tindal's dedications to Frederick, prince of Wales (1732), and to the duke of Cumberland (1745), both attempted to show how Rapin's 'History' could inform understanding of contemporary politics. 
Tindal's 'Continuation' incorporated Rapin's conceptual framework of the ancient Saxon constitution and the necessity of limiting royal power, and applied it to English history since the revolution of 1688. Tindal lacks some of Rapin's narrative flair, and relies on lengthy quotation, but one nineteenth-century commentator found Tindal's work 'a temperate and candid narrative of carefully ascertained facts' (Gardiner and Mullinger, 375). It also, according to Burton, became the authoritative work for the history of Queen Anne's reign. The work's detractors, however, doubted Tindal's authorship or suggested political interference, while William Duncombe published an anonymous attack on Tindal's style, 'Remarks on Mr. Tindal's Translation' (1728). 
While vicar of Waltham, Tindal also wrote a scrappy 'History of Essex' ('c'.1732) based upon the manuscripts of William Holman, which was nevertheless an important precursor to the work by his close friend and correspondent, Philip Morant. In 1731 he was appointed master of the Royal Free School at Chelmsford, and in 1732 chaplain-in-ordinary at Chatham. Following the death of his uncle, Matthew Tindal, in 1733, he became embroiled in a very public dispute with Eustace Budgell over the will, which Tindal believed had been forged by Budgell and had robbed him of his inheritance. Tindal published his case in 'A Copy of the Will of Matthew Tindal...' (1733), but he failed to obtain restitution from Budgell. 
In 1738 Tindal was appointed chaplain to Greenwich Hospital, and in 1740 he was presented to the rectories of Calbourne, Isle of Wight, and Alverstoke, Hampshire. In 1764 he published 'A Guide to Classical Learning, or, Polymetis Abridged', which proved a very popular handbook, and subsequent editions appeared in 1765, 1777, 1786, and 1802, all in duodecimo. Tindal was married again, on 11 August 1753 at the chapel of Greenwich Hospital; his second wife was Elizabeth Judith Gugelman. He died at Greenwich Hospital on 27 June 1774, in his eighty-seventh year, and was buried on 2 July 1774 in the second burial-ground of the hospital, known as Goddard's Garden. 


@@@@@


doc= 27464


Tindal, Sir Nicholas Conyngham (1776-1846), judge, was born at Coval Hall, near Chelmsford, on 12 December 1776, the son of Robert Tindal, a solicitor of Chelmsford, and his wife, Sarah, only daughter of John Pocock of Greenwich. He was related to the celebrated deist Matthew Tindal and was the great-grandson of the historian Nicholas Tindal. He was educated at Chelmsford grammar school, where Thomas Naylor was master, before going at the age of nineteen to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1799 as eighth wrangler, winning the chancellor's gold medal. He was elected fellow of Trinity in 1801, and in 1802 graduated MA; he was awarded an honorary DCL degree from the University of Oxford in 1834. In 1802 he entered as a student at Lincoln's Inn in London. Seven years later, on 2 September 1809, he married Merelina (died 1818), the youngest daughter of Thomas Symonds, a captain in the Royal Navy. They had one daughter and four sons; their eldest son, Nicholas Tindal (died 1842), became vicar of Sandhurst in Gloucestershire, and the youngest, Charles John (died 1853), a barrister of Lincoln's Inn. 
On 20 June 1809 Tindal was called to the bar, having previously read with Sir John Richardson and practised as a special pleader. He joined the northern circuit, and earned a considerable practice on the strength of his wide and accurate learning (he was never a good advocate). His learning, even in obsolete law, was shown to advantage in the case 'Ashford v. Thornton', in which he successfully claimed for his client the right of wager of battle, later abolished by statute. Henry Brougham and Parke (afterwards Lord Wensleydale) were among his pupils. He was subsequently with Brougham as counsel for Queen Caroline in her trial in 1820 (H. P. Brougham, 'The Life and Times of Henry Lord Brougham', 1871, 2.381). 
Tindal entered parliament in 1824 as a tory member for the Wigtown burghs, and became solicitor-general on 20 September 1826 at a time of change caused by Copley's appointment as master of the rolls, and was knighted. Also in 1826, he was returned to parliament for Harwich; but in 1827, Copley's becoming lord chancellor created a vacancy at the University of Cambridge, and Tindal was elected by 479 votes against 378 for William John Bankes. With characteristic modesty he declined to assert his claim to become attorney-general, either against James Scarlett (afterwards first Baron Abinger) in 1827 or against Sir Charles Wetherell in 1828 (Arnould, 'Life of Lord Denman', 1873, 1.206). On 9 June 1829 he was appointed chief justice of the common pleas in succession to William Draper Best, first Baron Wynford, a position which he kept until his death. Among the cases which he tried were Norton's action against Lord Melbourne for criminal conversation and the murder trials of Courvoisier and MacNaghten. He worked up to ten days before his death from a stroke at Folkestone on 6 July 1846. He was buried at Kensal Green cemetery, Middlesex, on 14 July. 
Tindal was esteemed by contemporary lawyers for his grasp of principle, accuracy of statement, skill in analysis, and store of case law. He became somewhat procrastinating and eccentric as a judge at the end of his life, but retained the respect and affection of those who practised before him. He had a considerable, highly legal wit, of which some examples are given in Benjamin Robinson's 'Bench and Bar' (1889, 153-8). 


@@@@@


doc= 27465


Tindal, William (1756-1804), antiquary, was born at Chelmsford on 14 May 1756, the son of James Tindal (died 1760), captain in the 4th regiment of dragoons, who was the youngest son of the historian Nicholas Tindal (1687-1774). His mother was Lucy Shenton, who, after James Tindal's death in 1760, married Dr Smith, a physician at Cheltenham and Oxford. At four years of age William Tindal and his mother went to live with her brother, a minor canon of Chichester, and six years later they moved to Richmond. On 19 May 1772 Tindal matriculated from Trinity College, Oxford, and he was elected a scholar in the same year. He graduated BA in 1776 and proceeded MA in 1778. In 1778 he was ordained deacon and obtained a fellowship, which he held until his marriage. 
After serving as curate at Fladbury, Worcestershire, Tindal became rector of Wallingford in Norfolk in 1789. In 1792 he also became rector of Kington, Worcestershire. In 1799 he exchanged the living at Wallingford for the chaplainship of the Tower of London. In the same year he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. 
Besides writing several political pamphlets, Tindal published a work on Dr Johnson's life and the works of Gray (1782). In 1794 he published 'The History and Antiquities of the Abbey and Borough of Evesham'. This was well reviewed by the 'Gentleman's Magazine', which commented, 'this history is executed just as such works should be, and in an agreeable and correct style' ('GM', 1st ser., 64/2, 1794, 836). It was also said to have won high praise from Horace Walpole. 
Tindal committed suicide by shooting himself with a musket in his residence at the Tower on 16 September 1804 while suffering from mental depression. He was to have joined his wife on the day of his suicide, when she was staying with an aunt in Exeter. A verdict of lunacy was returned by the coroner's court, amid scurrilous rumours regarding his wife's conduct, which were vehemently denied by Tindal's friends. 


@@@@@


doc= 27466


Tynemouth, John (fl. c.1350), chronicler, is a writer of whom little is known. The best medieval tradition describes him simply as vicar of Tynemouth in Northumberland. On account of references in his chronicle, the 'Historia aurea', to villages close to Wheatley in the diocese of Winchester, he might possibly be identified with a John Whetely, who was vicar of Tynemouth in the 1350s and 1360s. It is more probable, however, that our subject came from Wheatley in Yorkshire, which would explain the name, John York, which is given to the author in certain manuscripts of his work. Whatever his origins, the close connection between the vicarage at Tynemouth and the abbey of St Albans may be responsible for certain features in the manuscript tradition of the 'Historia aurea'. The prior of the St Albans cell at Tynemouth appointed the vicars of Tynemouth, whose vicarage formed part of the priory church. Although Horstmann's suggestion that John Tynemouth was a St Albans monk is uncertain, it is possible that Thomas de la Mare, when prior of Tynemouth from 1341 to 1349, encouraged John Tynemouth in his work. As evidence of an early association with St Albans, an abbreviated copy of the 'Historia aurea' was known to Thomas Walsingham when he was constructing the early drafts of his 'Chronica majora' in the 1380s. 
Apart from the 'Historia aurea', John Tynemouth wrote a 'Sanctilogium', which contains 156 lives of British saints. A single copy, presented to the St Albans cell at Redbourn in Hertfordshire by Thomas de la Mare, survives in BL, Cotton MS Tiberius E.i. John Tynemouth's main achievement, the 'Historia aurea', compiled 'c'.1350, was a world history extending from the creation to 1347. In addition to a number of abbreviated versions, copies of the 'Historia aurea' survive from Durham, Bury St Edmunds, and St Albans. In the 'Historia aurea' (a name chosen by its author, for reasons that remain unknown) John Tynemouth gave an account of world history contained in some twenty-three chapters. Written on a larger scale than the 'Polychronicon', it lacked the coherence of Higden's work, with which its fortunes were none the less to be associated. In constructing his chronicle John Tynemouth used a short version of the 'Polychronicon', but during the fourteenth century the 'Historia aurea' itself became the source of a new version of Higden's text. In certain manuscripts of the 'Polychronicon' the later books of the 'Historia aurea' were combined with the 'Polychronicon' to provide what was in effect a new edition of the latter work. Apart from its association with the 'Polychronicon' the 'Historia aurea' enjoyed a modest success in its own right, and its concluding section was used in several fourteenth-century chronicles. At St Albans, however, the complete text of the 'Historia aurea' does not appear to have been known until the fifteenth century, indicating that John Tynemouth himself may not have been a St Albans monk. 


@@@@@


doc= 27467


Tinney, John (c.1706-1761), engraver and printseller, the son of John Tinney ('b'. 'c'.1673), of the Merchant Taylors' Company, was probably born in London. He was apprenticed for seven years to the engraver John Sturt on 3 August 1721 and made free of the Goldsmiths' Company on 8 April 1730. He was trading in Great Eastcheap, Cannon Street, in 1734 but is said to have spent some time in France. He took livery in the Goldsmiths' Company in May 1737 and set up at the sign of the Carved Golden Lion in Fleet Street, between Peterborough Court and the Globe tavern. In 1745 the contents of his shop were insured for $300. There, according to his trade label, he sold 'great variety of French prints and several fine prints done from his own new copper plates, in neat frames and glasses or without, and all sorts of maps; also several new drawing books, copy books and great variety of royal sheets, lotteries &c' and 'performs engraving in all its branches in the neatest manner'. He engraved competently in line and in mezzotint and trained a number of apprentices, of whom Anthony Walker, William Woollett, and John Browne became distinguished engravers. Advertisements in newspapers further reveal that Tinney published a wide variety of topical, satirical, and decorative prints. His 'Compendium anatomicum' (1743) was an important early guide to human anatomy intended for artists. He was an important publisher of maps, the most remarkable being John Rocque's twenty-four-sheet 'Plan of the Cities of London and Westminster' (1746), one of the greatest of all London maps. 
About 1752 Tinney acquired from John Hinton the plates for Emanuel Bowen and Thomas Kitchen's 'Large English Atlas' (1749-60) which remained the most important English county atlas until the appearance of John Cary's in 1787. Robert Sayer and the Bowles brothers shared the cost of this enterprise from about 1755 and they also acquired shares in several of the sets of prints of country houses, villas, and gardens that Tinney published. He probably engraved the earliest of these himself, but later views were drawn and engraved by his pupils, notably by William Woollett. These views for tourists included sets depicting Chiswick House (1738, 1754), Hampton Court and Kensington Palace (1744), the Oxford colleges (1754), and Whitton and West Wycombe (1757). Tinney died a widower at Fulham, administration of his goods being granted to his sister Elizabeth Mackrabie on 14 April 1761. 


@@@@@


doc= 27468


Tipper, John (b. before 1680, d. 1713), mathematician and almanac maker, was born at Coventry. In 1699 he was elected master of Bablake Hospital school there at a salary of $20, which he supplemented by teaching mathematics, surveying, dialling, accounting, and music to private pupils. Some boarded with him; others living within 10 miles of Coventry he visited on a weekly basis. By 1705 he was able to hire an assistant master. In 1704 Tipper launched the 'Ladies' Diary', a hybrid almanac and pioneering women's magazine. Early editions covered elementary astronomy, with data on the universe and notes on Halley's work on comets. There were also features on cooking and diet, medical recipes (from the writings of Robert Boyle), and advice on the care of small children. In lighter vein he wrote on the virtues of the female sex, mused on love (drawing on Rochester, Dryden, and Otway), and ran a serialized burlesque romance. His friend Humfrey Wanley the antiquary, a Coventry man by origin, acted as his London intermediary, giving advice on material, liaising with Halley, and procuring specialist books. 
The 'Ladies' Diary', dedicated to Queen Anne and carrying her portrait each year, proved a success from the start. In 1706 Tipper introduced verse 'enigmas' sent in by readers, which quickly became its most popular feature. He printed the names of those who set or solved them (some of them men) and offered small prizes. Though most of the early riddles were verbal, others were mathematical and these gradually became more challenging. An early prize was won by Henry Beighton, a future fellow of the Royal Society. There were soon so many correspondents that in 1711 Tipper launched a monthly journal of the same kind, 'Delights for the Ingenious', price 3died, though this soon fell victim to the new stamp tax. 
Tipper's 'Diary' printed meteorological data, but no prophecies; he had no interest in astrology. In 1710 he founded another annual title, 'Great Britain's Diary', which supplied useful notes for tradesmen. In addition he published 'The Art of Reading' (1705), a manual (now lost) designed for parents and teachers, and planned an ambitious history of Coventry to be published by subscription, for which he issued a detailed prospectus in 1711. He did not live to complete it, but some of his work was incorporated in the 1730 edition of Sir William Dugdale's 'Antiquities of Warwickshire'. Tipper died in 1713. After his death the 'Ladies' Diary' was continued by a succession of able mathematicians and played a significant part in promoting the subject for over a century until it merged with the 'Gentleman's Diary' in 1840. 


@@@@@


doc= 27469


Tipping, William (1598-1649), author, was the second son of Sir George Tipping (1560/61-1627), of Whitfield and Draycott, Oxfordshire, and his wife, Dorothy (1564-1637), daughter of John Burlace of Little Marlow, Buckinghamshire. With his younger brother Samuel he matriculated on 23 June 1615, aged sixteen, from Queen's College, Oxford, where his tutor was John Langhorne and from where he graduated BA on 23 October 1617. The brothers were admitted together on 29 January 1618 to Lincoln's Inn, but while Samuel pursued his legal studies and became a barrister in 1625, William returned to Oxfordshire. On the death of his father in 1627 he inherited land at Draycott and Attington. Anthony Wood, who says that he 'lived a single life many years in Canditch', Oxford, 'for the sake of scholastical company and of books' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3rd edn, 3.243-4), also asserts that he never married, but by 5 October 1628, when his daughter Dorothea or Dorothy was baptized, Tipping had married Ursula, daughter of Sir John Brett of Edmonton, Middlesex. Their other children were George (their elder son), William ('bap'. 1631), and Margaret. 
In 1633 Tipping published in Oxford 'A Discourse of Eternitie', thereby earning himself the nickname Eternity Tipping in the university. Relying on Latin rather than vernacular biblical quotation, it contends that both the ancients and 'newly discovered nations' (p. 10) possess a knowledge of God and eternity, and exhorts the reader to holiness and to reliance on the mercy of God. Tipping had become a justice of the peace for Oxfordshire, but in 1635 and 1636 he appeared several times before the court of high commission, having been charged with puritan practices. In 1639 he sold part of Draycott Manor. 
In 1640 recovery from serious illness prompted Tipping to publish 'A Return of Thankfulness'. Several sources claim that in the same year he was made vicar of Shabbington, Buckinghamshire, a family living, but it was his cousin John ('b'. 1601/2), a graduate of Magdalen Hall, Oxford, who was inducted. It is not clear whether Wood's statement that Tipping also took the covenant is correct, but his subsequent publications place him firmly among the godly. 'The Father's Counsell' (1643) aimed to give 'usefull directions, for all young persons, especially elder brothers, whose portion it is... to be left in a fatherlesse or friendlesse condition'. Addressed to 'my son' it is a robust affirmation of the Calvinist doctrine of calling, castigating the 'pernicious sin' and 'destructive vice' of idleness: 'let no elder brother shelter himself under his fair estate, or plead the inheritance of his father, for his sloth'; 'better thy son were a basket maker, than an idle drone' (p. 196). Regular, twice-daily religious exercises and catechizing of children and servants was to be accompanied by frugality, charity, and hospitality. In 'The Preachers Plea' (1646), Tipping (named Typing on the title-page) deplored the lack of progress 'in debate on church-government' (p. 4) and the 'many drunken, ignorant, superstitious, Prophane Ministers [who] are crept into every corner of the land' (pp. 17-18), criticized those who worried that prelatical power would be replaced by presbyterial power, and called for appropriate maintenance for pastors and for a parliamentary directory for catechizing the kingdom. His 'The Remarkable Life and Death of the Lady Apollina Hall' (1647) was a conventional puritan 'pattern of imitation' (p. 3). 
Tipping died at Waterstock, Oxfordshire, on 2 February 1649, and was buried in the chancel of the church there six days later. By his will, dated 2 October 1648, he left an annuity for an annual Good Friday sermon at All Saints' Church, Oxford, $200 for other charitable uses in the city, and smaller sums for the poor and for maimed soldiers elsewhere. In keeping with his writings, his children were exhorted to industry and godliness. The will was proved by his widow and executor on 23 March 1649. 


@@@@@


doc= 27470


Tiptoft, John, first Baron Tiptoft (c.1378-1443), administrator and speaker of the House of Commons, was son and heir of Sir Payn Tiptoft ('c'.1351- 'c'.1413) of Burwell, Cambridgeshire, and Agnes, sister of Sir John Wroth (died 1407) of Enfield, Middlesex, whose estates he inherited in 1413. Sir Payn, as the youngest son of John, second Lord Tiptoft or Tibetot (1313-1367), held substantial estates in Cambridgeshire. Although Sir Payn was a prominent retainer of Richard (III) Fitzalan, earl of Arundel (died 1397), his son joined the household of Henry, earl of Derby, serving in 1397 at a wage of 71/2died a day, and probably shared his exile during the next two years, for he was among those knighted on 11 October 1399, on the eve of Derby's coronation as Henry IV, and was formally retained for life with an annuity of 100 marks. By 1402 both he and his father were receiving livery as knights of the chamber. His prowess on campaign in Wales and the north won him considerable rewards, so that by 1406 his income from fees and annuities came to $91 p.a. and land placed in his keeping provided $34 p.a. more. He was elected for Huntingdonshire to the parliaments of January 1404, October 1404, and 1406, and in the last, notwithstanding his request for exoneration 'because of his youth and lack of sense and discretion' ('RotP', 3.568), the Commons chose him as their speaker. Although he was the conduit of vociferous criticism of the administration, expressed in the three sessions of an unprecedentedly long parliament, which culminated in the nomination of the council in parliament and its subjection to articles drawn up by both houses, it is most unlikely that Tiptoft himself was opposed to the government (as historians have generally assumed). Rather, working for the crown, he first successfully contained a hostile house and then helped persuade it to accept a compromise package of reform. With considerable skill he offended neither his fellow MPs nor the king. On 8 December the council entrusted him with the proposed reform of the royal household by appointing him its treasurer. For eight months in 1407 he also held the office of chief butler, and he was removed from the treasurership of the household, in July 1408, only to be promoted to that of the exchequer. There he enjoyed considerable control over royal patronage, directly benefiting by further acquisitions of property for himself. 
In 1406 or 1407, and before May 1407, Tiptoft made the first of two lucrative marriages. His first wife was Philippa ('c'.1367-1417), sister and coheir of John Talbot (died 1388) of Richards Castle, Herefordshire, and widow of Edward III's last chamberlain, Sir Robert Ashton (died 1384), and of the distinguished soldier Sir Matthew Gournay (died 1406). She brought him estates in ten shires, notably the Gournay holdings which he sold in reversion to Henry V for $4000, enabling him to become a major landowner in the south and west, and particularly in Somerset. Tenure of the Gournay lordships in the Bordelais resulted in his appointment as seneschal of the Landes and constable of Dax, and in his involvement in the defence of that region. In 1408 he dispatched a ship to Bordeaux containing goods worth $3000, but despite the truce it was taken by a vessel from Bilbao. Henry IV wrote to his nephew Juan II, king of Castile, to seek redress for him. 
Dismissed from the treasurership in December 1409, during Prince Henry's ascendancy, Tiptoft remained in comparative obscurity for the next five years, and although he sat in parliament again in April 1414, for Somerset, he was not re-elected speaker. Henry V initially restricted his royal fees to $120 a year, but he soon won the king's confidence, and in April 1415 was appointed seneschal of Aquitaine. His force of 480 soldiers was mustered at Plymouth on 19 June and disembarked at Bordeaux before 20 August. In 1416 he was empowered to treat for an extension of the truce between England and Castile, and following his return home he became closely involved in the diplomatic preparations for the invasion of Normandy, being the person most frequently entrusted with secret negotiations. In September he was attached to the retinue of Emperor Sigismund, with whom he travelled to Dordrecht and Luxembourg, discussing the ways Sigismund might support Henry V's campaign; and diplomatic work at the Council of Constance, lasting until May 1417, earned him a daily wage of $2. On 25 January, Henry wrote instructing him to disclose secretly to Sigismund the duke of Bourbon's promise to recognize Henry as king of France. He again visited Constance in August. Having undertaken to provide a force of 120 men for service in Normandy, he joined the king there before November, and was appointed president of the duchy exchequer. In 1418 he received an entailed grant of a manor house in Caen for his residence. He occupied the presidency until January 1419, all the while continuing diplomatic work. Largely due to his initiative, Valois-inspired attacks on Gascony were suspended, but following renewed threats to the region he sailed there again in 1420, with a retinue 900 strong. He took Budos, and his viceregal authority was further enhanced by the royal grant of the lordship of Lesparre. 
Before 8 July 1421 Tiptoft had contracted to marry again, and in February 1422 he secured Henry V's permission for the marriage to proceed because of his good services overseas. Joyce ('c'.1403-1446), younger daughter and coheir of Edward, Baron Charlton of Powys (died 1421), brought him not only considerable additions to his landed estate, but also social advancement, for her mother, Eleanor, was a daughter of Thomas Holland, fifth earl of Kent (died 1397), and the widow of Roger Mortimer, fourth earl of March (died 1398). Joyce was a coheir of her uncle Edmund, earl of Kent (died 1408), and successive partitions of the Holland estates, notably in 1425 when her half-brother Edmund, earl of March, died, resulted in Tiptoft's further enrichment. He also added to his estates in Cambridgeshire, where his landed interests, centred on Burwell, had always been greatest. His annual income from land trebled, from $360 in 1412 to $1098 in 1436. 
Henry V's death in 1422 led to Tiptoft's resignation of the seneschalcy of Aquitaine, and reinstated him in a position of authority at home. During the first parliament of Henry VI's reign he was appointed a member of the newly constituted council, with a salary of $100 a year, and until 1432 he was conspicuous among the councillors for the regularity of his attendance at meetings. Well placed to enjoy the fruits of royal patronage, he secured the wardships and marriages of Sir Edmund Ingoldisthorpe (grandson and heir to both Sir John Ingoldisthorpe and Sir Walter de la Pole), to whom he married his daughter Joan, and of the heir of Thomas, Lord Ros of Helmsley, who married his eldest daughter, Philippa. A third daughter, Joyce, was matched with the eldest son of a fellow councillor, John, Lord Dudley. In 1425 his colleagues appointed him chief steward of the Welsh possessions late of the earl of March. Preferential treatment at the exchequer helped him recover large debts owing for past services. Numerous diplomatic assignments led to further travels abroad, and he visited France in December 1424 for talks with the regent, John, duke of Bedford (died 1435). His summons (as Lord Tiptoft) to the parliament at Leicester in February 1426, and his appointment shortly afterwards as steward of the household, indicate that he supported Bedford's policies. From May to July 1427 he was absent on an embassy to the dukes of Bedford and Burgundy, and in 1430 he accompanied the king to France for his coronation. During the next two years he made several journeys home on governmental business, on one such spending Christmas with Cardinal Henry Beaufort (died 1447) at Canterbury. At the parliament of 1431 he successfully presented petitions regarding his wife's inheritance and the sale of the Gournay estates. Following the coronation in Paris on 16 December he returned home with the king in February 1432, only to be displaced from the stewardship of the household in a coup staged by Humphrey, duke of Gloucester (died 1447). His appearances at council meetings became sporadic, although he was among the councillors who in November 1434 protested to the king about his susceptibility to the advice of others. 
Probably because of the threat to Marck Castle, of which he had been made governor five years earlier, in June 1436 Tiptoft led a troop of eighty-five men on Gloucester's expedition to relieve Calais. His negotiations with delegates from the Hanseatic League later that year resulted in a commercial treaty. Following Henry VI's formal assumption of control over the government in 1437 he joined the 'prive counseill', and although his salary was reduced to 100 marks this was guaranteed for life, even if he was absent through ill health. Further diplomatic assignments attest that his faculties remained unimpaired for some years more. Yet in Cambridgeshire, where he had long been dominant, his rule was successfully challenged at the elections to the parliament of 1439 by Sir James Butler (died 1461), the heir to the earldom of Ormond, who asserted that Tiptoft had done countless wrongs to the local people. 
Tiptoft's last recorded attendances on the council fell in August 1442, and he died about the end of January 1443, having left instructions for the foundation of a chantry in Ely Cathedral, his likely burial place. He apparently composed the commonplace book of English history known as Tiptoft's chronicle, showing scholarly interests that he evidently transmitted to his son, the humanist John Tiptoft (1427-1470), who was created earl of Worcester in 1449. 


@@@@@


doc= 27471


Tiptoft, John, first earl of Worcester (1427-1470), administrator and humanist, was the only son of John Tiptoft, first Baron Tiptoft (c.1378-1443), and his second wife, Joyce ('c'.1403-1446), younger daughter of Edward Charlton, fifth Baron Charlton of Powys (died 1421). Born at Great Eversden, Cambridgeshire, on 8 May 1427, he was educated in arts at University College, Oxford, where he had rooms as a 'commensalis' ('lodger') for three terms in 1440-41, 1441-2, and 1442-3 with his tutor John Hurley, and for one term in 1443. Upon his father's death, about the end of January 1443, he succeeded to his honours and estates in East Anglia as Lord Tiptoft, and also to Nether Wallop and Brockenhurst, Hampshire, Enfield, Middlesex, and to the Wroth estates at Wimbish in north-west Essex. At his mother's death, on 22 September 1446, he divided the Powys estates in Gloucestershire on the Welsh border with his cousin Henry, son of Sir John Grey and Joanna Charlton. In April 1449 he married Cecily, widow of Henry Beauchamp, duke of Warwick (died 1446), and daughter of Richard Neville, earl of Salisbury (died 1460); his wife's aunt Cecily was wife of Richard, duke of York (d. 1460), and sister of George Neville, the future archbishop of York (died 1476), and Richard Neville, earl of Salisbury and Warwick, the Kingmaker (d. 1471). On 16 July 1449 Tiptoft was created earl of Worcester by patent. Following Cecily's death, on 28 July 1450, he married another widow, Elizabeth Baynham, daughter of Robert Greyndour, MP for Gloucestershire, and his wife, the schoolfounder Joan Greyndour; the couple had a son who died in infancy. Elizabeth died before 4 April 1452, when in a letter to Henry Cranebroke, monk of Christ Church, Canterbury, Tiptoft asked for prayers, 'with special remembraunce of her soule whom I loved best' (Pantin, 3.103). Elizabeth had been an only child, and her death brought him the Greyndour estates in Gloucestershire. Remaining close to the Yorkist members of his first wife's family, Tiptoft was appointed treasurer of England on 15 April 1452 (an office he held until 7 October 1454), and was already a member of the king's council when on 24 October 1453 he signed a minute calling for the attendance of York at a great council summoned for the settlement of the regency during Henry VI's insanity. On 3 April 1454 he was appointed joint keeper of the sea for three years. On 5 August 1457 he was appointed, with Robert Flemming (died 1483) and Philip Wentworth, to offer the king's obedience to Pope Calixtus III ('r'. 1455-8). 
Although this mission was not in fact carried out, early in 1458 Tiptoft left England, which was then on the brink of civil war, to visit Italy and make a pilgrimage to the Holy Land. Letters of attorney to go abroad were issued to him on 28 January 1458, and he and his party arrived in Venice in time to attend the ceremonial 'wedding of the sea' on Ascension day (11 May). With the Milanese soldier Roberto da Sanseverino, and the Paduan noble Gabriele Capodilista, he sailed for Jaffa on 17 May. His ship reached Durazzo on 2 June, Cyprus on the 15th, and Jaffa on the 19th. He arrived in Jerusalem on the 25th and bathed in the Jordan on the 29th, departing from Jaffa on 5 July and arriving back in Venice on 6 September 1458. In the autumn of 1458 he resided briefly on the Capodilista estates in the Euganean hills, south of Padua, and began his studies at the university, almost certainly in civil law, which he continued with some interruptions until the summer of 1461. There he made the acquaintance of Ognibene da Lonigo and Galeotto Marzio, and also met two English scholars, Peter Courtenay (died 1492) and John Free (died 1465), probably engaging the latter as his secretary. Tiptoft probably spent the autumn of 1459 in Ferrara at the school of Guarino da Verona, where he met Lodovico Carbone, whom he later tried to persuade to return with him to England. 
Tiptoft returned to Padua, from where he addressed a letter to the University of Oxford, offering to present a collection of choice Latin works, on which students would be encouraged to model their Latin style. The proposal was met with immediate acceptance in a letter of 1 April 1460, averring that this largess made Tiptoft the successor to the late Humphrey, duke of Gloucester (died 1447) in the university's affections. Although the donation did not take place as planned, several of his books were eventually given to Oxford. In the summer of 1460 Tiptoft travelled to Florence, where he heard at least one lecture by John Argyropoulos, and commissioned books from Vespasiano da Bisticci. Appointed an envoy on 16 May 1459 to convey the obedience of Henry VI to the new pope, Pius II ('r'. 1458-64), Tiptoft probably travelled from Florence to Rome, where he made a Latin oration which, according to John Free, moved the pope to tears of joy for the beauty of his Latinity. Following another visit to Venice in the autumn of 1460, Tiptoft returned to Padua for a final year of study and book collecting, and commissioned John Free to make a Latin translation of Synesius's 'Laus Calvitii', and Francesco Griffolini a Latin version of Lucian's 'De calumnia', which he received just as he left Italy. 
The accession of Edward IV in the summer of 1461 opened the way to high office. An elegy by Carbone, rejecting Tiptoft's offer of employment in England, asserts that John ''Gunthorp told me that the king has called you home'' (Weiss, 'Tiptoft and Carbone', 212). Tiptoft landed in England on 1 September 1461, and two months later he was appointed to the king's council. On 25 November he was made chief justice of north Wales, which office he resigned on 28 August 1467 in favour of William Herbert, earl of Pembroke, in return for a life pension of $200 a year. On 2 December 1461 he was appointed constable of the Tower of London for life, and on 7 February 1462 as constable of England was commissioned to try all cases of treason on simple inspection of fact (that is, without a jury). An earlier generation of historians regarded Tiptoft's judicial activities as entailing a substantial extension of the powers of his office. But this is unlikely. Basing its jurisdiction upon civil- rather than common-law principles, the constable's court had long been empowered to proceed to judgment upon the king's record alone, without either indictment or jury trial. It would have been at Edward IV's bidding that later in February, Tiptoft tried and sentenced to death for high treason John de Vere, earl of Oxford, and his son Aubrey, Sir Thomas Tuddenham, and others. He was created knight of the Garter on 21 March 1462 and appointed treasurer on 14 April, an office he held for fourteen months. He accompanied Edward IV north in the autumn of 1462 and took part in the siege that led to the surrender of Dunstanburgh Castle. Next year he was appointed lord steward of the household, and in July 1463 was given command of a fleet that failed to prevent the escape of Queen Margaret from Northumberland to Flanders. On 31 January 1464 he was appointed chancellor of Ireland for life. But he was with Edward IV that spring and summer in the north, where he tried and condemned to death a number of prisoners after the battle of Hexham on 15 May, and Sir Ralph Grey on 10 July, after the surrender of Bamburgh. On 12 August 1464 he was commissioned to arrange a truce with envoys of the duke of Brittany; in June 1466 he was responsible for organizing the famous tournament held outside London at West Smithfield between Antoine, the Bastard of Burgundy, and Anthony Woodville, Lord Scales (died 1483). That autumn Tiptoft was sent to Wales to capture rebels loyal to Henry VI holed up in Harlech Castle but he could not force them to surrender. In 1467, during the lieutenancy of the duke of Clarence, Tiptoft was appointed deputy governor of Ireland to replace the suspect Thomas Fitzgerald, seventh earl of Desmond. Soon after reaching Ireland he summoned a parliament to Drogheda at which he attainted Desmond and his brother-in-law, Thomas Fitzgerald, the seventh earl of Kildare. There he had Desmond executed, and tortured his two young sons, eventually having them put to death. In revenge for these executions the Fitzgeralds of Munster rebelled and ravaged Meath and Kildare. At a second parliament Kildare was pardoned, and he was later installed as deputy governor, Tiptoft having been recalled to England early in 1470. 
Tiptoft remained loyal to the king when Warwick and Clarence rebelled in 1469. Campaigning in the north with Edward, on 14 March 1470 he was reappointed constable of England. On 23 March he received the lieutenancy of Ireland, from which the duke of Clarence had been dismissed, and on 10 July he was reappointed treasurer of England. He accompanied the king south to Southampton, where he had twenty of the earl of Warwick's men who had been captured at sea handed over to him for trial, and condemned them to execution for high treason, adding impalement to the sentence of hanging, drawing, and quartering. This cruelty outraged public opinion and earned him the reputation, reported in a contemporary chronicle, as 'that fierce executioner and horrible beheader of men' (Gairdner, 183). In October 1470, after the flight of Edward IV to Flanders, and the consequent readeption of Henry VI, Tiptoft left London and took refuge in the Forest of Weybridge, Huntingdonshire, disguised as a shepherd. When a man sent to buy food for him aroused suspicion by presenting an unexpectedly valuable coin in payment, soldiers were sent to search for him and found him concealed in a tree. Taken prisoner and brought back to London, on 15 October 1470 Tiptoft was arraigned and condemned for high treason before the newly appointed constable of England, John de Vere, earl of Oxford (died 1513), whose father and brother he had sentenced to death. His execution was fixed for the 17th, but the crowd pressing to see him so interrupted his passage by foot that the sheriffs were obliged to lodge him in the Fleet prison for the night. At his execution on Tower Hill on the afternoon of 18 October, he bore himself with quiet dignity, requesting the executioner to strike off his head with three blows in honour of the Trinity. He was buried, head and body together, in the church of the Blackfriars at Ludgate, where his sister Joan Ingoldisthorpe later put up a tablet to his memory. Hated for his cruelty, he was called (by later Tudor propagandists) the Butcher of England. For his swift and ruthless justice Tiptoft earned the reputation that he 'juged by lawe padowe' (Warkworth, 5), that is, he followed summary legal procedures, learned from his study of Roman law. This same charge is repeated by his Italian biographer, Vespasiano da Bisticci, writing in 1490 (Bisticci, 1.419). 
On his way to Ireland in the autumn of 1467 Tiptoft had met and promptly married (without the king's licence) his third wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Hopton and widow of Sir Roger Corbet of Morton Corbet, Shropshire. Elizabeth gave birth, on 14 July 1469, to the earl's only surviving child, a son named Edward in honour of the king. Since Tiptoft was not attainted, Edward succeeded 'de jure' to the earldom of Worcester at his father's death. When he died, childless, on 12 August 1485, this earldom became extinct. Edward's heirs were his three aunts, his father's sisters, who probably commissioned Tiptoft's effigy (with two of his wives) on the cenotaph erected in the south aisle of Ely Cathedral in the 1470s. 
Infamous for his cruelty, Tiptoft was also renowned for his learning and his love of books, especially the Latin classics, humanist works, and fresh Latin translations of ancient Greek texts. Of his own writings only some survive. These include his English translations of Cicero's 'De amicitia', and Buonaccorso's 'De vera nobilitate', both printed by Caxton in 1481; the latter was reprinted as 'The Declamacion of Noblesse' (Mitchell, 'John Tiptoft', appx 1, 215-41). Several of his ordinances, issued as lord constable or as treasurer, survive: 'For Jousts and Triumphes' (J. Harington, 'Nugae antiquae', 1804, 1.1-11); 'For Placing the Nobility' (BL, Cotton MS Tiberius E.viii, and Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 763); and various ordinances published in 'Excerpta historica' (ed. S. Bentley, 1833). His letter to Oxford University is published by J. Tait (Tait, 571-2), and those of 1452 to and from Henry Cranebroke are edited by W. A. Pantin (Pantin, 3.103-4). A supposed work is the compendium of English history compiled under the title 'Cronice regum Anglie de diversis historiografis per dominum Iohannem Wigornensem Comitem sparsim collecte' (Hunt. L., HM 19960). Lost works include an oration to the people of Padua and the speech given before Pope Pius II and cardinals at Rome in 1460. A great loss is the 'Liber epistolarum Johannis Tiptofti', which Thomas Tanner reports ('Bibl. Brit.-hib.', 1748, 716-17) was once housed in the library of Lincoln Cathedral. 
Tiptoft's real passion was book collecting: as Carbone observed in his funeral oration for Guarino da Verona, Tiptoft 'despoiled the libraries of Italy so he might adorn England with handsome monuments of books' (Carbone, 398, 400). At least a dozen books from his library survive, including classical texts: Lucretius, 'De rerum natura', Tacitus, 'De oratoribus claris', Suetonius, 'De claris grammaticis rhetoribusque', and Sallust, 'Bellum Catilinarium' and 'Bellum Jurgurthinium', which he commissioned from Vespasiano as a gift for Peter Courtenay. Humanist works include Ognibene da Lonigo's commentary on Juvenal, Basinio da Parma's 'Astronomicon', and Free's Latin version of Synesius's 'Laus Calvitii', and Griffolini's version of Lucian's 'De calumnia', mentioned above. Even after taking into account various scholastic collections, John Lydgate's 'Fall of Princes', and books of hours, inherited from family members or perhaps confiscated from political enemies, the collection remains heavily classical, reflecting the critical importance of the years in Italy. Tiptoft may thus be justly called the first Italianate Englishman in two different respects. He brought the texts of the 'new learning' of the University of Padua, Guarino's school in Ferrara, and Medicean Florence back to English libraries, and he applied the harsh lessons of Italian politics to the service of his sovereign, Edward IV, in ways that in the end were to cost him his life. 


@@@@@


doc= 27472


Tiptoft, Robert, Lord Tiptoft (1228?-1298), soldier and administrator, succeeded to the lands of his father, Henry, in January 1250. He was a staunch supporter of Henry III and the Lord Edward during the troubles of the 1260s. In November 1265 he was made constable of Portchester Castle. He accompanied the Lord Edward to the Holy Land in 1270 ['see also 'Lord Edward's crusade], and in January 1275 was made constable of Nottingham Castle. He took a leading part in the negotiations with, and campaigns in, Wales in 1277 and 1282-3 and after the conquest become one of Edward I's key officers in Wales. He was appointed justice of south Wales on 8 June 1281 and held the post until his death; he was also constable of the royal castles of Carmarthen and Cardigan. He sat in parliament in 1290, but there is no record of the writs of summons. 
Tiptoft took a leading part in the suppression of the revolt of Rhys ap Maredudd in 1287-8. Rhys's pretext for revolt was the compulsory introduction of 'English customs' by Tiptoft. Tiptoft took Rhys's chief castles, but he did not effect his capture until 1292. In 1294 Tiptoft was appointed a counsellor and lieutenant of John of Brittany, earl of Richmond, in the expedition sent to recover Gascony. John of Brittany sent him to negotiate an alliance with Sancho IV of Castile. He was also left in command of Rions on the retreat of the English army before Charles of Valois, but had to surrender on 7 April 1295. He was summoned to take part in Edward I's Scottish expedition of 1297, and died at his manor of Nettlestead (Suffolk) on 22 May 1298. 
With his wife, Eve (perhaps a member of the Chaworth family of Kidwelly), Tiptoft had a surviving son, Pain (1279-1314), who is commonly reckoned first Lord Tibetot or Tiptoft. His son, John (1313-1367), second lord, was grandfather of John Tiptoft ('c'.1378-1443). 


@@@@@


doc= 27473


Tirechan (fl. c.690), bishop and writer, was the author of the so-called 'Collectanea' about St Patrick that forms part of the 'Book of Armagh'. His feast day is 3 July, but his sainthood may have been acquired late: he is not in the 'Genealogies of the Saints', nor in any martyrology before the twelfth century. Reportedly a native of Tirawley, co. Sligo, he became a bishop, though no see is named. The 'Collectanea' implies that he belonged to the Ui Amolngada (in the north-west of the present-day co. Mayo), and to a branch (descended from Conall, son of Endae, son of Amolngaid) who were servants of Patrick. His kinship may thus explain why Tirechan became, with Muirchu maccu Machtheni, one of two major Patrician hagiographers of the late seventh century. He was a disciple of Ultan, bishop of Ardbraccan in Brega (in what is now co. Meath), who died in 657, from whom he claims to have derived information, both by word of mouth and from his book, the exact nature of which is unknown. On the other hand, the 'Collectanea' was probably written 'c'.690: before 696, the beginning of the reign of Loingsech mac Oengusso (of Cenel Conaill), since he takes for granted the supremacy of the southern Ui Neill dynasties; also probably before 693, since he seems to assume that the king of Leinster belongs to the Ui Dunlainge. The reign of the Ui Dunlainge king of Leinster, Bran mac Conaill maic Faelain, from 680 to 693, was preceded and followed by kings of a rival dynasty. The date is probably after 688 since he refers to 'the recent plagues' in the plural ('Collectanea', chap. 25). Adomnan, writing 'c'.700, speaks of two major plagues in his lifetime, presumably those of 664-6 and the one he dates himself, 686-8. 
The 'Collectanea' -- first given this title by Archbishop James Ussher (1581-1656) -- is not a life such as that written at much the same date by Muirchu. It purports to recount a journey taking Patrick round the northern half of Ireland, beginning in Brega (on the coast north of Dublin), going west across the midlands through the kingdoms of the southern Ui Neill, across the Shannon into the lands of the Connachta, round the northern coast as far as what is now co. Antrim, then south-west to Armagh, and finally back to Brega. At the end Tirechan briefly takes Patrick via Leinster to Cashel, seat of the kings of Munster. The journey is a convenient framework: he himself admits that Patrick crossed the Shannon not once, but three times. The purpose was to assert that Patrick was the founder of numerous churches as well as the arbiter of the fates of some local dynasties. Tirechan's loyalty, however, was to Patrick and his 'familia' in general rather than to Armagh in particular, which he mentions only once, and then only in passing. The churches to which he gave his greatest attention were Donaghpatrick (Domnach Patraic), in co. Meath, and a church by 'the Wood of Fochluth' (chap. 42), which may well have been Tirechan's own local church. Donaghpatrick was adjacent to two other sites mentioned by Tirechan. The first was Tailtiu, the site of the annual assembly and fair, the greatest such event in Ireland, and by Tirechan's time an essential element in the high-kingship, monopolized since 637 by the Ui Neill. The other site, Raith Airthir, was the royal seat of the kings of Brega; the current ruler, Finsnechtae mac Dunchada, was also king of Tara (as the high-kings were called). Tirechan's text expressed the hope that an alliance between the Ui Neill of Brega and the heirs of Patrick might dominate Ireland; he may also have envisaged Donaghpatrick being the chief Patrician church rather than Armagh. 
Tirechan apparently did not know Muirchu's work, and the reverse may also be true. In any case their intentions, both literary and political, were quite different: while Muirchu was the champion of Armagh, Tirechan wished to uphold the claims of the heirs of Patrick, without any special reference to Armagh, by attaching the saint on the one hand to many small, often ancient, churches and, on the other, by harnessing the power of the leading Ui Neill dynasty of the time behind the 'familia' of Patrick. Tirechan's text offers the first detailed picture of the ecclesiastical and political geography of Ireland. Later lives of Patrick, notably the tripartite life, were principally based on a combination of Muirchu's life and Tirechan's 'Collectanea'. Some of the personalities he records as disciples of Patrick may well be early figures, but it is difficult to see how this can be demonstrated. 


@@@@@


doc= 27474


Tirel, Walter (d. in or before 1130), courtier and landowner, was the son and heir of another Walter Tirel and was lord of Poix in Picardy, some 17 miles south-west of Amiens, and Domesday lord of Langham, Essex. He was a vassal of the count of Pontoise and Amiens and held his English estate of his father-in-law, Richard de Clare. Walter Tirel is described by some contemporary authorities as having fired the arrow that killed King William Rufus. But Suger of St Denis and John of Salisbury both report that in later years Walter denied the allegation, at a time when (as Suger observes) 'he had nothing to fear or gain'. Walter declared repeatedly that he had not so much as seen Rufus in the New Forest on the day of his death and had not set foot in the part of the forest where Rufus was hunting. Theories of an assassination conspiracy involving Walter Tirel, Henry I, and the Clare family are not supported by contemporary evidence and are no longer taken seriously. 
Walter Tirel was a friend of Anselm, abbot of Bec, who, on a visit to Poix of uncertain date, correctly prophesied the unexpected arrival of a large sturgeon for their dinner. Anselm's visit is one of several indications of Walter's association with the abbey of Bec. The connection probably resulted from the close relationship between the abbey and the family of Walter's wife, Adeliza de Clare, who spent her widowhood at Conflans, a daughter house of Bec, and whose brother Richard had been a monk of Bec before becoming abbot of Ely. The Clares were benefactors of Bec itself and also founded the Bec priories of St Neot's, Huntingdonshire, and Stoke by Clare, Suffolk. 
Walter Tirel was active in both France and England. William of Malmesbury reports that he was on the friendliest of terms with William Rufus, who brought him from France to his court in England. He was clearly at Rufus's court at the time of the king's death on 2 August 1100 and was doubtless in Rufus's company at other times as well, although he attests no surviving royal charters. But he is also known to have entered into an agreement with the count of Pontoise and Amiens in 1087 and he was in attendance at the French royal court in 1091. His two major monastic foundations were both French: the abbey of St Pierre de Selincourt, and the priory of St Denis de Poix to which he granted two marks annually from the tithes of Langham in Essex. 
Walter had presumably died by 1130: the pipe roll of that year records Langham, Essex, as being held by his wife (or widow) Adeliza. Their lands at Poix and Langham passed to their son and heir, Hugh, who subsequently sold Langham to Henry of Cornhill on joining the second crusade in 1147. 


@@@@@


doc= 27475


Tisdal, Philip (bap. 1703, d. 1777), lawyer and politician, was baptized on 1 March 1703 at St Mary's Church, Dublin, the son of Richard Tisdal (died 1742), registrar of the Irish court of chancery, and MP for Dundalk (1707-13) and Louth (1713-27), and his wife, Marian, daughter of Richard Boyle, MP for Leighlin. He was educated at Thomas Sheridan's school in Capel Street, Dublin, and from 1718 at Trinity College, Dublin, where he was tutored by Swift's friend Patrick Delany. He graduated in 1722 and entered the Middle Temple in 1728. In 1733 he was called to the Irish bar, where he achieved rapid success. His marriage in 1736 to Mary, daughter of the Revd Rowland Singleton, and niece and coheir of Henry Singleton, chief justice of the common pleas and master of the rolls, aided his political career. Not only was she a distinguished beauty, but she was also extremely wealthy. His influential connections enabled him to stand as a parliamentary candidate for Dublin University in 1739, and although initially defeated by Alexander McAuley, who was backed by Swift, Tisdal's petition was successful and he represented the university in the Irish parliament until 1776. 
On 21 January 1742 Tisdal was appointed third serjeant-at-law, and became a bencher of the King's Inns, and on the death of his father in October he succeeded him as registrar of the court of chancery. In 1743 he was one of the leading counsel for the plaintiff in the celebrated Anglesey peerage case. In 1751 he was appointed solicitor-general, and on 31 July 1760 attorney-general, appointments which he owed in part to the influence of his new patron, the primate, George Stone. The first of these appointments sparked resentment among the speaker Henry Boyle's party and it was a contributory factor in the increase of tension that led to the money bill dispute of 1753. 
Tisdal's parliamentary talents raised him to great eminence as a politician and he was invaluable as a parliamentary speaker to a succession of viceroys. However, his bitter rivalry with John Hely-Hutchinson, MP for Cork City, occasionally persuaded him to obstruct government measures, as did the influence of Primate Stone. During the duke of Bedford's administration he refused to support a money bill until resolutions against the burden of pensions on the Irish establishment were transmitted to London. After the government's defeat Tisdal persuaded the patriot clubs of Dublin to organize a celebration. Although he quickly returned to the government fold once Bedford had made his peace with Stone, he threatened to go into opposition when Richard Rigby, chief secretary, appeared likely to be appointed as master of the rolls. He was eventually assuaged by the offer of the reversion of the post of secretary of state. 
At the general election of 1761 Tisdal was again returned, by a large majority, for Dublin University, and in the same year received the freedom of the city of Cork. In the Irish Commons his pre-eminence was challenged by an alliance between Hely-Hutchinson and the new chief secretary, William Gerard Hamilton. But with the assistance of Stone and Lord Shannon, Hamilton's personal ambitions were scuppered and Tisdal returned as leader in the Commons. His political comeback, however, was short-lived as the new viceroy, Lord Hertford, opted for Hely-Hutchinson as his chief parliamentary manager. Tisdal's position had been undermined by the death of Stone and inconsistent government majorities during the previous viceroyalty. 
On the death of the lord chancellor, John Bowes, in 1767, Tisdal made a strenuous effort to gain the seals. But despite support from Lord Townshend, the ministry was unwilling to appoint an Irishman to this post, and it went to James Hewitt, Viscount Lifford. Smarting at his treatment Tisdal did not proffer his support for Townshend's planned augmentation of the army. Nevertheless he was able to retain a great degree of influence in the Townshend administration, and that of his successor, Lord Harcourt; his luxurious living and social habits added, in the eyes of both Townshend and Harcourt, to his merits as an adviser. Tisdal, his wife, and their two daughters divided their time between their town mansion in Leinster Street, Dublin, and Stillorgan Park, co. Dublin. The artist Angelica Kauffman, who was patronized by Mary Tisdal, was a frequent visitor to their homes during her stay in Ireland in 1771. As a leading member of the Dublin Castle government Tisdal was satirized in 'Baratariana', a compilation of anti-Townshend propaganda pamphlets written by prominent opposition MPs. In this work Tisdal was Don Philip the Moor, but he was more commonly known as Black Phil due to his dark complexion, grave demeanour, and sardonic temper. 
Tisdal's support for government was always conditional on his personal advancement, but he was not devoid of patriot sympathies. He voted for the absentee tax despite Harcourt's withdrawal of support, and was reluctant to offer support for parliamentary approval of the American war -- although this was partly motivated by pique following the appointment of Henry Flood to the post of Irish vice-treasurer, which Tisdal wanted for himself. In 1776 Tisdal's election for the university seat was opposed by Richard Hely-Hutchinson, the son of his rival. Tisdal was defeated, but was returned at the same general election for Armagh. A petition was lodged against Hutchinson's return, which was subsequently declared void. Tisdal's death at Spa in the Netherlands on 11 September 1777 was a severe blow to government, which struggled against a rejuvenated opposition during the Buckinghamshire viceroyalty. Tisdal was buried at Finglas, near Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 27476


Tisdall, William (1669-1735), Church of Ireland clergyman, was born in Dublin, the son of William Tisdall, sheriff of Carrickfergus, and his wife, Anna. He entered Trinity College, Dublin, on 16 August 1688, where his tutor was Edward Smith, later bishop of Down and Connor. He became scholar in 1692, fellow in 1696, and obtained the degree of DD in 1707. Tisdall seems to have made the acquaintance of Jonathan Swift as early as 1695-6, while the latter was at Kilroot, co. Antrim, during one of his estrangements from Sir William Temple. Swift sympathized with Tisdall's arrogant churchmanship and hatred of Presbyterians, and thought a good deal of his capacity as a preacher. He and Tisdall corresponded too on political questions, and were in agreement as to the desirability of passing a bill against occasional conformity by dissenters. These relations were abruptly changed in 1704, when Tisdall announced to his friend that he had designs upon the hand of Swift's companion, Esther Johnson (Stella). Swift replied in a letter dated 20 April 1704, in which rage and irony are apparent enough beneath the studied calmness which he affected. The episode was very soon over but Swift never got over his grudge against the 'interloper'. When he wanted a contemptuous epithet for Richard Steele he called him a 'Tisdall fellow'. Tisdall consoled himself by marrying, on 16 May 1706, Eleanor (died 1736), daughter of Hugh Morgan of Cottlestown, co. Sligo. 
In 1706 Tisdall became vicar of Kerry and Ruavan, co. Antrim. He was appointed rector of Drumcree, co. Armagh, on 29 November 1711, and was admitted vicar of Belfast in the following year. His reputation as a controversialist was already considerable in the north of Ireland. His ironical 'A Sample of True-Blew Presbyterian Loyalty, in All Changes and Turns of Government' appeared in 1709; this was followed, in 1712, by his vigorous 'Conduct of the Dissenters in Ireland'. Tisdall declared in jest (though the joke was not relished by Swift) that he had saved Ireland by this work, as Swift had saved England by his 'Conduct of the Allies'. John McBride retorted in 'A Sample of Jet-Black Prelatic Calumny'. Tisdall published two other small tracts before the dominion of the whigs was definitely established in 1715. After this he was silent. His relations with Swift became closer again after Stella's death, and he was a witness to Swift's will. Tisdall died on 8 June 1735 and was survived for just a year and a day by his wife. A son, William, became vicar of St James's, Dublin. He married Lady Mary, daughter of Chambre Brabazon, fifth earl of Meath. 


@@@@@


doc= 27477


Tisdale, John (b. 1530/31, d. in or after 1563), printer, freed in 1555, aged twenty-four, began to print in partnership with John Charlewood in 1557 or 1558 at the Saracen's Head, near Holborn conduit. His next book, in 1558 or 1559, he apparently printed alone at the sign of the Mitre in Smithfield. In 1560-61 he was in Knightrider Street, south of St Paul's Cathedral, and in 1561-3 at the sign of the Eagle's Foot in All Hallows churchyard, Lombard Street. He was an original member of the Stationers' Company, and is mentioned in its first charter, on 4 May 1557. The first entry to him in the register is in 1558 for a licence 'to prynte an A B C in laten for Rycharde Jugge, John Judson, and Anthony Smythe', which is the 'first instance recorded in the 'Register' of one printer printing for another' (Arber, 'Regs. Stationers', 1.95). He is also known to have printed for Rafe Newbery and Francis Coldocke. 
Tisdale married, on 5 November 1559, Katherine Master. He began to take apprentices in the same year, on 25 December. One of his devices was an angel driving Adam and Eve out of paradise; another was Abraham's sacrifice. He printed several of Bishop Bale's treatises. His last production is dated 1563, and the latest entry referring to him is one for taking an apprentice on 25 June of the same year (Arber, 'Regs. Stationers', 1.227). 


@@@@@


doc= 27478


Titcomb, Jonathan Holt (1819-1887), first bishop of Rangoon, was born, with a twin sister, in Kensington, London, on 29 July 1819, the son of Jonathan Holt Titcomb (died 1851) of Fulham. He was educated in London at Clapham and at King's College School and, after a lacklustre university career, graduated BA (junior optime) from Peterhouse, Cambridge, in 1841. In the spring of 1842 he was engaged by Lady Harriet Forde of Hollymount, near Downpatrick in co. Down, as tutor to her nephew, and in the following September was ordained deacon and appointed curate on the estate. Initially he was a high-churchman, but his ministry among the estate workers converted him to evangelicalism and awakened an interest in missionary endeavour. In September 1843 he was ordained priest and in April 1845, after several months as curate at St Mark's, Kennington, London, he accepted the living of St Andrew-the-Less at Barnwell near Cambridge. He took to it his new wife, Sarah (1824-1876), eldest daughter of John Wood of Southport, Lancashire, whom he married on 24 May 1845 and with whom he was to have eight daughters and two sons; the couple's eldest son, William Holt Yates Titcomb, became a noted artist closely associated with St Ives, Cornwall. 
Barnwell offered considerable scope for an evangelical preacher. Contemporaries described it as a sinkhole of moral impurity brought about by a massive population increase -- from 400 in 1820 to 7000 in 1841. Titcomb initially concentrated on drawing new people into the church with lecture programmes and Sunday schools; but in 1850, fretting about the thousands of people beyond the church's reach, he braved unfavourable comparison with nonconformists by plunging into open-air preaching. He defended the practice in letters to the 'Christian Guardian' and with growing confidence had made for himself a folding iron pulpit so that he could preach outdoors in style. While at Barnwell he also published the first of several works designed to minimize the effects of doctrinal controversy on churchgoers and broaden evangelicalism's outlook, including 'Heads of Prayer for Daily Private Devotion' (2nd edn, 1850), and 'Bible Studies, or, An Inquiry into the Progressive Development of Divine Revelation' (1851). Later publications included 'Baptism: its Institution, its Privileges, and its Responsibilities' (1866); 'Cautions for Doubters' (1873); and 'Before the Cross: a Book of Devout Meditation' (1878). 
In June 1859 Titcomb became secretary of the Christian Vernacular Education Society, but he missed direct pastoral work and in April 1861 he accepted the living of the new church of St Stephen's, South Lambeth, London -- then in the Winchester diocese. He successfully built up a new congregation while maintaining a busy schedule of London speaking engagements and commitments to the Religious Tract Society and the 'True Catholic', which he edited for two years. From 1870 to 1876 he was additionally rural dean of Clapham, London, and in 1874 was made an honorary canon of Winchester Cathedral. The years at South Lambeth were marked by personal sadness: the deaths of two daughters; of his beloved twin sister; and finally, in January 1876, of Sarah, 'one of the wisest and best of wives' (Edwards, 16). 
Titcomb struggled to see the wisdom of God in his losses and in March 1876 he was grateful to move on to the living of Woking, Surrey, offered to him by the earl of Onslow. The challenge of a new parish revitalized him and in 1877 he accepted the bishopric of Rangoon, in Burma, a new post funded largely by the Winchester diocese. He arrived in Rangoon with three of his daughters in February 1878 and embarked enthusiastically on strengthening the Burmese church and raising funds to remedy its deficiencies in chaplains and buildings. Among other activities, he held a confirmation in the Andaman Islands, consecrated a missionary church at Toungoo, ordained as deacons several Tamil and Karen Christians, and baptized numerous converts from among Rangoon's indigenous, Indian, and Chinese populations. In July 1879, however, illness again struck his family with the death of his eldest daughter, and another fell so seriously ill that Titcomb had to return with her to England to await her death. During this unhappy vigil he wrote a slim volume entitled 'Personal Recollections of British Burma and its Church Mission Work' (1880). He returned to Burma in late 1880 but in February 1881 fell over a cliff in the Karen hills and was eventually forced back to England, where he resigned the bishopric in March 1882. 
Titcomb did not expect to work heavily again but in January 1884 the bishop of London appointed him his coadjutor for supervising the English church in northern and central Europe, a job hardly less physically challenging than his previous one and which committed him to extensive visitation tours to France, Germany, Scandinavia, Poland, Russia, and numerous countries in between. In 1886, very nearly worn out, he took up the perpetual curacy of St Peter's, Brockley, in Kent. He died at 28 Marina Street, St Leonards, Sussex, on 2 April 1887 and was buried in Brompton cemetery, London, on 7 April. His two sons and four of his daughters survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 27479


Tite, Sir William (1798-1873), architect, was born on 7 February 1798 in the parish of St Bartholomew-the-Great, London, the son of Arthur Tite, a Russia merchant, and his wife, Anne, daughter of John Elgie. Educated at a day school in Tower Street in the City of London and afterwards at a school in Hackney, at the age of fourteen he was articled to the architect David Laing (1774-1856), a pupil of Sir John Soane chiefly remembered as the designer of the London custom house of 1813-17. During his pupillage he assisted Laing in rebuilding the nave of Wren's church of St Dunstan-in-the-East (1817-20) and published in 1818 a history of the building (of which only Wren's tower remained after extensive bomb damage in 1940). He also appears to have visited Italy at this time (Briggs, 39). 
In July 1818 Tite was admitted to the Royal Academy Schools, where he attended Soane's lectures on architecture. However, his first commission was executed in a medieval Gothic idiom far removed from Soane's cool neo-classicism. Having failed to win a number of architectural competitions of the early 1820s, in 1824 he was appointed by the Revd Edward Irving to design a new church in Sidmouth Street, off Regent Square, for the Church of Scotland -- a commission which enabled him to set up his own office in Jewry Street in the City of London that year. The church, completed in 1827 (and demolished in 1950 following serious war damage), was couched in a Decorated Gothic style, and its west front modelled rather incongruously on York Minster. However, his second major commission -- Mill Hill School, Middlesex, of 1825-6 -- signalled the exuberant eclecticism that was to characterize his career, being executed in a severely neo-classical style. 
In 1832 Tite designed the austerely classical Golden Cross Hotel in London's Strand (dem. 1936 to make way for South Africa House), and the following year began work on the King's Weigh-House Church in Fish Street Hill (dem. 1890s). By the time he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society, in 1835, his growing practice, and a financially advantageous marriage in 1832 to Emily, daughter of John Curtis of Herne Hill, Surrey, had enabled him to move out of the City to the prestigious Bloomsbury address of 25 Upper Bedford Place. In 1838 he was elected president of the Architectural Society (merged with the new Royal Institute of British Architects in 1842). The same year he designed the Anglican and nonconformist chapels (dem. late 1950s) and other buildings at Norwood cemetery in south London in an attractive Perpendicular Gothic. He also began work, in partnership with C. R. Cockerell, on the headquarters of the London and Westminster Bank in Lothbury (dem. 1928 to make way for the Mewes and Davis building now known as NatWest Hall). In 1839 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, whose vice-president he was from 1860 until his death in 1873. Two years later he was working in Scotland, on the Gothic parish church at Dollar, Clackmannan (1841; altered 1921). 
The building which made Tite's name was the new Royal Exchange at the heart of the City of London. Having failed to enter the first open (and ultimately fruitless) competition of 1839, in February 1840 Tite was chosen as one of the judges for the subsequent closed competition, for which five leading national architects -- among them Sir Charles Barry, Sir Robert Smirke, and Cockerell -- were invited to submit designs. In the event only Cockerell entered a scheme, which then lost by thirteen votes to seven to a treatment entered, somewhat unprofessionally, by Tite himself. (A watercolour perspective of Cockerell's splendid design survives in the RIBA drawings collection.) Work on Tite's design began in 1841, and the exchange was opened by Queen Victoria on 28 October 1844. Tite's massive Corinthian portico still dominates this part of the City, but the building itself was converted in 1988 to mixed retail and office use, for which an additional attic storey was added. 
During the 1840s Tite was increasingly employed by the new railway companies in valuing and buying land and, most importantly, in designing their new stations. His first major station, built in 1838, was the first London terminus of the London and Southampton Railway (after 1848 the London and South-Western Railway or LSWR) at Nine Elms, a handsome though reticent Italianate building whose most prominent feature was its five-bay arcade. By 1848 Nine Elms had been superseded by a new LSWR terminus further east, at Waterloo (where Tite merely advised the architect Joseph Cocke). However, Tite's Nine Elms survived as a goods depot until demolished in the early 1970s, to make way for the New Covent Garden market. At the other end of the line Tite built stuccoed Italianate termini at Southampton (1838-40) and Gosport (1842). The latter flanked the line, and was dominated by a splendid Tuscan colonnade (the ruin of which was, following closure and fire, safeguarded by English Heritage and the local authority after 1990). Most of the LSWR's intermediate stations were also designed by Tite; of these, Eastleigh and Winchester still survive, but are much altered, and only the small building at Micheldever appears in anything like its original guise. 
Following his work for the London and Southampton, Tite was employed as a station architect by a large number of other railway companies. In 1846-51 he completely rebuilt the Liverpool and Manchester Railway's terminus at Liverpool Lime Street, its new stuccoed Renaissance facade (since altered) being dominated by a nineteen-bay Tuscan colonnade. At his Carlisle Citadel Station of 1847-8, for the Caledonian and Scottish Central Railway, Tite abandoned the refined Italianate classicism of his London and Southampton stations for an asymmetrical, collegiate late Gothic style, even incorporating a crenellated clock tower. Carlisle was followed by two similarly styled Caledonian and Scottish stations: Perth and Edinburgh Caledonian, both of 1848. In his presidential address to the RIBA in 1862 Tite declared that 'At Carlisle and Perth I have done my best to mould the forms and modes of thinking of medieval architects to the unusual requirements of railways', though six years later he did admit that his Carlisle design was 'troublesome, and did not go very well with the platforms and sheds' (Briggs, 95). For the LSWR's terminus at Windsor (now Windsor and Eton Riverside) of 1851, he employed a Tudor Gothic idiom, lighting the booking hall with a vast, cross-framed Tudorbethan window. His surviving Chiswick Station of 1849 for the same company was, however, a complete contrast: a demure, three-bay Georgian cottage in brick and stucco. During the 1840s Tite also designed the small terminus at Blackwall, east London, of 1840 (dem.), the stations on the Exeter and Yeovil Railway (later incorporated into the LSWR), and the intermediate stations from Le Havre to Paris via Rouen for the Compagnie des Chemins de Fer du Nord. (His station at Le Havre, much rebuilt, was immortalized in Emile Zola's darkly pessimistic 'La bete humaine' of 1890, and finally demolished in 1930.) 
After a serious illness, followed by a trip to Italy in 1851-2, Tite gradually wound down his once-thriving practice. He designed only four buildings between 1853 and 1859, three with the help of assistants, and nothing during the remaining fourteen years of his life. The buildings at the London metropolis cemetery at Brookwood, Surrey, of 1854-6 were devised in partnership with Sidney Smirke; his Gresham House in London's Old Broad Street, also of 1854-6 (and demolished after the First World War), was built with the assistance of E. N. Clifton; while St James's, Gerrards Cross, of 1858-9 was built in partnership with his former office assistant Ebenezer Trotman. (Tite's brick church was in an uncompromisingly strident Byzantine style, complete with octagonal dome and tall campanile, since labelled 'aggressively un-English' and 'exotic' (Briggs, 96).) His other last work, the carpet warehouse for Tapling & Co. in Gresham Street of 1857, was destroyed in an air raid of 1940. 
After 1859, however, Tite was far from idle. He was president of the RIBA in 1861-3 and again in 1867-70, and after an unsuccessful attempt to win the seat of Barnstaple for the Liberals in 1854 was elected as MP for Bath in 1855; he served as the city's MP until his death. In parliament he strenuously opposed the scheme of Sir George Gilbert Scott to clothe his new Foreign Office in a Gothic style, decrying the proposal as 'inconvenient and expensive' ('Hansard 3', 152, 11 Feb 1859, cols. 260-63). He subsequently helped to persuade the prime minister, Palmerston, to force Scott to alter his design to 'a light and correct Italian style, consistent with the general character of the buildings in the neighbourhood' ('Hansard 3', 152, 18 Feb 1859, col. 522). Ironically, Tite later warmly welcomed Scott's unapologetically Gothic design for the Albert Memorial as 'appropriate', 'elegant', and 'satisfactory to the nation' ('Hansard 3', 170, 23 May 1863, col. 605). 
Tite was also a member of London's Metropolitan Board of Works, in which capacity he advised on the construction of the Victoria Embankment; a director of the London and Westminster Bank; a magistrate for the counties of Middlesex and Somerset; a governor of Dulwich College and St Thomas's Hospital; and, in 1862, master of the Spectaclemakers' Company. Although not a Royal Academician, he exhibited 'a composition from the works of Inigo Jones' at the academy in 1854. Winner of the royal gold medal for architecture in 1856, he was knighted in 1869, and made a companion of the Bath the following year. 
Tite was also active as an antiquary. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1839 (in 1848 he published a descriptive catalogue of the finds from the excavations conducted during the rebuilding of the Royal Exchange), honorary secretary of the London Institution between 1824 and 1869, and president of the Cambridge Camden Society in 1866. Eminent as an architect, Tite was also a renowned book collector of omnifarious taste. The sale of his library at Sothebys in May and June 1874 occupied sixteen days and produced the sum of $19,943 6's'. As it was one of the greatest collections of the time (including many rare books and historical autographs), and the auction was almost the first of a series of events of the kind, a large selection of his books is included in 'Contributions towards a Dictionary of English Book Collectors' (ed. B. Quaritch, 1969, 288-92). 
Tite died during a trip to Torquay on 20 April 1873 (by which time he was living at the fashionable Belgravia address of 42 Lowndes Square) and was, appropriately, buried in the Anglican catacombs, Norwood cemetery. His wife survived him, but they had no children. His personal property was valued after his death at nearly $400,000. (Tite had reportedly boasted 'that he had inherited one fortune from his father, had married another, and had earned a third by his own exertions' (Briggs, 96).) Of this he left $1000 to the RIBA to establish an annual Tite prize, having already founded a Tite scholarship at the City of London School before his death. The architectural pupils who survived him included his assistants Ebenezer Trotman and C. F. Porden, and E. N. Clifton. 


@@@@@


doc= 27480


Tietjens, (Johanna) Therese Carolina (1831-1877), singer, was born in Hamburg on 17 July 1831, the daughter of Peter Albrecht Tietjens, a day labourer in the shipyards, and his wife, Maria Friederica Schroeder, who after her husband's death kept a small inn. She had two elder sisters and a brother. After a private musical education in Hamburg, subsidized by friends, she went to study in Vienna. Her voice was a soprano of singular sweetness and power; after a debut in Auber's 'Le Macon' she made a mark (1849) as Donizetti's Lucrezia Borgia. Until 1856 she sang principally at Frankfurt, Brno, and Vienna. She was engaged for the 1858 season at Her Majesty's by Benjamin Lumley, who simplified her name to Titiens, and her London debut as Valentine in 'Les Huguenots' was a great success. From that date, though she occasionally appeared on the continent (Turin, 1861; Paris, 1863; Naples, 1863, 1864) and in North America (1874, 1876), she made her home in London, and in 1868 became a naturalized British subject. She was known for opera mainly in London and in Dublin and for oratorio in the chief British cities. Her power and grandeur, her irreproachably maiden condition, her kindness, and her geniality met the expectations of mid-Victorian Britain; even her ultimate fatness and her weakness for travelling with unnecessary luggage became incorporated into a stereotype of the prima donna. As Lucrezia, Semiramide, and Countess Almaviva, she had competitors, but she had none as Cherubini's Medea or Beethoven's Leonore: here she was reckoned a 'consummate tragedian' (Davison). She gave the first London performances of several Verdi and Gounod parts, and sang Ortrud in 'Lohengrin'. Though the 'Musical Times' called her 'one of the greatest artists the world has yet seen', Shaw was to write of her 'essential obsolescence'. In 1871 she was awarded the gold medal of the Royal Philharmonic Society. 
In 1875 cancer was diagnosed; after several operations and considerable pain Tietjens made on 19 May 1877 her last appearance (as Lucrezia), but collapsed at the end. She died on 3 October 1877 at her home, 51 New Finchley Road, St John's Wood, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery on the 8th. Her funeral was attended by a large crowd, and marred by the presence of a 'rough element', who damaged trees, stole flowers, and pressed around the grave. 


@@@@@


doc= 27481


Titley, Walter (bap. 1698, d. 1768), diplomatist, baptized on 6 December 1698 at Ingestre, Staffordshire, was the son of Abraham Titley of Hopton, Staffordshire. He was admitted a king's scholar at Westminster School in 1714. While there he acted as 'help' to Osborn Atterbury, the son of Francis Atterbury, bishop of Rochester, and was afterwards his tutor. On 28 May 1719 he was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in 1720; he graduated BA in 1722, was elected a fellow of Trinity in 1725, and proceeded MA in 1726. He then entered the diplomatic service, wishing for 'some sort of employment abroad, in which I might have an opportunity of acquainting myself with business and seeing the world' (Black, 'British Diplomats', 101), and became secretary of the British embassy at Turin. On 3 January 1729 he was selected to act as charge d'affaires at Copenhagen in the absence of John Campbell, Lord Glenorchy (later third earl of Breadalbane), and on 3 November 1730 he was named minister-resident. Titley's diplomatic career was henceforward devoted to Britain's ongoing efforts to exclude Denmark from any alliance led by France. The policy was pursued throughout the century, usually with success. 
In 1733 Richard Bentley (1662-1742), master of Trinity, appointed Titley to the physic fellowship at that college. Titley resigned his diplomatic position to accept it, but had become so attached to his life at Copenhagen that he was unable to leave it. He accordingly resumed his post. In 1736 Horatio Walpole proposed that Titley be made envoy-extraordinary to the Danish court; his nomination was initially unsuccessful, but Titley received the promotion in 1739. He became the century's longest-serving British diplomatist, exceeded in his time overseas only by Sir Horace Mann. The emphasis he placed on socializing was well known: Walpole thought him 'amused and deceived by little outward personal civilities' (Black, 'British Diplomats', 100), and in 1746 Titley complained that, with his pay in arrears, he was unable to give dinners and so alienated prospective friends at court. His efforts to ensure that successive Danish kings were friendly to Britain included not only outbidding proffered subsidies from France, but also a role in the arrangement of two royal marriages: that of Princess Louisa of Great Britain to Prince Frederick, later King Frederick V of Denmark, in 1743, and of the Princess Caroline Matilda of Great Britain to King Christian VII of Denmark in 1766. Another particular achievement was an agreement in 1761 whereby the king of Denmark agreed to order the seizure and extradition of deserters from the British army and navy, on condition that the British government reciprocated with Danish absentees. Two years later, in 1763, Titley reported his exhaustion to London -- his 'gouty legs' would no longer support him 'in paying court or pursuing the noble pastime of levee-hunting' (ibid., 99) -- and he was granted an assistant. He died, greatly respected and lamented by his contemporaries, at his estate at Lyngby, near Copenhagen, on 27 February 1768. In his will he bequeathed $1000 each to Westminster School, Trinity College, and the University of Cambridge. Part of the last bequest was to be devoted to buildings. 
In addition to a number of original Latin verses, Titley wrote an 'Imitation' in English of the second ode of the third book of Horace; this was much admired by Bentley, who parodied it. 


@@@@@


doc= 27482


Titus, Silius (1622/3-1704), royalist conspirator and politician, was born at Bushey, Hertfordshire, the first son of Silas Tyto (died 1637) and his second wife, Constancia Colley (died 1667). His father was of Italian ancestry and was a soap manufacturer and salter of some wealth who lived at Bushey and Holborn, London. Titus matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, in March 1638, aged fifteen. In the following year he entered the Middle Temple, where he remained until the outbreak of civil war in 1642 (he was to hold on to his rooms there until 1652). He joined the forces of parliament in Hertfordshire, where he was granted a commission in the county militia and also served as a captain under Colonel Ayloffe; he was present at the siege of Donnington Castle in October 1644. Titus was of presbyterian persuasion and chose to resign his commissions rather than serve in the New Model Army. Appointed to attend the king when the latter was at Holdenby House in 1647, he brought news of the king's seizure by Cornet George Joyce and was granted an annuity of $50 by parliament. Later he served in the king's household while the latter was held in the Isle of Wight, and was won over to the royalist side. As part of his new service to Charles I, Titus attempted to engineer the king's escape from the island and was expelled from Carisbrooke Castle. He remained on the Isle of Wight, however, and in September 1648 was once more in attendance on the king until Charles was taken into final custody by the army. The presbyterian faction in parliament, desiring a messenger to Jersey, used Titus, but the discovery of this action meant that he was forced to become an exile in December 1649. 
After the regicide Titus sought service with the new king and accompanied Charles II into Scotland. There his presbyterianism led to his appointment as one of the grooms of the bedchamber to the king. Thereafter Titus was frequently used as a confidential messenger, especially in 1651 when he carried the idea of Charles II's marriage to the marquess of Argyll's daughter to the queen mother. Exile and the royal court in the 1650s also brought Titus into the world of intrigue, where he often used the alias of John Jennings. He was daring in his exploits as he went back and forth carrying messages to the king's allies in England; some thought him 'negligent of his own safety' in such business (Routledge, 4.226). In June 1659 he was observed prowling undisguised in a bookbinder's shop in London when he had already been closely involved in Booth's royalist rising of that year and would have been severely dealt with if caught. Titus had, however, previously made overtures to secretary of state John Thurloe for permission to return to England in 1654, even offering to swear fidelity to Cromwell. These overtures were rejected and the exiled Charles II and Sir Edward Hyde continued to trust Titus. Hyde noted 'unless he is the greatest dissembler in the world... he sets the least value on himself and gives the greatest testimony to others' (Routledge, 4.460). 
In the 1650s Titus was associated with the exiled George Villiers, second duke of Buckingham, and through Buckingham he became acquainted with the plotters John Wildman and Edward Sexby. It was Titus who encouraged the former Leveller Sexby in his plans to assassinate Cromwell and from March to April 1657 the pair lurked in the Netherlands. It was at this time that Sexby composed his pseudonymous pamphlet 'Killing Noe Murder'. In 1697 Titus claimed sole authorship of this notorious publication, but it is likely that Sexby, who was no fool, and a very capable author in his own right, had the main part in its creation. It may be that Titus, who later became known for his quips in parliament, added some of the wit that sparkles throughout the work. But after Sexby's arrest in July 1657 it was he, not Titus, who publicly acknowledged the pamphlet as his own. 
With the restoration of the monarchy in 1660 Titus returned home. He was rewarded for his former service with $3000 from the Convention Parliament and the keepership of Deal Castle. He sat in the Convention as a member for Ludgershall in Wiltshire and went on to serve in the parliaments of three reigns: for Lostwithiel in 1670, Hertfordshire in 1679, Huntingdonshire in 1679 and 1681, and Ludlow in 1691. While managing to remain in the Commons during a large part of this period he was noted as a speaker willing to use wit even in the dullest debates. Although he was never sufficiently significant to gain major office, there were rumours of his receiving a secretary of state's post in the 1680s. He was often seen as a court supporter, but he also remained very much the back-bench agitator, preferring to play to the gallery and relish his own jokes. Nevertheless, Titus was serious enough in seeking revenge against the regicides and was one of those who moved for the exhumation of the bodies of Cromwell, Ireton, and Bradshaw in 1661. He lost his seat at the election that same year and remained out of the Commons for some time, but he retained his post as groom of the bedchamber. In 1663 he married Katherine (died in or after 1705), daughter of James Winstanley, counsellor at law of Gray's Inn and Braunstone, Leicestershire; they had three daughters. In 1666 during the Dutch war Titus was made a captain of a company and colonel of the Kent militia. During the 1670s he became a propertied gentleman, resigning his post as groom of the bedchamber and buying Ramsey Abbey in Huntingdonshire. 
During the years of the Popish Plot, Titus was an active leader of the anti-Popish faction in the Commons, where among other matters he served as one of the examiners of Edward Coleman, the duke of York's secretary, and attacked a French version of the 'London Gazette' (and by implication its translator) for its papist interpretations. He was often a melodramatic speaker during the period of the plot. Although he sometimes missed the humour of the house because of this, he also tended to be one of those who dominated its debates. Titus had both personal and financial reasons to hate Thomas Osborne, earl of Danby, the king's chief minister, who became a target during the plot on grounds of his dealings with the French on Charles II's behalf. Titus cited non-payment of $4000 owed for his offices on the council of plantations and as groom of the bedchamber; he was also against popery and arbitrary government in any form. He was thus one of the first to attack Danby in the Commons in 1679 and was also very active in the second Exclusion Parliament of 1680-81, especially against the earl of Halifax. He was one of the managers of Viscount Stafford's trial and undertook any number of interventions on the matter of exclusion itself, although he may well have been trying to get the government to buy him off with office and was never that popular with other exclusionists. He made his most famous speech in January 1681 on the matter of limitations on a Catholic sovereign with his usual wit. 
Titus was out of politics for some years after the dissolution of 1681, but was suspected of complicity in the Rye House plot of 1683 and in Monmouth's rebellion of 1685. He attracted attention once again in 1687 when he spoke in favour of the repeal of the penal laws and was thus brought into the privy council by James II, who sought both a presbyterian counterweight to the Church of England men and aid in the remodelling of parliament. Titus was rapidly disillusioned with James, claiming he would have nothing to do with the regime by February 1688, and he attempted to switch sides to William of Orange later that year. However, Titus seems to have overplayed his hand by accepting the patronage of a Catholic monarch and although he came back into parliament in 1691 he gained only limited success. He died in December 1704 at Bushey and was buried there the same month in St James's Church. He was survived by his wife and at least two of their daughters, Susan and Catherine. 


@@@@@


doc= 27483


Tobias (d. 726), bishop of Rochester, was probably a native of Kent. Bede gives most of what is known about him, stating that he had been a pupil of Theodore and Hadrian at Canterbury and had become familiar with Latin and Greek as well as English. He was consecrated ninth bishop of Rochester by Archbishop Berhtwald, in succession to Gefmund, who died between 699 and 716. His name appears as a witness to a charter of dubious authenticity, dated 706. He died in 726 and was buried in the chapel of St Paul which he had built in St Andrew's Cathedral at Rochester. 


@@@@@


doc= 27484


Tobin, George (1768-1838), naval officer and artist, born in Salisbury on 13 December 1768, was the second of eight children of James Tobin (1736/7-1817), a sugar planter and merchant of Nevis in the West Indies and Bristol, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of another Nevis planter, George Webbe; he was an elder brother of John Tobin and a younger brother of James Webbe Tobin. After attending King Edward VI School, Southampton, in May 1780 he entered the navy as a captain's servant on the 'Namur', in which he took part in the battle of the Saintes in April 1782, before transferring to the 'Bombay Castle'. In February 1785 Tobin joined the 'Thisbe' which sailed for Halifax, Nova Scotia, where he completed his time as midshipman in the 'Assistance' and 'Leander'. Being unemployed on his return to Britain in 1787, he sailed as sixth mate on board the East Indiaman 'Sulivan' to Madras and Whampoa (Huangpu) between the autumn of 1788 and June 1790. After rejoining the navy, in the 'Tremendous', he was made a lieutenant on 22 November 1790. 
In April 1791 Tobin was chosen as third lieutenant of the 'Providence' for William Bligh's second breadfruit voyage. When the expedition's official artist withdrew, Tobin became the principal illustrator for the journey to Otaheite (Tahiti) and the West Indies. His journal of that voyage, now in the Mitchell Library, Sydney, shows he was an interested, witty, and tolerant observer of Tahitian life and the accompanying sketches show a scientific interest in natural history and a romantic vision of landscape. Those from his fifteen days on Australian soil at Adventure Bay are among the first European records of Tasmania. Tobin was always generous about Bligh in later years. 
On his return to Britain in August 1793 Tobin was happy to learn that Nelson, related through his wife to Tobin's mother, was no longer able to keep open for him a vacancy as third lieutenant of the 'Agamemnon'. It seemed to Tobin, as a protege of Marjory, duchess of Atholl, better to be appointed, in November 1793, second lieutenant of the frigate 'Thetis' under the command of Captain Alexander Cochrane. In general Tobin recorded the more eventful moments of his career in his sketches and watercolours and this is true of his service in the 'Thetis', and in Rear-Admiral George Murray's flagship 'Resolution', in the Halifax squadron between May 1794 and 1798. 
In July 1798 Tobin was appointed commander of the cedar sloop 'Dasher', in which, having returned home and changed his mind about Nelson's fortune, he tried to get himself posted to the Mediterranean with Nelson. However, Tobin spent the next two years harrying French coastal trade off Brittany before being paid off in October 1801. He was promoted captain on 29 April 1802. On 13 June 1804, still on half pay, he married Dorothy (1767/8-1840), daughter of Captain Gordon Skelly RN, and widow of Major William Duff; they had a daughter, (Eliza) Lucy Hope, and a son, George Webbe. In September 1804, at the request of Rear-Admiral Alexander Cochrane, Tobin was appointed captain of the flagship 'Northumberland', blockading Ferrol and, later, chasing a French fleet to the West Indies where, in September 1805, he was moved into a 38 gun frigate, the 'Princess Charlotte'. On 5 October 1805, by disguising his ship as a merchantman, Tobin captured the French corvette 'Cyane' off Tobago. 
Between 1806 and 1810 the 'Princess Charlotte' operated with the Irish squadron, based in Cork, mainly protecting trade to the West. From April 1811 Tobin acted on occasions as senior officer of the squadron harassing French forces off the north coast of Spain in co-operation with guerrillas before his ship, renamed 'Andromache', joined the Channel Fleet off Ushant in July 1812. The 'Andromache' was present at the fall of San Sebastian in September 1813 and on 23 October captured the Franco-Batavian frigate 'La Trave' off the Saintes. Having previously acted as senior officer off the Gironde, Tobin returned there in December 1813 and successfully led Rear-Admiral Penrose's squadron in the difficult task, requested by Wellington, of forcing an entry into the Gironde. 
When the 'Andromache' was paid off in July 1814, Tobin retired to Teignmouth. On 8 December 1815 he was made a CB. Still contributing to the 'Naval Chronicle', he continued to sketch and paint naval and local scenes with his fellow painters Thomas Luny and Commander Rowland Mainwaring, the latter of whom had married Tobin's stepdaughter Sophia Henrietta Duff. From July 1830 he commanded the royal yacht 'Prince Regent' until it was sold in August 1836. Having been promoted rear-admiral of the White on 10 January 1837, Tobin died in Teignmouth on 10 April 1838 and was buried there in St Michael's Church ten days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 27485


Tobin, John (1770-1804), playwright, was born in Endless Street, Salisbury, on 26 January 1770, the third of eight children of James Tobin (1736/7-1817), a sugar planter and merchant of Nevis and Bristol, and his wife, Elizabeth (1744/5-1824), daughter of another Nevis planter, George Webbe. 
Tobin's father, a partner of the Bristol West India merchant John Pinney, campaigned against the abolition of slavery. An older brother, Rear-Admiral George Tobin (1768-1838), sailed on Bligh's second voyage to Tahiti and was an amateur marine painter. James Webbe Tobin (1767-1814), the eldest of the children with whom he was very close, moved in radical and dissenting circles and was a friend of Coleridge, Southey, Lamb, the philosopher William Godwin, and Sir Humphry Davy. Unlike his father, James Webbe campaigned for the abolition of slavery and was instrumental in bringing to the attention of the British public the cruelties of the Nevis planter Edward Huggins. 
In 1777 James Tobin set out with his wife for Nevis in the West Indies, leaving his three eldest sons in the care of their grandfather who sent them to King Edward VI School in Southampton. When his father returned to settle in Bristol in 1784 John Tobin was sent to Bristol grammar school. In 1787 he left Bristol to be articled to a solicitor in Lincoln's Inn, taking over the partnership with three others in the office some ten years later. Disagreements arose and Tobin left to join a new firm with a Mr Ange. 
A quiet, contemplative, but disorganized man, Tobin was bored with legal work. Always interested in poetry and the theatre as a child, he devoted all of his spare time and energy to writing, trying his hand at opera and tragedy, but feeling most at ease with comedies and stage lyrics. These tended to be imitative and his explanation was that he had 'great difficulty in getting good plots, or in making them' (Benger, 38-9). One such comedy about gambling, 'The Faro Table', was provisionally accepted by Sheridan who then rejected it on the grounds that it bore too close a resemblance to 'School for Scandal' and it might have libelled a well-known dowager who gambled. 
In 1796 Tobin's brother James, whose eyesight was failing, came to live with him at the Temple. His brother played an important role in sustaining Tobin when thirteen of his plays (including 'The Curfew' and 'School for Authors') were rejected by theatre managers. Tobin suffered again when he was persuaded to put his name to Godwin's dull play 'Antonio' and attend the rehearsals to keep up the deception. Godwin was afraid that his play would be suppressed because of his radical reputation. It is not clear how far Tobin shared Godwin's political views, as in 1792 he had complained about 'the present growing system of mental tyranny' in England, but was becoming disillusioned with the outcome of the French Revolution (Benger, 28-30). Desperate to have some of his own work performed, Tobin was encouraged to get the popular actor John Shepherd Munden to stage a piece as a benefit. This early and insignificant farce, 'All's Fair in Love', was put on successfully in April 1803 but was speedily forgotten. 
Tobin's final effort, 'The Honey Moon', was inspired by a discussion one day in his chambers as to how far it would be possible to revive old English comedy as it existed in the days of Shakespeare and Fletcher. Tobin set out to write a play imitative of this style. It was rejected in 1804 by Covent Garden and submitted to Drury Lane. Without knowing the result Tobin left London with some resignation to recover his failing health in Cornwall. While there he concluded that producing a new edition of Shakespeare's work would be less arduous than combating the obduracy of managers, and he began collecting materials. He was almost delirious with joy on hearing that 'The Honey Moon' had been accepted; but in the meantime alarming symptoms of tuberculosis had become evident. He was told that to save his life he must winter in the West Indies. He left Cornwall to see his family in Bristol where he learned that the play was in rehearsal and his father heard of his writing activities for the first time. Tobin left for the Caribbean, possibly on board the 'Pilgrim' from Bristol, in late November 1804. His ship sailed out of Cork on the afternoon of 7 December but he died that night. The ship was driven back by a contrary wind and this allowed Tobin to be buried, unmarried, in what is now known as the Lusitania graveyard near Cobh, where his father, visiting some years later, erected a plaque in his memory. 

'The Honey Moon', a romantic comedy written in blank verse interspersed with prose, was staged at Drury Lane on 31 January 1805, with Elliston as Duke Aranza and Bannister as Orlando, and proved a great success. Much of it was imitative as Tobin had planned and his success at this is demonstrated by the reactions to it. Hazlitt thought the plot owed much to the 'Taming of the Shrew'; Genest detected reminiscences of Massinger and other Elizabethans; others saw Beaumont and Fletcher. A favourite on the English stage for twenty years and still being put on in 1869 at Sadler's Wells, it was translated into French and performed in North America. After this initial posthumous success, Tobin's rejected pieces were eagerly sought after. 

'The Curfew', a tragi-comedy set in feudal times alternating prose with blank verse, was produced at Drury Lane on 19 February 1807 and would have run longer than twenty nights but for Sheridan's anxiety to avoid providing a benefit for Tobin's relatives as had been agreed. Two further pieces, 'The Fisherman', an opera, and 'Attraction', were accepted by Drury Lane and Covent Garden respectively but the music was lost in a fire at these sister theatres. 

'The School for Authors', a prose comedy, was the next success. Based on 'The Connoisseur', one of Jean-Francois Marmontel's tales, this amusing and well-constructed little play owes something to Samuel Foote's 'The Patron'. The part of Diaper, the sensitive author, provided a triumph for J. S. Munden when he played the role at Covent Garden on 5 December 1808. Tobin's brother, who had been an energetic literary executor, then had to set out himself for Nevis for the sake of his own failing health and no new work was staged until he began to renew pressure on theatre managers from the Caribbean. 
In 1813, a year before he died, James Webbe Tobin wrote a letter from Nevis in which he noted the earlier withdrawal by Sheridan of 'The Faro Table'. He noted also that on the death of the dowager it had been brought forward again and put into rehearsal. However two days before its presentation he was told that it could be considered as a satire on another lady and it was withdrawn. He continued 'Now Sir, should there be no more peeresses or ladies of quality standing in the way, I may justly require that this piece... may be brought forward' (Benger, 157-8). This was done eventually at Drury Lane on 5 November 1816, nearly twenty years after it had been written, when the manners it satirizes were already passing away. It was not a success nor was 'The Fisherman' which was staged unexpectedly in 1819. 


@@@@@


doc= 27486


Tod, James (1782-1835), army and political officer in India, born at Islington on 19 March 1782 and baptized there on 5 May, was the son of James Tod ('b'. 1745), and his wife, Mary, the daughter of Andrew Heatly, a Scot who settled at Rhode Island. He was educated in Scotland. In 1798 his uncle, Patrick Heatly, procured him an East Indian cadetship, and, after training at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, he went (March 1799) to Bengal, arriving on 26 August; he was posted to the 2nd European regiment (ensign's commission dated 9 January 1800). After volunteering for service with Lord Wellesley's projected expedition to the Moluccas, he served for a short time with the marines on board the 'Mornington'. Appointed on 29 May 1800 lieutenant in the 14th Bengal infantry, he went up country; in 1801, when stationed at Delhi, he was ordered to survey an old canal in the neighbourhood. In 1805 he was attached to the escort sent with his friend Graeme Mercer, envoy and resident at Sindhia's court. While travelling with the maharaja's camp, and afterwards from 1812 to 1817 when it remained at Gwalior, he was constantly surveying or collecting topographical information. In 1815 he submitted a map to the governor-general (Lord Hastings), in which for the first time the term 'central India' was applied to the Indian states later under the central India agency. Rajputana was also included in the area of his researches. He wrote: 'Though I never penetrated personally further into the heart of the Indian desert than Mundore... my parties of discovery have traversed it in every direction, adding to their journals of routes living testimonies of their accuracy, and bringing to me natives of every 't'hul' from Bhutnair to Omurkote and from Aboo to Arore. The journals of all these routes, with others from Central and Western India, form eleven moderate-sized folio volumes. (Tod, 'Annals of Rajasthan', 2, 1832, 289)' Most of Tod's extra salary was spent in paying his Indian explorers. In October 1813 he was promoted captain, with command of the resident's escort; and in October 1815 the resident, Richard Strachey, nominated him second assistant. 
When Lord Hastings, in 1817, began operations against the Pindaris, Tod's local knowledge became invaluable. He had already sent in reports on the Pindaris and plans of a campaign, and on volunteering for service was sent to Rowtah in Haraoti, where he organized and superintended an intelligence department, which in the governor-general's opinion contributed significantly to the success of the campaign. He also induced the regent of Kotah to capture and surrender to the British officers the wives and children of the leading Pindari chiefs. 
In 1818, after the chiefs of Rajputana had accepted the protective alliance offered to them, Tod was appointed by the governor-general political agent in the western Rajput states, and was so successful in his efforts to restore peace and confidence that within less than a year some 300 deserted towns and villages were repeopled, trade revived, and, in spite of the abolition of transit duties and the reduction of frontier customs, the state revenue had reached an unprecedented amount. During the next five years Tod earned the respect of the chiefs and people, and was able to rescue more than one princely family, including that of the ranas of Udaipur, from the destitution to which they had been reduced by Maratha raiders. Bishop Heber, who travelled through Rajputana in February 1825, was told that the country had never known prosperity until Tod came, and that everyone, rich or poor, except thieves or Pindaris, loved him. According to Heber, because Tod so favoured Indian princes, the Calcutta government suspected him of corruption, and consequently limited his powers and associated other officers with him until he was disgusted and resigned; but the government later came to believe its suspicions were groundless. However, ill health was the reason given for Tod's retirement in June 1822, though it did not prevent his journeying to Bombay by the circuitous route described in 'Travels in Western India', published after his death. 
Tod left Bombay for England in February 1823, and never returned. The rest of his life was mostly spent in arranging and publishing the immense mass of materials accumulated during his Indian career. He also acted for a time as librarian to the Royal Asiatic Society, before which he read several papers on his favourite subjects. According to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', 'to him also belongs the praise of having initiated the study of Indo-Grecian antiquities' (204). On 1 May 1824 he was promoted major, on 2 June 1826 lieutenant-colonel, being retransferred to the 2nd European infantry, and on 28 June 1825 he retired from the service. On 16 November 1826 he married Julia (1808/9-1850), third daughter of Henry Clutterbuck MD, a London physician, and they had two sons and a daughter. 
Thenceforth Tod lived much on the continent, and in 1827 visited Comte de Boigne, Sindhia's old general, at Chambery. Tod published archaeological papers in the Royal Asiatic Society's 'Transactions'; a paper on the politics of western India, appended to the report of the House of Commons committee on Indian affairs, 1833; 'Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan' (1829-32); and 'Travels in Western India' (1839), with an anonymous memoir of Tod. 
In September 1835 Tod bought a house in Regent's Park, London, and on 16 November, his wedding anniversary, while transacting business at his banker's, Robarts & Co., in Lombard Street, had an apoplectic stroke from which he never recovered. He died at Regent's Park on 18 November 1835, aged fifty-three, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 27487


Todd, Alpheus (1821-1884), librarian and constitutional historian in Canada, the son of Henry Cooke Todd, an author, was born in London on 30 July 1821. He emigrated with his family to York, Upper Canada, in 1833, and the following year, when York was incorporated as Toronto, produced an 'Engraved Plan of the City of Toronto'. This work brought him to the notice of the lawyer Robert Baldwin Sullivan, who helped him gain employment in the library of the house of assembly of Upper Canada in 1835, and in 1836 he became assistant librarian. Keenly interested in British parliamentary practice and its relevance to Canada, he published 'The Practice and Privileges of the Two Houses of Parliament' (1840), which was officially adopted for the use of Canadian members, who hitherto had had no such guide. In 1841 Todd was made assistant librarian to the assembly of the united province of Canada, and subsequently was appointed constitutional adviser to both houses of the legislature, a task for which his intimate knowledge of parliamentary precedent made him admirably suited. In 1856 he visited Europe to restock the library, which had suffered two serious fires. His canny buying there and his subsequent additions left the library with 55,000 volumes by 1865. On his return from Europe in 1856 he was made chief librarian. In 1867 he was appointed librarian at Ottawa to the dominion parliament, an office which he held until his death, judiciously stocking and efficiently organizing the library. 
Todd's most important published work was 'On Parliamentary Government in England' (2 vols., 1867-9), which met with acclaim at the time and soon ran to further editions and foreign-language translations. He sought to vindicate the power of the monarch and saw the rising tide of democracy with considerable foreboding. His work was extensively used in Britain and its dominions and in the development of parliamentary institutions in nineteenth-century Japan. Todd was special adviser in 1873 to the governor-general, Lord Dufferin, to whom he dedicated 'Parliamentary Government in the British Colonies' (1880), which extended his study of the granting of responsible government by Britain to its possessions, particularly Canada, and in which he again stressed the continuing role of the crown, and therefore the governor-general. 
In 1845 Todd married Sarah Anne St John. They had a daughter and four sons, one of whom, Arthur Hamlyn, edited second editions of his father's two main works and left an unpublished life of him. Todd was a keen student of the 'Bible' and in 1837 entered the ministry of the Catholic Apostolic church. He was dissuaded from giving up his secular appointment only by the arguments of the church authorities themselves. From 1874 he had charge of the apostolic congregation at Ottawa, and at one point during this time of a second in the United States. 
In 1881 Todd was made honorary LLD of Queen's College, Kingston, and was created CMG. He died suddenly at Ottawa on 22 January 1884. Of humble parentage and largely self-taught, he influenced the practice of government over much of the British empire through his meticulously researched publications. 


@@@@@


doc= 27488


Todd, Elliott D'Arcy (1808-1845), army officer in the East India Company, was born on 28 January 1808 in Bury Street, St James's, London, the third and youngest son of Fryer Todd, accountant, of Chancery Lane, a Yorkshire gentleman of good family and originally wealthy. His mother was Mary Evans, the 'Mary' of Samuel Taylor Coleridge. His father lost his money by speculation, the home was broken up, and Elliott D'Arcy Todd, when three years old, came under the care of his maternal uncle, William Evans, of the East India Company's home establishment. He was educated at Ware, Hertfordshire, and in London, and, through his guardian's influence, entered the company's military college, Addiscombe College, in 1822, passing out in December 1823. 
Todd was commissioned second lieutenant in the Bengal artillery on 18 December 1823, landed at Calcutta on 22 May 1824, and was stationed at the artillery headquarters at Dum-Dum until the rainy season of 1825, when he was posted to the 4th company 3rd battalion of foot artillery at Cawnpore. His company joined Lord Combermere's army for the second siege of Bharatpur. When the place was taken on 18 January 1826 Todd received a subaltern's share of the prize money amounting to $250, and the same year he was posted to the 1st troop 2nd brigade of the horse artillery; but, on promotion to first lieutenant on 28 September 1827 he reverted to the foot artillery. He was posted in 1828 to a horse artillery troop at Mathura. In January 1829 he moved to Karnal, where bad health compelled him to go on sick leave to the hills. 
On 2 March 1831 Todd was transferred to the 1st troop 1st brigade horse artillery. He studied Persian with such success that the Indian government, who, among their efforts to enable the shah of Persia to maintain his independence, had decided in 1833 to send British officers to instruct the Persian army, selected Todd to serve with the regular Persian troops under Colonel Pasmore, and to be artillery instructor. He embarked at Calcutta on 7 August, and arrived at Tehran on 28 March 1834. After the death of Shah Fatteh Ali and the accession of Muhammad Shah, a firman was issued on 31 July 1835 placing all matters connected with artillery in Todd's hands. 
Todd took great pains in drilling the artillery at Tehran, and received from the shah the second class of the order of the Lion and Sun. Sir Henry Ellis, British minister at Tehran, was much impressed by a critical paper by Todd on Burnes's 'Military Memoir on the Countries between the Caspian and the Indus'. Ellis wrote to Lord Auckland, the governor-general, urging the necessity of a political agent at Kabul, and recommending Todd. 
In the autumn of 1836 Todd was at Tabriz as military secretary to Major-General Sir Henry Lindesay Bethune, commanding the Persian legion trained by British officers, but when Bethune declined to accompany the shah's troops beyond Khorasan and returned to Tehran, Todd was sent, in January 1837, by John McNeill (1795-1883), British minister, to travel by the shores of the Caspian, Ghilan, and Rudbar, to Qazvin, and thence to Tehran. For his report on this route he received a complimentary letter from Palmerston. He was granted the local rank of major while specially employed on service in Persia. In March 1838 Todd accompanied the British minister to the Persian camp before Herat, where he arrived on 6 April. Todd was employed by McNeill to negotiate with the Heratis, and, as it was the first time a British officer had appeared in Herat in full uniform, 'a vast crowd went out to gaze at him' (Kaye, 'History', 1.256). The negotiations failed, and in May Todd carried dispatches from McNeill to Lord Auckland. He travelled as an Englishman, but in Afghan dress and without baggage, and his route was by Kandahar, Kabul, and Peshawar. He arrived at Simla on 20 July, having accomplished the ride in sixty days. 
On 1 October 1838 Todd was appointed political assistant and military secretary to William Hay Macnaghten, the British envoy and minister to Shah Shuja. He was promoted to be brevet captain on 18 December 1838. He arrived with Sir John Keane's army at Kandahar in April 1839. Eldred Pottinger was the political agent at Herat, but it was decided to send Todd on a special mission to negotiate a treaty with Shah Kamran, whose chief minister, or wazir, was Yar Muhammad, of whom Kaye has written 'of all the unscrupulous miscreants in Central Asia, Yar Mahommed was the most unscrupulous' ('History', 1.218). The mission left Kandahar in June, and arrived at Herat on 25 July. A treaty was concluded with the Shah Kamran, by which he was allowed 25,000 rupees a month on certain conditions, one of which was that he should have no communication with Persia without the consent of the British envoy. A committed Christian, Todd loathed the slave trade and the cruelties of the Herati government. M. E. Yapp has suggested that 'a more cynical, less scrupulous unambitious man might have been a better envoy at Herat' (Yapp, 364). Todd favoured British annexation of Herat, but Auckland refused it. After Pottinger's departure for Kabul in September 1839 things went on smoothly at Herat for some months. One of the objects of the mission was to try to stop the slave trade by the central Asian peoples. In this traffic Yar Muhammad, the khan of Khiva, and the Turkoman peoples towards the Caspian were the chief offenders. In December 1839 Todd, on his own responsibility, sent Captain James Abbott, one of his assistants, on a friendly mission to the khan of Khiva to mediate between him and the Russians who were advancing on Khiva, and to negotiate for the release of the enslaved Russian captives. Todd's action was approved. Later, again on his own initiative, he sent Richmond Shakespear to Khiva to negotiate the release of the Russians sold into slavery, which Shakespear accomplished to the number of 416 captives. 
Early in April 1840 Todd received, through the British charge d'affaires at Erzurum, a letter which the wazir, Yar Muhammad, had written in January in the name of Shah Kamran to the Persian Shah Mahommed; Kamran declared himself the faithful servant of the Persian monarch, and stated that he merely tolerated the British at Herat from expediency. Kamran and his people had been saved from starvation by British aid, and had received over 10 lakhs of rupees from the Indian government. The act of treachery was, however, pardoned by the governor-general. 
On 27 January 1841 Todd was formally gazetted political agent at Herat. From the time of his first arrival at Herat in 1839 he had desired to introduce into Herat a contingent of Indian troops under British officers. Early in 1841 Kamran and his minister proposed to agree to their introduction on condition that $20,000 was paid down and the monthly subsidy increased. It soon, however, became clear to Todd that Yar Muhammad and his master had no intention of admitting any contingent into Herat. Todd, apparently misunderstanding private instructions from Macnaghten, provoked a rupture with the Herati government. He refused to pay the subsidies. Yar Muhammad demanded more money, then expelled the mission. After submitting to indignities short of personal violence, Todd withdrew the mission on 9 February 1841 to Kandahar, without first receiving permission to do so. 
Auckland was so exasperated by the withdrawal of the mission, which he believed jeopardized his policy, that, without waiting for Todd's explanations, he removed Todd from the political department and ordered him to rejoin his regiment as a subaltern. Todd was shocked by this. Macnaghten wrote to comfort him that his conduct had been admirable and that he had told Auckland so. But Auckland, angry and bitter at Todd's conduct at Herat, was obdurate. Todd ceased to be political agent and military secretary to the envoy at Kabul on 24 March 1841, and gave over charge of the Herat political agency on 24 April, when he was posted to the Bengal artillery. Before joining he went to Calcutta, and had an interview with Auckland, but without result. 
Todd joined his regiment at Dum-Dum in March 1842, having been appointed to command no. 9 light field battery on 2 February. He was promoted to be captain in the Bengal artillery on 13 May 1842, and on 22 August of the following year he married Marian, eldest daughter of Surgeon Backshall Lane Sandham of the 16th lancers. It was a brief marriage. On 27 September 1845 he was given the command of the 2nd troop of the 1st brigade of the horse artillery. His wife died on 9 December, and Todd left to take part in the First Anglo-Sikh War. At sunset on 21 December 1845 Todd's troop was ordered forward at the battle of Ferozeshahr. He placed himself in front of the troop, and was giving orders to advance when his head was taken off by a roundshot. His remains were buried on the field of battle. 


@@@@@


doc= 27489


Todd, Henry John (bap. 1763, d. 1845), Church of England clergyman and literary scholar, baptized at Britford near Salisbury on 13 February 1763, was the son of Henry Todd ('b'. 1733/4), curate of that parish from 1758 to 1765, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Smith. Admitted as a chorister of Magdalen College, Oxford, on 20 July 1771, he was educated at its school and proceeded to the college, matriculating on 15 October 1779; he graduated BA on 20 February 1784. Soon afterwards he became fellow-tutor and lecturer at Hertford College, and he took his MA on 4 May 1786. The previous year he had been ordained a deacon; he served as curate at East Lockinge, Berkshire, and in 1787 he was ordained priest. 
In his early preferment Todd was greatly indebted to family connections. His paternal aunts presented him to his first living, the perpetual curacy of St John and St Bridget, Beckermet, in Cumberland. More advantageous was his father's long-standing friendship with Bishop Horne, then dean of Canterbury, who secured Todd a minor canonry in the cathedral while exempting him from the necessity of residing on his living. This patronage was given oblique acknowledgement in Todd's service as Horne's biographer, including him in his first published work of 1793, 'Some Account of the Deans of Canterbury'. Its accompanying 'catalogue of the MSS in the Church Library' revealed Todd's scholarly metier, anticipating his later archival work at Lambeth. By 1792 Todd had become chaplain to Robert, eleventh Viscount Kilmorey, and James, second earl of Fife. Some time before that date Todd married Anne Dixon (1765/6-1844). The union produced eight daughters, the baptisms of several of whom between 1792 and 1801 are recorded in the registers of Canterbury Cathedral. Todd's literary ambitions brought him to the attention of Archbishop Moore, assuring him a succession of livings in the gift of the dean and chapter of Canterbury: a sinecure rectory at Ogarswick (1791-2) was followed by the vicarage at Milton, near Canterbury, which Todd held until 1801. Of greater significance was his association with the family of the eccentric antiquary Francis Egerton, to whom Todd dedicated the work which established his literary reputation. This was an edition of 'Comus' (1798), which made extensive use of the important Bridgewater manuscript. 
The patronage of Canterbury culminated in Todd's presentation to the rectory of All Hallows, Lombard Street, London, in November 1801, and with this advancement Todd took up residence in the capital. His arrival coincided with the publication of his 'chef d'oeuvre', an edition of Milton's poetical works. In addition to Todd's own copious annotations and judicious selection from previous commentaries, the work included for the first time extracts from Stillingfleet's projected edition, together with criticism solicited from the family of Thomas and Joseph Warton. Republished on four subsequent occasions, it remained the standard edition for fifty years. The first volume, a thorough biographical study of Milton, revised in 1809 and 1826, was published separately and enjoyed an equal measure of success. For his labours Todd was rewarded with the handsome sum of $200, and his new-found celebrity was acknowledged with his elevation as a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1802. His reputation firmly established, Todd next set to work on an edition of Spenser, for which he received 'a very liberal sum' (Nichols, 'Illustrations', 7.59). Published in 1805, its reception was more equivocal, being 'severely but justly' appraised by Scott in the 'Edinburgh Review' ('GM', 25.322). In April 1803 he became chaplain to John William, seventh earl of Bridgewater, who shared Todd's antiquarian interests. William commissioned Todd to write a study of his inheritance, the privately printed 'History of the College of Bonhommes at Ashridge' (1812), which contained Todd's reflections on the Gothic style. 
After the publication of his work on Spenser, Todd focused his interests mainly on the archiepiscopal library at Lambeth, where he became keeper of manuscripts (or records) and embarked upon his next major project -- a study of Bishop Walton and his circle's work on the polyglot 'Bible'. By 1807 Todd had been appointed librarian and chaplain to Archbishop Manners-Sutton; this testified as much to Todd's churchmanship as to his personal merits, since the prelate's chaplains 'were all High Churchmen' (Nockles). This favourable association saw an appreciable change in Todd's fortunes, with his appointment to a rectory at Coulsdon (1807) followed by the vicarage of Addington (1812), both in Surrey. In December 1812 he was created royal chaplain-in-ordinary, a position which he retained until his death. 
The depth of Todd's philological erudition, first witnessed in his Milton, was further demonstrated with the publication of a new edition of Johnson's dictionary in 1818. The same year saw Todd's promotion as one of the six preachers in Canterbury Cathedral and the first occasion on which his learning was brought to bear on theological matters, with the publication of 'Original Sin, Free-Will and other Doctrines, as Maintained by our Reformers', the first of a series of writings which sought to defend the Church of England against a background of Roman Catholic and dissenting agitation. In the preface Todd expressed his dismay at the prevalence of erroneous doctrines of justification, which he identified as an animating force behind the 'Great Rebellion'. For the next ten years Todd found himself engaged in various polemical writings, albeit of a scholarly hue. His next publication, 'Vindication of our Authorised Translation and Translators of our Bible' (1819), answered the searching criticisms of its writers and their Caroline successors made by the Hebraist John Bellamy, who had published a new rendering of scripture in 1817. Todd's patient, largely philological exegesis, which sought to justify and explain their methods, revealed the depth of his study of Walton and his circle. 
In 1818 Todd was presented by the earl of Bridgewater to the valuable rectory of Settrington in Yorkshire, where he took up residence. Except for occasional visits to London, which ill health made increasingly rare, he lived at the rectory for the next twenty-five years. Here, he established 'a tolerable collection of old books' and a 'formidable body of tracts... their number being some thousands... commenc[ing] about 1540' (MS Bodl. Oxf., 1004, fol. 26'r'). He sustained a prodigious output in the next decade which culminated with his biography of Cranmer. His immediate efforts were concentrated on seeing through the press the fruits 'of the years passed delightfully in Lambeth Library': his 'Memoirs of Bishop Brian Walton, with Notices of his Coadjutors on the London Polyglot Bible' (1821). In the polemical preface to the memoir, Todd drew comparison between the 'Great Rebellion' and the present, and offered further unfavourable commentary on Bellamy's work. A companion volume, consisting of associated manuscripts deposited at Lambeth by the antiquarian Carlyle, appeared in 1823. Todd's scholarly labours were rewarded in 1824 with his election to the Royal Society of Literature. 
The same year saw Todd engaged with a more formidable antagonist, the most illustrious of Manners-Sutton's proteges, Christopher Wordsworth, master of Trinity College, Cambridge, whose robust assertion of Charles I's authorship of 'Eikon basilike' Todd set out to repudiate in his 'Letter to the Archbishop of Canterbury on the Authorship of the Icon basilike' (1824). Wordsworth's vituperative reply, characterized by Todd as his opponent's 'verbosa et grandis Epistola', left its target apparently unscathed, remarking with genial contempt how the head of house had 'fired away his useless ammunition' (MS Bodl. Oxf., 1004, fol. 54'r'). Todd's more considered response, the baldly titled 'Bishop Gauden the Author of the Icon basilike, further Shown in Answer to Dr Wordsworth', appeared in 1829; it hardly aimed to conciliate, with pointed epigraphs culled from Hooker warning of 'glozening delusion'; and Milton's portrait of Belial condemning: '
high words that bear 

Semblance of worth, not substance. 

' More significant was Todd's contribution to the debate which followed recent Roman Catholic accounts of the English Reformation: 'Cranmer's defence of the true and Catholick doctrine of the sacrament [1550], with [an] introduction vindicating his character from Lingard and others' (1825). The 'vindication' was published separately the following year and was followed in 1827 by Todd's dissection of his principal opponent's spirited defence, 'Reply to Lingard's Vindication of his History of England Concerning Cranmer'. He broadened the controversy the next year with 'Of Confession and Absolution, and the Secrecy of Confession', which sought to clarify the Church of England's position against the misrepresentation of Roman Catholic apologists. 
In 1830 Todd was appointed by the archbishop to the prebendal stall of Husthwaite in York Cathedral. The following year his two-volume 'Life of Archbishop Cranmer' appeared; in essence a more compendious contribution to the continuing debate on the foundations of the established church. On 2 November 1832 Todd was installed in the archdeaconry of Cleveland, an office in the gift of the archbishop. With characteristic industry, in the following year he saw through the press 'Collections Relating to the Benefices in the Archdeaconry of Cleveland'. Todd remained active into his eighth decade, contributing to the convocation debate (1837) and publishing an appreciative selection from verse renderings of the 'Psalms' in 1839. His last published work, 'On Clerical Societies' (1841), was typically robust in its advice; warning clergy of the dangers of opening dialogue with dissenters and exhorting them to 'show the wisdom as well as the duty of obedience... to Episcopal rule' and to 'maintain the well-founded conviction of the Apostolical constitution, and of the validity and importance of the Litany and Articles' (H. J. Todd, 'On Clerical Societies', 2). 
Todd's writings may conveniently be divided into those of literary, theological, and antiquarian interest, so long as it is borne in mind that his erudite philological and historical flair remained conspicuous irrespective of his chosen field of enquiry. Indubitably, his edition of Milton was Todd's 'opus magnum', a significant feat of scholarship which remained authoritative for fifty years. The foundations of Todd's methodology, selecting commentary and annotation from earlier editors complemented by the fruits of his own research, was familiar to his contemporaries, who thus designated him an 'illustrator' of literature. It is a procedure which broadly anticipates that of the variorum editions of twentieth-century scholarship. In his literary taste and judgement Todd was a confirmed Augustan; a follower of Pope and Gray rather than Wordsworth and Coleridge. His lack of sympathy with prevailing ideas helps to explain the unfavourable notice of one grudging obituarist, who complained that Todd's 'turn of mind was not poetical' and expressed bafflement that he had dared 'to put a step into the regions of Parnassus'. The Romantic belief in the prerogative of poets as literary critics is confirmed with the concluding remark that Todd 'should have left Milton and Spenser to Southey and Scott' ('GM', 25.323). The more measured appraisal of the historian of Milton's editors remains authoritative: 'Todd is a very industrious follower of the line of research pursued by Warton. While he added much to the material of his subject he contributed little to its method, and so must be classed rather among the useful than the great editors. (Oras)' The same authority concludes that the most important and original component of Todd's edition was his thorough survey of the poet's sources. 
Any strict distinction between Todd's historical and theological writings is unsatisfactory and would have been incomprehensible to their author who, as an expositor of the Church of England, was at once priest and scholar, controversialist and historian. Todd's work on Cranmer was as much an account of the identity of the Church of England, offering a corrective to the nascent Roman Catholic historiography of Lingard, Butler, and Milner, as it was a biography. In his theological writings a common thread is Todd's endeavour to demonstrate the origins of the eucharistic teaching of the high-church party in the writings of the founders of the English Reformation, while at the same time downplaying the influence of Calvin in their deliberations. In this, his keen opposition to any toleration of protestant and Roman Catholic dissent and his reverence for the Restoration high-churchmen, together with his friends Routh and Oxlee he was one of a 'short file' of clerics who continued to give eloquent voice to the teachings of the Augustan Church of England on the eve of the 'Great Reform Bill'. Yet the imperatives of scholarship were never subordinated to the expediency of party: Todd's meticulous and decisive contribution to the debate on a cherished high-church myth, the king's supposed authorship of 'Eikon basilike', proved that. Nor was he a bigot: his firm convictions on the preservation of the confessional 'status quo' did not prevent his forming warm friendships with dissenters, most notably the publisher Charles Dilley, who left Todd a substantial legacy. 
Of Todd's character his writings reveal only an unremarkable outline which may be summarized as fastidious, thorough, and, in the proper Augustan sense, polite. More revealing and attractive glimpses are afforded in his letters to the younger and importunate antiquary Edmund Barker, whom Todd indefatigably but fruitlessly attempted to lure to Settrington. Here emerges the stoic valetudinarian, the gentle but teasing wit, and the tireless, ever solicitous scholar. Two likenesses of Todd exist: one a sketch 'stealthily painted by a lady'; the second a handsome portrait in oils by Joseph Smith dated 1822, currently in the possession of Magdalen College School, showing its subject in clerical attire. 
Todd died on 24 December 1845 at the rectory at Settrington; he was predeceased by his wife who died on 14 April 1844. He was buried in the chancel of the church where a monument of plain white marble commemorates both husband and wife. A stained-glass window was put by the clergy in the tower at the west end of the church. The beneficiaries of Todd's will included St Bee's College, where his father had been a pupil and which received his copy of Walton's polyglot 'Bible', and the antiquary Philip Bliss, who received copies of Todd's scarce Lambeth manuscript catalogues. His important collection of books relating to Milton had been donated to Magdalen College some years earlier. To his unmarried daughters he left 'many volumes from his library' ('GM', 25.659). The sum of $50 was left to the poor of Settrington. 


@@@@@


doc= 27490


Todd, Hugh (c.1657-1728), Church of England clergyman and antiquary, born at Blencow in Cumberland, was the eldest son of Thomas Todd, rector of Hutton in the Forest in the same county, who was ejected by Cromwell's sequestrators and imprisoned at Carlisle. Educated at Queen's College, Oxford, he matriculated on 29 March 1672, graduated BA in 1677, and was elected fellow of University College the following year. Proceeding MA in 1679, he became chaplain to Thomas Smith, bishop of Carlisle, in 1684 and vicar of Kirkland, Cumberland, in which county he resided for the rest of his life. In 1685 he was collated prebendary of Carlisle and presented to the vicarage of Stanwix, resigning that living in 1688 when Richard Graham, Viscount Preston, a staunch tory with Jacobite leanings, presented him to the rectory of Arthuret. Eleven years later Bishop Smith asked him to accept the vicarage of Penrith as well, and he held both livings in plurality until his death. Within a few months of taking up his Penrith parish, he married on 30 May 1700 Lucy Dalston (died 1733), the eldest daughter of the late Christopher Dalston who had been lieutenant-governor of Carlisle in 1697. 
Todd accumulated the degrees BD and DD in 1692 and was a man of wide intellectual interests. He contributed to Moses Pitt's 'English Atlas'; assisted John Walker in his 'Sufferings of the Clergy', John Stevens in his additions to Dugdale's 'Monasticon', and Henry Wharton in his 'Anglia sacra'; furnished Edmund Gibson with information for his 1698 edition of Camden's 'Britannia', and provided Edward Bernard with an account of several Cumbrian manuscript collections for his two-volume catalogue of English and Irish manuscripts, published in Oxford in 1697. As well as these contributions to the works of others he delivered papers to the Royal Society, translated into English works from Latin and Greek, and published several poems. Above all, however, he was a keen antiquary with a particular interest in the ecclesiastical history of his native county. His manuscript writings included 'An historical description of the bishoprick of Carlisle', the consummation of a lifetime's research, but which in spite of an ambition to that end, he never published 'for the most obvious of all reasons, namely waiting for further materials' (Nicolson and Burn, 1.iii). Although the local historian Benjamin Nightingale considered in 1911 that the value of Todd's work was diminished by his ecclesiastical bias and carelessness in his facts and dates (Nightingale, 1.437), this and Todd's other manuscripts relating to the city, diocese, and cathedral of Carlisle were sources which local ecclesiastical writers relied upon until the twentieth century. 
A resolute high-church tory, Todd was frequently in controversy with the forceful William Nicolson, who became bishop of Carlisle in 1702. Their initial animosity predated Nicolson's shift from tory to whig, and was originally due to jealousy between fellow antiquaries and probably also to professional rivalry. After several rather petty squabbles, he and the absentee dean, Francis Atterbury, questioned the bishop's right of visitation, insisting that the cathedral statutes upon which Nicolson relied were invalid. On 6 February 1708 the court of common pleas upheld their contention, but not before Todd had been excommunicated by his diocesan. It was, however, a pyrrhic victory, for the ecclesiastical establishment, alarmed by the limitations placed upon episcopal authority, hastened to secure a parliamentary bill to re-establish their right of visitation. After its passage the sentence of excommunication was removed. 
A generous benefactor and an energetic cleric, Todd undertook extensive improvements to the church at Arthuret in 1700, and St Andrew's, Penrith, was almost entirely rebuilt during his incumbency. Bibliophile as well as antiquary (he had a library of some 800 volumes among which were many fine editions) he was also, with Bishop Smith and Arthur Savage, one of those who towards the end of the seventeenth century re-established the dean and chapter library which had perished amid the disasters of the siege of Carlisle in 1644-5. Todd was buried at St Mary's Abbey, Carlisle, on 13 September 1728. His personal estate was valued at $1229 16's'. All his books and manuscripts were sold by his widow in accordance with instructions contained in her late husband's will. 


@@@@@


doc= 27491


Todd, James Henthorn (1805-1869), biblical scholar, was born in Dublin on 23 April 1805, the eldest son of Charles Hawkes Todd (1782-1826), professor of surgery at the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, and his wife, Eliza (1786-1862), daughter of Colonel Bentley. Robert Bentley Todd was his younger brother. Todd entered Trinity College, Dublin, on 6 November 1820, and graduated with honours in 1824; he took his BA in 1825. A year later his father died, leaving him the eldest of a family of fifteen who had very little money. He stayed in Trinity College, where he took pupils and edited the 'Christian Examiner', a church periodical aimed at placing the debate between the established Church of Ireland and the Roman Catholic church on a more historical and learned footing. Thereafter he believed it to be his mission to improve the condition of the established church in Ireland and to promote greater learning among the clergy and greater knowledge of church history among the people. 
Todd was elected a fellow of Trinity College in 1831 and in the same year took deacon's orders. From this time until he became senior fellow in 1850 he was one of the most popular tutors in Trinity. He was conservative, a high-churchman (in doctrine rather than ritual), and disliked but accepted reform of the college. In 1832 he took priest's orders and wrote a brief history of the university for the 'University Calendar' of 1833. Many years later he revised this history, and included it as the introduction to his published 'List of Graduates of the University' (1866). He graduated BD in Dublin in 1837 and DD in 1840. 
In 1833, through contacts made via Samuel Roffey Maitland, Todd began to write for the 'British Magazine', an English church periodical just started under the editorship of Hugh James Rose. His contributions, all of which defended protestant ascendancy, included papers on Wyclif, on church history, and on the Irish church questions of the day. Around this time the Irish national education system had been started by Archbishop Whately. This was intended to be non-denominational, but many members of the established church, including Todd, felt that the scripture lessons issued by the commissioners favoured Roman Catholics. In order to alert the people in England to what he saw as the true state of affairs, Todd published a fictional letter from the pope to his clergy, advocating the line of action already pursued. This letter, entitled 'Sanctissimi domini nostri Gregorii papae XVI epistola ad archiepiscopos et episcopos Hiberniae... translated from the original Latin' (1836) may have been intended as a joke (the same tactic had been used against the Oxford Tractarians not long before), but the published 'letter' was taken as genuine by some protestants at a meeting at Exeter Hall, where it raised tensions considerably. Todd publicly announced himself as the author, and was severely criticized for his conduct which he attempted to justify in a preface to a second edition, published the same year. 
In 1838 and 1839 Todd was the Donnellan lecturer in Trinity College. Choosing as his subject the biblical prophecies relating to Antichrist, he attacked the view then held by many Irish protestant clergy, that the pope was the Antichrist of 'Revelation', arguing that despite much corruption the Roman Catholic church still maintained the essential truths of Christianity. Todd's lectures were published as 'Discourses on the Prophecies Relating to Antichrist in Daniel and St Paul' (1840). In the same spirit of calm and learned discussion of theological differences, he also started a society at Trinity College for the discussion of religious history, and published a small volume entitled 'The search after infallibility: remarks on the testimony of the fathers to the Roman dogma of infallibility' (1848), long before the issue of papal infallibility was defined by the Roman Catholic church at the First Vatican Council (1869-70). 
In 1843 Todd joined with Edwin Richard Quin, Lord Adare (afterwards third earl of Dunraven), W. Monsell (Lord Emly), William Sewell, and others, to found St Columba's College at Rathfarnham, near Dublin. The school was conducted on Anglican church principles. Unusually for an established school, it taught Irish as well as classics to would-be ordinands. Having also been treasurer of St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin, since 1837, Todd was made precentor, the second dignitary of the cathedral, in 1864. He turned his attention first to restoration work on the building and then to the improvement of choral services. 
In 1849 Todd was made regius professor of Hebrew at the University of Dublin and in 1852 he was appointed librarian at Trinity College. The library had long been neglected, but Todd, with the assistance of John O'Donovan and Eugene O'Curry, classified and arranged the large collection of Irish manuscripts held there. He spent what money the board of Trinity College allowed him in buying rare books, and left the library's holding more than quadrupled, as well as catalogued: 'his greatest monument is the printed catalogue' (McDowell and Webb, 278). Todd made Trinity College Library and manuscript room a world-class library for scholars. His numerous gifts to the university museum included mummy crocodiles and ancient Scandinavian almanacs. He also compiled a 'Catalogue of Graduates', since updated. 
Todd's most substantial contribution to scholarship was in Irish studies, his work on which was centred mainly at the Royal Irish Academy. Elected a member of the academy in 1833, Todd was involved in its activities from the beginning. He procured transcripts or syntheses of Irish manuscripts held abroad, particularly at the Bibliotheque Royale, Brussels. He was the academy's honorary secretary from 1847 to 1855, and president for five years from 1856. As president he sought to raise the profile of Irish antiquities, and to promote scholarship in the field of Irish literature. In 1840 he founded the Irish Archaeological Society, which published a number of rare manuscripts and volumes. Todd was also an energetic honorary secretary of the society, and contributed a number of publications to its proceedings, including 'The Irish Version of the Historia Brittonum of Nennius' (1847), the 'Martyrology of Donegal' (1864), edited in conjunction with William Reeves, and the 'Liber hymnorum, or, Book of Hymns of the Ancient Church of Ireland' (2 vols., 1855 and 1869). Todd was very widely consulted about works relating to Irish literature and history, and was said to have been second only to Archbishop Ussher in his knowledge of, and help in developing the discipline of, Irish studies. 
About 1860, the same year in which he was given an 'ad eundem' degree by the University of Oxford, Todd was asked by a London publisher to write the lives of the archbishops of Armagh. The publishing firm collapsed when the first volume, dealing with the life of St Patrick, was in press, and it was brought out independently in 1864 as 'St Patrick, Apostle of Ireland'. In addition Todd published the text of two medieval Irish manuscripts in the 'Rolls Series' as 'Cogadh Gaedhel re Gallaibh: the war of the Gaedhil with the Gaill, or, The invasions of Ireland by the Danes and other Norsemen' (1867). 
Todd was one of the best-known Irishmen of his day, consulted both by statesmen and theologians. During his life he advised and corresponded with Lord John George de la Poer Beresford, W. E. Gladstone, Lord Brougham, John Henry Newman, and E. B. Pusey. In politics he was conservative but independent-minded. He wanted the maintenance of the Anglican establishment at the university. However, according to R. B. McDowell and D. A. Webb, 'the rigidity with which he maintained as principles opinions... disqualified him from statesmanship even on a small scale; as Provost he would have been disastrous' (p. 278). Notwithstanding, his contributions to Irish literature and to the development of Trinity College Library into a manuscript library of worldwide importance cannot be overestimated. Archdeacon Cotton once referred to Todd as the 'Sine qua non of every literary enterprise in Dublin' (ibid., 525-6). 
Todd died, unmarried, in his home, Silveracre, Rathfarnham, co. Dublin, on 28 June 1869, and was buried in the churchyard of St Patrick's Cathedral. After his death the Todd lectureship of the Celtic languages was established in his memory with the help of the Royal Irish Academy. 


@@@@@


doc= 27492


Todd, Robert Bentley (1809-1860), physician and physiologist, was born in Dublin on 9 April 1809, the second son of Charles Hawkes Todd (1782-1826), professor of anatomy and surgery at the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, and his wife, Eliza Bentley (1786-1862), daughter of a colonel in the Indian army. His father was a distinguished surgeon and teacher, an editor of the 'Dublin Hospital Reports', and a dedicated administrator and president of the college. Robert was one of nine sons and six daughters; all of his brothers went into the professions -- three into medicine, three into the church (one of these was James Henthorn Todd; 1805-1869), and two into law, with one a solicitor and one a barrister. 
Todd received his primary education at a local day school and from a private tutor, the Revd W. Higgins, later the bishop of Derry. Medicine, to which Todd so wholeheartedly devoted his life, was not his first choice as a career: he entered Trinity College, Dublin, in January 1825 planning to study law. However, when his father died in March 1826 at the early age of forty-three he left his large family with very little money. Todd was obliged to become an apprentice at the Richmond Hospital, Dublin, where his father had been surgeon and had taught. He graduated with a BA from Dublin University in 1829 and was already living in Charlotte Street, London, when he became a licentiate of the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland in 1831. 
Todd's background as a member of the Anglo-Irish professional establishment and his Irish liberal and medical education served him well in London. The Irish medical schools were among the most innovative and brilliant in Europe at that time, and in 1826, precisely when Todd was taking up his medical studies, Robert Adams and Richard Carmichael, two of the luminaries of Irish medicine of their generation, established the Richmond school of medicine and surgery at the hospital. Todd also studied under Robert James Graves from whom, he later said, he imbibed his taste for physiological inquiry. Physiology was only beginning to be taught in London in the 1830s but the Irish College of Surgeons had had a chair in anatomy and physiology since the end of the eighteenth century. Todd appreciated that the improvements in the microscope made in the 1820s provided the technology to move beyond the gross anatomy of the early physiologists. He accurately predicted that microscopic anatomy and organic chemistry, accompanied by careful observation of symptoms during life, would form the basis for future medical progress, and he therefore dedicated himself to becoming a 'physiological physician'. 
Todd had planned to spend a year studying in Paris but on receiving an offer to teach anatomy and physiology at one of the private schools of medicine, the Aldersgate School, he settled in London. He immediately began planning to study for academic medical degrees, and attended Oxford briefly; he received his MA in 1832, his BM in 1833, and his DM in 1836. Already in 1832 he was projecting his 'Cyclopaedia of Anatomy and Physiology'. He travelled to Paris in 1833, and made the acquaintance of some of the great French scientists whom he recruited as contributors to the venture. In the same year he became a member of the Royal College of Physicians of London. 
In 1834 Todd left the Aldersgate School and joined a physician and two surgeons from the Westminster Hospital, London, in establishing a new private school, where he taught for the next two years. Todd and his colleagues put up approximately $3000 to buy a building for this school, an indication that Todd had already established a successful private practice. During these years he became physician to the Western Dispensary and the Royal Infirmary for Children. In 1835 the first volume of 'The Cyclopaedia' (5 vols., 1835-59) was published, establishing Todd as a leading physiologist, and in August of 1836 he was elected to the chair of physiology and general morbid anatomy at King's College, London. A few months later, on 20 December, he married Elizabeth, daughter of the late J. H. Hart, of Tenerife, at Hemple, near Hull; they had four children. 
A man of boundless energy and a fine administrator, Todd immediately began major changes in the medical school at King's. Medical education in the 1830s was largely private and students were not required to attend lectures or take examinations until their final qualifying tests, which many failed. They lived in rooms all over the city 'in the midst of its bustle and gaiety', and 'exposed to all its temptations', as Todd wrote in 1837 in a series of articles proposing a radical reform of medical education (Todd, 11.337-8). In Todd's view the existing system trained the future medical practitioners of England to be radical in politics, indifferent in religion, and half-informed in professional matters. Todd and his colleagues at King's believed that religious education was key to developing the moral and mental habits which would make medical students respectable and useful both in their professional work and in society at large. At the same time Todd stressed the importance of a sound scientific and clinical education. He believed that students should want to acquire knowledge for its own sake; grasping first principles and thinking for themselves rather than simply learning facts by memory in order to pass exams, as was then the practice. Todd started a system of keeping attendance records at lectures, and, working with the clergy at King's, he introduced a residential collegiate system, modelled on that at Oxford and Cambridge; this was the first such medical college in England; in 1842 Todd became its first dean. He also was responsible for establishing the first scholarships for medical students in England. 
The King's medical school had no clinical facilities when Todd arrived in 1836. Todd's conviction that clinical teaching was the only way to gain practical medical knowledge led, in 1840, to the establishment of the first King's College Hospital, situated in the former St Clement Danes poorhouse in Portugal Street. An accomplished fund-raiser, Todd was also instrumental in building the second King's College Hospital, a model building which opened in 1861. By the 1850s Todd had achieved his goal of making King's both a leading clinical and academic medical school. Its students had a physiology laboratory, received their entire education within the college, wore caps and gowns, and were alone eligible to be clinical clerks, dressers, physician's assistants, and house surgeons to the hospital. These positions were awarded by examination, and could not be bought or achieved through apprenticeship as was still common practice elsewhere. 
Todd's belief that a clinical hospital served the dual purpose of teaching academic medicine and providing the best possible care for the patients led him to undertake a second major and lasting reform, that of nursing. In 1848 a group of prominent Anglicans, whom Todd had recruited, established the first training school for nurses. The school, which became known as St John's House, took the form of an Anglican sisterhood and was based on the same principles as Todd's reforms of medical education. The school was residential and supervised by older, more educated persons. The sisters of St John's House were upper-class women -- 'ladies' -- who received systematic training together with the working-class nurses in various teaching hospitals. Once trained, the sisters supervised and taught the pupil nurses, providing both religious education and practical bedside training, while doctors gave lectures on medical subjects. 
By 1856 St John's House was able to take on the whole of the nursing at King's College Hospital. The new nursing service was unique in England and immensely successful. It became the model for nursing reforms in the 1860s and 1870s. St John's House was to be the main inspiration for Florence Nightingale's school, which opened at St Thomas's Hospital in 1860; Sister Mary Jones, 'Lady superintendent' of St John's House from 1853 to 1868, became one of her principal mentors and dearest friends. 
As with Todd's medical reforms, the aim of this seminal nursing reform was to improve the character of the working-class women who traditionally provided hospital nursing services by giving them systematic, professional education, and allowing them to achieve a better social position. For the lady nurses the goal was to provide a legitimate field of labour, either full-time or part-time. Socially it was a very radical move, for upper-class women lost their status as ladies if they worked at a regular job. It was also quite revolutionary for ladies to take the same training and work side by side in the wards with the working-class nurses. However, this nursing reform was characteristic of Todd and the broad-churchmen at King's, who fostered education for women and a corporate view of society. It is noteworthy that one of Todd's daughters, Bertha Jane Johnson, who married the Revd Arthur Johnson, was one of the most active members in the circle that established the women's colleges at Oxford. She was the first principal of Oxford home students from 1893 to 1921. 
Todd became a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in 1837, a fellow of the Royal Society in 1839, a fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1844, and one of the first physicians to King's College Hospital. At the Royal College of Physicians he gave the Goulstonian lectures in 1839, the Croonian lectures in 1842, and the Lumleian lectures in 1849-50. Todd was a great clinical lecturer as well as an internationally known researcher and a leading medical practitioner in London. In 1853 his growing private practice forced him to resign his chair. In order to keep his services, King's rescinded the rule that a physician to the hospital must be a college professor. 
Todd's associates spoke of the enormous workload which he was able to carry and always mentioned his kindness and generosity. Sir William Bowman called him his 'loved and honoured friend and workfellow', describing him as having a fine countenance, excellence of heart and life, and as a man who was warmly loved by his students (W. Bowman, 'BMJ', 2, 1866, 190-91; 'The Times', 6 Feb 1860). Apart from the work which he constantly encouraged and supported among others, Todd's own contributions to medical knowledge were significant. In his time cerebro-vascular accidents were thought to be the cause of all paralyses. Todd demonstrated that epileptic seizures often caused a paralysis from which the patient could recover completely, within a matter of days ('Todd's paralysis'). He introduced the concept of afferent and efferent nerves and identified astereognosis, the inability to recognize objects or shapes by touch. Todd was also the first to describe hypertrophic cirrhosis of the liver and the first to describe tabes dorsalis, defining locomotor ataxia as a distinct clinical entity and connecting it with the lesions in the posterior columns of the spine. 
Todd was also a leader in the movement which did away with the old depleting therapies of scant diets, bleeding, salivating, purging, and vomiting. Rather he advocated upholding the vital powers with food and stimulants. In his later years he considered alcohol the natural food of the nervous system and prescribed it with increasing enthusiasm -- sometimes as much as 30 ounces of brandy a day. This practice was heavily criticized by many of his colleagues, and may explain why a man so pre-eminent in his own time was later largely forgotten. Some thought that he lost more patients than other doctors as a result, while the medical students at King's thought he was dosing himself with large quantities of brandy to bolster himself against the strains of his extensive private practice. 
Todd was a prolific writer. His letters and lectures appeared frequently in the medical press and he published three volumes of clinical lectures. The five-volume 'Cyclopaedia of Anatomy and Physiology' was considered his magnum opus, and it was still thought the most important work of its kind in England in the 1890s. 'The Physiological Anatomy and Physiology of Man', which he wrote together with William Bowman, was published between 1845 and 1857. It was the first text in physiology to describe the histology of the organs and tissues of the body in such minute detail, and its lucid style and fine microscopical detail immediately made it the standard authority in England and abroad. 
Because of failing health Todd resigned as physician to King's College Hospital in December 1859. Six weeks later, on 30 January 1860, he died at his London consulting rooms in Brook Street, following multiple attacks of haematemesis. The post-mortem revealed advanced cirrhosis of the liver and congested and enlarged kidneys. Todd was buried on 4 February in Kensal Green cemetery, with more than two hundred of his former pupils following his coffin to the grave. His colleagues commissioned a marble statue of him which stands in front of the third King's College Hospital at Denmark Hill. Todd was survived by his wife and four children; their youngest child and only son, James Henthorn Todd (1847-1891) was educated at Eton College and at Worcester College, Oxford. He served in the Bombay civil service. 


@@@@@


doc= 27493


Todhunter, Isaac (1820-1884), mathematician and historian of mathematics, was born on 23 November 1820 in Rye, Sussex, the second son of George Todhunter ('c'.1792-1825), Congregationalist minister, and his wife, Mary Hume ('c'.1790-1860). His father's death in 1825 left the family in reduced financial circumstances, and his mother opened a school for girls at Hastings. Todhunter, who as a child was 'unusually backward' (Macfarlane, 134), was sent to a school in the same town kept by Robert Carr, and subsequently to one newly opened by a Mr J. B. Austin from London, by whose influence Todhunter's career was largely determined. About 1835 Todhunter moved with Austin to a school in Peckham where he became assistant master. While thus occupied, he managed to attend evening classes at University College, London, where he had for his instructors Thomas Hewitt Key, Henry Malden, George Long, James Joseph Sylvester, and Augustus De Morgan. He always held himself greatly indebted to all of them, but especially to the last, for whom his admiration was 'unbounded'. It was from this 'venerated master and friend' (Macfarlane, 142) he derived 'that interest in the history and bibliography of science, in moral philosophy and logic, which determined the course of his riper studies' (Mayor, 3). In 1842 Todhunter graduated BA, obtained a mathematical scholarship in the University of London, and, on proceeding MA two years later, obtained the gold medal awarded for that examination, as well as prizes for Greek and Hebrew. Concurrently with these studies, from 1841 he filled the post of mathematical master in a large school at Wimbledon. 
On 4 May 1844, acting on De Morgan's advice, Todhunter entered St John's College, Cambridge. In 1848 he gained the senior wranglership and the first Smith's prize, as well as the Burney prize. In the following year he was elected fellow of his college (the delay probably being due to his nonconformist background). From this time he was mainly occupied as college lecturer and private tutor, and in the compilation of the numerous mathematical treatises, chiefly educational, by which he became widely known. Of these, his 'Euclid' (1st edn, 1862) attained an enormous circulation and several editions, while his expositions of algebra (1858), trigonometry, plane and spherical (1859), mechanics (1867), and mensuration (1869), all became standard textbooks, remaining so until the beginning of the twentieth century. They secured a vast readership, were adopted by the Indian government, and were translated into Urdu and other oriental languages. 
Todhunter was elected FRS on 5 June 1862, was a candidate for the Sadleirian professorship (to which Arthur Cayley was elected) in 1863, and became a member of the London Mathematical Society on 18 June 1866, in the second year of its existence. In 1864 he resigned his fellowship on his marriage, on 13 August, to Louisa Anna Maria (1832/3-1918), eldest daughter of Captain George Davies RN (at that time head of the Cambridge county constabulary force). In 1871 he won the Adams prize for his 'Researches on the calculus of variations'. Perhaps his most original work, it deals with the abstruse question of discontinuity in solution. In the same year he was elected a member of the council of the Royal Society, on which he served for two years. 'The Conflict of Studies and other Essays' appeared in 1873, containing his views on many issues concerning education. In 1874 he was elected an honorary fellow of his college. 
Todhunter's life was mainly that of a studious recluse, and his publications were the outcome of great research and industry which enabled him to acquire a wide acquaintance with general and foreign literature. Besides being a sound Latin and Greek scholar, he was also familiar with French, German, Spanish, Italian, Russian, Hebrew, Arabic, Persian, and Sanskrit. He was well versed in the history of philosophy, and was one of the chief founders of the moral science examination at Cambridge, acting as examiner in 1863-5. He was also responsible for editing posthumous works by two other prominent scientific figures: in 1865, the second edition of Boole's 'Treatise on Differential Equations' and, eleven years later, the literary and scientific correspondence of William Whewell. 
Todhunter is also remembered for his many valuable contributions to the history of mathematics. These were lengthy histories of the calculus of variations (1861), probability (1865), the theories of attraction and the figure of the earth (2 vols., 1873) and elasticity (2 vols., 1886-93), a posthumous publication completed by Karl Pearson. They remain valuable reference books to this day, although Todhunter's literary style hardly makes them light reading. 
Todhunter's habits and tastes were singularly simple, and to a gentle, kindly disposition he added a high sense of honour, a warm sympathy with all that was calculated to advance the cause of genuinely scientific study in the university, and a love of animals, especially birds and cats. However, he had little love for art and no ear for music: 'He used to say he knew two tunes; one was 'God save the Queen', the other wasn't; the former he recognized by the people standing up' (Macfarlane, 137). An affection of the eyes in 1880 proved the forerunner of an attack of paralysis which eventually prostrated him. He died on 1 March 1884, at his home, 6 Brookside, Trumpington Road, Cambridge. His widow, four sons, and a daughter survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 27494


Toft, Mary (bap. 1703, d. 1763), the rabbit-breeder, daughter of John and Jane Denyer, was baptized at Godalming, Surrey, on 21 February 1703. She married Joshua Toft, a journeyman clothier, about 1720. They had three children, Mary, Anne, and James. Joshua, who followed a trade in which many, including himself, were chronically underemployed, provided little income for his family. Mary, an illiterate, was of small stature, with a healthy, strong constitution, and a sullen temper. 
In August of 1726 Mary miscarried. On 27 September 1726 Mary, her husband, and her mother-in-law cut up a cat, removed its innards, inserted the backbone of an eel into the cat's intestines, and placed the creation in Mary's reproductive tract. Mary sent for a neighbour, Mary Gill, and after her arrival complained of great pains, feigned a brief labour, and was delivered of a 'monster'. The 'monster' was taken to John Howard, a surgeon practising midwifery in nearby Guildford. Howard claimed he would be convinced that 'the monster' was an actual birth product only if the 'monstrous head' was delivered. Mary obliged, and after a few days, was delivered of the head of a rabbit. Mary recalled that earlier, when five weeks pregnant, she was startled by a rabbit while working in the hop fields. Immediately she desired the rabbit for a meal, but was unable to catch the animal. Her cravings were further increased by a dream about rabbits, yet her longings remained unfulfilled. Four months later, she claimed to have been delivered of a strange misshapen piece of flesh. She made a similar delivery some three weeks later, at which time Howard was called. 
As soon as Mary Toft was delivered of her first whole rabbit-headed monster, she fell into labour once again. By early November, with Howard in attendance, she was producing almost a rabbit a day. Toft was moved to Guildford so that Howard could more closely monitor the situation, and she soon gave birth to her ninth rabbit. Howard preserved the delivered products, all still births, in spirits, kept notes on the deliveries, and recorded the progress of events. Toft's case soon gained more than casual notice. Nathanael St Andre, surgeon and anatomist to the royal household, and Samuel Molyneux, private secretary to the prince of Wales, took particular interest in this case. On 15 November they visited Howard, examined Toft, and witnessed her delivery of the fifteenth rabbit. After carefully comparing the pieces obtained from a series of deliveries, St Andre was convinced of their authenticity, and he prepared an account of the matter which was subsequently published on 3 December as 'A Short Narrative of an Extraordinary Delivery of Rabbets, Perform'd by Mr John Howard Surgeon at Guilford'. 
The Toft incident soon appeared in the periodical press, and Mary became the general talk of the town in London. George I dispatched Cyriacus Ahlers, surgeon to his majesty's German household, to investigate the matter. Ahlers arrived in Guildford on 20 November, and delivered part of a rabbit from Toft. Ever suspicious, Ahlers returned to London on 21 November and reported to the king that the births were a hoax. His published account, 'Some Observations Concerning the Woman of Godlyman', appeared on 8 December 1726. In an effort to resolve the controversial reports, George I dispatched the eminent London physician and man-midwife, Sir Richard Manningham, together with St Andre and Phillupus van Limborch, a surgeon and man-midwife, to Guildford to review the situation and return with Toft who had, by this time, been delivered of a total of seventeen rabbits. 
Toft reached London on 29 November, and was lodged in Lacy's Bagnio in Leicester Fields, where assorted members of the medical profession gathered to watch her next production. Although Toft underwent a series of violent contractions, no more rabbits were delivered. Besieged by a succession of men, including Manningham, the surgeon and anatomist James Douglas, justice of the peace Sir Thomas Clarges, the duke of Montagu, and Lord Baltimore, and threatened with 'a very painful experiment' to uncover any secret, Toft confessed her imposture on 7 December. Charged as a 'notorious and vile cheat', she was sent to Bridewell in Tothill Fields on 9 December. 
At least fifteen pamphlets and songs appeared following Toft's disclosure, satirizing what was portrayed as a mass delusion. Among these were: by a 'Gentleman at Guilford', 'The wonder of wonders, or, A true and perfect narrative of a woman near Guilford in Surrey, who was delivered lately of seventeen rabbets and three legs of a tabby cat' (1726); 'Doctors in labour: a philosophical enquiry into the wonderful coney-warren, lately discovered at Godalmin near Guilford in Surrey' (1726); 'The Sooterkin Dissected' (1726); T. Brathwaite, 'Remarks on a short narrative of an extraordinary delivery of rabbets, perform'd by Mr. John Howard, surgeon at Guilford' (1726); 'The Doctor's in Labour, or, A New Whim Wham from Guildford' (1726); R. Manningham, 'An exact diary of what was observ'd during a close attendance upon Mary Toft, the pretended rabbet-breeder of Godalming in Surrey' (1726); J. Douglas, 'An Advertisement Occasion'd by some Passages in Sir R. Manningham's Diary' (1727); 'St. A-D-E's Miscarriage: a Full and True Account of the Rabbit Woman' (1727); Lemuel Gulliver, 'The Anatomist Dissected, or, The Man-Midwife Finely Brought to Bed' (1727); 'Much ado about nothing, or, A plain refutation of all that has been written or said concerning the rabbit-woman of Godalming' (1727); 'The Discovery, or, The Squire Turned Ferret' (1727); and 'St Andre's Miscarriage' (1727). Many of these works depicted Toft's surgical and medical attendants as gullible and credulous. 
Toft was also parodied in several engravings, including William Hogarth's 'The cunicularii, or, The wise men of Godliman in consultation' and, later, the second version of his engraving 'Credulity, superstition, and fanaticism' (1762), as well as in a Drury Lane play. Toft's account continued to spark interest, most notably in Alexander Pope's poem, the 'Dunciad' (1728), which revolves around a woman who proliferated monsters, and in the Daniel Turner-James Blondel controversy over the power of the maternal imagination. The case against Toft was dropped, and she returned to Godalming. Charles, second duke of Richmond, occasionally showed Mary as a spectacle or curiosity at his residence in Godalming. She was reportedly charged with receiving stolen 'fowles' in 1740. Toft died in Godalming, and was buried there on 13 January 1763. 


@@@@@


doc= 27495


Tofte, Robert (bap. 1562, d. 1619/20), poet and translator, was baptized in the parish of St Magnus the Martyr, London, on 15 January 1562, the younger son of William Tofte, a fishmonger (died 1563) and his wife, Mary, the daughter of John Cowper, fishmonger and alderman for the ward of Bridge Without. The family seems to have originally been in the wool trade in the Guildford area. C. A. O. Fox claims he was the Robert Tafte (aged nineteen) who matriculated at Exeter College, Oxford, on 24 November 1581. He could also be the Robert Tafte, gentleman, who was paid for carrying official letters to Sir Edward Stafford, ambassador to France, in October 1590. Tofte did at times use the spelling Tafte for his name (Williams, 286). It seems he never married, and had a private income. 
Tofte travelled around Italy from March 1591 to June 1594, and showed a keen interest in things Italian, which resulted in a manuscript, 'Discourse of the five laste Popes' (now Lambeth MS 1112). Although he took a dispassionate interest in Roman Catholic theology and church organization, he remained firmly protestant. He also became very familiar with the conventions of pastoral poetry. Renaissance pastoral depicted love and other pleasures in an idealized country setting, while often commenting on contemporary events, both public and private, and like the medieval courtly love poem it was a safe cover for declaring one's passion for an unattainable lady. Before Tofte left Italy he began 'Laura', a collection of short pastoral poems, and a short sonnet sequence 'moste parte conceived in Italie, and some of them brought foorthe in England'. 
On his return to Britain in 1594 Tofte was embroiled in a lawsuit before the court of queen's bench over the banking arrangements for his trip. Tofte claimed that he had paid William Garraway, a London merchant, $45 16's'. 8died for bills of exchange that were to be cashed in Venice for 200 ducats. But Garraway's agent refused to honour the bills. Tofte sought damages of $100 for loss of credit. It is not known how the matter was resolved. In 1597 he published 'Laura', dedicating it to Lady Lucy Percy, the daughter of the eighth earl of Northumberland, and 'Two Tales Translated out of Ariosto'. At this time he was living in the inns of court, but in 1598 he took rooms in Mistress Goodall's house near Barnard's Inn in Holborn. That year he published a translation of Matheo Maria Boiardo's 'Orlando inamorato', and his most important work, 'Alba', a cycle of poems on unrequited love dedicated to Anne Herne, the wife of Sir Edward Herne and sister of Sir John Brooke, to whom one of the prefatory poems is written. It is now extremely rare, and was edited in 1880 by Alexander Grosart. 
Like Philip Sidney's 'Astrophil', 'Alba' is probably autobiographical. It seems that Alba was a young married woman of the Caryll family with whom Tofte was infatuated. Grosart suggests she was Mary Caryll, the daughter of Sir Thomas Caryll of Bentone, Sussex. She married Sir Richard Molyneux of Sefton, who became Viscount Molyneux of Mayborough. She seems to have led Tofte on for many years before finally dropping him. Even the forematter of 'Alba' observes pastoral convention: the last eight of its lyrics are arranged in the form of the song contest common in classical pastoral (cf. Virgil, 'Eclogues' III, V, and VII). A number of these poems play on Tofte's nickname, Robin Redbreast. 'Alba' is also notable for a reference to Shakespeare's 'Love's Labour Lost', in which Tofte saw a parallel to his own predicament. 
In March 1599 came 'Of Mariage and Wiving: an Excellent, Pleasant and Philosophicall Controversy', Tofte's translation of Ercole Tasso's 'Dello ammogliarsi piacevole', in which Tasso argues against marriage and his brother, Torquato, defends it. This book was burnt at Stationers' Hall on 4 June 1599 under the provisions against satire. Another work on a similar theme, 'The Bachelor's Banquet' (1603), a version of 'Les quinze joies de mariage', was probably by Tofte, and promised, in its full title, discourses on 'the variable humours of women, their quicknesse of wittes, and unsearchable deceits'. By this time it seems Tofte was acquiring a reputation for misogyny. His next work appeared in 1608, 'Ariosto's Satyres', published under the name of Gervais Markham, which Tofte bitterly resented. In the preface to his 'Blazon of Jealousie' (1615) he writes: 'I had thought for thy better contentment to have inserted (at the end of the Booke) the disastrous fall of three noble Roman Gentlemen, overthrowne thorow jealousie, in their Loves; but the same was, with 'Ariosto's Satyres' (translated by mee out of Italian into English Verse, and Notes upon the same) Printed without my consent or knowledge, in another man's name.' The publisher reissued the book in 1611, without the name of the translator. Tofte's other translations are 'Honours Academie' (1610), from the French of Nicolas de Montreux, and Benedetto Varchi's 'Blazon of Jealousie' published 'with special notes' in 1615. 
Tofte was buried at St Andrew's, Holborn, on 24 January 1620. His long will specifically excludes 'my kinnesfolkes whose underserved unkyndenes and ingratitude towardes me hath estranged my harte from them'. Apart from the poor of the parish and certain friends, the beneficiaries of his will are a network of cousins belonging to the Urrie family of Thorlie, Isle of Wight, and the Day family of West Drayton, Middlesex. Tofte left a considerable estate, bequeathing about $750 in cash and almost the same amount in personal effects. 


@@@@@


doc= 27496


Tofts, Catherine (d. 1756), singer, was the daughter of Andrew Tofts (died 1704), who was in the employ of Gilbert Burnet, bishop of Salisbury, before he joined the royal household at St James's Palace in July 1702. Catherine Tofts 'took her first Grounds of Musick here in her own Country' (Cibber, 226), and may well have studied singing with Nicola Matteis the younger. She first sang in public in a series of subscription concerts at Drury Lane and Lincoln's Inn Fields theatres between 30 November 1703 and 14 March 1704, missing a concert on 14 December because of 'a great Cold' ('Daily Courant', 21 Dec 1703). On each occasion she sang several songs in Italian and English and on 18 January she was also advertised as singing Pallas in John Weldon's 'The Judgment of Paris'. A songsheet of 'Fly swift ye hours' by Henry Purcell was published as 'Sung by Mrs. Tofts in the Subscription Musick'. (At this time the title 'Mrs' does not indicate that she was married.) On 8 February 1704 a letter from Mrs Tofts was printed in the 'Daily Courant', expressing surprise and annoyance that her former servant, Ann Barwick, had 'committed a Rudeness last night at the Play-house, by throwing of Oranges, and hissing when Mrs. l'Epine the Italian Gentlewoman Sung'. The two singers were supported by different political factions, the whigs favouring 'British Tofts', and the tories 'fam'd L'Epine' ('Diverting Post', 9-16 June 1705), but there is no evidence of personal animosity between them. 
On 16 January 1705 at Drury Lane, Mrs Tofts took the title role in the first English opera in the Italian style, Thomas Clayton's 'Arsinoe', and a year later in the even more successful 'Camilla' (Bononcini, arranged by Haym), the part with which she became identified. On 4 March 1707 she sang in Clayton's 'Rosamond', which had a libretto by Joseph Addison, and on 1 April in 'Thomyris' (pasticcio, arranged by Pepusch). The arrival of the castrato Valentini led to opera performances in a mixture of Italian and English. Mrs Tofts had leading roles in 'Love's Triumph' (26 February 1708), 'Pyrrhus and Demetrius' (14 December 1708), and 'Clotilda' (2 March 1709). The actor Colley Cibber never forgot 'the Beauty of her fine proportion'd Figure, and the exquisitely sweet, silver Tone of her Voice, with that peculiar, rapid Swiftness of her Throat' (Cibber, 226). She earned a reputation for avarice and pride and was repeatedly involved in disputes over pay, costume, and conditions. In March 1709 Charles Dering wrote that her benefit would raise 'a vast deal' and that she had been selling kisses at a guinea a time at the duke of Somerset's, where 'some took three, others four, others five kisses' (Milhous and Hume, 'Register', 437). Then on 26 May 'The Tatler' reported 'the Distresses of the unfortunate 'Camilla', who has had the ill Luck to break before her Voice, and to disappear at a Time when her Beauty was in the Heigth of its Bloom' ('The Tatler', 26 May 1709). This report does not indicate a breakdown in the modern sense, but that her extravagant lifestyle had led to serious debts and the need to leave London to escape her creditors. The opera company became completely dominated by Italian singers, so there was no place for her there. In July 1711 Anthony Hammond encountered her in the Netherlands 'en route' for Hanover and by December she was in Venice. The following April the 'Daily Courant' reported that she was much applauded there for her singing in grand private concerts. In September 1716 Alexander Cunningham wrote from Venice: 'As for Mr Smith he is soe much in Love wt Mrs Tofts, that he is fitt for nothing at present' (Levey, 352). This was Joseph Smith (1673/4?-1770), a successful businessman and later British consul in Venice who was to become a patron of Canaletto and a collector of fine books and paintings, many of which are now in the Royal Collection. The date of his marriage to Catherine Tofts is unknown, but she was travelling under the name of Smith when Hammond met her in 1711. The Smiths lived in style in the Palazzo Balbi -- now the Palazzo Mangilli-Valmarana -- on the Grand Canal and a villa at Mogliano. It is likely that they had a son, since there is a memorial tablet for John Smith (1721-1727) in the church of Santi Apostoli near their palazzo. She died early in 1756 and her husband erected a fine memorial to her in the protestant cemetery on the Lido that is now to be seen in the extension to the Cimitero San Nicolo. 


@@@@@


doc= 27497


Toland, John (1670-1722), freethinker and philosopher, was born on 30 November 1670 on the peninsula of Inishowen, co. Donegal, Ireland. Although his parents are unknown, he supposedly was the illegitimate son of a Roman Catholic priest and was probably baptized Sean Eoghain (Sean Owen, John's John). He later wrote that he had been baptized Janus Junius, a play on his name that recalled both the Roman two-faced god Janus and Junius Brutus, reputed founder of the Roman republic. Appealing to his ability to read ancient Gaelic texts, he claimed a respected Irish ancestry, probably descent from the Ui Tuathallain family, traditional historians and bards for the once powerful O'Neills. 
While still a child Owen of the Books (as Toland was known) developed a critical attitude toward his religious upbringing. At the age of sixteen he rejected Catholicism, 'the insupportable Yoke of the most Pompous and Tyrannical 'Policy' that ever enslav'd Mankind under the name or shew of Religion' (J. Toland, 'An Apology for Mr. Toland', 1697, 16). Supported by Presbyterian sponsors who hoped that he would become a minister, he attended Redcastle School in Londonderry and in 1687 enrolled in the University of Glasgow. In 1689 he moved from Glasgow to the University of Edinburgh where he received the MA degree in 1690. In Edinburgh he seems to have had his first involvement with secret societies (probably the Rosicrucians). Soon afterwards he travelled to London where he tutored in the household of a wealthy widow and met prominent figures such as Daniel Williams 'the Presbyterian Pope'. Impressed by the young Irishman, Presbyterians in London sent him to the universities of Leiden and Utrecht to study under Friedrich Spanheim the younger. From Spanheim he learned exegetical techniques of biblical criticism developed by Baruch Spinoza, Pierre Bayle, and Richard Simon. 
At the Rotterdam house of the English Quaker merchant Benjamin Furly, Toland met the Dutch remonstrant theologians Philip van Limborch and Jean Le Clerc, who wrote letters of introduction for him to John Locke. They described Toland as a 'freespirited ingenious man' and an 'excellent and not unlearned young man... frank, gentlemanly, and not at all of a servile character' (Daniel, 7). In the summer of 1693 he returned to London; a few months later he moved to Oxford to work at the Bodleian Library on an Irish dictionary and a dissertation proving that the Irish had been a colony of the Gauls. To the Ashmolean Museum curator Edward Lhuyd, Toland seemed arrogant but he impressed others (including the antiquary John Aubrey) as a promising scholar. He borrowed money from Locke, exchanged ideas about their manuscripts, and came to know Locke's closest friends, such as John Freke and James Tyrrell. In 'The fabulous death of Atilius Regulus' he questioned the reliability of classical texts, and in his manuscript of 'Christianity not mysterious' he combined a Lockean theory of meaning with strategies of biblical criticism learned from Spanheim. Locke's 'Reasonableness of Christianity' (1695) seems to have been in part a response to points raised by Toland. 
In conservative Oxford, Toland's coffee-house polemics quickly gained him a reputation as 'a man of fine parts, great learning, and little religion' (Daniel, 8). After the vice-chancellor ordered him out of the city, he retired to London and anonymously published 'Two Essays Sent in a Letter from Oxford'. In 'Two Essays' he introduced the materialist cosmology to which he would appeal for the rest of his life, arguing that fossils could have been shaped in rock by a 'plastic power' that contains the seeds of all forms of matter. 
Toland was but twenty-five when his most famous work, 'Christianity not Mysterious', anonymously appeared late in 1695 (with a 1696 imprint). In it he argued that no tenets of true Christianity could be contrary to or above human reason, for if they were they would be unintelligible. This contradicted Locke who, in the 'Essay Concerning Human Understanding' (1690), had argued that revealed truths (for example, about the divinity of Christ) may be above but are not contrary to reason. Toland countered that once a truth is divinely revealed, it is no longer beyond human comprehension; it is neither contrary to reason nor above reason. An unintelligible belief could not be an object of faith because no believer can assent to a doctrine without understanding what it would mean to hold that belief. He concluded that the so-called mysteries of Christianity are not essential to the faith at all but are either puzzles that can be solved or ploys by which priests exercise control over others. 
The book immediately caused a furore and was presented to the grand jury of Middlesex. A second edition appeared in late summer 1696 identifying its author. In early 1697 Toland returned to Ireland and introduced himself to Locke's friend William Molyneux. Molyneux wrote to Locke that he had found Toland a 'candid free-thinker and a good scholar' but that clerical animosity and Toland's practice of conducting theological disputes in taverns made it awkward to be seen with him (Sullivan, 7). Apparently Toland had hoped to offer his scholarly and linguistic skills to the new lord chancellor, John Methuen. But in Dublin his book was denounced from the pulpit as a Socinian attack against the divinity of Christ, and Peter Browne, provost of Trinity College, Dublin, blasted him for reducing faith to mere knowledge. In September it was condemned by the Irish House of Commons and Toland was ordered to be arrested. Before the order could be carried out, he retreated to London and spent the next five years defending his 'juvenile thoughts' and 'unadvised expressions' (as he called them). In a self-deluded bid to stand in the general election for a borough in London, he sought to clear his name in 1702 by resolving 'never hereafter to intermeddle in any religious Controversies' (J. Toland, 'Vindicius liberius', 1702, 24). 
None of this notoriety was missed by patrons attracted to his learning and free-spirited method of inquiry. Anthony Ashley Cooper, third earl of Shaftesbury, shared Toland's interest in antiquity, philosophy, religion, and opposition to superstition. It was probably through Shaftesbury that Toland met the leader of the 'country' forces in the House of Commons, Robert Harley, later first earl of Oxford. Harley saw in Toland an advocate for traditional whig causes supporting religious toleration for dissenters and the protestant succession. Other whigs, such as John Holles, first duke of Newcastle, and Sir Robert Clayton, director of the Bank of England and mayor of London, commissioned Toland to prepare biographies and editions to show how Commonwealthsmen Algernon Sidney, Denzil Holles, Edmund Ludlow, John Milton, and James Harrington were models of public religion and civic virtue. With Ludlow's 'Memoirs' in particular, Toland took great liberties, changed its tone, improved its style, added his own reflections, and eliminated thousands of words written by the civil war republican. His portrait of Ludlow provided a model for both the notorious Calves-Head Club and for aristocratic whigs, and it united radical thinkers such as John Phillips, Matthew Tindal, and William Stephens, with members of the Grecian Club such as John Trenchard and Walter Moyle, and 'Roman' whigs like Shaftesbury, Harley, and Robert Molesworth. In the 'Militia Reform'd' and 'The Danger of Mercenary Parliaments' (both 1698) he endorsed the effort of Harley's country party coalition of Jacobite tories and republican whigs to prevent William's standing army from entering England. In his life of John Milton (1698) he argued that the 'Eikon basilike' was not written by Charles I, as claimed, but by his chaplain, Gauden, and he added that many ancient writings, both secular and religious, were forgeries. When he was accused of doubting the authenticity of the Christian scriptures, he displayed his scholarly and exegetical abilities in 'Amyntor' (1699) with a list of more than seventy spurious gospels, epistles, and acts attributed by early Christian writers and church fathers to Christ, Mary, and the apostles. Always seeking to portray himself as a defender of the faith, Toland turned even seemingly academic disputes about religion into opportunities for political alliances and, prompted by Harley and Shaftesbury, drew those themes together in 'The Art of Governing by Partys' and 'Paradoxes of State' (1702). 
Pleased by Toland's justification of the protestant succession in 'Anglia libera' (1701), Harley requested that the Irishman be selected as a secretary to the embassy of Hanover under Charles Girard, second earl of Macclesfield. Toland had the honour to present the 'Act of Settlement' and a copy of his book to the Electress Sophia, who in turn introduced him to the court in Berlin and to her daughter, Sophie Charlotte, queen of Prussia. Amused by his wit, impressed by his knowledge of ten languages, and attracted by his good looks, the queen liked to walk and converse with Toland for hours at a time. In turn, he presented her with his rare copy of Giordano Bruno's 'Expulsion of the Triumphant Beast'. 
In 1702 Toland returned to Berlin where, in numerous discussions in the presence of the queen, he and G. W. Leibniz began a philosophical exchange that would last for years. Although Leibniz expressed doubts about Toland's manners, he respected the young man's intellect and even wrote a brief reply to 'Christianity not Mysterious', which Toland received with great pleasure. Toland's suggestions that Leibniz pay special attention to the works of Bruno were generally ignored, but his promotion of the Italian thinker gained Toland notoriety for his knowledge of rare books and manuscripts containing heterodox doctrines. 
While passing through Holland on this second trip to Germany, Toland provided Pierre Bayle with a materialistic account of the soul that Bayle incorporated into the second edition of his 'Dictionary'. He also met Baron von Hohendorf, chief lieutenant to Prince Eugene of Savoy, commander of the armies of the Austrian Habsburgs, who commissioned him to increase the prince's library of rare and clandestine works. It was especially in this context that Toland encouraged the widespread study of Bruno in clandestine circles. 
After his return to England Toland set to work on 'Letters to Serena' (Queen Sophie Charlotte). In it he diagnosed the origin and force of prejudices and superstitions, argued that motion was essential to matter, and rejected Spinoza's ahistorical account of motion and Newton's reliance on divine agency. When the book was published in 1704, followers of Newton (notably Samuel Clarke) quickly recognized the political and religious implications of Toland's attack on Newtonian physics in that it indicated how individuals did not need external, whether monarchical, clerical, or spiritual, inspiration to act. 
After Harley became secretary of state in 1704, Toland expected to receive a more stable income than that provided by the occasional political piece commissioned by Harley. But Harley continued to rely on Toland merely as a source of information about intrigues on the continent and as a propagandist. Using the Quaker leader William Penn as an intermediary, Sidney Godolphin (the lord treasurer) had Toland compose 'The Memorial of the State of England' (1705) to show how occasional religious conformity contributed to a stable commonwealth. Such commissions were hardly enough to support Toland, so Penn appealed to Harley on his behalf. Toland assured Harley that he had broken off the 'tattling and mean acquaintances' of his coffee-house days and publicly presented himself as a staunch supporter of the Church of England (Sullivan, 24). Although Harley remained aloof, Toland continued to supply him with confidential reports and to procure additions to his library. 
In 1707 Toland returned to the continent. In Dusseldorf, desperate for money, he accepted a commission to write 'The Declaration Lately Published by the Elector Palatine' (1707), in which he explained the elector's claim to have the right to curtail religious liberty, even if that meant the submission of protestants to Catholics. He next travelled to Hanover and Berlin and then on to Vienna where his knowledge of Bruno and hermetic texts was appreciated as nowhere else. He wintered in Prague at a convent of Irish Franciscans who attested to his ancestry and his scholarly credentials for Gaelic research. Early in 1708 he returned to Berlin where, despite his charm, he upset members of the court by claiming more privilege than his status warranted. In addition, he irritated Leibniz by drawing little distinction between superstition and true religion. 
On his way back to England, Toland learned that Harley had been forced out of office, so without much prospect for fortune in England, he remained in Holland. His research turned to showing how primitive (especially Celtic) Christianity was not characterized by pomp or austere submission to a set of papist doctrines. Instead, he suggested, ancient Christianity celebrated fellowship, freedom of conscience, and egalitarian social virtues. Furthermore he imagined hermeneutic strategies for retrieving those ideals from centuries of institutionalized superstition. Some of this work he dedicated to his friend and fellow freethinker, Anthony Collins, in 'Adeisidaemon' ('The unsuperstitious man'; 1709). He expanded on this research in 'Nazarenus' (1718), in which he proposed that the ancient Celtic beliefs revealed in an Irish manuscript of the four gospels captured the true spirit of Christianity, Judaism, and Islam. In 'Reasons for Naturalizing the Jews' (1714), he even went so far as to suggest that Jews should be afforded the same rights as other citizens of the nation. 
After Harley's return to power in the tory government of October 1710, Toland still believed that Harley was primarily committed to the protestant succession and Queen Anne. So Toland returned to England early in 1711, supported by Harley with work and a house at Epsom. When Harley was almost killed in an assassination attempt in March 1711, enemies of Toland spread a false rumour that the assassin was one of his correspondents. But Harley's affections for Toland (for whatever they were worth) had dissipated by then, and his concerns were less with maintaining whig ideals than with securing peace with the French. Toland knew this and shortly thereafter became an informer to Harley's political opponents. 
For the next two years Toland's lifelong interests in religious toleration and civil liberty were the focus of his writings. When those principles seemed to have been thoroughly ignored in the government's negotiation of a commercial treaty with France in the treaty of Utrecht (1713), he declared his final break with Harley in his bitter work 'The Art of Restoring' (1714). Because Toland had been a close friend and dependant of Harley, his explicit attack confirmed the suspicions of many Englishmen that Harley (now Lord Oxford) no longer supported the ideals of the protestant succession. Toland's book went through ten printings in less than a year, which provided him with the financial independence he needed to compose his equally popular treatise on whig political theory, 'The State Anatomy of Great Britain' (1717). 
In 1718 Toland published the results of his earlier work on biblical criticism and turned his attention to a projected monumental study of the druids. He was fascinated by the secretive activities of the ancient Irish, and in his 'Tetradymus' (1720) and 'Pantheisticon' (1720) he examined how the distinction between esoteric and exoteric doctrines function in religion and philosophy. His interest in the topic had appeared as early as in his 'Letters to Serena', and he had appropriated the term 'pantheist' in his 'Socinianism Truly Stated' from Joseph Raphson, who had referred to 'panthei' and 'pantheismus' in 'De spatio reali, seu, Ente infinito' (1697). Like Raphson, Toland describes pantheists as those who think of God as the omnipresent space in which all material and immaterial distinctions are intelligible. God is not simply matter but that which is prior to all distinction, including the distinction between the material and immaterial. Because God is the matrix for all discernment, he is eminently accessible to every speaker and can hardly be considered mysterious. Pantheists tolerate promiscuous communication, therefore, because it is the means by which identity and differentiation first appear. In his 'Origines Judaicae' (1709), Toland associated pantheists with Spinozists because their methodological toleration required that they limit philosophical discussion to what can be observed, namely, bodies in motion. He concluded that, if life itself is nothing more than such motion, then the adoption of a pantheistic attitude toward the universe and God would provide a tranquil temperament and peace of mind. 
In the financial collapse of the South Sea Company in 1720, Toland lost what little money he had been given by his friend Robert Molesworth, by then Viscount Molesworth. The following year his already frail health declined further, aggravated by the polluted air of London. Although he moved out of the city to Putney his condition did not improve appreciably. Afflicted with kidney stones and apparently drinking heavily, he became bedridden at Christmas 1721. On 11 March 1722 in the cluttered room of a carpenter's house, he died surrounded by piles of his books and manuscripts stacked on the floor. According to one account he told those around him 'I thank you for your care, but I am poisoned by a physician' (Sullivan, 39). It is also said that when asked, immediately before he died, whether he wanted anything, he replied he wanted only death. And after bidding those around him farewell, he simply said that he was going to sleep -- an attitude that Voltaire greatly admired. 
Toland was buried two days later in Putney churchyard, but because of his poverty no gravestone marks the spot. The Latin epitaph he composed for himself concluded: 'His spirit is joined with its ethereal father from whom it originally proceeded; his body likewise yielding to nature is laid again in the lap of its mother. But he's frequently to rise himself again, yet never to be the same Toland more... If you would know more of him, search his writings' (Daniel, 13-14). 
Because Toland's life and writings were filled with challenges to propriety, he generated great hostility. By making reason a criterion of knowledge and faith, he raised doubts about the legitimacy of beliefs and texts and continued to prompt responses from apologists throughout the eighteenth century. His criticism of arbitrary power and his widely read editions of Sidney, Ludlow, Milton, and Harrington had, for many, the unsettling effect of bringing together republican and classical ideals. In the long term it provided a foundation for the whig intellectual tradition that influenced Maximilien Robespierre, Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Jefferson, and Thomas Paine. On the continent Toland's blend of polemics and toleration, his defence of liberty, and critique of religious excess, attracted Voltaire and other Enlightenment figures. According to Denis Diderot and the baron d'Holbach, his doctrine of the essential activity of matter undermined the simplistic distinction between matter and spirit that had burdened metaphysics since Descartes. Freemasons throughout Europe appropriated his clandestine practices and pantheist philosophy as models for responding to surreptitious efforts to impose ways of thinking and social order. In recent years the ground-breaking bibliographic work of Giancarlo Carabelli has opened up new prospects for research on Toland. Several major studies of his life and thought have been published since then, culminating in 1996 with a flurry of books and articles on the tercentenary of the publication of 'Christianity not Mysterious'. Because of Toland's interest in challenging the bounds of propriety, he has been the object of work in hermeneutics, deconstruction, and post-structuralism. Not surprisingly, the assessment of his importance in understanding the political and religious intrigues of the early eighteenth century still provokes controversy. 


@@@@@


doc= 27498


Toler, John, first earl of Norbury (1745-1831), judge and politician, was born at Beechwood, co. Tipperary, on 3 December 1745, the youngest son of Daniel Toler (died 1754x6) and Letitia Otway (died 1794), the Tolers being a Cromwellian family who came originally from Norfolk. He was educated at Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated BA in 1761 and MA in 1766. Admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 19 March 1761 he was called to the bar in Michaelmas 1770. On 2 June 1778 Toler married Grace (died 21 July 1822), daughter of Hector Graham; they had two sons and two daughters. His father, on his deathbed, was said to have given him a case of silver mounted pistols and charged him 'never to omit the valour of an Irish gentleman in resorting to his weapons' (Sheil, 85-6). Whatever may have been the truth of that story Toler certainly demonstrated throughout his career a readiness to challenge those with whom he clashed to a duel. 
Toler's political career began in 1776, when he was returned to the Irish House of Commons as MP for Tralee. He made clear his support for the government from the beginning and was duly advanced in his profession to the rank of king's counsel in 1781. In 1783 he was returned for the borough of Philipstown in King's county, his elder brother Daniel (died 1796) having been returned at the same time for Tipperary. He represented Gorey, East Wexford, from 1790 to 1800. Toler was vehement in his opposition in parliament to the proposals for reform urged by Grattan and others, which included their proposals for the relaxation of the laws against Catholics. He was further rewarded for his loyalty to the government on 12 August 1789, when he was appointed solicitor-general. One of his first actions in post was to oppose a motion by Grattan deprecating the sale of places and peerages by the viceroy. 
Toler was a jovial figure, on the short side and increasingly corpulent, with a ribald and sometimes seriously misplaced sense of humour. He was also remarkably belligerent, even by the parliamentary standards of the era. In 1792 he in turn was challenged, by James Napper Tandy, secretary of the United Irishmen, to a duel which never took place, Tandy being imprisoned for contempt by the Commons. Tandy was notoriously ugly and, commenting on his election as secretary, Toler said that it was odd that they had been unable 'to set a better 'face' on the matter' ('DNB'), a characteristic example of the wit for which Toler was renowned. 
Toler fell out of favour with the government when the liberal-minded Earl Fitzwilliam became viceroy in 1794, but the prime minister, William Pitt, only agreed to his being removed from the post of solicitor-general on the condition that another place would be found for him. Fitzwilliam was recalled after spending less than two months in Dublin, Toler's fortunes were restored, and his zealous denunciations of measures for Catholic relief handsomely rewarded. His wife was created a peeress of Ireland in her own right on 7 November 1797 with the title of Baroness Norwood of Knockalton, co. Tipperary; on 10 July 1798 Toler was appointed attorney-general, and he was sworn of the privy council on 2 August. 
During and after the rising of 1798 Toler conducted some of the most important prosecutions in person with a ferocity which was unusual even by the standards of the time. In the most celebrated of the trials with which he was concerned, that of the brothers Sheares, his efforts to secure a conviction were helped by the fact that one of the counsel appearing for the brothers, Leonard McNally, was secretly in the pay of Dublin Castle and had disclosed one of the defence's legal strategies to Toler and his team, who were thus well prepared with their replying arguments. When the case had been at hearing for over fifteen hours one of the defence counsel, John Philpot Curran, who was described as 'fainting with exhaustion', pleaded for an adjournment, which was successfully opposed by Toler. The brothers were convicted and executed the following day, and Toler's anxiety that the sentence should be carried out as quickly as possible may have been due to his concern that the lord chancellor, Lord Clare, might be disposed to extend clemency to the brothers. 
In the aftermath of the rising Toler was responsible for legislation which gave the viceroy a discretionary power to suspend the 'Habeas Corpus Act' and establish martial law. These services and his support for the 'Act of Union' in 1800 led to his appointment as chief justice of the court of common pleas on 20 December 1800. He was elevated to the peerage as Baron Norbury of Ballyorenode, co. Tipperary, nine days later. 
Toler had a poor reputation as a lawyer. As an advocate his style blended buffoonery with portentous gravity. These features of his personality moved Lord Clare to his reported comment: 'Make him a bishop or an archbishop but not a judge' ('DNB'). Such misgivings as to Toler's fitness for office were amply justified by his conduct on the bench. His liking for coarse humour and his constant altercations with leading counsel, notably O'Connell, resulted in his court's frequently being crowded to capacity. His jocular approach was even evident when those before him were being sentenced to death. One contemporary account said contemptuously that his performances 'were greatly preferred, in the decline of the Dublin stage, to any theatrical exhibition' (Sheil, 97). It was not suggested that he was corrupt in the ordinary sense. In civil suits, however, he almost invariably found for the plaintiff and this was attributed by his critics to the fact that, at that time, the judge and the registrar were paid an additional fee if there was a decree in favour of the plaintiff. There were reported to be two bags underneath Norbury's desk, one of silver coins for himself and one of copper coins for his registrar. 
As it happened, in the most celebrated trial over which he presided, that of Robert Emmet, Norbury was not at his worst. Before reaching his famous peroration -- 'let no man write my epitaph' (Phillips, 359-61) -- Emmet had sought to justify his leadership of the abortive foray in the streets of Dublin in terms which the judges were bound to regard as treasonable. Yet he was given considerable latitude by them and when Norbury eventually intervened he did so in reasonably measured terms. He expressed the concern of the judges that the 26-year-old Emmet, whose father had been physician to the viceroy and whose elder brother, Christopher, had been a most highly regarded member of the Irish bar until his early death, should have been associated in so desperate an enterprise, and his dismissive comment on Emmet's followers as lower class riff-raff is hardly surprising for its time. It has even been said, although there is no authoritative confirmation of the suggestion, that he was moved to tears by Emmet's plight as he passed the death sentence. 
The most serious threat to Norbury's continued tenure of office resulted not from his behaviour in court but from the discovery and publication of a letter sent to him some years previously from William Saurin, then attorney-general. In the letter Saurin had urged Norbury, when travelling on circuit, to encourage in private the members of the grand juries to resist the campaign for Catholic emancipation. The letter was found on Ormond Quay in Dublin by a young Catholic attorney and then came into O'Connell's possession. The latter wrote indignantly to Earl Grey, the prime minister, that the letter was 'clear evidence of a conspiracy to pervert the judicial character into an engine of calumny and bigotry' ('Correspondence of Daniel O'Connell', 2.402). O'Connell enlisted the support of Henry Brougham, then a member of the House of Commons, in raising the matter there but it was brushed aside by the chief secretary for Ireland, Sir Robert Peel, who said that he thought the manner in which the letter was published baser than its contents. Norbury was infuriated by Brougham's actions and was reported to have said: 'I will resign to demand satisfaction. That Scottish Brougham wants to be made acquainted with an Irish stick' ('DNB') -- another fair sample of the excruciating puns on which Norbury's reputation as a wit apparently rested. The chance finding of the letter on Ormond Quay was said to have been the result of Norbury having put it, along with other papers, in the stuffing of an armchair that had been sent to be upholstered, but this may be apocryphal. 
Although he survived that episode Norbury's behaviour on the bench led to increasing pressure for his removal. In 1825 O'Connell presented a petition to parliament calling for his removal on the ground that he had fallen asleep during a murder trial and was unable to give any account of the evidence when his notes were called for (he was then aged eighty). Again Norbury survived but when Canning became prime minister in 1827 he was at last induced to retire. However, his departure was smoothed by his advancement in the peerage as Viscount Glandine and earl of Norbury, together with a retiring pension of $3046. These titles were created with a special remainder in favour of Norbury's second son, Hector John (died 1839), in consequence of the poor mental health of his eldest son, Daniel (died 1832), second Baron Norwood in succession to his mother and later second Baron Norbury. O'Connell, in his private correspondence, described the departing chief justice as 'a sanguinary buffoon', who had been 'bought off the bench by a most shameful traffic' ('Correspondence of Daniel O'Connell', 3.323). 
In private life Norbury was an amiable person, given to singing and declaiming poetry; he knew much of Shakespeare and Milton by heart. He was also reputed to be an excellent landlord and a kindly and thoughtful employer. In contrast O'Connell regarded Norbury's behaviour as a judge as symptomatic of the worst features of the post-Union Irish judiciary. It was not simply that his hostility towards Catholic emancipation remained undiminished; even in an age when there was a more relaxed attitude towards idiosyncratic behaviour by judges Norbury was conspicuous for his eccentricity. He died at Cabra, near Dublin, on 27 July 1831. 


@@@@@


doc= 27499


Tolfrey, William (bap. 1777?, d. 1817), orientalist, was probably baptized on 27 October 1777 at St Swithin London Stone, London, the son of William and Susannah Tolfrey. He was apparently educated in England. In 1794 he went to Calcutta, where his father then lived, and obtained at first some subordinate post in a public office, but soon afterwards relinquished this for an ensigncy in the 76th (foot) regiment. His military career was creditable. Promoted to the 74th regiment, he served in the Anglo-Mysore War under General George Harris and in the Maratha campaigns of 1803-4. He was distinguished also in the battle of Assaye. 
In 1805 Tolfrey sold his commission, and, visiting an uncle, Samuel Tolfrey, in Ceylon, obtained a post in the civil service of the island in 1806. In 1813 he was assistant commissioner of revenue and commerce, and shortly afterwards his proficiency in Sinhalese obtained him the post of chief translator to the resident at Kandy. On the arrival of Sir Robert Brownrigg as governor in 1812, a 'Bible' society was started, and with other scholars Tolfrey undertook the revision of the old Sinhalese translation of the 'Bible' made by the Dutch. The work was printed under the direction of the Colombo Auxiliary Bible Society between 1817 and 1820. Struck by the unduly colloquial character of the original edition Tolfrey had decided on the course of first translating each verse into classical Pali. It was probably this that led him to attempt the translation of the whole 'New Testament' into Pali, a work which he had nearly completed at the time of his death. It was subsequently printed, but as a literary production it was of no great or lasting value. Tolfrey was, however, probably the first Englishman to study Pali, the most important of the languages of Buddhism, and he merits recognition as a pioneer. Benjamin Clough used his materials for the compilation of his Pali grammar, printed in Colombo in 1824, which was the only work of the kind for some thirty years. 
Tolfrey died in Ceylon on 4 January 1817. He appears to have been unmarried at the time of his death: his sole executor was his mother, and after leaving legacies to his servants, he bequeathed the residue of his personal estate to the Colombo Auxiliary Bible Society. A monument was erected to his memory in the church of St Peter in the fort of Colombo. 


@@@@@


doc= 27500


Tollemache, Thomas (c.1651-1694), army officer, was the second surviving son of Sir Lionel Tollemache, baronet (1624-1669), and his wife, Lady Elizabeth Murray, from 1655 countess of Dysart and afterwards also duchess of Lauderdale ('bap'. 1626, died 1698). It was rumoured that his mother had been Cromwell's mistress and that he was Oliver's son. According to Lord Dartmouth, Tollemache 'had a peculiar sort of vanity in desiring it should be understood' ('Burnet's History', 4.228). Nevertheless, Sir Lionel was in no doubt that he was his own son and made ample provision for him in his will. 
Tollemache was brought up at Helmingham in Suffolk and according to the inscription on his monument 'His natural abilities and first education were improved by his travels into foreign nations, where he spent several years, in the younger part of his life, in the observation of their genius, customs, politicks and interests'. Tollemache had returned to England by 1668 when he was admitted as a fellow commoner on 22 May to Queens' College, Cambridge. Entering the Inner Temple in the same year he was later created MA by Queens' in 1669. 
Soon afterwards Tollemache joined the army, and by 1673 was serving as a captain in Cologne. He was commissioned into the Coldstream Guards on 16 January 1678 as a captain, but served for most of the year in Flanders as the lieutenant-colonel of a regiment raised by his cousin, Lord Alington. The regiment returned to England in early 1679 and was disbanded in April, freeing Tollemache to rejoin the Coldstreamers in May. In 1680 Tollemache was posted with a detachment of Coldstream Guards to the English outpost of Tangier, then under threat from the Moors. On 18 September he volunteered to command the advance guard in the successful but bloody attempt to recover the Pole Fort and later in the month he negotiated a temporary treaty with the Moors. On 27 October 1680 he took part in the garrison's last and most successful battle in which he and Percy Kirke were praised for having 'behaved themselves like brave and gallant men' ('A Particular Relation'). Tollemache arrived back in England from Tangier on 26 November 1680. In June 1682 he fought a duel, following which he lost his commission in the guards and returned to Tangier as a volunteer. 
Back in England by 1685 Tollemache was given the lieutenant-colonelcy of the newly raised Royal Regiment of Fusiliers, but in April 1686 he resigned his commission in protest at the admission of Catholics into the army. He was a leading member of the Treason Club, a group of youngish would-be politicians and officers led by Henry Wharton and Lord Colchester who met in the Rose tavern in Covent Garden with the purpose of encouraging and assisting an armed intervention by William of Orange. In March 1688 Tollemache was made the colonel of an English regiment in the pay of the Dutch government and sailed to the Netherlands, from where he kept in touch with his fellow conspirators in England. In November 1688 he returned as part of William's invasion force. His regiment formed the advance guard on the march from Torbay to London and occupied the Tower on 19 December 1688. In that same month he was appointed governor of Portsmouth and in January 1689 he was, through the influence of Henry Wharton, elected to parliament as the member for Malmesbury. 
Tollemache was rewarded for his service to William III on 1 May 1689 by being made colonel of the Coldstream Guards. He was posted with his regiment to von Waldeck's allied army in Flanders where he played an important part in the victory at Walcourt (15 August 1689). After spending the winter in England, Tollemache returned to Flanders in spring 1690 to command the six British battalions that had been left there. In the summer he was ordered to join von Waldeck's army, but could not leave Ghent until money arrived from England to pay the debts incurred over the winter. In consequence he and his command missed the battle of Fleurus (21 June 1690). He spent the rest of the campaign in Flanders and in October 1690 commanded the battalions sent to winter in Brussels, after which he returned to England. He was promoted to major-general on 20 December and was ordered back to Flanders. 
In May 1691 Tollemache was recalled to join the campaign in Ireland. He arrived in Dublin in June and joined Ginckel's army during the attack on Athlone. The Irish army had dug in on the west bank of the Shannon and had broken the bridge that separated them from the English. Tollemache proposed a simple but daring plan in which a few hundred armoured men would wade through the river to seize the bridgehead on the other side and hold it long enough for planks to be laid across the broken span so that the infantry could charge across the bridge. Ginckel was anxious to try any solution and, desperate though it was, Tollemache's plan was adopted. 
To Tollemache's disappointment he was not allowed to put his own plan into action because the major-generals commanded in strict rotation, and Major-General Hugh Mackay refused to relinquish his turn. Mackay thought Tollemache's plan 'defied all the rules of law and policy' (Mackay, 144) as once the English troops had seized the town the whole Irish army, which was camped on the far side of Athlone, would drive them straight out again. On the day of the assault, 30 June 1691, Tollemache took part as a volunteer. He was carried through the river by his grenadiers and was the fifth man into the breach. The Irish were driven out of Athlone within the hour and the expected counter-attack never came. The French general of the Irish army, St Ruth, had ignored advice to tear down Athlone's western defences, and the English found themselves protected from the Irish by the town's walls. 
On 12 July 1691 Tollemache commanded an infantry division in the centre of Ginckel's army at Aughrim. The Irish infantry attacked Ginckel's centre by crossing the bog that divided the two armies. Tollemache raced to support 'with some fresh men, he gave orders for our broken regiments to halt, and face about, which they did' (Story, 132). The Irish were chased back across the bog and eventually defeated in the bloodiest battle of the war. 
Tollemache served in the short investment of Galway (19-29 July 1691) where his bravery and diligence were again praised. In a successful attack on the outworks it was noted that 'Major General 'Talmash' would needs go a Volunteer as he usually did when it was not his turn to command' (Story, 163). He also took part in the siege of Limerick, and on 16 September 1691 supervised the construction of a pontoon across the Shannon and established a bridgehead through which most of the army later marched. After the Irish surrender of 3 October 1691 he remained behind as governor of Limerick. Once all the Irish troops had marched out he left for Dublin, on 9 November, and returned to England. 
Amid rumours that he was going to resign his commission in disgust at the preference given to William's Dutch officers over his British ones, Tollemache was summoned to a two hour private interview with the king 'who is extremely satisfied with his conduct of matters' (Luttrell, 'Brief Historical Relation', 2.338). On 23 January 1692, the same day on which he was sworn in as the member of parliament for Chippenham, Tollemache was promoted to lieutenant-general. He accompanied the Coldstream Guards to Flanders in March, but in May he was ordered back to England to take command of the army to oppose the threatened invasion by James II's Franco-Irish army. Once the danger had been averted by the destruction of the French fleet off La Hogue (19-24 May 1692) he returned to Flanders and served in the battle of Steenkerke (3 August 1692), where, although the French were victorious, 'our foot [were] brought off by the great conduct of lieutenant general Talmach' (ibid., 2.528). In the parliamentary debate on Steenkerke (23 November 1692) several members complained that the Dutchman Count Solms had been promoted over the better qualified Tollemache. Lord Colchester, the one-time chairman of the Rose tavern Treason Club, asserted that 'There is not a braver man in the world than General Tollemache' ('Parliamentary Diary of Narcissus Luttrell', 255). 
In September 1692 Tollemache was made governor of Dixmunde where he commanded a force of 12,000 men and foiled a French attempt to cut him off from Dunkirk and, in December, a threat to take both Dixmunde and Furnes. He arrived back in England on 22 December 1692. In March 1693 he took over as governor of the Isle of Wight in the king's absence, and in April was granted the rents for three years of almost 13,000 acres of forfeited land in Ireland. He returned to Flanders that month and in May he commanded the British troops outside Ghent. At the battle of Landen (29 July 1693) he played an important part in resisting the French attacks and had a horse killed under him. 
On 11 December 1693 Tollemache addressed parliament in favour of the increased army estimates for 1694. 'It may be thought that I, having no estate, am ready to put the nation to a great charge; but I do declare I am as weary of war as any person and as desirous to have an end of it. And although I cannot answer for the success of the war, yet if the House will enable the king to come into the field with a good army, they may be able to preserve Flanders. (Grey, 364)' In spring 1694 Tollemache was commanded to lead an expedition to Brest, the home of the French Atlantic Fleet. The expedition was plagued by delays and by 1 May it was common knowledge that he was to lead an expedition 'to plunder the French seaside towns' (Luttrell, 'Brief Historical Relation', 3.304). In early May, Louis dispatched the engineer Vauban to Brest to improve the defences. Not only did the French know of his plans for Brest, but Tollemache knew of the French preparations for his reception before he left Spithead. He wrote to Whitehall for further instructions but did not receive a reply before his departure at the end of the month. He also wrote to his brother, Lord Huntingtower, to say that he had been 'resolv'd to goe Live in the country the rest of my life, but my ill fortune will not let me alone, and now I am ingag'd more than ever, I must say much against my will' (Tollemache, 81). He expected, he wrote, to return in a month and then to be posted back to Flanders. 
The English fleet anchored in Camaret Bay on 7 June 1694. The French were found to be 'much better prepared on all sides, with Mortars, Guns and Men, than we expected' (Caermarthen, 15). A council of war was called for the next morning, and Tollemache outlined his plans to land troops on the Quelern peninsula under covering fire from the fleet. Once the defences had been overrun on the south side of the Goulet, the narrow stretch of water that connects the Rade de Brest to Camaret Bay, the fleet would be able to pass through the Goulet and bombard Brest. According to Burnet 'the Council and Officers were all against making the attempt; but 'Talmash' had set his heart so much upon it, that he could not be diverted from it' ('Burnet's History', 4.227). 
It took all morning of 8 June 1694 for Lord Carmarthen to position his ships and Tollemache was not able to give orders for the landing until noon, by which time it was clear that the fire from the warships was ineffectual against the French defences. He nevertheless sent towards the landing beach a flotilla of small boats led by his major-general, Lord Cutts. As the boats neared the shore they were met by heavy fire; the assault stalled, and in the moment of hesitation Tollemache had his boat rowed to within shouting distance of that carrying Cutts. 'My lord,' shouted Tollemache, 'is this following of orders? Do you see how the boats are in disorder? Pray, my lord, let us land in as good order as we can' (Childs, 'William III', 233). Cutts sent some of his men after his commanding officer, but remained afloat. To set an example Tollemache reached the shore, and with Captain Nathaniel Green and nine men made it to the cover of a large rock. Any further advance was prevented by the 150 French musketeers positioned further up the beach. Tollemache led his second wave of 150 grenadiers against this position. Most of his men were shot down, and he was shot in the thigh. He retreated until a further 200 men were landed, and led a second attack, but again the fire from the batteries and the musketeers was too fierce and most of them did not make it back to cover. Tollemache called for more men to land, but was persuaded to retreat to the boats once a body of French cavalry appeared along the shore. He was lifted into a boat and, still under heavy fire, was rowed to safety. Three hundred soldiers were lost in the raid. 
Tollemache held one last council of war in which it was decided that the fleet should return to England. He reached Plymouth on the 'Dreadnought' on 11 June 1694, where he was seen by surgeons. The prognosis was good, but in the afternoon of 12 June his leg 'was to a prodigious bigness swell'd from the Wound up to the Groyne, & so downward to the Anckle.... Cap Green told him he fear'd it was death, the generall answer'd God's will be done, I beleeve the same... and about 7 a Clock hee dyed in Captn Green's Armes being sensible to the last. (Tollemache, 80)' 'Before he died the general asserted it was impossible to have served their majesties better unless he had been obeyed, because none of the general officers landed with him' ('CSP dom.', 184). 
Tollemache was 'much lamented' (Luttrell, 'Brief Historical Relation', 3.329), and although it was planned to bury him in Westminster Abbey his wish to be buried at home was respected. On 30 June 1694 he was laid in the family vault at Helmingham where an elaborate memorial was erected and still stands. Tollemache never married, but left in his will provision for his son 'Lt-Coll Wilkins's ensign, commonly called Thomas Tolmach'. 
At his funeral Tollemache was described as 'a true Englishman' (Brady, 23). Bishop Burnet remembered him as 'a brave and generous man, and a good officer, very apt to animate and encourage inferior officers and soldiers, but he was much too apt to be discontented and to turn mutinous' ('Burnet's History', 4.228). Tollemache's family and supporters were left with the unpleasant suspicion that he had died in consequence of 'the envy of some of his pretended friends' (memorial) who had either warned the French of the attack or had failed him in its execution. Whatever the truth of those suspicions it is clear that at Camaret Bay Tollemache had again defied those laws of war and policy referred to by Mackay, and had sacrificed himself and his men in an attack on a strong and well-prepared position. 'I am indeed extremely affected with the loss of poor Tollemache', wrote King William when he received the news, 'although I do not approve of his conduct, yet I am of opinion that his too ardent zeal to distinguish himself induced him to attempt what was impracticable' ('Private and Original Correspondence of... Shrewsbury', 199). 


@@@@@


doc= 27501


Toller, Sir Samuel (1764-1821), lawyer in India, was born on 10 November 1764, the eldest son of Thomas Toller (1732-1795), dissenting minister, and his wife, the daughter of Samuel Lawrence, dissenting minister. Thomas Toller was the youngest child of Hugh Toller, attorney, of Taunton; he attended Mile End Academy, Middlesex, was ordained in 1754, and in 1760 became a pastor at Monkwell Street Chapel, London, succeeding his deceased father-in-law. Following a quarrel with another pastor, he left about 1775, ministered in Hoxton, and died on 3 March 1795. 
Samuel Toller was educated at Charterhouse School, Smithfield, London, from March 1775 to April 1782. He was admitted at Lincoln's Inn on 27 March 1781, and called to the bar. In 1793 Toller married Miss Cory of Cambridge, sister of Robert Towerson Cory, master of Emmanuel College, Cambridge, from 1797 to 1835; they had at least one child. 
In March 1812 Toller was appointed advocate-general at Madras, and was subsequently knighted. He published two valued legal works: 'The Law of Executors and Administrators' (1800; 7th edn by Francis Whitmarsh, 1838; 2nd American edn by T. F. Gordon, 1824; 3rd American edn by E. D. Ingraham, 1834) and 'Treatise of the Law of Tithes: Compiled in Part from some Notes of Richard Wooddeson' (1808; 3rd edn, 1822). 
Toller died in India on 19 November 1821, on his way to Bangalore, where he was going for his health. 


@@@@@


doc= 27502


Tollet, Elizabeth (1694-1754), poet, was born on 11 March 1694, the daughter of George Tollet (d. 1719) and Elizabeth, 'nee' Cook (1659/60-1702). Her father was a central influence in her early intellectual development; she probably spent her first seven or eight years in his residence in York Buildings, then lived with him in his house in the Tower of London into her adulthood. Early on, he, 'observing her extraordinary Genius, gave her so excellent an Education, that besides great Skill in Music, and Drawing, she spoke fluently and correctly the 'Latin', 'Italian', and 'French' Languages; and well understood History, Poetry, and the Mathematicks' (preface to Tollet, 'Poems', i). 
George Tollet was well acquainted with a number of the most prominent members of the intelligentsia of the day, including Samuel Pepys, John Evelyn, Edmond Halley, Isaac Newton, and Robert Harley, first earl of Oxford, whom Elizabeth Tollet praises in her poem 'To my Brother at St. John's College in Cambridge'. John Duncombe's biographical note on Elizabeth Tollet in John Nichols's 'Select Collection of Poems' (1780) states that 'Sir Isaac Newton honoured both [George Tollet] and his daughter with his friendship, and was much pleased with some of her first essays' (6.64n.). From 1699 until his death in 1727 Newton was master of the mint, which was then within the precincts of the Tower of London. Although Elizabeth likely presented these 'first essays' to him during her years in the Tower, the family's acquaintance with Newton might date as far back as 1693, when, in preparation for a projected national lottery, Samuel Pepys corresponded with Newton and George Tollet on the nature of probabilities. 
Elizabeth Tollet seems to have attained considerable literary proficiency even as a teenager, since Thomas Parnell's poem 'To a Young Lady, on her Translation of the Story of Phoebus and Daphne, from Ovid' -- published initially in Steele's 'Poetical Miscellanies' (December 1713) -- is almost certainly in praise of Tollet's poem 'Apollo and Daphne', which must therefore have been written by 1713, when she could have been no older than nineteen. In 1724 a book of her poetry appeared anonymously -- 'Poems on Several Occasions. With Anne Boleyn to King Henry VIII. An Epistle' -- published in London by John Clarke. Eighty-four pages in length, the slim duodecimo volume contains, in addition to the long title poem, several imitations of Horace, Ovid, and Virgil; a handful of Latin verse; poems to friends, such as the harpsichordist Elizabeth Blackler, and poems on famous contemporary writers such as William Congreve, Alexander Pope, Anne Finch, countess of Winchilsea, and Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, as well as other poems demonstrating striking artistic and intellectual range. Especially interesting to recent scholars is Tollet's poem 'Hypatia', a polemic of nearly 200 lines in which Tollet has the 'Shade' of the ancient female mathematician-philosopher Hypatia argue -- against 'Tyrant Custom' -- that women have the right to better education and to freedom of intellectual enquiry of diverse kinds -- including scientific, classical, and theological. References to the inappropriateness of ''L -- -- s'' Spleen' and the inadequacy of ''Toland''s Praise' in line 14 suggest Tollet's poem is in part a response to Thomas Lewis's 'History of Hypatia' (1721) and the substantial third section, 'Hypatia', of John Toland's 'Tetradymus' (1720). 
Evidence from book subscription lists suggests Tollet probably lived in the Tower for some years after her father's retirement to Betley, Staffordshire. At his death in 1719 he left her 'a handsome Fortune' (preface to Tollet, 'Poems', i): this included an annuity of $250, among other legacies. She later lived in Stratford, Essex, where she was associated with 'the Stratford-le-Bow school', and spent her last years in Westham (now West Ham), Essex. She died, unmarried, on 1 February 1754 and was buried in All Saints, West Ham, on 11 February. Her epitaph, now worn beyond legibility, once claimed '
Religion, Justice, and Benevolence, 

Appeared in all her Actions; 

And her Poems, in various Languages, 

Are adorn'd with extensive Learning, 

Applied to the best Purposes. 
(Toldervy, 2.230)' Clues to the contents of her library may be found in her poems, her will, book subscription lists (as indexed in the 'Biography Database' CD-ROM), and Hodgson's 'Catalogue of the Betley Hall Library' (1923). 
William Cole described Tollet as 'a little, crooked woman, but a sharp wit' (Nichols, 'Illustrations', 8.584), but no portraits appear to be extant. 
During her lifetime several of Tollet's poems were circulated in manuscript, and some saw periodical and miscellany publication, but it seems it was only after her death that any poem appeared under her name in print. Tollet's writings were entrusted to her chief executor, Colonel Richard King. She had in her will stated that she wanted posthumous publication of 'my Writings in Verse together with those already printed by Mr. Clark at the Royal Exchange that they may be published entire and without mixture of other Hands those in prose being wrote for private use'. At 238 pages, a considerably expanded edition of her poems, bearing the same title as that of the 1724 edition, appeared in 1755. In this posthumous volume, ascribed to 'Mrs. Elizabeth Tollet' by the title-page, there are many additional poems, including several concerning further contemporary artists or intellectuals such as Charles Jervas, Dr John Woodward, and Isaac Newton; over thirty renderings of psalms into English verse; as well as a 'musical drama' entitled 'Susanna; or, Innocence Preserv'd', which elaborates the apocryphal story of Susanna and the Elders from the 'Old Testament'. The book also includes further Latin verses, and several poems which draw on recent scientific thought in their theological argumentation, the most elaborate of these being 'The Microcosm'. The text of the 1755 Clarke edition was later reissued by the publisher Thomas Lownds 'c'.1756-60. 
Tollet's work was anthologized by Henry Dell, in whose 'Select Collection of the Psalms of David' (1756) Tollet, with twenty-nine psalm renderings, is by far the most well-represented author, by John Duncombe in John Nichols's 'Select Collection of Poems' (1780), and by Robert Southey (1807), Alexander Dyce (1825), and Frederic Rowton (1848), among others. She was rediscovered by Roger Lonsdale and included in his influential 1980s anthologies of eighteenth-century verse, since when scholars such as Isobel Grundy in 'Halcyon' and Deborah Baker Wyrick in the 'Dictionary of Literary Biography' have called for Tollet's 'reinscription' into literary history, citing her importance as an early feminist and overlooked poetic voice of the period; and Tollet's work has been further and quite widely anthologized. 


@@@@@


doc= 27503


Tollet, George (bap. 1725, d. 1779), literary critic, son of George Tollet ('b'. 1696) and Elizabeth or Isabel ('nee' Oates), was baptized on 29 September 1725 in Kirk Braddan, Isle of Man. He was probably a student at Eton College by 1742. Tollet matriculated from King's College, Cambridge, on 17 December 1744, and appears to have been in residence at King's from Michaelmas 1744 to Nativitatis 1748. He was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 2 July 1745, and was called to the bar by the inn on 19 June 1751. 
A bachelor, Tollet lived for the latter decades of his life in Betley Hall, in the small town of Betley, Staffordshire; he had inherited the house and surrounding properties from his father. In 1754 Tollet inherited the bulk of the library of his aunt Elizabeth Tollet, the poet, and subsequently enlarged it with his own acquisitions. He contributed fifteen notes to the 1773 edition of Shakespeare by Samuel Johnson and George Steevens, and over four hundred to the ten-volume 1778 edition. In Arthur Sherbo's assessment, this makes Tollet 'one of the greatest single contributors to the commentary on Shakespeare in the eighteenth century, always excepting the editors of the various editions. His notes are on all the plays of the accepted canon except 'Julius Caesar', 'Titus Andronicus' (which many thought uncanonical), and 'Romeo and Juliet' (hardly bachelor fare). (Sherbo, 'Shakespeare's Midwives', 51)' Sherbo laments that Tollet's scholarship has frequently been overlooked by recent Shakespearian critics, and asserts that his work 'richly deserves' greater attention (ibid., 66). 
Tollet's dissertation on the so-called Betley Window, a painted glass window from his house in Betley, thought to depict Morris dancers and May day festivities, has inspired much comment from scholars of Shakespeare, folklore, and early English painted glass. This dissertation was first printed in the 1778 edition of Shakespeare by Johnson and Steevens (5.425-34), and a manuscript version addressed to George Steevens is held by the Bodleian Library (Bodl. Oxf., MS Percy c. 4., 62'r'-65'v'). The window itself is now in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. Tollet's copy of Elizabeth Tollet's 'Poems on Several Occasions' (1755) -- now at Smith College Library, Massachusetts -- is enriched by extensive annotation in his hand, and constitutes an important source of evidence for the poetry and life of his aunt. 
Tollet died in October 1779, probably on the 21st or 22nd, at Betley. He was buried there, at St Margaret's Church. William Cole, who had been a contemporary of Tollet at King's College, described him as 'a shy, reserved man, and of no genteel appearance or behaviour' (Nichols, 'Illustrations', 8.584), but no portraits have been located. 


@@@@@


doc= 27504


Thom, John Nichols (bap. 1799, d. 1838), impostor and lunatic, was baptized on 10 November 1799 at St Columb Major, Cornwall, the only son (he had one sister) of William Thom (or Tom), a small farmer and innkeeper, and his wife, Charity, whose maiden name was Bray. Charity Thom showed symptoms of insanity by 1816 and later died in the county lunatic asylum. Thom was educated at Bellevue House Academy, Penryn, and at a school in Launceston, run by Richard Cope, the local Congregational minister, on narrow religious lines, which left a lasting impression on his mind. He was clerk to a solicitor at St Columb (1817-20) and, after a few months as an innkeeper at Wadebridge, he became clerk to Lubbocks, wine merchants, in Truro. He married in February 1821 Catherine Fisher ('b'. 'c'.1775), daughter of William Fulpitt of Truro, a comfortably off fisherman turned market gardener, and, using his wife's money, took over Lubbocks on the retirement of the partners. Thom appeared a friendly, diligent tradesman, better educated than most. Almost 6 feet tall, swarthy, and well built, he was a fine cricketer, reputedly one of the best wrestlers in Cornwall, and well known locally for his feats of strength. 
Although Thom said little about his religious and political beliefs, in 1821 he secretly joined the Spencean Society, which advocated the nationalization of land. On 19 June 1828 Thom's business premises in Truro burned down, and although they were insured and rebuilt he showed signs of incipient insanity and was under treatment for much of 1829-31. In May 1832 he vanished when on a visit to Liverpool to sell a cargo of malt; he reappeared in September at Canterbury, where he falsely claimed he had been travelling in the Near East. He had probably been living in London, masquerading as Squire Thompson and taking an interest in the cause of distressed Jews. He had grown his hair and beard extravagantly long and, calling himself Count Moses Rothschild, he lodged at The Rose inn. Here he showed a talent for duplicitous self-advertisement, financing the largess he distributed to the credulous mob by loans on which he promised repayment with interest. 
Styling himself a knight of Malta, Thom assumed the name of Sir William Courtenay and claimed the earldom of Devon; the real earl lived in France and surprisingly never confronted Thom's imposture. He also claimed the Kentish estates of Sir Edward Hales, sixth baronet, who had died without issue in 1829, and bought some of his clothes from his valet. At the general election of December 1832, standing for Canterbury as an independent, Thom capitalized on the enthusiasm for reform and, promising to abolish tithes, taxes on shopkeepers, primogeniture, placemen, and corporate bodies, he polled a respectable 375 votes (the winner polled 834). However, a few days later he secured only four votes in the county election for East Kent. He then published 'The Lion', a weekly broadsheet (March-May 1833), which amid much scurrilous nonsense acutely attributed the cause of the prevailing popular unrest to heavy taxation and exorbitant rents. Unfortunately, Thom was indicted for perjury in his defence of some smugglers at Rochester, and at Maidstone assizes (25 July 1833) he was sentenced to three months' imprisonment and seven years' transportation. After his wife arrived from Cornwall to relate his previous insanity, he was placed in the county lunatic asylum at Barming Heath, where for four years he was a model patient. His father, backed by Thom's former employer (now MP for Truro), petitioned the home secretary, Lord John Russell, for his release, which was granted on 3 October 1837. 
Persisting in his claim to be the rightful earl of Devon, Thom refused to return to Cornwall with his family, and for three months lodged near Canterbury with George Francis, a blinkered snob deluded by Thom's aristocratic pretensions and impressed with his biblical exegesis. Thom aimed to whip up the rural working classes against the unfair distribution of wealth, low wages, lack of employment, and the harsh operation of the poor law. Closely resembling the traditional likeness of Christ, and mouthing messianic and apocalyptic prophecies, he gathered about forty followers, armed them with cudgels, and, mounted, with pistols, on a white horse, with a flag bearing a lion as emblem, he led them about the countryside. A warrant charged him with enticing away the labourers of a local farmer, and on 31 May 1838 Thom shot Nicholas Mears, one of the constable's party serving the warrant, cruelly mangling the dying man with his sword. When two companies of the 45th regiment marched from Canterbury that afternoon to arrest him, Thom retired to Bossenden Wood, threatening his followers with death if they fled. In a fight only lasting a few minutes, Thom, having shot one of the officers, Lieutenant Bennett, was himself killed, along with eight of his followers; three more died of their wounds a few days later. Of those captured, three were subsequently sentenced to transportation and six to a year's hard labour. Thom was buried on 5 June in Hernhill churchyard, where no mark or memorial was allowed over his grave. 
Thom's paranoia, with its delusions of grandeur and sartorial extravagance, was accompanied by considerable clarity of thought and a commanding presence, all of which gulled his illiterate and ignorant followers (and indeed some of the Canterbury well-to-do). In the aftermath of the final incident in Thom's life, the government of Lord Melbourne came under fire for releasing him from his asylum, and the established church was attacked for its lack of influence locally. 


@@@@@


doc= 27505


Tombes, John (1602-1676), clergyman and ejected minister, was born at Bewdley, Worcestershire, and was baptized in the parish of Ribbesford (which included Bewdley) on 10 October 1602, the son of Edward Tombes, a dyer. His mother's identity is unknown, but he had at least one elder sister. He probably attended Bewdley grammar school. On 23 January 1618 he matriculated at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, where he was a batteler, and was admitted BA on 12 June 1621, MA on 16 April 1624, and BD in Trinity term 1631. An accomplished linguist, he was the favourite pupil of the Hebraist William Pemble, and reputedly had the 'Greek Testament' 'almost memoriter' ('Brief Lives', 2.258). In 1623 he succeeded Pemble as catechism lecturer at Magdalen Hall, and while preparing a lecture in 1627 began to doubt the scriptural basis for infant baptism. During this period he was ordained and appointed a lecturer at St Martin Carfax, where his preaching was much admired, particularly by puritans. He 'was soon taken notice of' both for his intellectual ability and for his potential to 'doe a great deale of mischiefe to the Church of England' ('Brief Lives', 2.258). 
In 1630 Tombes became a preacher at Worcester, and on 17 November 1630 was instituted vicar of Leominster, Herefordshire. At about this time he married Elizabeth Scudder (1613-1633), daughter of the puritan divine Henry Scudder. Elizabeth died on 15 December 1633, leaving an only daughter, Elizabeth (died 1658). Tombes had remarried by 1636, when his only son, John, was born on 26 November. 
Tombes was highly regarded in Leominster until he became actively involved with the county's parliamentarian and presbyterian minority. His 'disusing the ceremonies' in December 1640 'nettled the ignorant and superstitious' ('Portland MSS', 3.76), as did his participation in a puritan survey of Herefordshire clergy in early 1641. Early in 1642 he organized resubscription to the protestation oath and promoted a pro-parliamentary petition. By early August, the 'barbarous rage and impetuous violence of people' forced Tombes, his wife, and children to flee Herefordshire (J. Tombes, 'Fermentum Pharisaeorum', 1643, sig. A2'v'). 
'After much wandring up and down' (Tombes, 'Apology', 6), Tombes was appointed lecturer at All Saints, Bristol, on 4 January 1643. During the next few months he published the sermons 'Iehovah iireh' and 'Fermentum Pharisaeorum' in support of his party's cause. He also had a momentous dispute with an antipaedobaptist which further undermined his belief in infant baptism, and left him resolved to go to London in order to 'consider that matter more full' (ibid., 6). However, in mid-July 1643 royalist advances forced him and his family to escape from Bristol by sea to Milford Haven. 
Tombes eventually arrived in London on 22 September 1643, and by January 1644 was convinced of the case against infant baptism. By July he had presented a Latin 'Exercitation' on the scriptural evidence to the Westminster assembly, hoping in vain to have his arguments considered 'in a faire Scholastike way' (Tombes, 'Apology', 15). He also drew up a detailed manuscript 'Examen' of a sermon by Stephen Marshall published in August 1644 in defence of infant baptism, which was delivered to Marshall on 9 December and followed by a 'friendly conference' between the two men on 30 December 1644 (ibid., 11). During 1644 Tombes had been rector of St Gabriel Fenchurch but, his parishioners having become 'disaffected' (ibid., 10), he lost his position. On the understanding that he would not preach his antipaedobaptist opinions, he was appointed at the end of January 1645, apparently through Marshall's influence, to be master of the Temple where, as preacher to its two inns of court, he would not need to baptize infants. In May 1645 Tombes agreed to a copy of his 'Examen' being sent to New England by the Baptist Henry Jessey. He still, however, received no response from the assembly to his arguments, and on 15 December 1645 he published as 'Two Treatises' an English translation of his 'Exercitation', and the 'Examen'. Numerous attacks on Tombes swiftly appeared in print, including one by Marshall dedicated to the assembly; in August 1646 Tombes defended himself in 'An Apology or Plea for the Two Treatises', but, in spite of presenting his writings to Cromwell, he was removed from the Temple. 
Tombes returned during 1646 to his native Bewdley as curate of the town's chapel of ease. On 12 September 1646 he was also appointed rector of Ross, Herefordshire. He now devoted himself to the work which 'the Lord hath alotted me', the recovery of believers' baptism (J. Tombes, 'Antipaedobaptism', 3 vols., 1652-7, vol. 1, sig. A2'r'). At Bewdley, while retaining his parish role, he founded a small Baptist congregation, training some of its members for the Baptist ministry. On 1 January 1650 his celebrated public debate on baptism with Richard Baxter took place in Bewdley chapel, lasting from nine in the morning until five at night. Tombes was acknowledged to be the better disputant, but the numerous followers of each side at last 'fell by the eares, hurt was donne' ('Brief Lives', 2.259). Tombes and Baxter were to maintain an uneasy relationship for the next twenty years, 'not enemies though antagonists' (Keeble and Nuttall, 1.416). 
Perhaps as a result of this debate, Tombes left Bewdley during 1650, and by October 1651 had returned to his vicarage at Leominster, where he was to remain until 1662. He was also appointed master of St Catherine's Hospital, Ledbury, on 12 April 1649, a commissioner for approbation of public preachers in 1654, and an assistant to the Herefordshire commission on 29 September 1657. During this period Tombes participated in several other public debates on baptism, including a formal disputation with Henry Savage at the annual Oxford Act in 1652; he also disputed against Quakers, encountering George Fox in 1657. He published accounts of some of these debates, but his major work of the 1650s was the three-part 'Antipaedobaptism' (1652, 1654, 1657), an exhaustive analysis of the arguments of his numerous opponents. He continued to foster Baptist congregations, but was gradually returning to his earlier belief that separation was not justifiable. It was to promote protestant unity that in 1659 he invited Baxter to contribute prefaces to 'Romanism Discussed' (1660) and the anti-Quaker 'True Old Light Exalted' (1660). 
In 1660 Tombes 'willingly submitted' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.1063) to the Restoration, and published 'A Serious Consideration' in defence of taking the oath of supremacy. For this and other works on the same subject he received a yearly pension of $50 through the influence of Clarendon, whom he had known at Magdalen Hall. None the less, his opposition to infant baptism made his ejection under the 'Act of Uniformity' inevitable; in September 1662 Herbert Croft, bishop of Hereford, reported that 'the proud Anabaptist Toms, than whom I never knew a prouder' had refused subscription (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 48, fol. 41). 
On 4 September 1661 Tombes had married his third wife, the widow Elizabeth Combs, by licence at St Edmund's, Salisbury, and after his ejection he settled in her parish. With his characteristic blend of conservatism and radicalism, he regularly attended the parish church and received communion, while adhering to his tenet on infant baptism 'by going out of the Church whilst that office was performing and returning in again when it was ended' ('Calamy rev.', 488). He was on good terms both with Seth Ward, bishop of Salisbury, and with local nonconformists. After the declaration of indulgence in 1672 his house was licensed as a presbyterian meeting-place, and he sometimes preached, 'though seldome & to few' (Keeble and Nuttall, 2.138). 
Although Tombes continued 'every where disputing for his old opinion concerning paedobaptisme' (Keeble and Nuttall, 2.138), he accommodated his publications to the new regime, attacking Fifth Monarchists in 'Saints No Smiters' (1664), separatists in 'Theodulia' (1667), both dedicated to Clarendon, and Socinians in 'Emmanuel, or, God-Man' (1669). His last work was 'Animadversiones in librum Georgii Bulli' (1676), a Calvinist contribution to the controversy over Bull's 'Harmonia apostolica' (1670). 
Tombes was 'but a little man, neat limbed, a little quick searching eie, sad, gray'. Although a formidable disputant, he was charitable to his opponents and was generally acknowledged to be 'as great a divine as most we had' ('Brief Lives', 2.260, 259). But as Tombes himself recognized, those 'usefull to uphold a Party, are the men esteemed' (Tombes, 3). He was alienated from presbyterians by his antipaedobaptism, and from most Baptists, even while being widely perceived as 'the great Ringleader of that Sect', by his acceptance of an established church (BL, Add. MS 63054, fol. 194'r'. 2). His reputation both in his own time and subsequently has suffered as a result. 
John Tombes made his will on 6 May 1676 and died on 22 May at Salisbury, survived by his wife, Elizabeth. He was buried on 25 May in St Edmund's churchyard. He left an extensive library of controversial writings and 'Godly english Treatises' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/351, fol. 331'v'); his epitaph, composed by himself, describes him simply as 'a constant preacher of God's word' ('Brief Lives', 2.260). 


@@@@@


doc= 27506


Tombs, Sir Henry (1824-1874), army officer, son of Major-General John Tombs (1777-1848), Bengal cavalry, and his wife, Mary (1791/2-1876) 'nee' Remington, came of a family settled since the fifteenth century at Long Marston, Gloucestershire, and was born at sea on 10 November 1824. He entered the East India Company's military college, Addiscombe, in 1839, and was commissioned second lieutenant, Bengal artillery, on 11 June 1841. He arrived at Calcutta on 18 November 1841 and was posted to the foot artillery at Dum-Dum. In August 1842 he went with a detachment to the upper provinces. On 1 March 1843 he was posted to the 3rd company, 5th battalion of artillery, at Saugor; on 23 November he went to the 6th company, 6th battalion, at Jhansi, and took part in the Gwalior campaign. He arrived with the force called the 'left wing' under Major-General Sir John Grey at Badli-ki-sarai on 28 December 1843, and next morning marched to Panniar, where the Marathas were defeated; he was mentioned in dispatches. 
On 15 January 1844 Tombs was promoted first lieutenant, and on 1 March he was appointed to the horse artillery at Ludhiana. He served in the First Anglo-Sikh War (1845-6) in the 1st troop, 1st horse artillery brigade. This troop had suffered so severely from fever, prevalent at Ludhiana, that it was at first contemplated that the whole troop be left behind, but on the evening of 13 December 1845 Tombs brought the good news to the barracks that four guns were to march at daybreak next day, leaving the other two and the sick troopers behind. They first marched to Bassian (28 miles), then, on 16 December, to Wadni, where the governor shut the gates and refused supplies until the British forces were got into position, when he submitted. After a short march on 17 December, and a long and tedious one of 21 miles the following day, Mudki was reached, and, while the camp was being formed, the alarm was given and the battle began. Tombs's troop was hotly engaged, and its captain, Dashwood, died of his wounds. At the battle of Ferozeshahr on 21 December, Tombs was with his troop at headquarters, and engaged in the attack on the southern face of the Sikh entrenchment. 
In the operations of January 1846, including the action of Badiwal (21 January), and culminating in the battle of Aliwal on 28 January, Tombs was acting aide-de-camp to Sir Harry George Wakelyn Smith, and was mentioned in dispatches. He served in the second Sikh or Punjab campaign as deputy assistant quartermaster-general of the artillery division, and was at the action of Ramnagar on 22 November 1848, at the battle of Chilianwala on 13 January 1849, and at the crowning victory of Gujrat on 21 February. He was mentioned in dispatches and was recommended for a brevet majority as soon as he attained the rank of captain. 
Tombs was employed on special duty in 1849 and 1850. On 12 March 1850 he was appointed a member of the special committee of artillery officers at Ambala. On 30 October he was appointed adjutant and quartermaster of the 2nd brigade, horse artillery, and on 13 November adjutant of the Ambala division of artillery. On 30 November 1853 he was transferred to the foot artillery. He was promoted captain in the Bengal artillery on 25 July 1854, and brevet major for his services in the field on 1 August. On 27 November 1855 he returned to the horse artillery. 
On the outbreak of the Indian mutiny in 1857 Tombs was at Meerut commanding the 2nd troop, 1st horse artillery brigade, and on 27 May moved with the column of Brigadier-General Archdale Wilson to co-operate with a force which the commander-in-chief was bringing down from Ambala. On approaching Ghazi-ud-din-Nagar, on the left of the River Hindan, on the afternoon of 30 May, the heat being very great, the column was attacked by the rebels. The iron bridge spanning the Hindan was held, and Tombs dashed across it with his guns and successfully turned the right flank of the enemy, who were repulsed. Tombs's horse was shot under him during this action, and again in that of the following day, when the village of Ghazi was cleared. He marched with Wilson on 5 June to Baghpat, crossed the Jumna, and joined the Ambala force under Sir Henry Barnard at Panipat on 7 June. 
The combined forces marched from Alipur on 8 June, and Tombs, with his troop, was detached to the right with a force under Brigadier-General Hope Grant to cross the Jumna Canal, and so get in rear of the enemy at Badli-ki-sarai. The rebels fought desperately, but the British bayonet carried the day, and the cavalry and horse artillery converted the enemy's retreat into a rout. Tombs had two horses shot under him. 
Tombs served all through the siege of Delhi. On 17 June he commanded a column which captured the 'idgah' battery and took a 9-pounder gun. This battery was on the south-west of Paharipur, opposite the curtain between the Lahore gate and Garstin bastion; it was enclosed in a fort, and threatened to enfilade the British position. Tombs had two horses shot under him, and was slightly wounded. Sir Henry Barnard, the same evening at the staff mess, thanked Tombs for his gallantry, and proposed his health. Lord Roberts later wrote: 'The hero of the day was Harry Tombs... an unusually handsome man and a thorough soldier... As a cool, bold leader of men Tombs was unsurpassed... He was somewhat of a martinet, and was more feared than liked by his men until they realised what a grand leader he was. (Roberts, 96)' Tombs also commanded a column in the action of 19 June under Hope Grant. 
On 9 July 1857 Tombs went to the aid of Lieutenant James Hills (later Sir James Hills-Johnes) of Tombs's troop, who was attacked by some rebel cavalry while he was posted with two guns on picquet duty at 'the mound' to the right of the camp. Tombs ran through with his sword a sowar who was on the point of killing Hills: both Tombs and Hills received the VC. 
Tombs commanded the artillery of the force under Brigadier-General John Nicholson at the battle of Najafgarh on 25 August 1857, when the enemy endeavoured to intercept the siege-train coming from Ferozepore, and were defeated. He commanded no. 4 battery, of ten heavy mortars, during the Delhi siege operations in September, and he commanded the horse artillery at the assault on 14 September, when he was wounded. He was promoted brevet lieutenant-colonel on 19 January, and was made a CB, military division, on 22 January 1858 for services at the siege of Delhi. 
In March 1858 Tombs, in command of the 2nd troop of the 1st brigade of Bengal horse artillery, joined the artillery division, under Sir Archdale Wilson, of Sir Colin Campbell's army assembled at the Alambagh for the attack on Lucknow. He took part in the siege and capture of the city, and was mentioned in general orders. Tombs commanded his troop in the operations for the subjugation of Rohilkhand with the force under Brigadier-General Walpole. He left Lucknow on 7 April for Malaon, and, after the unsuccessful attack on Ruilja, took part on the 22nd in the action at Aliganj, when the enemy were driven across the river and four guns were captured. On 27 April, Tombs, with this force, joined that of the commander-in-chief and marched on Shahjahanpur, which was found evacuated; on 3 May he was united with the troops commanded by Major-General R. Penny at Miranpur Katra, on 4 May arrived at Faridpur, a day's march from Bareilly, and on 5 May took part in the battle of Bareilly. 
On 15 May, Tombs and his troop marched with the commander-in-chief's force to the relief of Shahjahanpur, and took part in the action of 18 May. On 24 May he commanded the artillery in a force under Brigadier-General Jones against Muhamdi, out of which the rebels were driven, and the force returned to Shahjahanpur on 29 May. He took part also in an expedition against Shahabad on the night of 31 May, returning to Shahjahanpur on 4 June, when, the rebels having been driven out of Rohilkhand, the field force to which Tombs was attached was broken up. Tombs was promoted on 20 July 1858 brevet colonel, and was praised by Lord Panmure, the secretary of state for war, in the House of Lords in proposing a vote of thanks to the army. 
Tombs was promoted lieutenant-colonel, Royal Artillery, on 29 April 1861, and was appointed to the 2nd brigade. From 16 May 1863 he was appointed a brigadier-general to command the artillery brigade at Gwalior. In 1865 he received a good-service pension. In 1864 he commanded the force which recaptured Dewangiri in Bhutan, for which campaign he was on 14 March 1868 made a KCB. After the Bhutan expedition he returned to his duties as brigadier-general commanding the artillery at Gwalior. He was promoted major-general on 11 March 1867. Tombs married, on 1 March 1869, Georgina Janet, youngest daughter of Admiral Sir James Stirling; after his death, she married on 19 December 1877 Captain Herbert Stewart. On 30 August 1871 Tombs was appointed to command the Allahabad division of the army, and was transferred to the Oudh division on 24 October 1871. He became a regimental colonel of artillery on 1 August 1872. He was obliged to resign his command on account of ill health, and returned to England on sick leave. He died at Newport, Isle of Wight, on 2 August 1874. 
At news of Tombs's death Lord Napier of Magdala issued a general order expressing regret at the loss of so distinguished an officer. 


@@@@@


doc= 27507


Tomes, Sir John (1815-1895), dental surgeon, eldest son of John Tomes (1791-1864), farmer, and his wife, Sarah (1792-1870), daughter of William Baylies of Welford in Gloucestershire, was born at The Sands, Weston-on-Avon, in Gloucestershire, on 21 March 1815. After attending schools in Stratford upon Avon and Evesham, Tomes was articled in 1831 to Thomas Furley Smith, a medical practitioner in Evesham. In 1836 he began medical studies in London at King's College and the Middlesex Hospital, then temporarily united; although unqualified, he was house surgeon to the Middlesex Hospital between 1839 and 1840. He did not take his final examinations but, advised by Sir Thomas Watson (1792-1882) and James Moncrieff Arnott, Tomes decided to become a dental surgeon, and in 1840 he commenced practice at 41 Mortimer Street (later Cavendish Place) in central London. From 1840 to 1843 he was dental surgeon at King's College Hospital and from 1843 to 1874 he practised at the Middlesex Hospital. On 15 February 1844 Tomes married Jane Sibley (1823-1904), daughter of Robert Sibley, architect; of their two sons only the younger survived ['see below']. 
In 1838, while Tomes was still a student, his first paper was given to the Royal Society. Presented by Thomas Bell, this was on the microscopical structure of teeth and was the earliest detailed histological investigation on the subject to be published by an English author. For twenty years Tomes continued to study the histology of bone and dental tissues; several anatomical structures are named after him. He published widely in medical, dental, and scientific journals, and on 6 June 1850 he became a fellow of the Royal Society, where his most important papers were presented. Tomes also developed the more modern type of forceps adapted to the necks of individual teeth, and in 1845 patented the 'dentifactor' for carving ivory to fit irregular surfaces and to facilitate the making of dentures, for which he received the Isis gold medal of the Society of Arts. He introduced a number of technical innovations, devised new instruments, and made other improvements in operative dental surgery. In 1845 he delivered a course of lectures at the Middlesex Hospital which marked a new era in dentistry. These were published in 1848, and his 'System of Dental Surgery' in 1859. This remained a standard work for fifty years. It reached a fifth edition in 1906 and was also published in France and America. When ether became available in 1847 he administered it for dental extractions and acted as anaesthetist for surgical operations at the Middlesex Hospital. 
Entry to the dental profession was, in the mid-nineteenth century, haphazard, with no specific qualification available. After two unsuccessful attempts in 1843 and 1855, Tomes was one of several practitioners who, with the support of Arnott, persuaded the Royal College of Surgeons in 1858 to institute a licence in dental surgery (LDS). Having first belatedly qualified as a member of the Royal College of Surgeons, Tomes was appointed one of the first examiners. The establishment of a qualification ensuring fitness to practise gave encouragement to those who wished for statutory organization of dental practice, and eventually, after years of discussion, the Dental Reform Committee was set up in 1875. With others, notably James Smith Turner, Tomes, as chairman of the committee, pressed the government to enforce stricter regulation of dental practice, and the 'Dentists' Act' of 1878 established a dentists' register under the control of the General Medical Council. The success of the Dental Reform Committee, which had proved the value of co-operation between dentists, led to the formation of the British Dental Association in 1880. Tomes was its first president. He was also a founder member of the Odontological Society and president in 1862 and 1875. 
In 1876 Tomes retired to Upwood Gorse, Caterham, Surrey. He was elected an honorary fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1883, and was knighted in 1886. On his golden wedding anniversary he was presented by his fellow dentists with an inkstand and a sum of money which endowed a prize bearing his name to be awarded triennially by the Royal College of Surgeons for researches in the field of dental science. Tomes died on 29 July 1895 at his home, Upwood Gorse, and was buried at St Mary's, Upper Caterham, on 1 August. 
Tomes began to practise dentistry when it was a trade; he left it a well-equipped profession. He showed that a dentist was capable of the highest kind of scientific work -- that of original observation. In addition he had considerable technical skills and a practical mind. 
Tomes's younger son, 


@@@@@


doc= 27508


Charles Tomkins (1757-1823), painter and etcher, was born in London on 7 July 1757, the elder brother of Peltro William Tomkins. He exhibited at the Royal Academy from 1773 to 1779. In 1776 he gained a premium from the Society of Arts for a view of Millbank, and he subsequently practised as a topographical and antiquarian draughtsman and aquatint engraver and publisher. A drawing of London from Wandsworth Hill was engraved and published in 1786. In 1791 he published, from 2 Rathbone Place, 'Eight Views of Reading Abbey', with text by himself; this was reissued in 1805 with twenty-three additional views of churches originally connected with the abbey. In 1796 he published 'A Tour to the Isle of Wight', with eighty aquatint plates, and in 1805 a set of illustrations to Petrarch's sonnets, which he dedicated to the duchess of Devonshire. With Francis Jukes he engraved Cleveley's two pictures of the advance and defeat of a floating battery at Gibraltar (1782); he also drew and engraved the plates to the 'British Volunteer' (1799) and a plan view of the sham fight of the St George's volunteers in Hyde Park in the same year. Many of his watercolour drawings are in the Crowle copy of Pennant's 'London', in the British Museum print room. He had married, on 11 July 1782 at St Marylebone Church, London, Ann Hague of Hammersmith. He died in 1823. 


@@@@@


doc= 27509


Giles Tomkins (b. after 1587, d. 1668), musician, was also born at St David's. Organist of King's College, Cambridge, between December 1624 and June 1626, he was thereafter master of the choristers at Salisbury Cathedral (1629), musician for the virginals in the king's musick (1630), organist with the Chapel Royal during the Scottish visit of 1633, and musician for lutes, viols, and voices (from at least 1641). His court appointments, which were all renewed at the Restoration, were held concurrently with his duties at Salisbury, where he seems to have been mainly living in the 1660s. He was buried there on 4 April 1668. By his will dated 20 March and proved on 24 May by his eldest son, Thomas ('b'. 1631), he left legacies to his three sons and two daughters from his first marriage, his second wife, Elizabeth, and their son William, and his organ books to Salisbury Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 27510


John Tomkins (1586-1638), organist, was born at St David's. A scholar of King's College, Cambridge, he served as organist there from 1606 to 1619, and graduated MusB on 6 June 1608. He later served as organist of St Paul's Cathedral (1619), gentleman-extraordinary of the Chapel Royal (1625), and gentleman ordinary of the chapel (1627). He was appointed organist of the Chapel Royal for the state visit to Scotland in 1633 (jointly with his brother Giles). Married, he was father of Thomas Tomkins (1637/8-1675). He died in London on 27 September 1638, and was buried in St Paul's. References to John (as Thomalin) are found in the poetry of Phineas Fletcher, a contemporary at King's; an elegy on his death by William Lawes appeared in the latter's 'Choice Psalmes' (1648). 


@@@@@


doc= 27511


Tomkins, John (c.1663-1706), Quaker preacher and biographer, was born to Quaker parents. His father died when he was very young but his mother, who married again, ensured that he received a religious education, and he helped her in her business. He assisted the poor and the sick, and he became a good preacher. 
Tomkins's collection of Quaker biographies, 'Piety promoted, in a collection of dying sayings of many of the people called Quakers. With a brief account of some of their labours in the gospel and sufferings for the same', was the first and a very influential example of an important Quaker form that continued into the twentieth century in the 'Annual Monitor'. Tomkins wrote the first three parts of 'Piety Promoted' (1701, 1702, and 1706) and the series continued to be expanded throughout the eighteenth century. It was reprinted in various forms until 1856 and was translated into Latin and French. Later contributors included Joseph Gurney Bevan and John Kendal. Tomkins's own brief biography appears in part 5 (1721). His other works include pieces on prayer and the 'Bible'. 
Tomkins, who was married and had children, died at Maryland Point, Stratford-le-Bow, Middlesex, on 12 July 1706. 


@@@@@


doc= 27512


Tomkins, Martin (d. 1755), Presbyterian minister and religious writer, was born in the late seventeenth century, possibly in Abingdon, Berkshire, but little is known about his early life. He appears to have been closely related to Hardinge Tomkins, an attorney of note and clerk to the Company of Fishmongers, who may even have been his brother. In 1699 he travelled with Nathaniel Lardner to the Netherlands to study at the University of Utrecht, and met Daniel Neal there, but his name does not appear on the university's register of students. On 8 September 1702 he was admitted to the University of Leiden. In the following year he returned to England, accompanied by Lardner and Neal, and in 1707 he was appointed minister to the Presbyterian congregation in Church Street, Stoke Newington. At first his ministry was successful but it later became apparent that he differed from his congregation on important doctrinal subjects. Suspected of entertaining Arian views he was dismissed in July 1718, after which he published a defence of his opinions and of his right to hold views that differed from Trinitarian orthodoxy, in a pamphlet entitled 'The Case of Martin Tomkins' (1719). 
Tomkins did not again settle as a pastor of a congregation but he did preach occasionally. When, for instance, William Whiston met him 'about 1720' he was living at Burtonwood, Essex, and lodging with Mr Barber, the dissenting minister there, who 'invited him sometimes to preach for him' (Whiston, 295). Later he lived in Hackney, where he attended the ministry of John Barker, an uncompromising Trinitarian. Although in general Tomkins approved Barker's public ministrations he was dissatisfied with the Trinitarian doxologies that Barker preached at the close of his prayers. During this later period of his life Tomkins was engaged primarily in writing theological works against trinitarianism. The first of these, published anonymously in 1723 as an answer to Isaac Watts's 'The Christian Doctrine of the Trinity', was entitled 'A sober appeal to a Turk or an Indian concerning the plain sense of scripture relating to the Trinity'. A second edition appeared in 1748 with additional tracts in answer to Watts's and Daniel Waterland's criticisms of his first edition. In 1732 he published 'Jesus Christ the Mediator between God and Man', a work in which he again argued against Christ's divinity. His most significant work was inspired by his distaste for John Barker's use of Trinitarian doxologies and entitled 'A calm enquiry whether we have any warrant from scripture for addressing ourselves in a way of prayer or praise directly to the Holy Spirit' (1738). This was much admired by anti-Trinitarians and, according to Joshua Toulmin, 'contributed very much to the disuse of the Trinitarian doxology amongst the dissenters' (Toulmin, xvii). This was Tomkins's last major publication. He died, probably in Hackney, in 1755. 


@@@@@


doc= 27513


Nathaniel Tomkins (1599-1681), Church of England clergyman and musician, was born in Worcester and studied at Balliol College, Oxford, graduating BA on 20 April 1619 and proceeding MA on 3 February 1622 and BD on 13 March 1629. On 15 May that year he was appointed canon of Worcester Cathedral by Bishop William Laud, for whom he had apparently acted as an agent against Bishop John Williams of Lincoln. In his 'Memorial' (1693) of Williams, John Hacket claimed that: 'Mr N. T., a musician and a Divine -- one that could make better music upon an organ than upon a text... had leave to use the whole [of Williams's] house, to go into the bishop's bedchamber, or study... [he] transcribed some letters which he found and sent them to an enemy [Laud]. (Vining)' Tomkins became rector of St Martin's, Worcester, in 1633 and of Broadway, Worcestershire, in 1637. Ejected in 1646, he was sequestered before 1650. Restored to St Martin's in 1660, he also became rector of Todenham, Gloucestershire, that year and of Upton upon Severn from 1663. He was probably the editor of his late father's 'Musica Deo sacra' (1668), of which he was inspecting proof sheets as early as 1665. None of his own music survives. He died at Martin Hussingtree on 20 October 1681. 


@@@@@


doc= 27514


Tomkins, Peltro William (1759-1840), engraver and draughtsman, was born on 10 October 1759 in St Pancras, Middlesex, and baptized there on 15 October 1759, a younger son of William Tomkins (c.1732-1792), landscape painter, and his wife, Susanna Callard. He entered the Royal Academy Schools in 1775, aged fifteen, and was taught to engrave by Francis Bartolozzi, a connection proudly proclaimed by Tomkins on many plates. After 1781, working chiefly in stipple, he engraved a large number of plates for a variety of publishers. The designers he interpreted were principally contemporaries such as William Redmore Bigg, Henry Bunbury, William Hamilton, Angelica Kaufmann, and Thomas Stothard. He was one of the principal engravers employed by Thomas Macklin for his 'British Poets' and produced a fine interpretation of Henry Fuseli's 'Prince Arthur's Vision' (1788) for the first number. He married Lucy Jones on 2 June 1787 and raised a large family, including a daughter, Emma, who practised as an artist and married Samuel Smith, an engraver. 
Tomkins gave drawing lessons to the daughters of George III, and in 1793 he was appointed historical engraver to Queen Charlotte. He engraved Princess Elizabeth's designs for illustrations to Sir J. Bland Burgess's poem 'The Birth and Triumph of Love'. In 1793 he joined his brother J. F. Tomkins, trading as P. W. Tomkins & Co. at his print shop, 49 New Bond Street, a business continued until 1823. They financed ambitious works, notably an illustrated edition of James Thomson's 'Seasons' (1797), with engravings by Tomkins and Bartolozzi after designs by William Hamilton. This was arguably the most magnificent book to be illustrated with stipple engravings. Two much later ventures, 'The British Gallery of Pictures' (1818-20), with text by Henry Tresham, and 'Engravings of the... Marquis of Stafford's Collection of Pictures' (1818), with text by William Young Ottley, were less successful. Tomkins suffered a heavy financial loss and was compelled to obtain a private act of parliament (57 Geo. III c. lxi) authorizing him to dispose by lottery of the watercolour drawings from which he had worked, together with the unsold impressions of the plates (many already coloured), the whole being valued at $150,000. The first prize consisted of 291 pictures, representing the entire collection of the marquess of Stafford. Before the lottery could take place the letterpress and apparatus for captioning the prints was lost in a fire and Tomkins was obliged to seek a second act (1 Geo. IV c. lxxxix) to extend the date of drawing the tickets until 31 March 1821. His last work was a series of three plates (1834-40) from copies by Harriet Whitshed of paintings discovered at Hampton Court. Tomkins died on 22 April 1840 at his home, 25 Osnaburgh Street, St Pancras, and was buried on 28 April at St Pancras Church. 




@@@@@


doc= 27515


Tomkins, Thomas (1572-1656), composer, was born at St David's, Pembrokeshire, the son of Thomas Tomkins ('c'.1545-1627) of Lostwithiel, Cornwall, vicar-choral of St David's Cathedral, and his first wife, Margaret Pore (died 'c'.1583). In 1577 his father became organist and master of the choristers at St David's, but by 1594 he had moved to Gloucester as a minor canon. In the meantime Tomkins senior had married his second wife, Anne Hargest, with whom he had three other sons who subsequently also became notable musicians -- John Tomkins, Giles Tomkins ['see below'], and Robert Tomkins. 
Little is known of Thomas Tomkins's early musical education. He was educated at home, and probably gained his knowledge of the rudiments as a treble at St David's. It would appear that at some stage before he was appointed organist of Worcester Cathedral in 1596 he studied with William Byrd, the most significant composer of the Elizabethan era. Regrettably, the dedication of his madrigal 'Too much I once lamented', from the 'Songs of 3. 4. 5. & 6. Parts' (1622), 'To my ancient and much reverenced master, William Byrd' is ambiguous as to the specific nature of their relationship. The 1607 citation of his Oxford BMus degree notes that he had been '14 years student in music': this would place the beginning of his formal instruction in 1593. In 1597 Tomkins married Alice Hassard ('c'.1563-1642), widow of his predecessor as organist at Worcester, Nathaniel Patrick. Their son Nathaniel Tomkins ['see below'] was born in 1599, and they also had a daughter, Ursula. 
Tomkins's investigation of music theory must have been significantly enhanced by the publication of Thomas Morley's 'A Plain and Easy Introduction to Practical Music' (1597). He worked through Morley's treatise carefully, making a number of marginal annotations to his copy that betray a fascination with theoretical aspects of music. His interest in theoretical abstractions was complemented by antiquarian zeal. He became the owner of an important manuscript source of English liturgical organ music dating back to the Marian period (BL, Add. MS 29996), into which he subsequently copied a variety of later pieces in different genres by more up-to-date composers such as Byrd and John Bull along with some pieces of his own. More extensive than this composite manuscript is a holograph source (Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris, MS Res. 1122) which includes a significant number of Tomkins's own keyboard pieces. Many of the works contained in this manuscript bear precise dates (unusual for this period); remarkably, most were composed when he was approaching eighty years of age. This manuscript also contains two lists of keyboard pieces by Tallis, Byrd, and Bull among others, including some comments on the relative merits of the latter two. Byrd's work is singled out 'for Substance' (clearly an acknowledgement of Byrd's senior position among contemporary English composers), while Bull's is described as 'for the Hand', a comment inspired no doubt by its typically virtuosic technical demands, and not necessarily to be interpreted as a derogatory judgement. Tomkins's own keyboard works draw upon the techniques of both composers. 
Clearly Tomkins's compositional gifts had made some impact in the capital by the turn of the century, since Morley included the madrigal 'The fauns and satyrs tripping' in his famous anthology 'The Triumphs of Oriana' (1601) alongside the work of more established court composers. Tomkins may well have become attached to the court in some capacity shortly thereafter, dividing his time, like a number of his contemporaries, between a cathedral post (at Worcester) and the occasional demands of the Chapel Royal. The cheque book of the Chapel Royal contains no entry relating to Tomkins's actual appointment as a gentleman in ordinary, though he had been elected by 29 June 1620, when his signature appears in a record of a vestry meeting. Evidently he had been connected with the court in some capacity for about a decade before this: his anthem 'Know ye not' was clearly intended for the funeral of Prince Henry in 1612. 
In 1621 Tomkins succeeded Edmund Hooper as an organist of the Chapel Royal, where his colleagues included Orlando Gibbons (senior organist) and Nathaniel Giles (master of the choristers). Both men were dedicatees the following year of madrigals in Tomkins's 'Songs of 3. 4. 5. & 6. Parts' (1622), a collection in which each piece bears a specific dedication, giving quite a detailed impression of the composer's social circle during the first quarter of the century. This included, in addition to colleagues such as Gibbons and Giles, the composers John Coprario, John Danyel, William Heather (soon to become the first professor of music at Oxford), and William Byrd, the poet Phineas Fletcher, and the anthologist Thomas Myriell, in whose manuscript collection, 'Tristitiae remedium' (1616), Tomkins's best-known anthem, 'When David heard', is to be found. Following Gibbons's early death in 1625, Tomkins presumably became senior organist (although this is not specifically recorded) and was responsible, along with Giles, Heather, and John Stevens, for Charles I's coronation music. In 1628 he was the victim of an embarrassing administrative error by the bishop of Bath and Wells, who had drawn up a document appointing Tomkins 'Composer in Ordinary of the King's Musick' in succession to Alfonso Ferrabosco the elder at a salary of $40 per annum; this had to be hastily revoked when it was discovered that the position had previously been promised to Ferrabosco's son. 
From about 1635 Tomkins's appearances at the Chapel Royal probably became less frequent. Although he enjoyed a long retirement, it cannot have been especially happy owing to a combination of personal and national misfortunes. Following the death of his wife, Alice, on 29 January 1642, Tomkins seems to have become increasingly involved in cathedral affairs at Worcester, a deepening involvement in a familiar environment from which he perhaps drew spiritual comfort amid the increasingly turbulent political scene. However, even that solace was short-lived. In 1646 Worcester surrendered to the parliamentary forces and cathedral services were effectively discontinued, although Tomkins (an ardent royalist) continued to reside in the cathedral close until 1654, when he moved to the nearby village of Martin Hussingtree to live with his son, Nathaniel. There he died in early June 1656, and was buried on 9 June. 
Contemporaries considered Tomkins a worthy but not especially outstanding or idiosyncratic composer. It is perhaps significant that while seventeenth-century portraits of Bull and Gibbons survive in the Oxford music faculty there is none of Tomkins. His musical output is conservative in style. The keyboard pieces dating from the last decade of his life could easily have been composed sixty or more years earlier and include a relatively large quantity of pieces known as 'In nomine', a genre that had largely died out with Byrd (although some very late and uncharacteristic examples occur in the work of Purcell towards the end of the seventeenth century). While his instrumental music is significant, Tomkins's lasting contribution to English music lies in the field of church music. His particular forte was perhaps the verse anthem, a type of sacred vocal music for the Anglican rite that alternates 'full' and 'solo' choral groupings with organ accompaniment. His madrigals do not depart significantly from this 'serious' idiom and seem to avoid the Italianate influences that had been so prominent in the work of the previous generation led by Thomas Morley. His main contribution to the various instrumental repertories was undoubtedly in the realm of stylized dance music, especially the pavan and galliard. This music was clearly for private purposes, a fact reflected in the relatively narrow distribution of manuscript sources, mostly emanating from the west country (with which the composer maintained lifelong associations). 
Tomkins's son 
Thomas Tomkins's half-brother 
John's brother 
The third son of the elder Thomas Tomkins's second marriage, Robert Tomkins ('b'. after 1587, died in or after 1641), viol player and composer, was appointed musician for the consort of the king's musick on 28 March 1628. He was listed in the lord chamberlain's accounts for 1630 (with a salary of $46 per annum) and with his brother Giles was one of the musicians for lutes, viols, and voices from 1641. Probably he died during the Commonwealth, since the Restoration account books make no further reference to him, naming in his place Henry Hawes. All that remains of his musical output are three verse anthems, although the texts for five others survive in the Chapel Royal anthem book. 


@@@@@


doc= 27516


Tomkins, Thomas (1637/8-1675), Church of England clergyman, was born in Aldersgate Street, London, the son of John Tomkins (1586-1638) ['see under 'Tomkins, Thomas (1572-1656)], organist of St Paul's and gentleman of the Chapel Royal, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of Sylvanus Griffith, dean of Hereford Cathedral. Thomas's family connections -- notably his uncles, the musicians Thomas Tomkins (1572-1656) and Giles Tomkins (b. after 1587, d. 1668) ['see under 'Tomkins, Thomas (1572-1656)], as well as his father who died when he was an infant -- lay firmly within the world of the Caroline church and court. He 'was educated in virtue and learning from the cradle' by his cousin Nathaniel Tomkins (1599-1681) ['see under 'Tomkins, Thomas (1572-1656)], canon of Worcester Cathedral and a protege of Archbishop Laud (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.1046). Both Nathaniel and his father, the elder Thomas Tomkins, organist at Worcester, were ejected from their places by the parliamentarian authorities in 1646. 
Tomkins matriculated from Balliol College, Oxford, on 12 May 1651, graduating BA on 13 February 1655 and proceeding MA on 6 July 1658. He was elected fellow of All Souls College, Oxford, in 1656, was university proctor in 1663, was incorporated at Cambridge in 1664, and proceeded BD at Oxford in 1665 and DD on 15 May 1675. At the Restoration he distinguished himself as a zealous royalist and churchman. He has been described as one of a stable of pamphleteers whom Gilbert Sheldon, bishop of London and later archbishop of Canterbury, sought to mould popular opinion against any possibility of comprehension within the Church of England or toleration of dissent. Tracts written by Tomkins, George Stradling, Samuel Parker, and others 'were tailored to suit the secular political terrain upon which these issues were fought' (Spurr, 48). In 1660 he published 'The Rebels' Plea, or, Mr Baxter's Judgement Concerning the Late Wars', in which he criticized with considerable force Baxter's theory of the constitution, as well as his defence of particular actions of parliament. This was followed the next year by 'Short strictures, or, Animadversions on so much of Mr Crofton's 'Fastning St Peters bonds' as concern the reasons of the University of Oxford concerning the covenant', a pamphlet which Hugh Griffith in 'Mr Crofton's Case Soberly Considered' termed 'frivolous, scurrilous and invective'. 
On 11 April 1665 Tomkins was admitted rector of St Mary Aldermary, London, and about the same time was appointed chaplain to Archbishop Sheldon and employed as an assistant licenser of books; with his move to London he resigned his fellowship at All Souls. In this capacity he nearly refused to licence 'Paradise Lost' because he thought treasonable the lines: '
As when the Sun, new risen, 

Looks through the horizontal, misty air, 

Shorn of his beams, or from behind the moon, 

In dim eclipse, disastrous twilight sheds 

On half the nations, and with fear of change 

Perplexes monarchs: 
(J. Milton, 'Paradise Lost', I)' This is Tomkins's main claim on the interest of posterity, and the cause of no little censure, although he overcame his misgivings and granted his imprimatur some time before 20 August 1667. 
On 18 July 1667 Tomkins was appointed rector of Great Chart in Kent, and in the same year published a pamphlet entitled 'The Inconveniences of Toleration'. On 8 November 1669 he was installed chancellor and prebendary at Exeter, and three weeks later, on 30 November, was instituted rector of Lambeth, Surrey, all of which preferments he held until his death, resigning his two former livings. The Lambeth living came, according to Wood, because Archbishop Sheldon 'valued him so much that he kept him many years chaplain in his house, and resolving never to part with him, made him rector of Lambeth' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.1046). In 1672 Tomkins added a further living when he was instituted rector of Monks Risborough, Buckinghamshire. 
Tomkins's career as licenser and polemicist continued. On 2 July 1670 he licensed Milton's 'Paradise Regained' and 'Samson Agonistes'. In 1675 he published 'The modern pleas for comprehension, toleration, and the taking away the obligation to the renouncing of the covenant considered and discussed'. Another edition appeared in 1680 with the title 'The new distemper, or, The dissenter's usual pleas for comprehension, toleration and the renouncing of the covenant, consider'd and discuss'd'. 
Tomkins died at Exeter on 20 August 1675, aged thirty-seven, and was buried in the chancel of the church at Martin Hussingtree, Worcestershire, the parish where his cousin Nathaniel lived. A memorial plaque celebrated him as a staunch defender of the Church of England 'contra schismatices' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.1047). Administration of his estate was granted to his brother John. Besides his polemical writings he composed some commendatory verses prefixed to Edmund Elys's 'Die pomata' (1665). He is sometimes said to have edited 'Musica Deo sacra at ecclesiae Anglicanae' (1668), composed by his uncle Thomas, in spite of there being 'no proof that this eminent and learned divine had any great knowledge of music or deep interest in it' (Stevens, 69). Nathaniel, the elder Thomas's son, is a more likely candidate. 


@@@@@


doc= 27517


Tomkins, Thomas (1743-1816), writing-master, of whose birth, upbringing, or early life nothing is known, eventually kept a boarding-school in Foster Lane, Cheapside, London, where he taught writing and accounts to 'Young Gentlemen for Trades, Merchts. for Counting Houses and the Public Offices' (Heal, 108) and he was said to have been an excellent teacher. 
Tomkins's known work as a writing-master was not extensive; he published only two engraved copy-books and both of these appeared in the early part of his career. The first was entitled 'The Beauties of Writing' (1777), an expensive volume which sold for 15's'., and this was quickly followed by 'Alphabets Written for the Improvement of Youth' (1779); both contained a combination of plain and decorative writing exercises in a variety of styles. Apart from these copy-books, published in his own name, the mainstay of Tomkins's career was in producing ornamental penmanship for other people. Occasionally, he worked for publishers executing decorative titles for luxury publications such as Thomas Macklin's 'Bible' (1800) or Rudolph Ackermann's 'Microcosm of London' (1808-10). In contrast to the work of early eighteenth-century writing-masters little of Tomkins's work was either intended for publication or ever engraved. Instead he specialized in producing unique presentation certificates and decorative transcripts of important texts and public addresses. Between 1776 and 1816 he was employed by the corporation of London to embellish the honorary freedoms that they distributed and it was through this channel that Tomkins's work was acclaimed by no less noble figures than Prince Leopold of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld and the dukes of Kent, Sussex, and Gloucester. He also transcribed the Royal Academy's annual addresses to the king and queen, turning these texts into highly refined examples of penmanship which his obituarist praised for their 'boldness of design, inexhaustible variety, and elegant freedom' ('GM', 280). In 1806 and 1807 Tomkins also turned his hand to authorship and his 'Poems on Various Subjects' (1807) was successful enough to go through several editions. 
In fact Tomkins's life is characterized less by his achievements as a penman than by his dogged determination that calligraphy should be recognized as one of the sister arts and that, consequently, he should be honoured with a place in the Royal Academy. Despite Isaac D'Israeli's rather censorious view that this belief rendered him 'the vainest of all Writing Masters' (D'Israeli, 436) a number of entries in Joseph Farington's diaries reveal how well liked Tomkins actually was. Of course, as a calligrapher he was never given the opportunity to run for the Royal Academy, but his involvement in a number of benevolent schemes, including the scheme to erect a monument to commemorate the engraver William Woollett, in 1796, led to his being invited to several of the Royal Academy's annual dinners. A naturally good humoured and sociable man, Tomkins was friends with celebrities such as Samuel Johnson and Sir Joshua Reynolds. Indeed, when Reynolds completed Tomkins's portrait in 1789 he refused to take any more than $80 from 'a brother artist' (Heal, 109). According to one of Reynolds's first biographers, this compliment was extended when Reynolds, who signed few of his works, offered to give Tomkins ''a specimen of 'my' writing', and immediately, [and] with the utmost freedom, wrote with his brush on the reverse of the canvas, 'J. Reynolds, pinx.,' 1789' ('Sunday Times', 22 April 1928; portrait in the Guildhall, London). After suffering a long and painful illness, Tomkins died in September 1816 at his house in Sermon Lane, Doctors' Commons, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 27518


Tomkinson, Thomas (1631-c.1710), Muggletonian, was the son of Richard Tomkinson and his wife, Ann (died 1661/2), of Sladehouse in the parish of Ilam, Staffordshire. He came from a family of substantial tenant farmers long settled in the parishes of Ilam and Blore Ray. Tomkinson may have acquired his considerable learning from the library belonging to the estate of his namesake Thomas Tomkinson, who was buried at Blore Ray on 25 December 1640. The future Muggletonian 'procured a library of presbyterian books' ('DNB') and he also borrowed books (including St Augustine's 'City of God' and the works of the Anglican apologist Henry Hammond) from his landlord, Thomas Cromwell, fourth Baron Cromwell and first earl of Ardglass, at Throwley Hall. On his mother's death in late 1661 or early 1662, Tomkinson's father made over his affairs to him, and boarded with his son as a lodger. Shortly after Tomkinson married 'a good virtuous maid' (whose name he does not record), who brought with her a marriage portion of $120 so that Tomkinson was able to pay his father for his cattle (BL, Add. MS 42505, fol. 2'v'). Tomkinson established himself as a factor and remained in Staffordshire until at least 1681. That year proved expensive for him when he lost $140, partly through damages awarded against him for a squib against his local minister whom he accused of popery, partly through the failure of a chapman in London with whom he traded. 
In February 1652 God spoke to John Reeve, co-founder of Muggletonianism, and told him (on three successive mornings) that he and his cousin Lodowicke Muggleton, were the 'Two Last Witnesses' revealed in chapter 11 of the book of 'Revelation'. Ten days afterwards Tomkinson had a visionary experience, suffering wonderful things in his sleep, when 'things were made plain to me and I beheld wonders inexpressible' (Tomkinson, 'Christian converte'). Yet Tomkinson did not hear about God's commission until nearly a decade later, remaining until then 'a most zealeous prespeterian' (BL, Add. MS 42505, fol. 4'v'). It was through reading the writings of Lawrence Clarkson that Tomkinson was able to tie up his own previous revelation with the principles of the new Muggletonian religion. His mother, who had shared her son's presbyterian commitment, followed her son into the new faith. She found hardest to give up her old presbyterian practice of praying to God, an issue over which Muggleton had broken with Reeve: Muggleton (and Tomkinson enthusiastically endorsed his position) denied that God took 'immediate notice' of his creatures. 
Tomkinson's conversion was in 1661 but it would be another three years before he was fully committed to Muggletonianism, and blessed by Muggleton. During these three years Tomkinson pursued the prophet with detailed questions -- he later praised Muggleton's patience in answering these doubts. He might not have been too pleased to know of Muggleton's comment to a third party: 'what a great deale of paine to please the unsatisfied fancye of one particular man' (BL, Add. MS 60171, fol. 373). To some exquisite rhapsody of doubts from Tomkinson in 1664 comes the prophet's revealingly brusque reply: 'Nothing venture, nothing have' (BL, Add. MS 60171, fol. 406). But by August of that year a believer, Ellen Sudbury, is welcoming him to the fold, and is also excited by news of his wife's growing interest. Just before his marriage Tomkinson had gone up to London to see Muggleton, leaving Staffordshire on May day 1662. He later acknowledged that he had occasionally attended church 'to please an old father and a young wife', until 1674 (BL, Add. MS 42505, fol. 2'v'). His father remained hostile to his son's new belief. Muggleton in 1666 wrote to Tomkinson that his wife would lose nothing by committing herself to the faith 'if she hold out to the End' (Delamaine, 180). Tomkinson's daughter, Anne (there was also a son, Thomas), was blessed by Muggleton on 10 July 1684. 
The Tomkinson conversion was thus not straightforward: his enlightenment had preceded his discovery of his new religion; the occasional conformity he himself had practised (although he claimed, on the other side, to have made over twenty converts) would find dubious echoes in the behaviour of his brother-in-law and sister, who avoided persecution in 1682 by pretending to be papists. But it was, in the end, a prize worth having. Muggleton recognized this, however belatedly, when he used his authority (rarely exercised in this manner) to prevent Tomkinson from emigrating in 1674 to avoid persecution. When Tomkinson did turn up in court to pay a fine, Archdeacon Cook overheard him explaining to a Quaker where his doctrines were wrong. The sequel was a happy one. Cook was reported to have said 'if hee have no worse principles than this hee is not to be blamed'. So Tomkinson and a friend paid a 20's'. fine each, while two Baptists were fined $16. Tomkinson said 'they never knew how I came off for our business was private' (Tomkinson, 'Christian converte'). 
Clarkson had been Tomkinson's introduction to Muggletonianism. Although personally disgraced in 1661 for challenging Muggleton's leadership, Clarkson was not ideologically disgraced. When one of Tomkinson's cavils prior to conversion had been whether the man Jesus knew he was God while on earth, Muggleton referred (this was in 1664) to the authority of Clarkson for support (BL, Add. MS 60171, fol. 404). Clarkson had been emphatic that God did not take 'immediate notice' of men and women, and Tomkinson followed Clarkson and Muggleton on this. In 1664 he wrote a concordance of Reeve's and Muggleton's writings, and scriptural references in support of the Muggleton/Clarkson doctrine were inserted (BL, Add. MS 60189, fol. 1'v'). The debate acquired new urgency in 1671 when Muggleton's denial of 'immediate notice' became the basis of a rebellion against his leadership, led principally by William Medgate and Walter Buchanan. Tomkinson was present at the debate between Muggleton and Buchanan and believed that Muggleton won it hands down: 'I was wonderfully satisfied at the prophets doctrine concerning God not taking notice of every particular Action that is done' (Tomkinson, 'Christian converte'). But he acknowledged in his ''Zions Sonnes'' of 1679 that he himself had initially been tempted by the rebels' principles. The temptation had not lasted; he was boasting indeed in a letter to believers in Ireland in 1674 that he had enjoyed ten years 'without the least Doubt' in the faith (BL, Add. MS 60180, fol. 12). 
Nobody would prove better in communicating such certainties than Tomkinson. He was the ablest of all Muggletonian writers in his age -- perhaps in the religion's history. His greatest work was 'Truth's Triumph' (published 1823). He wrote it in 1676; in April 1679 his fellow believer Alexander Delamaine wrote to him to say how much Muggleton had approved of it; in 1690 Tomkinson made additions to the manuscript; and he dedicated it to Muggleton on 9 August 1691. He does not add to the doctrines of Reeve and Muggleton, but they are presented in a sophisticated manner and backed by references to scholarly sources. What is clear in this work, and in others, is his explicit admiration for Thomas Hobbes. They shared reverence for magistracy, belief in mortalism and materialism, respect for Job, and contempt for free will and the Trinity. 
Tomkinson was to have a pivotal role in the publication of Muggleton's autobiography in 1699, 'The Acts of the Witnesses'. Muggleton had been known to be working upon the manuscript for some time but would not let anybody see it. But two weeks before his death (in 1698), he put it into the hands of Tomkinson. Tomkinson had ended his own 1692 work, 'The Harmony of the Three Commissions, or, None but Christ' (published 1757), with a desperate postscript, lamenting internal strife within the movement. In the dedicatory epistle with which Tomkinson now prefaced the publication of Muggleton's posthumous memoirs the same sombre note was struck: there was no salvation for the believers who professed to own Reeve, and yet who would not acknowledge Muggleton. The 1671 scars had therefore not healed: they would even persist into Victorian Muggletonianism. But no man had done more to prevent this happening than Tomkinson. He died about 1710 in London, where he had settled some time after 1681. 


@@@@@


doc= 27519


Tomkis, Thomas (b. c.1580, d. in or after 1615), playwright, the son of John Tomkys (d. 1592), entered Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1597, was admitted scholar in 1599, and was granted his BA in 1600. In 1602 he was elected minor fellow, and two years later earned an MA; he became a major fellow the same year. Tomkis has been remembered by posterity as the author of two academic plays, both written and probably performed at Cambridge. The first, entitled 'Albumazar', was performed on the evening of 9 March 1615, in Trinity College hall, which was designed for theatrical use as well as for dining. (The hall was built by Thomas Nevile, master from 1593 to 1615, and included a demountable stage and galleries. It was the site of numerous royal visits.) Among the spectators were James I, Prince Charles, and various courtiers who had converged on the university for several days. The party was entertained by a different play each evening. One of these was written by Samuel Brookes, who eventually became master of Trinity College; another by Phineas Fletcher, admitted to King's College in 1600. 

'Albumazar', an adaptation of Giambattista della Porta's 'L'astrologo' (printed in Venice in 1606), was performed in English by the members of Trinity College. In the college account book the senior bursar noted that Tomkis received $20 'for his paines in penning and ordering the English Commedie at our masters appoyntment' (Nelson, 'Cambridge', 1.527). The play was attributed to Tomkis on the title-page of two 1615 printings, and this was verified in an account of the royal visit in a manuscript by Sir Edward Dering (CUL, Add. MS 2677, art. 1, fol. 3). 'Albumazar' was improperly identified by John Dryden in his prologue to a 1668 revival at Lincoln's Inn Fields as the model for Ben Jonson's 'Alchemist' (1610). In the nineteenth century there was some speculation that the play was written by William Shakespeare, a theory that has been thoroughly dismissed (Rimbault, 259-60; Wright, 155). 
The subject matter of Tomkis's play -- a satire on astrology -- apparently made the piece a great success. 'Albumazar' was entered in the London Stationers' register on 28 April 1615 and printed almost immediately. However, the gossipmonger John Chamberlain remarked that 'there was no great matter in it more than one good clown's part' (Chambers, 3.498). The play was printed twice in 1615 and reprinted in 1634 and 1668, as well as numerous times throughout the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. The first quarto was printed again in 1944, followed by another reprint in 1977. 'Albumazar' retained its theatrical attractiveness throughout the eighteenth century, being performed at Drury Lane in 1744, 1747, and 1748. Subsequently the actor David Garrick made alterations and performed in his new version (also at Drury Lane) on 19 October 1773. This version was also published. 
Although falsely ascribed to Antony Brewer ('fl'. 1630-1655) a second Tomkis play was correctly identified by Sir John Harington early in the seventeenth century: 'The combat of lingua' as written by 'Thom[as] Tomkis of Trinity colledge in Cambridge' (BL, Add. MS 27632, fol. 30). The play was probably also performed in Cambridge. Here Tomkis seems again to have been influenced by an Italian model; 'Lingua' is a farcical presentation of a struggle between personifications of the tongue and the five senses, all which are identified by their Latin names. 
G. C. Moore Smith supported 1602 as a possible date for the composition of 'Lingua', on the theory that a compliment to Queen Psyche is really meant for Queen Elizabeth; however, other critics do not find this evidence convincing. There is also another myth, that Oliver Cromwell acted in 'Lingua', his young nephew performing the role of Small Beer. This led F. G. Fleay to suggest that the play formed part of Cromwell's entertainments for King James at Hinchinbrook on 27-9 April 1603. There is no evidence, however, to suggest that this was the case (Nelson, 'Cambridge', 2.942). A third theory, proposed by Frederick Boas, dated the play later, to shortly before the time of publication, because of certain similarities with passages in 'Macbeth'. 
The play was entered into the Stationers' register on 23 February 1607 as 'A Commedie called Lingua', and an anonymous printing followed soon thereafter in the same year. Here the play was entitled 'Lingua, or, The Combat of the Tongue, and the Five Senses'. Four other dated printings followed in 1617, 1622, 1632, and 1657, along with one undated printing. So popular was 'Lingua' during its time that it was translated as 'Speculum aestheticum' (1613) by Johannes Rhenanus for Maurice of Hesse-Cassel. Rhenanus probably accompanied Prince Otto to England in 1611. 
In addition E. K. Chambers identified a later, doubtful play that was supposedly written by Tomkis: 'Pathomachia, or, The Battle of Affections' (1630). In a running title, as well as in Bodleian Library manuscript (MS Eng. misc. e. 5), the same play is identified as 'Love's Load-Stone'. The piece, which contains two references to 'Madame Lingua', appears to be from about 1616 (Chambers, 3.499). It is not known when Tomkis died. He has frequently been confused with Thomas Tomkins (died 1656), the musician, and his son John (1586-1638); however, there is no known relationship between these families. 


@@@@@


doc= 27520


Tomline, Sir George Pretyman, fifth baronet (1750-1827), bishop of Winchester and political adviser, was born George Pretyman at Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, on 9 October 1750, the eldest son of George Pretyman (1722-1810), landowner and wool dealer, and his wife, Susan (1720/21-1807), daughter of John Hubbard of Bury St Edmunds. A family document claims that the Pretyman pedigree can be traced back to 1362 (Suffolk RO, HA119/T108/45/19), and the family had owned land in Suffolk for many generations. Pretyman's father served as one of the capital burgesses of the corporation of Bury St Edmunds. 
The young Pretyman was educated at Bury St Edmunds grammar school and matriculated from Pembroke College, Cambridge, in 1768. His mathematical abilities were recognized by the award of the Smith prize and by his status as senior wrangler. He graduated BA in 1772 and MA in 1775. He became a fellow of Pembroke in 1773, and was ordained deacon in the diocese of Norwich on 14 August 1774 and priest in the diocese of Peterborough two years later. When William Pitt the younger was sent as an undergraduate to Pembroke at the age of fourteen, Pretyman became his tutor, confidant, and friend, thus establishing the connection to which, as he frequently admitted, he owed his advancement in the church. He continued to play a part in university affairs, and assisted Pitt in his unsuccessful candidature for the university constituency in the general election of 1780. He served as university moderator in 1781. In 1782 he secured his first ecclesiastical preferment, the sinecure rectory of Corwen, Merioneth. Further preferment rapidly followed. In 1784 he was made a canon of Westminster and was created DD by Cambridge; in 1785 he became rector of Sudbourn-cum-Offord and was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. 
The appointment of Pitt as prime minister in December 1783 and his success in the general election the following spring gave Pretyman access to political influence. Pitt appointed him to what was in effect the post of private secretary, although he avoided use of that term lest it hinder Pretyman's career in the church. 'Mr Pitt has given me very good Apartments in his house, where I am to eat, drink & sleep just as I please', wrote Pretyman (n.d., Tomline MS, HA119/T108/45/25). Pitt made full use of his mathematical skills, seeking his advice as to the details of financial policy, notably the sinking fund. Pretyman secured his reward when at the age of thirty-six he became bishop of Lincoln. Pitt had to overcome the resistance of George III, who regarded Pretyman's elevation as a party appointment. The 'Gentleman's Magazine' subsequently repeated the familiar story that the king declared of Pretyman: 'Too young, too young -- can't have it!' but that when Pitt replied, 'Oh, but please your Majesty, had it not been for Dr P. I should not have been in the office I now hold', the king yielded: 'He shall have it, Pitt -- he shall have it, Pitt!' ('GM', 201). He was consecrated on 11 March 1787 and in the same month was installed as dean of St Paul's. Although Pretyman no longer resided at Downing Street after moving to the bishop's residence at Buckden Palace, Huntingdonshire, he remained on terms of the closest friendship with Pitt, who frequently wrote to 'my dear bishop' to solicit his counsel about senior ecclesiastical appointments. According to George Rose, the secretary to the Treasury, who knew both men well, Pretyman's advice weighed heavily with his patron. 
Pretyman married, on 3 September 1784, Elizabeth (died 1826), eldest daughter of Thomas Maltby of Germains, Buckinghamshire; they had three sons. Elizabeth Pretyman's intellectual gifts are evident in her letters to her husband and he took her fully into his confidence over ecclesiastical and political matters. His letters to her form a valuable commentary on significant aspects of public life. After dining with some of his clergy during one of his regular three-yearly visitations, he confided to his wife: 'these public dinners and suppers are dreadful things' (n.d., Tomline MS, HA119/T108/45/1). He was none the less a conscientious diocesan, who conducted eleven visitations during his thirty-three years as bishop of Lincoln. His obituarist tactfully observed: 'Though to the inferior clergy there was unquestionably something over-awing in his presence, arising from their conscientiousness of his superior attainments, yet it was impossible not to admire the courtliness of his manners and the benevolence of his sentiments' ('GM', 204). He was a loyal, albeit usually silent, supporter of Pitt's ministry in the House of Lords, although duties in his large diocese frequently kept him from London. However, he frequently visited Pitt and was accordingly well informed on public affairs, including the regency crisis of 1788-9. In 1789, preaching the 30 January sermon before the House of Lords, Pretyman showed that he shared Pitt's whiggish opinions by denouncing Charles I and praising those who had resisted him. During the late 1790s he advised Pitt over war finance and proposals for reform of the tithe laws. In 1800 he played an important part in devising Pitt's abortive 'ecclesiastical plan' which featured a scheme to augment clerical livings and to introduce a revised system of episcopal jurisdiction. 
Pretyman strongly deplored Pitt's resignation in March 1801 and disagreed with his patron's willingness to countenance Catholic emancipation as a concomitant of the 'Act of Union' with Ireland. He disapproved of Addington's administration and on more than one occasion urged a reluctant Pitt to return to office. He began to evince a severe anti-Catholicism, warning Pitt to avoid provoking the king by demanding full liberty to enact Catholic emancipation. Pretyman told Pitt in February 1801 that 'in thinking of the Cath. of Ireland he was not to forget the Protestants of England -- that there was still, & ought to be, a great Prejudice in this Country against Popery' (Tomline MS, HA119/T108/45/1). His personal friendship with Pitt was unaffected by this difference of policy and in 1801 he took a tactful lead in raising a subscription among Pitt's friends for the relief of the latter's debts; he himself contributed $1000. 
Pretyman was already a man of financial substance and in 1803 his family fortune was consolidated when, apparently to his surprise, he inherited a mansion house and a large estate at Riby in Lincolnshire from Marmaduke Tomline. The latter was not a blood relation, and Pretyman estimated that he had not met him more than five or six times. He exulted to his wife that this new property was 'worth two thousand pounds a year!!' (23 June 1803, Tomline MS, HA119/T108/45/1). From this time he took the name Tomline. A further bequest from James Hayes in 1821 brought him several farms in Suffolk which had previously belonged to the Pretyman family. 
Until the later 1790s Pretyman had not been noted as a theologian. However, in 1799 he published his two-volume 'Elements of Christian Theology', a work dedicated to Pitt and designed for Anglican ordinands. Its lucidity and accessibility earned it considerable popularity and it reached a twelfth edition in 1818. Several reprints and abridgements were made subsequently and the 'Elements' remained in print well into the second half of the nineteenth century. He endeavoured to repudiate the Calvinist interpretation of article 17, arguing that God gave man free agency to accept or reject His offer of salvation and that He foresaw who would accept and who would reject the offer. This, he claimed, was the only sense in which predestination could be reconciled with the attributes of a loving deity. A pamphlet based on this section of the 'Elements' appeared in 1822 under the title 'A Scriptural Exposition of the Seventeenth Article'. Armed with something approaching a scholarly reputation, Tomline was a serious candidate for the archbishopric of Canterbury on the death of John Moore on 18 January 1805. Pitt had returned to office in 1804 after the renewal of war with France and the dissolution of Addington's ministry. Although he had previously made a tentative agreement with George III that the primacy should be conferred upon Charles Manners-Sutton, bishop of Norwich, Pitt vigorously promoted Tomline's case. The king, however, viewed Pitt's advocacy as importunity, suspected a threat to one of his remaining prerogatives, and insisted on retaining the presentation in his own hands. The ultimate appointment of Manners-Sutton led Pitt to consider resignation and was a bitter disappointment to Tomline and to his wife. 
Tomline was present during Pitt's last days in January 1806 and attended him on his deathbed; after his death Tomline took on the role of custodian of his memory. He preached a eulogistic memorial sermon and undertook Pitt's biography. The result was a two-volume work published in 1821 that took the story to 1793; second and third editions in three volumes followed in the same year. Tomline was heavily criticized in several reviews for an excessive dependence on published sources; he also exaggerated Pitt's devotion to the Church of England. His account of Charles James Fox's questionable conduct at the time of the Anglo-Russian negotiations of 1791 involved him in a prolonged controversy with Fox's friend Robert Adair. Although Tomline compiled a further volume, it was never published, apparently as a result of the strictures directed against its predecessors. Pitt's death had removed him from political influence; he respected Lord Grenville but did not share his pro-Catholic sympathies and was relieved at the dismissal of Grenville's 'Talents' ministry in March 1807. 
Tomline returned to theological writing and in 1811 he consolidated and extended the message of many of the charges to his clergy in 'A Refutation of Calvinism'. He assembled a formidable collection of quotations from the fathers to demonstrate their opposition to Calvinist doctrines and, in chapter 6, argued from detailed evidence that the opinions of many heretics resembled Calvinism. He concluded: 'Our Church is not Lutheran -- it is not Calvinistic -- it is not Arminian -- It is Scriptural: it is built upon the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner-stone' (3rd edn, 1811, 590). The 'Refutation' achieved considerable success, reaching an eighth edition in 1823, and provoked replies of a high quality, notably from Thomas Scott. In 1812 Tomline strongly denounced the Catholic claims, asserting that 'Protestantism is an essential part of the British Constitution' (G. Tomline, 'A Charge Delivered to the Diocese of Lincoln', 1812, 10); he was strongly attacked in ripostes from the Unitarian John Disney and the latitudinarian Sydney Smith. Although Tomline shared with the older generation of high-churchmen a keen interest in patristic scholarship and an 'eirenicism towards continental Protestantism' (Nockles, 156), his aggressive assertion of the protestant nature of Anglicanism tended to distinguish him from them. 
In 1813 Tomline declined the bishopric of London on the death of John Randolph, as he was uneasy about the heavy responsibilities which that diocese would have involved. In July 1820, however, he was nominated bishop of Winchester and was enthroned by proxy on 27 October. He then resigned the deanery of St Paul's. In February 1823 his claim to a Nova Scotia baronetcy, originally conferred by Charles I upon Sir Thomas Pretyman, and dormant since 1749, was confirmed. Although for the rest of his life he was styled Sir George Pretyman Tomline, his descendants relinquished any claim to the title. 
Tomline died of apoplexy at Kingston Hall, near Wimborne, Dorset, on 14 November 1827 and was buried in Winchester Cathedral on 28 November. His wife had died on 13 June 1826. He had few qualms about pluralism and also used his influence to advance members of his family in the church. His brother John became archdeacon of Lincoln, his second son George became chancellor of Lincoln and prebendary of Winchester, and his third son Richard became precentor of Lincoln. His eldest son, William Edward, was MP for, successively, Christchurch, Truro, and Minehead. Tomline himself in public created an impression of aloof dignity. James Green's portrait shows him as refined, scholarly, and rather austere. In sympathetic company, however, he was capable of genial informality and he was a devoted husband and parent. He earned the respect of men of such different opinions as Samuel Parr. Particularly from 1806 he was a strong supporter of the existing order in church and state. His influence in the defence of both was considerable. 


@@@@@


doc= 27521


Tomlins, Elizabeth Sophia (1763-1828), novelist, was born in London, the eldest of four daughters and second of (at least) five children born to Thomas Tomlins, esq. (died 1815), a solicitor and clerk of the Painter-Stainers' Company, and his wife, about whom nothing is known. One of her nephews was the publisher and playwright Frederick Guest Tomlins (1804-1867), who later succeeded his grandfather and uncle to the clerkship of the company. 
With her elder brother, Sir Thomas Edlyne Tomlins (1762-1841), Tomlins co-published her first known work, 'Tributes of Affection: with a Slave and other Poems', by 'A Lady and her Brother'. The collection includes sonnets, ballads, birthday pieces, and trifles, one of which provides a slight description of the woman herself. 'To Eliza; Gardening', signed by her brother ('E') and dated 1790, mourns the waste of her maidenly personal attractions, a 'beauty and talent' later corroborated by her obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' in 1828. As a poet she is best known for 'The Slave' (signed 'S'), with its twin themes of personal liberty and politics in which the 'noble' slave Quashi, on the point of gaining freedom, chooses suicide over revenge. Reflecting the political climate in England, other anti-slavery poems in the collection include 'Wilberforce' and the closing poem, 'To the House of Commons, on their Vote for the Abolition of the Slave-Trade, April 2, 1792', signed by her brother. Eschewing the feminine tradition of writing exclusively of the personal, Tomlins's contributions incorporate the classical mode, along with a ballad trilogy of love, betrayal, and death, 'Connal' (1782), 'Mary' (1783), and 'Athol' (1784), published also in 'Dr. Langhorne's collection' ('GM', 1st ser., 98). 
As a novelist Tomlins's style shifted from early sentimentalism and didacticism to a post-1797 realism about deprivations of economics and personal freedom facing the working woman. Her first novel, 'The Conquests of the Heart: a Novel. By a Young Lady' (1785), is a highly romanticized biography of a Jamaican friend, the subject of two poems, 'To R. N.' and 'To the same Friend'. The introduction to 'Tributes of Affection' indicates that Tomlins and he ('R. N.') collaborated on the novel. During the same period Tomlins wrote 'The Victim of Fancy' (1787), published also as 'La victime de l'imagination, ou, L'enthousiaste de Werther', whose Goethe-inspired heroine Theresa Morven acts out her life (and death) like a character in the current fiction, such as Sophia Lee's 'The Recess', on which she feeds. Between 1780 and 1827 other writings included a translation of the history of Napoleon Bonaparte and many periodical essays ('GM', 1st ser., 98). During the gap between her early and later canon (after 1797), Tomlins subsumed her personal 'advantages' to her 'severe' father's directives; she assumed the duties of governess to his 'innumerable' children, in addition to attending his professional desk which she 'actually superintended' during the final seven years of his life (ibid.). 

'Rosalind de Tracey' (1798) and an earlier novel, 'Memoirs of a Baroness' (1792), while conventionally moralistic, also insert portrayals of the marginalized, especially the poor working woman. In a defence of the novel genre Tomlins claims to promote 'fortitude in affliction' ('Rosalind de Tracey', vi) and female friendship. Tomlins's novels feature the lone female character who ventures haplessly into public commercialized space. Like the Baroness D'Alantun, Rosalind undergoes abduction and violence in London, a venue for Tomlins's true-to-life vignettes of working women, such as governesses, and women lacemakers dying in squalid conditions as they ply their trade to bedeck the rich. 
After her father's death in 1815 Tomlins moved to The Firs, a family cottage in Chalden, Surrey, with three sisters and their mother. Returning to her 'fascination' with poetry, she had commenced a poem of 'considerable length', but, after falling from a pony on 7 August 1828, she died at Chalden in an 'apparent fainting fit' on 8 August 1828 ('GM', 1st ser., 98), and was buried in the parish church there on 15 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 27522


Tomlins, Frederick Guest (1804-1867), journalist, was born in August 1804. Little is known of his family or education. He married on 3 May 1829 Jane Vasey. His career began with contributions to periodicals such as Henry Hetherington's 'Poor Man's Guardian' in 1831. In 1834 he became associated with Thomas Mayhew in the publication of the 'Penny National Library', for which he edited, among other works, the 'Variorum History of England from Rapin to Hume' (1836). For a long time afterwards he was in the employment of Whittaker & Co., publishers, London, as publishing clerk and literary assistant to George Byrom Whittaker. Soon after Whittaker's death in 1847 Tomlins commenced business as a publisher in Southampton Street, Strand, London, and there issued his own periodicals, 'The Self-Educator' and 'The Topic', which, however, were not very successful. He next opened a shop for new and second-hand books in Great Russell Street, Bloomsbury, near the British Museum, but after a while he abandoned business for literary pursuits. 
Tomlins was well acquainted with Shakespeare and Shakespearian literature; he founded the Shakespeare Society in 1840 and acted as the society's secretary for the twelve years of its existence. His interest in the theatre dated back to his childhood, when he had seen Edmund Kean appear in the role of Shylock in 'The Merchant of Venice' at the Drury Lane Theatre in January 1814; this interest led him to publish various works on drama: 'The Past and Present State of Dramatic Art and Literature' (1839) and, in 1841, 'A brief view of the English drama, with suggestions for elevating the present condition of the art', 'The Nature and State of the English Drama', and 'The Relative Value of Acted and Unacted Drama'. Tomlins also tried his hand at writing his own tragedy, 'Garcia, or, The Noble Error', which was produced at the Sadler's Wells Theatre in December 1849. From 1850 to his death he acted as the dramatic and fine-art critic of the 'Morning Advertiser'. For a while he was also sub-editor, and later proprietor, of 'Douglas Jerrold's Weekly Newspaper'. In 1865 he became the political editor of the 'Weekly Times', to which he contributed a series of letters signed Littlejohn, and was also editorially connected with 'The Leader' soon after it started. 
On the death of his uncle, in 1864, Tomlins succeeded him as clerk of the Painter-Stainers' Company, an office which had been held by his grandfather. Tomlins died at the Painter-Stainers' Hall, Little Trinity Lane, Queenhithe, London, where he had been living, on 21 September 1867, and was buried at St Peter's Church, Croydon, on 27 September. He was survived by his wife and a daughter, who married a cousin in the merchant navy and subsequently went to Australia with her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 27523


Tomlins, Sir Thomas Edlyne (1762-1841), legal writer, was born in London on 4 January 1762, the eldest son of Thomas Tomlins (died 1815), solicitor and clerk to the Company of Painter-Stainers. Elizabeth Sophia Tomlins (1763-1828) was his sister. The family was descended from the Tomlins of the neighbourhood of Ledbury in Herefordshire and of Hereford. Thomas Edlyne was admitted a scholar at St Paul's School on 21 September 1769. He matriculated from Queen's College, Oxford, on 27 October 1778, and was called to the bar by the society of the Inner Temple in Hilary term 1783. 
For some years Tomlins was editor of the 'St James's Chronicle', a daily newspaper, and on 30 May 1801 he was appointed counsel to the chief secretary for Ireland. In the same year he became parliamentary counsel to the chancellor of the exchequer for Ireland, a post which he retained until the union of the British and Irish treasuries in 1816. He was knighted at Wanstead House on 29 June 1814, on the recommendation of the duke of Wellington. In 1818 he was appointed assistant counsel to the Treasury. In Hilary term 1823 he was elected a bencher of the Inner Temple, and in 1827 he filled the office of treasurer to the society. In January 1831, on the whigs' coming into office, he retired from his post in the Treasury. He died a widower on 1 July 1841 at St Mary Castlegate, York. 
Tomlins was a prolific writer. Among other works, he wrote 'A Familiar Explanation of the Law of Wills and Codicils' (1785), a clear account of the subject for the layman, which reached a seventh edition in 1819. His new edition of Giles Jacob's 'Law Dictionary' (1797) was equally successful, and he produced further editions, under his own name, until 1838. 
Sir Thomas's nephew, 
Tomlins's legal publications included a popular law dictionary (1838) and an edition of Sir Thomas Littleton's 'Treatise of Tenures' (1841). As an antiquary he translated the 'Chronicles' of Jocelin of Brakelond (1844) and published an account of the environs of Islington (1844). He died in Islington, Middlesex, on 17 May 1875. 


@@@@@


doc= 27524


Thomas Edlyne Tomlins (1803-1875), legal writer and antiquary, was born on 26 September 1803, the son of Sir Thomas's brother Alfred Tomlins, a clerk in the Irish exchequer office, Paradise Row, Lambeth. He entered St Paul's School on 6 February 1811, and was admitted to practice in London as an attorney in the Michaelmas term of 1827. 


@@@@@


doc= 27525


Tomlinson, Charles (1808-1897), science teacher and writer, was born on 27 November 1808 in Tottenham, Middlesex, the younger son of Charles Tomlinson. His father sought to better his condition by enlisting in 1810 but, after serving in Holland, died on the way to India, leaving a widow in straitened circumstances to raise Charles and his elder brother, Lewis (1806-1880). The boys went first to a dame-school then to a large day school for boys. Charles's first employment was in the office of Joseph Woods, architect of the Corn Exchange. He next worked on transcribing 'Pepys's Diary', and afterwards was for some years in a lawyer's office. During this time he went to evening classes at the London Mechanics' Institute to study science, and also learned French. Lewis meanwhile maintained himself as a clerk at Wadham College, Oxford, graduated BA in 1829, took holy orders and became classics master in a school in Berkshire. When a vacancy arose in 1830 Charles joined him, teaching elementary Latin and French. A few years later Lewis obtained a curacy near Salisbury, and with his brother founded a school in the city where Charles taught modern languages and experimental science. At this time the brothers married the sisters of one of their students: Charles married Sarah Windsor (died 1872), and Lewis married her elder sister, Maria (died 1880). 
Charles continued to improve his knowledge of science by attending lectures at University College, London, and elsewhere. Articles he contributed to popular science journals were, with others, reissued in 1838 as 'The Student's Manual of Natural Philosophy', which enjoyed a rapid sale and encouraged him in 1848 to leave Salisbury and settle in London. His connection with Parker's publishing house brought Tomlinson into contact with various men of science, among them Sir William Snow Harris, with whom he collaborated on the development of lightning conductors for ships. He gave editorial assistance to the chemist William Thomas Brande, and to John Frederick Daniell, who was preparing a new edition of his 'Meteorology'. When Daniell died in 1845 Tomlinson and William Allen Miller saw it into print. Tomlinson's wife, who was from an evangelical family, assisted him in all his work, and also wrote books of a moral and religious persuasion for the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge. 
Being by this time a familiar figure at King's College, London, Tomlinson was appointed lecturer in experimental science at King's College School. He took a large house in Hampstead Road where some of the scholars boarded, bringing a family atmosphere to his childless marriage. Tomlinson continued to write on a broad range of scientific and literary topics, but regarded his 'Cyclopedia of Useful Arts' (1852, enlarged edition 1866) as his major production, coming as it did in the aftermath of the 1851 exhibition when industry and manufacture were advancing rapidly. In addition, his investigation of the behaviour of camphor, and other light and heavy fluids when added to water, led to important theories concerning surface tension of liquids. 
Tomlinson's sight worsened in the late 1850s and by 1860, despite a visit to a celebrated German oculist, he was blind in one eye. He nevertheless remained active, being elected to the council of the British Association for the Advancement of Science in 1864, and in the same year to fellowship of the Chemical Society. In 1867 he was elected fellow of the Royal Society, serving for many years on its library committee. He retired from teaching in 1866 and moved to Highgate where he continued his experiments in a laboratory fitted up in his house. After several months' illness his wife died in 1872. In his later years Tomlinson turned to literature and the study of poetry, and from 1878 to 1880 he held the Dante lectureship at University College, London. Lewis and Maria Tomlinson both died in 1880 and their daughter Mary moved to Highgate to care for her uncle, who at seventy-three was still mentally and physically active and insisted on her learning to play chess. Latterly he was more frequently ill, and died at his home, 7 North Road, on 15 February 1897. He was buried at Highgate cemetery alongside his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 27526


Tomlinson, Nicholas (1764-1847), naval officer, third son of Captain Robert Tomlinson RN, was from March 1772 on the books of the 'Resolution', guardship at Chatham, of which his father was first lieutenant. In 1776 he transferred to the 'Thetis', in which he made two voyages to St Helena and served on the North American station. In March 1779 he joined the 'Charon', with Captain John Luttrell, third earl of Carhampton, a friend of his father; he served as Luttrell's aide-de-camp in the capture of Omoa. Continuing in the 'Charon' with Captain Thomas Symonds, he was present at the capture of the French privateer 'Comte d'Artois' and the defence and surrender of Yorktown. 
Tomlinson returned to England through an exchange of prisoners in December 1781, and on 23 March 1782 was made lieutenant in the 'Bristol', which went with convoy to the East Indies. In April 1783, a few days after the 'Bristol''s arrival in Madras Roads, Tomlinson volunteered to go to the help of the Indiaman 'Duke of Athol' and was on her when she was blown up with the death of nearly two hundred men. Tomlinson escaped with his life, but was severely injured. In the 'Bristol' he was at the fifth action between Suffren and Sir Edward Hughes off Cuddalore; in September 1784 he was appointed to the 'Juno' and in her returned to England in 1785. 
From 1786 to 1790 Tomlinson served in the sloop 'Savage' on the coast of Scotland. He then, with a recommendation from Lord Hawke, joined the Russian navy and had command of a Russian ship of the line, which he resigned on the imminence of the war between England and France in the beginning of 1793. In July he was appointed to the British 'Regulus' (44 guns), which ill health compelled him to leave after a few months, but in July 1794 he was appointed to command the gunboat 'Pelter', in which he performed a variety of enterprising actions along the French coast, for one of which -- the cover of the retreat of a party of French royalists after the failure of the expedition at Quiberon -- he was publicly thanked by Sir John Borlase Warren on the quarterdeck of the 'Pomone' in July 1795. He married, in 1794, Elizabeth, second daughter and coheir of Ralph Ward of Forburrows, near Colchester, and had a large family. 
On 30 November 1795 after brief appointments to the 'Glory' (98 guns) and the gun-vessel 'Vesure' Tomlinson was promoted to the command of the sloop 'Suffisante', in which, in the following May, he captured the French brig 'Revanche'; and through the summer he took or destroyed several privateers, armed vessels, storeships, and traders, for which the Committee for Encouraging the Capture of French Privateers voted him a piece of plate valued at $50, as did the court of directors of the Royal Exchange Assurance; and on 12 December 1796 he was advanced to post rank. In the following year, being unable to get employment from the Admiralty, he fitted out a privateer in which he made several rich prizes; but being reported to the Admiralty as having used the private signals to avoid being overhauled by warships, his name was struck off the list of post captains on 20 November 1798. After a determined effort to obtain reinstatement he was permitted in 1801 to serve as a volunteer in the fleet going to the Baltic with Sir Hyde Parker, and being favourably reported on by him was restored to his rank in the navy, with seniority, on 22 September 1801. 
From July 1803 to June 1809 Tomlinson commanded the sea fencibles on the coast of Essex; in the summer of 1809 he fitted out and commanded a division of fireships for operations in the Scheldt. On returning to England he resumed the command of the fencibles until they were broken up early in 1810. In that year he successfully fought a legal case brought against him by the Navy Board for conniving at uttering a false receipt connected with the repair of the 'Pelter' in 1795. He had no further employment, but was put on the retired list of rear-admirals on 22 July 1830; he was transferred to the active list on 17 August 1840 and was promoted vice-admiral on 23 November 1841. He died at his house near Lewes on 6 March 1847. Two of his brothers also served in the navy and retired with the rank of commander after the war. Philip died in 1839, Robert at the age of eighty-five in 1844. 


