@@@@@


doc= 27527


Tompion, Thomas (bap. 1639, d. 1713), horologist and maker of scientific instruments, was baptized on 25 July 1639 at Northill, Bedfordshire, the eldest of three surviving offspring of Thomas Tompion (died 1665), a blacksmith, and his wife, Margaret, of Ickwell, a hamlet in the parish of Northill. Nothing is known of his childhood but it is likely that he watched his father at work with the hammer and anvil and that he eventually practised forging metal under his tuition. Apart from this experience it is not known if he was ever formally apprenticed or how he learned the skills which brought him fame. He is believed to have left Ickwell before his father's death in 1665 because the blacksmithing business was continued by the younger son James. 
The nature of even Tompion's earliest recorded commissions bespeaks a pioneering craftsman of unparalleled versatility. In 1671 he cast a church bell of 4 cwt, in 1674 he made a turret clock for the Tower of London and a quadrant for the Royal Society, and, in 1675, he made a longcase clock with a dead-beat escapement for Sir Jonas Moore and a balance-spring watch for Charles II. By about 1680 he had produced the first of a group of two-train grande-sonnerie clocks whose workmanship is finer and more complex than that of any earlier English timepiece recorded. 
Tompion is first recorded in London early in 1671 when he occupied one of the first post-fire houses to be rebuilt in Water Lane, a narrow byway running south towards the Thames from Fleet Street. After a search of his premises by Clockmakers' Company officials in July 1671 he was admitted to the company as a brother at the next quarter court on 4 September and he bought his freedom on 20 April 1674. Soon after, he enrolled the first of at least twenty-four apprentices bound during his career. 
In the same year he became acquainted with two most influential men, both enthusiastic supporters of the advancement of scientific knowledge, Robert Hooke (1635-1703), curator of experiments for the Royal Society, and the mathematician Sir Jonas Moore (1627-1679), who took up residence at the Tower upon his appointment as surveyor-general of the ordnance in 1669. Hooke kept a diary which contains many references to Tompion and the projects they worked on, to social meetings, and topics they discussed. He first employed Tompion on behalf of the society to make a quadrant (with telescopic sights supplied by Cock) to demonstrate his criticism of the method of naked-eye astronomical observation. Tompion made other fine mathematical instruments and barometers. His 'quicksilver weatherglass' was advertised in the 'Royal Almanac' of 1677, which suggests that his was one of the first shops to offer mercury barometers for sale. Three fine barometers survive in the Royal Collection, two having been made for William III. 
It was presumably Moore who commissioned Tompion to make the 'extraordy Clock for the new Tower over the powder rooms' installed in the latter half of 1674, and early in 1675 he made for Moore a longcase clock which had a dead-beat escapement -- one of the earliest recorded instances of its use -- which stood in his dining-room. This was the first of at least three escapements, the others being another dead-beat design for clocks, and a 'virgule' for watches, which Tompion inexplicably chose to abandon, and their great potential lay dormant until the 1720s when George Graham (c.1673-1751) modified the designs. 
In 1675 when Huygens wrote from Paris of his invention of a watch with a balance-spring, Hooke indignantly reminded the Royal Society of his lectures on the subject delivered some years earlier, and a rough draft of his patent application of about 1660 survives to prove his previous involvement. There is no evidence, however, that he had achieved the use of a spiral spring and Huygens clearly deserves credit for that crucial advance. With a view to obstructing the patent application being sought for Huygens's invention, Hooke, accompanied by Moore and Tompion, was received in audience by the king to plead his case. In the event neither party was granted exclusive rights but Charles evidently ordered Hooke to produce a watch of his design and, with Moore's encouragement, Hooke commissioned Tompion to work on it. It is said to have been signed 'Robert Hooke inven. 1658. T. Tompion fecit 1675' but neither this, nor any of the small number believed to have been made and similarly signed, is known to have survived; James, duke of York, and Prince Rupert are both believed to have owned examples and two were made for the dauphin. Tompion soon abandoned its unnecessarily complicated escapement -- it had two balances geared together -- in favour of a single balance. 
This important new advance still required some regulating device, and the standard method adopted by the majority of British makers of verge and cylinder movements from the late 1670s until the nineteenth century incorporated a pinion and a toothed rack with curb-pins. This device is known as 'Tompion regulation' but although he was among the first to use it, it cannot be shown that he was the inventor. The introduction of a successful balance-spring, with its controlling influence improving accuracy, served to encourage and enable further experimentation in movement design and in manufacturing methods. 
At the beginning of 1676 Tompion moved his business and household into more extensive premises on the west side of Water Lane at the corner of the junction with Fleet Street (the site, no. 67 Fleet Street, is now identified by a blue plaque). His cotenant for the ensuing eight years, Jasper Braem, was a cabinet maker and inlayer of marquetry and there can be little doubt that he was responsible for many of the fine longcases of this period containing Tompion movements and dials; it is not inconceivable that he also made cases for other clockmakers and he may even have offered other items of furniture for sale in Tompion's shop. Braem was the first of several cotenants to share the property with Tompion but none of later date has yet been shown to have had horological leanings. Tompion traded from these premises for the rest of his life and his successor, Graham, remained until 1720 when he moved the business to the north side of Fleet Street. 
Also in 1676, Tompion was commissioned by Moore to make a pair of year-going timepieces for the newly built Royal Observatory at Greenwich, which served John Flamsteed (1646-1719), the first astronomer royal, during his 35-year incumbency. Using these in harness with other instruments, including a quadrant that Tompion helped to make, Flamsteed was able to determine that the periods of the sun's successive crossings of the meridian are not regular but follow the table of equation which he had calculated. He also established that the earth revolves at a constant rate (a finding which was not challenged until the twentieth century), and he compiled a catalogue of 3000 stars, and tables of planetary motions and timings of Jupiter's moons. Both clocks have survived though their dead-beat escapements have been converted to recoil for domestic use. One has been in the British Museum since 1927, the other was returned to the observatory in 1994. Each dial bears the inscription: 'Sr Jonas Moore Caused this Movement With great Care to be thus Made Ao 1676 by Tho Tompion'. 
Tompion's outstanding group of two-train grande-sonnerie clocks, the first of which was probably made in the late 1670s, incorporated a new type of striking mechanism termed rack and snail, which allowed the time to be determined, by bells, at any time upon pulling a cord; it was of particular use in bedrooms during hours of darkness. Perhaps inspired by an early Tompion quarter-repeating mechanism which utilized a six-step snail (but no rack), it was devised by the Revd Edward Barlow alias Booth (1639-1719). These were also the first table-clocks to have a pendulum suspension spring of flat steel strip whose use enabled another new device, rise-and-fall regulation, which allowed the owner to adjust the clock's rate simply by moving a hand on the dial. 
Tompion went to some lengths, especially during the period 1675-90, to keep new designs secret by preventing easy access to the movements of the first retail models. Several early examples had secret locking bolts securing their movements within the cases, while other cases had no back door so that not even the back plate could be seen. Similarly, the earliest repeating watch movements were locked into their cases by secret latches. 
The prestigious commissions of the 1670s enhanced Tompion's reputation and the fact that during this period he was occasionally obliged to buy in movements from other makers to be finished for retail in his own shop is evidence of his failure to satisfy all demands for his wares. It was probably this inability which encouraged the adoption of a rudimentary form of mass production of clocks and watches to ensure a steady supply of standard models for retail. Their cases, dials, and movements were almost certainly made in batches to await selection for assembly and sale and by the early 1680s as many as 100 to 150 watches and fifteen to twenty clocks were being retailed each year, figures which remained surprisingly consistent throughout his career. Increased production was not accompanied by a reduction in the quality of workmanship but rather the opposite. Improvements in manufacturing methods, the continual modernization of machinery, and the honing of individual skills all enabled greater precision in both production and performance and Tompion's business continued to offer the largest selection of items of the best quality. Most of Tompion's apprentices can be identified in the records of the Clockmakers' Company and while some are known to have remained in his employment after they were made free they could never have constituted a large enough body to account for the prolific output. Other employees and workshops were undoubtedly involved but very little is known of the network of selected artisans which would have developed as his business grew, persons he employed on his own premises as journeymen and work-masters, and elsewhere as outworkers. Between 1676 and 1691, for instance, Nathaniel Delander's workshop in Old Bailey supplied Tompion with well over a thousand watch-cases. 
From about 1680 by far the greater number of items sold were standard stock items, timepiece watches, eight-day table clocks and timepieces, and thirty-hour, eight-day, or month-going longcase clocks. With most of this work delegated to others Tompion would have acted as overseer and probably spent time on unusual commissions, experimenting with and improving designs, and personally serving prestigious customers. He also employed a clerk, probably from the early 1680s, who would have dealt with accounts as well as serving in the shop. By the 1690s Tompion was a wealthy man. In June 1694 he bought $1000 worth of Bank of England stock (he was one of the first subscribers), and the 1695 assessment on marriages, etc., classed him as an individual with personal estate worth not less than $600 or real estate worth not less than $50 per year. He also invested money in the Million Bank, to the tune of $1500 by 1704. For small business transactions he employed, at least from 1702, the services of Sir Richard Hoare, banker, at the nearby sign of the Golden Bottle, Temple Bar. In 1684 he was excused from serving as steward to the Clockmakers' Company when he claimed he was sick and busy altering his house, but he kept his word and served the following year instead. In 1691 he was elected to the court of assistants and later served as junior warden (1700), renter warden (1701), senior warden (1702), and finally master in 1703. 
Apart from his earlier role in the introduction of the balance-spring Tompion was at the forefront in improving other aspects of watch design. When Edward Barlow applied for a patent for repeating watches, Tompion made the watch produced in court in March 1687, but James II ruled in favour of one made by Daniel Quare who countered Barlow's claim, Tompion's watch having two separate push-pieces while Quare's had just one. By about 1689 Tompion had developed a standard retail model which was of sturdier and more reliable construction than those of his contemporaries. 
A deficiency of early watches with cases pierced to allow the sound of a bell to escape was their tendency to clog with dust and fluff. Tompion was probably the first maker to introduce a protective ring to encircle the movement, and about 1704 he began covering the balance-cock with a cap. It was not until ten years later, however, that these components were combined, probably by Graham or Quare, to form a dust-cap which effectively enclosed the movement; this became a standard component of the English watch. 
In 1695, in conjunction with Booth and William Houghton, Tompion patented (no. 344) the first watch escapement to incorporate a horizontal escape wheel acting directly on a single balance arbor (the type later named virgule), whereby both the contrate and crown wheels were eliminated. The venture was not successful and production was soon abandoned (one incomplete movement was noted as part of his sixth recorded series) but George Graham returned to the idea thirty years later to achieve a substantial result -- the cylinder escapement. In common with other leading London watchmakers Tompion began about 1710 to use diamond endstones for the balance-pivots of most repeating watches and of a few timepieces, to reduce friction and wear. 
It is possible that during Tompion's career well over a hundred employees contributed to the production and retail of those items bearing his name, working to the high standards which he himself set. This resulted in a uniformity in workshop procedures -- a house style -- which prevents any positive identification of an individual's work, and even Tompion's hand is unrecognizable in all but the earlier pre-standardization items. It was inevitable that such an output would soon necessitate a record system to ensure easy identification of items, and serial numbers, undoubtedly linked to ledger records, were placed on most of the standard watches and clocks. 
At least six individual numbered series were begun, some of which were later merged together. The first was for all types of watch being produced at the time the series started about 1681. In 1683-94 the numbers were often coded. After Tompion's death in 1713 the series was continued by Graham and after his death in 1751 Colley used it until the 1760s. The second series, for spring-driven clocks, begun about 1682, and that for weight-driven clocks, probably begun at the same time, were merged together by about 1686. The series included all types of clock except a small number of special commissions, chiefly those for royal residences, and turret clocks. Graham continued the series, apparently until his death, although several late unnumbered examples are recorded. A series for repeating watches, begun about 1688 soon after their introduction, was continued by Graham and then Colley until about 1760. A fifth series, for clockwatches and alarm-watches, began about 1692, and from that time series 1 was used exclusively for timepieces. Graham continued series 5 but abandoned it about 1720, perhaps when he moved the business, whereupon these watches were included in the timepiece or the repeater series. The sixth series was for watches with the Tompion-Houghton-Booth virgule escapement, begun about 1695 but abandoned almost immediately. 
The cases of several longcase clocks dating from about 1700 have been found to bear a secondary number, quite separate from Tompion's serial number, which may relate to a new case-maker's own records. No business records (other than a small number of sales receipts) are known to have survived and not a single manuscript in Tompion's hand is recorded. His signature appears on many documents, however, chiefly relating to Clockmakers' Company matters. 
Tompion's goods were more costly than those of his contemporaries and his customers were chiefly from the highest and wealthiest ranks of society, from the royal household to the nobility and gentry. Though he was never appointed royal clockmaker Tompion enjoyed royal patronage. Apart from the early balance-spring watch Hooke also refers to a striking clock made for Charles II, but it was during the 1690s that Tompion produced his finest royal commissions. William III's extravagance allowed the clockmaker free rein and several clocks were supplied with movements displaying the very best of his mechanical genius. Their cases, of matching quality, were almost certainly designed in collaboration with Daniel Marot, William's versatile designer of interior and exterior decorative features from wallpaper to gardens. The finest examples include the spring-driven year-going Mostyn Tompion, an ebony, silver, and gilt bracket-clock (now in the British Museum), a silver-cased travelling-clock whose movement (stolen from a private collection during the 1980s) has a dial-operated mechanism which allows for the choice of pendulum or balance control, a walnut year-going equation longcase timepiece at Kensington Palace, and the so-called 'record Tompion', named after an early twentieth-century sale price, a walnut three-month longcase clock now owned by the Colonial Williamsburg Foundation, Virginia, USA. In addition he supplied three finely cased barometers, two of which now hang at Hampton Court, the other at Kensington Palace. 
When Tompion petitioned Queen Anne for payment of William's unsettled debts she replied that she had 'no occasion for his clocks and watches' (State Papers, privy purse, 1703, TNA: PRO T 29/14, fol. 92). And yet Treasury accounts show that Tompion was employed upon work both for Anne and her husband, George, prince of Denmark. At Buckingham Palace is another year-going equation timepiece which is believed to have been made in 1703 for George, and he may also have owned the exceptional small silver and gilt travelling-clock with grande-sonnerie striking, quarter-repeat, and alarm, and choice of balance or pendulum control, now in the British Museum. 
Tompion's reputation spread beyond Britain and among those who owned one of his clocks or watches were Carl XI of Sweden, Philip V of Spain, Cosimo III, Tsar Peter the Great, Karl, landgrave of Hesse-Cassel, and the dauphin. Some of the pieces were diplomatic gifts but others were probably ordered by ambassadors in London on behalf of their sovereigns. Peter the Great obtained his clock, a 'pendulum clock contrived to bear the motions of the sea', from the cabin of Admiral Sir John Norris during a dinner party held on board the 'Ranelagh' in 1715. When the tsarina presented him with a diamond-studded snuff-box Norris felt obliged to part with the clock, along with some chairs, when they were admired by the tsar. Other adventurous works include an extraordinary month-going miniature boxwood longcase day and night clock with ting-tang quarter-strike, Roman notation hour-strike, and, to illuminate pierced dial numerals, oil lamps which are snuffed out automatically at a pre-set time. Also worthy of note is the group of complex three-train grande-sonnerie clocks like that given to Cosimo III, grand duke of Tuscany, by William III, and probably one of the items which the king failed to pay for. Tompion's reputation was such that watches fraudulently inscribed with his name were being made in the Netherlands and Switzerland at the end of the seventeenth century, and they could also be bought in Rome. Tompion published several editions of tables of equation as well as instructions, in English and French, for regulating watches. 
Other members of the Tompion family were associated with him in London. Margaret, his sister, may have accompanied him when he moved to St Bride's about 1671; that was her address when she married one Stephen Kent in 1674. She was widowed after just three years, before the birth of a third daughter, and later lived in Thomas's house, possibly as his housekeeper, with two surviving daughters, Eleanor and Margaret. She predeceased Thomas but her burial has not been traced. 
Tompion's nephew, Thomas junior, was apprenticed in the Clockmakers' Company to Charles Kemp, probably one of Tompion's workmen, in April 1694. He was freed in 1702 but none of his work has been positively identified and it is clear that he did not have the character to emulate his uncle, under whose will he was excused debts, inherited the Ickwell property, and had a moderate sum invested on his behalf. It was all to no avail; he went on trial at the Old Bailey with his wife, Anne, in November 1720 for stealing 11 guineas, and was described as of bad character and was alleged to have run a brothel for a number of years. 
In December 1694 Tompion's niece Margaret Kent married Edward Banger, a Tompion apprentice of west country extraction bound in 1687 and freed in July 1695. About 1701 Tompion took Banger into a partnership which failed about 1708. Banger left and was scathingly denied any bequest in Tompion's will made five years later. He continued in the trade and several clocks and watches bearing his name alone are recorded; he died intestate and was buried at St Botolph without Bishopsgate on 12 December 1719. The burial of Margaret Banger, generously provided for under Tompion's will, has not been traced. 
Thomas's niece Elizabeth ('b'. 1687) was just seventeen when she married George Graham, aged about thirty-one, in London in 1704. Graham had been apprenticed in July 1688 to a London clockmaker, Henry Aske, was made free in September 1695, and probably joined Tompion as a journeyman soon after. The marriage and Graham's character, highly commendable by all accounts, led Tompion to take Graham into partnership about 1711 and this arrangement lasted until Tompion's death. 
It is not known when Tompion ceased practical work. He resorted to Bath, presumably finding the waters beneficial to an ailment, and the Pump Room's fine equation timepiece presented by him about 1709 is believed to have been in gratitude. He died on 20 November 1713 and was accorded the honour of burial in Westminster Abbey on 25 November, in the centre of the nave. In 1751 Graham was interred in the same grave and his name added to Tompion's stone. In his will dated 21 October 1713 Tompion named Graham and former cotenant Michael Tesmond as executors. He made bequests to relatives and friends but the business and the residue of his personal estate passed to George and Elizabeth Graham. 
No description of Tompion's physical stature or of his personality is known but Kneller's half-length portrait of him wearing buttoned jacket and neck-scarf, probably painted in the late 1680s, shows him with an open, honest, genial face with full lips and clear skin, with shoulder-length hair, or perhaps a wig, with locks and curls. 
Several factors account for Tompion's extraordinary rise to the forefront of London's horological community within only a decade of setting up business in 1671. Primarily, it must have been his metalworking skills together with his innovative reappraisal of all aspects of his trade which appealed to the likes of Hooke and Moore, but his success also owes something to the favourable circumstances existing at the time of his appearance in the City, ten years after the Restoration and the formation of the Royal Society, and five years after the great fire. London's rebuilding and repopulation were advancing fast and science and commerce were demanding better timekeepers from a trade which, like the City, was in the throes of drastic change. The pendulum had been introduced only twelve years earlier, the recoil escapement had just been conceived, and the balance-spring for watches was about to divert every watchmaker's thoughts. The time was ripe for experimentation and the stage was set for a surge in pioneering work. 
Tompion's association with Hooke and Moore afforded him the opportunity to express his skills, ideas, and potential, and as a consequence, and more importantly to one with high aspirations, the opportunity to come to the notice of elite and influential members of society, and so to establish a reputation. One key to his great success lay in his business acumen, that is, in his ability to capitalize on that reputation by organizing batch production to meet demand. The serial numbers on surviving items are the only evidence of the ledger accounting system, whatever its nature, used to keep a check on production. Tompion's primary aims, even in cheaper items, were durability and accuracy, with the work being executed in as substantial or delicate a manner as was required. His appreciation of metals and their qualities, of the uses of springs, of efficiently profiled gearing, and of neat and precise finishing all resulted in the production of mechanisms of better and more reliable quality than any which preceded them. From his contributions grew a tradition of highest quality workmanship which was passed on by Graham to a third generation which included the likes of Thomas Mudge (1715-1794). 
The business ran under Tompion's name (including the partnership periods) for forty-two years during which time about 800 clocks and 5000 watches of various description and function were sold, as well as dozens of scientific instruments -- quadrants, barometers, pocket dials, and horizontal garden sundials. His business set the highest standards and doubtless he took great pride in the fact that none of his contemporaries achieved such consistently fine quality in such a wide range of products. His sobriquet 'the father of English watchmaking' was well-merited. 


@@@@@


doc= 27528


Tompson, Richard (d. 1693), art dealer and printseller, had a shop at The Sun in Bedford Street, London. He is first recorded as publisher of a broadside in 1656, and in 1659 as a picture dealer. In 1669 he acted as co-publisher of Alexander Browne's 'Ars pictoria'. Between about 1674/5 and 1686 he and Browne jointly conducted auctions of paintings, prints, and drawings, which seem to have been the first regular art auctions in London. He acted as 'crier' at the auction of Lely's paintings in 1682, and as a print dealer he sold prints to Robert Hooke between 1674 and 1676. 
In 1666 Tompson published 'The Infants Jesus and John Baptist Embracing', an engraving by Arnold de Jode after Van Dyck; it was dedicated to Peter Lely who owned the painting and is described as Tompson's 'fautor' (patron). This helps to explain why he published thirty-seven mezzotints after Lely's paintings; they can be dated to the late 1670s, appearing before the comparable series issued by Browne. Tompson himself was not a printmaker, and his plates were made by Jan van Somer, Jan Vandervaart, Robert Williams, and others. In the early 1680s he published jointly with Edward Cooper three large plates by Peter Vandrebanc after Antonio Verrio's frescoes in Windsor Castle, as well as mezzotints by William Faithorne the younger and John Smith. Tompson dedicated a plate to Samuel Cooper. The posthumous sale of his collection of old master prints was advertised in the 'London Gazette' of 5 October 1693. The spelling of his name varies: the earlier documents call him Thomson, while on the mezzotints he used Tompson. 


@@@@@


doc= 27529


Toms, Peter (bap. 1726, d. 1777), painter and herald, was baptized on 3 July 1726 at St Andrew, Holborn, London, the son of the engraver William Henry Toms (d. 1765) of Union Court, Holborn, and his wife, Rachael ('d. c'.1736). Toms's father took on several apprentices, including John Boydell, who later noted that he was 'a very passionate man & committed many extravagances while his phrenzy lasted' (Farington, 'Diary', 4.1415). As a young man Peter Toms was apprenticed to the portrait painter Thomas Hudson, and in 1746 was appointed Portcullis pursuivant by the College of Arms. In November 1748 he appeared in a list of London's leading artists, being described by the 'Universal Magazine' (vol. 2) as an 'eminent painter'. Toms was by now presumably employed as a portraitist, although no works by him are known. From 1749 he worked in London as a specialist painter of costume in other artists' portraits ('drapery painter'), following the death that year of the leading practitioner Joseph van Aken. It has plausibly been suggested that he was the unnamed artist mentioned by Lord Bath as working for Thomas Hudson, Allan Ramsay, and Joshua Reynolds in 1761 (Hudson, 53). Ramsay was certainly employing him in 1754 (Smart, 62). It was at one time also claimed that Toms worked for Gainsborough, although this would appear unlikely (Whitley, 2.279), especially as he was then based in Bath. From about 1755 Toms was employed as a drapery painter by Joshua Reynolds, for whom he worked until the early 1760s. In return for painting the draperies on a full-length portrait Toms received 15 guineas from Reynolds (Farington, 'Diary', 4.3238). According to Edwards, although he does not say when, Toms's price for painting 'the draperies, hands, &c.' of a whole-length portrait was 20 guineas; for a small 'three-quarter' length (30 x 25 in.), 3 guineas (Edwards, 55). Among other works Toms has been credited with painting the draperies in Reynolds's 'Lady Elizabeth Keppel' (1761-2; priv. coll.) and 'Master Thomas Lister' ('c'.1764-5; Bradford City Art Galleries and Museum). In the opinion of Reynolds's pupil James Northcote, Toms was a very good drapery painter, although his painting method 'did not exactly harmonise with the style of Sir Joshua's heads, as it was heavy and wanted freedom, so that his work had too much the appearance of having been done with a stamp, as the paper-hangings for rooms are executed. (Northcote, 2.28)' Their relationship was at times strained, as when Toms refused to replace the formal dress he had painted in a female portrait with the 'rural habit' required by Reynolds, telling him, 'you ought to be more explicit when you give the picture into my hands' (ibid., 2.29). Toms was evidently eccentric, Boydell recalling how he 'would strip himself & rub his body furiously from a notion that the circulation of the blood was stopping: at other times would lay in bed many days together believing himself to be much disordered' (Farington, 'Diary', 4.1415). About 1763 Toms travelled to Dublin with the earl of Northumberland, lord lieutenant of Ireland, in an attempt to revive his own portrait career. However, he returned shortly afterwards, working intensively from 1763, or possibly 1764, as a drapery painter for Francis Cotes. It was during this time that he presumably also worked for Benjamin West (Edwards, 54). In 1768 Toms was elected a founder member of the Royal Academy, possibly because of his close professional relationship with Reynolds, Cotes, and West ['see 'Founders of the Royal Academy of Arts]. He exhibited three works there between 1769 and 1771, an 'allegorical picture', an unidentified portrait, and a painting of wild plants. At this time he was living in Wimpole Street, around the corner from Francis Cotes, who had a grand residence in Cavendish Square. In June 1769 Toms witnessed Cotes's will. The death of Cotes, the following summer, apparently affected Toms deeply; he became increasingly depressed and turned to drink for solace. In 1772 Toms offered to sell his position at the College of Arms for $500, noting that he then earned between $30 and $40 per annum from the post, which he treated as a sinecure, plus $15 from the rental of his college apartments (Wagner, 409). In the event he retained the post until his death. Some time during the 1770s, while intoxicated, Toms attempted to commit suicide by cutting his throat. He survived for several years, dying on new year's day 1777 at his lodgings in Rathbone Place. His studio materials, prints, and drawings were auctioned by Gerrard later the same month. It is not known whether he married, although he was survived by a daughter, who was eighteen years old at his death (Whitley, 1.279). 


@@@@@


doc= 27530


Tomson, Laurence (1539-1608), administrator, was born in Northamptonshire. In 1553 he entered Magdalen College, Oxford; he graduated BA six years later. He was subsequently elected a fellow of the college and proceeded MA in 1564. The college granted him permission to pursue his studies abroad, and in May 1565 Tomson left Oxford to begin his travels in Europe. He may well have spent time studying in Geneva before joining the embassy of Sir Thomas Hoby dispatched in March 1566 to France, where presumably he remained until the ambassador's death in July. From France, Tomson travelled to Germany, and matriculated at the University of Heidelberg in March 1568. Aside from the fact that he resigned his fellowship from Magdalen in 1569, little is certainly known of his movements over the next three years. However, the epitaph on Tomson's monument at Chertsey in Surrey states that he also journeyed to Russia, Sweden, Denmark, and Italy. By November 1572 he was living under the protection of the puritan earl of Huntingdon in Leicester. 
It is hardly surprising that Tomson, well educated, cosmopolitan, and with a command of twelve languages, soon found his way into the service of Sir Francis Walsingham. Probably early in 1575 he was appointed Walsingham's secretary, in which capacity he was to serve for the next fifteen years. He accompanied the minister and William Broke, tenth Lord Cobham, to the Netherlands in June 1578. His role in this embassy was solely secretarial and indeed he never received an ambassadorial appointment. Nevertheless he was actively involved in England's foreign affairs. As well as drafting foreign correspondence for Walsingham, he wrote a Latin treatise, presumably for his master, on the history of the trading disputes that existed between the Merchant Adventurers and the Hanseatic League, and in 1580 travelled to Boulogne to interview a papal agent regarding the activities of Esme Stewart, duke of Lennox, in Scotland. In addition to his work as Walsingham's secretary and agent Tomson sat in parliament, first as MP for Melcombe Regis between 1578 and 1587, and latterly as the representative for Downton between 1588 and 1590. Upon Walsingham's death in 1590 he withdrew from public life to Laleham in Middlesex, where he died on 4 April 1608. He was survived by his wife, Jane, whom he had married before October 1579. 
Tomson, whether scholar, civil servant, or politician, consistently displayed throughout his life a deep interest in and commitment to the puritan religion. It is likely that Laurence Humphrey, president of Magdalen and a well-known puritan himself, may have helped to shape the younger man's religious sympathies. In addition to Humphrey, Tomson's correspondents in the years after he left Oxford included the outspoken puritan leader Anthony Gilby; his name has also been associated with other dissidents, including Francis Hastings and Thomas Cartwright. In tandem with William Davison, Elizabeth's resident ambassador in the Low Countries, he supported Walter Travers, a puritan chaplain to the Merchant Adventurers, when the company sought to depose him. Before Davison returned to England in May 1579, Tomson gave him further help by supplying him with the names of two puritan ministers, whom he believed might be suitable to serve the English congregation in Antwerp. Among his activities as an MP Tomson sat on the committee appointed in 1584 to examine the quality of ministers chosen by John Whitgift and to consider the petitions of those so far excluded by the archbishop. The following year he attended a further committee concerned with revising the bill for the introduction of the Geneva prayer book. He also devoted considerable time to the translation of theological works. Best known are his translation from Latin of Beza's 1576 'New Testament' and his English translation, 'The Sermons of Calvin on St Paul's Epistles to Timothie and Titus'. Yet for all Tomson's commitment to the puritan faith he was, to paraphrase Backus, more of a moderator than a pioneer. Although he possessed vociferous puritan friends, sat on government committees dealing with contentious religious issues, and translated other people's theological commentaries, it would seem that his considerable intelligence was equalled by his sense of caution. 


@@@@@


doc= 27531


Tomson, Richard (fl. 1582-1600), merchant, may possibly have been the son of Robert Tomson of Andover and Seville, but is more likely to have had his roots in Norfolk. If so, he can probably be identified with Richard Tomson of Yarmouth, nephew of John Thomson of Sheringham, whose mother was from Antwerp and who was engaged for some years in trade with the Mediterranean. In 1582 he was involved in litigation with the Turkey Company. He was part owner of the 'Jesus of London', which had been confiscated by a merchant rival and taken to Algiers; in 1583 he went there to ransom the prisoners. For four years (1585-9) he was a frequent correspondent with Walsingham. He spoke French and German, wrote in a vivid and fluent prose style, and may have been related to Laurence Tomson, Walsingham's secretary. He was involved in negotiations with Spain (1585-6) for the release of English prisoners in Dunkirk, and told Walsingham of the troop movements of Alessandro Farnese, duke of Parma. In January 1588 he was in Flanders, where he was solicited by Spaniards to deliver a large quantity of iron ordnance and cables from England, for which he was promised a monthly pension for life. Knowing that the ordnance was for equipping the projected armada, he refused the offer and informed Walsingham so that he could prevent its export. He later wrote to Burghley that 'no true-hearted Englishman will prefer filthy lucre before the public benefit of his country' (Tomson to Burghley, 3 April 1593 'CSP dom.', '1581-1603', ccxliv, 116). 
In the summer of 1588 Tomson was lieutenant of the 'Margaret and John', a merchant ship involved against the armada, and wrote to Walsingham a long report from the Isle of Walcheren (30 July), giving particulars of his encounters with the Spaniards, especially the capture of the galleon of Don Pedro de Valdes during the night after the first battle, and the boarding of the 'San Lorenzo', which had keeled over in Calais harbour. But for Tomson it would not be known what occurred on the only occasion during the armada's passage when one of the combatants boarded and captured an enemy ship. He occupied her for one and a half hours, finally making off when the robbing of a French deputation provoked a loud protest from the guns of the castle at Calais. He was engaged (1588-9) in a lengthy negotiation with Parma over the ransom terms for the release of armada prisoners, and wrote regularly to Walsingham about this, and the possibility of replacing Spanish authority in Flanders. By 1591-2 he was corresponding with Burghley about the Catholic League's activities in France and Parma's projected march to aid them. He informed Burghley (1592) of Spanish preparations at Ferrol for a new armada against the British Isles. 
It is possible that Tomson was the interloper charged by the Barbary Company (1596) with supplying Mawlay Ahmad, king of Morocco, with oars, lances, and firearms, in return for almonds, dates, molasses, and indigo; in vain the company asked Burghley to ban Tomson's imports into England. He traded in partnership with Gilbert Sootherne, who died in Morocco (1599), and protested to Robert Cecil that he was being deprived of his goods in Sootherne's possession, but despite a pressing letter from Elizabeth to the king his goods do not appear to have been released. Tomson is finally discovered writing to Cecil (1599-1600) about contradictory reports of a new Spanish armada and slanderous talk against Cecil which he overheard in a Suffolk inn while 'en route' for his home in Norfolk. He may have been the Captain Tomson with the notorious pirate Peter Eston in 1611-12, but the name is too common to make identification certain. 


@@@@@


doc= 27532


Tone, (Theobald) Wolfe (1763-1798), Irish nationalist and political writer, was born in Dublin on 20 June 1763, probably at 27 St Bride Street, the eldest son of Peter Tone (died 1805), a successful coach builder, and his wife, Margaret Lamport (died 1818). The Tones had sixteen children, but only five others survived: William (1764- 'c'.1799), Matthew (1771-1798), Mary ('c'.1779- 'c'.1800), Arthur ('b'. 1782; last heard of in 1812), and Fanny ('c'.1784-1792). As the eldest in this close-knit family, Tone took his family responsibilities very seriously. He had Matthew, Arthur, and Mary accompany him at various stages of his life in exile in America and France, giving a home to Mary and finding employment for his brothers. All the children had an adventurous streak, the boys sharing a fascination with military life: Arthur ran away to sea at the age of twelve and William left home when he was sixteen to enlist in the East India Company. 
In the 1760s and early 1770s the Tones were a relatively wealthy middle-class family, living at 44 Stafford Street close to the heart of fashionable Dublin, with property interests elsewhere in Dublin and in co. Kildare. In the late 1770s, however, Peter Tone's business declined, and the family moved out of Dublin to their home at Bodenstown, co. Kildare. This was part of the estate of the distinguished barrister and politician Theobald Wolfe, Tone's godfather and namesake. In 1789 Peter Tone lost all the family property after lengthy and expensive litigation with his elder brother Jonathan (died 1792) over rightful ownership. 
Tone's father was ambitious for his eldest son, and from an early age the boy was educated at private schools with the object of entering university in Dublin; his father stepped in to curb his waywardness, which almost certainly would have caused him to run away from home to embrace a military career. Tone entered Trinity College, Dublin, in February 1781. Much as at school, he was deemed a highly talented but scarcely diligent student, and he was suspended from college for a year because of his involvement in a duel in which a fellow student was killed. Much of his 'sabbatical' was spent on amateur dramatics and a romantic liaison with a married woman, Eliza Martin, the wife of Richard Martin, MP for Jameston, co. Leitrim. Though there is much self-mockery in his journals about his appearance, we know that women found him attractive. He was 5 feet 8 inches in height, and while this was considered tall for the age, his slight frame created the impression of smallness. He had brown hair, a smallish, oval-shaped face, deep-set dark eyes, a large nose, and a sallow complexion: 'a slight, effeminate-looking man, with a hatchet face, long aquiline nose, rather handsome and genteel looking, with lank, straight hair', as he is described in a contemporary account (Walsh, 152-3). Another account thought the posthumous portrait by his daughter-in-law depicted him as far too passive, failing to capture: 'the small grey glancing eye of the original... According to my recollection of him he was a 'very' slender, angular 'rapid' moving man, a thin face, sallow and pockmarked, eyes small, lively bright... laughed and talked fast with enthusiasm about music and other innocent things... wise he could not be but he had not a foolish look -- too lively and smart for that. (TCD, MS 873/38, Sir Philip Crampton to Dr R. R. Madden, 3 May 1843)' Tone returned to university in 1783, chastened by his suspension, and had earned a glowing reputation by the time of his graduation in February 1786, most notably for his performances in the college historical society. At Trinity, Tone mixed with and befriended many who were to become statesmen and public leaders. He was being groomed to enter Ireland's political elite, and the next stage was training as a barrister at the Middle Temple in London (1787-9). But since there was little required of the students but dining regularly in hall, Tone turned to writing. He collaborated in writing a satirical 'roman-a-clef', 'Belmont Castle' (1790), and produced a detailed plan for a British military colony on the Sandwich Islands (Hawaii), for which he tried unsuccessfully to elicit the support of the British prime minister, William Pitt. 
While still a student at Trinity, Tone eloped with and married, on 21 July 1785, the sixteen-year-old Martha or Matilda Witherington, for which he earned the lifelong enmity of most of her family and that of their relative, the future lord chancellor of Ireland, John FitzGibbon, earl of Clare. 
In 1789-90 Tone had sat in the public gallery of the Irish House of Commons as a heated electoral campaign was waged by the newly formed Irish whig party against placemen and corruption in government. Thus inspired, he produced, in March 1790, a pro-whig pamphlet, 'A Review of the Conduct of Administration during the Last Session of Parliament'. Even this early, Tone's thinking had gone beyond the traditional whig programme of combating excessive executive power to stating the eighteenth-century classical republican idea of government as a trust, with power ultimately lying with the people. Inspired by the modest success of the pamphlet, Tone addressed another cause of the moment in the follow-up, 'Spanish war!: An enquiry how far Ireland is bound of right to embark on the impending contest on the side of Great Britain' (July 1790). Though also inspired by debates in the Irish parliament, this was a much more independent work than the 'Review' and his first analysis of the connection between Britain and Ireland. It called for Irish politicians to take an independent stance on the war issue and bemoaned Ireland's lack of separate national standing. Although in 1790 such ideas were already being aired by others, Tone's pamphlet was deemed dangerous, and he attributed its lack of success to a fearful bookseller suppressing it. 
It was while attending the parliamentary debates in 1790 that Tone met and befriended Thomas Russell. Theirs was to be a very special and close friendship, and Russell was the main figure in Tone's celebrated journals. Indeed these were begun by Tone as a form of friendly rivalry with Russell, and they stand as testimony to the quick wit for which Tone was already celebrated during his time at Trinity. He was noted for being able to find the apt and wittiest quote for any situation, and the journals reveal a retentive mind and an impressive command of eighteenth-century ideas and writings. He was also a competent flautist; he packed his flute on his travels and made a special pilgrimage to a famous music store in the Netherlands while acting as United Irish agent to France after 1796. 'I admired him for the brilliancy and great variety of his conversation, the gay and social cast of his disposition', wrote a fellow barrister, William Sampson, traits which are amplified in his personal writings ('Memoirs', 262). 
Although Russell did not write with Tone's facility, he was a man of advanced opinions, particularly on religious toleration, and he had a marked influence on Tone's thought. An army officer, he was posted to Belfast in September 1790 and from there also introduced Tone to the thinking of the northern dissenters. It was Russell who wrote asking Tone to compile resolutions for a political club to be established in Belfast on the anniversary of the fall of the Bastille, 14 July 1791. These became the founding resolutions for the Society of United Irishmen, but it was the covering letter which was to receive most attention, for it fell into the hands of government and (since it declared Tone's preference for a separation from England) was later used by FitzGibbon to denounce Tone as a traitor. Tone's resolutions were at first rejected by the Belfast reformers (because of their implied demand for Catholic emancipation) and, irritated by such double standards among these self-styled reformers, he produced his most mature political work to date: 'An Argument on Behalf of the Catholics of Ireland' (August 1791). 
Tone's 'Argument' was addressed to protestants (though more specifically the Ulster Presbyterians) who were radicals in politics but resistant to granting Catholics equal rights. In it he reiterated his complaint that Ireland was not recognized as a nation in its own right. The reason for this was the form of government, but the Irish tolerated it because of their own divisions. Thus had earlier reformers failed in their campaigns because government had been able to play upon their fears of the Catholics. He now thought such fears redundant in the newly secularized world created by the French Revolution. In the 1790s only Thomas Paine's 'Rights of Man' gained a larger readership in Ireland than Tone's pamphlet, and it impacted on Presbyterians and Catholics alike. The Presbyterians dropped their reservations and invited Tone to Belfast in October 1791 to help found the Society of United Irishmen. The Catholics totally reformed their conservative Catholic Committee to reflect the new radicalism, and in 1792 Tone was invited to join their campaign for Catholic rights as their agent and secretary. He had found his metier as a talented political writer. He always prepared his ground by detailed research, then wrote up his findings quickly, so that there is an immediacy and directness which sets his writings apart from the often torpid style of his contemporaries. Between 1791 and 1792 (the peak of his career as a political writer for both the United Irishmen and the Catholic Committee) he was recognized by both as their most talented propagandist. 
It was with Tone's two-week visit to Belfast in October 1791 that his journals opened. These are a witty, often self-mocking account of Tone's and Russell's activities in the town, their late-night socializing at clubs, coteries, and the theatre intermixed with the political discussions associated with the foundation of the Society of United Irishmen. A typical eighteenth-century man of letters, Tone was as fascinated by new technology as by the play of ideas, and he was impressed by Belfast. It was the middle-class capital of Ireland, its largely Presbyterian business class stoking the developments which were already making Ulster the most prosperous province in the country. His growing distrust of aristocracy and privilege was deepened by his Ulster experience, for Belfast was a closed borough, its local government, like central government, monopolized by Ulster's landed (and largely Anglican) class. 
The United Irish Society was finally inaugurated in Belfast on 14 October on the basis of Tone's slightly modified July resolutions. The 'Declaration and Resolutions of the Society of United Irishmen of Belfast' reiterated many of Tone's arguments and formulated them into three objectives: a union among all the people of Ireland to counter the huge weight of English influence in the country; a radical reform of parliamentary representation as 'the sole constitutional mode' by which such influence can be countered; and the inclusion of Irishmen of 'every 'religious' persuasion'. Tone and Russell then returned to Dublin as effective ambassadors for the north and inaugurated the Dublin Society of United Irishmen on 9 November on the same principles. Tone's 'Argument' had been the decisive impetus in convincing the radicals that no reform could be achieved without also addressing Catholic grievances, and, although Tone continued to write on behalf of the United Irish Society and served for short spells early in 1792 as its chairman and secretary, it was in the cause of winning political rights for the Catholics that he devoted most of his efforts for the next three years. 
In the leaders of the Catholic Committee, notably wealthy merchants such as John Keogh and Richard McCormick, Tone discovered the same middle-class community of interest against the Anglican political establishment which he so admired in Belfast. That Anglican ascendancy had conducted a vitriolic attack on the Catholic leaders in the parliamentary debates of February 1792, when the Catholics' petition for relief was rejected by a huge majority. In April Tone was invited to become agent and assistant secretary to the Catholic Committee, and for the rest of the year his energies were devoted to organizing national elections to a Catholic Convention to petition for Catholic rights. He accompanied John Keogh on a number of campaigning trips to win support, most notably to the north, where he was considered the bridge to the Presbyterians. A year after his resolutions had been defeated on 14 July 1791, he returned again to Belfast for Bastille day celebrations, this time as a Catholic agent. Knowing of continued opposition to immediate Catholic relief from a number of leading reformers, Tone's address of 1792 was much more conciliatory than that of 1791, and was accepted. But two visits to Rathfriland, co. Down, in July and August, to defuse growing sectarian conflict there, aroused considerable resentment from the local gentry, and on the second visit the delegates were all but run out of the town. 
Throughout that summer it was Tone who conducted the publicity side of the Catholic Committee's campaign, responding to a series of letters in the northern press and, most notably, confronting leading members of the ascendancy who, through the country's grand juries, issued bigoted statements against Catholic relief. The statements declared that the Catholics were acting unconstitutionally and that a protestant ascendancy had been established by the revolution of 1688; with a superciliousness which infuriated the newly confident Catholic leaders, they denounced the Catholic leaders for not behaving sufficiently humbly. These addresses were badly written and a gift to someone like Tone. In a series of ripostes published in the press under the 'nom de plume' Vindex, he assumed the character of the ordinary man (a favourite device of his) and showed the concept of a protestant ascendancy to be a pretence for unaccountable power and corruption. The ascendancy campaign backfired badly, and as a result the Catholics' cause attracted additional support from reforming protestants. 
The object of all the campaigning, the Catholic Convention, opened in Dublin on 3 December, with 233 elected delegates. It was the first national body of lay Catholics to meet in over a century, and Tone's diary is the fullest account we have of the internal debates. While it highlights tensions between the more traditional conservatism of leading Catholics and the new radicalism of the age, the latter won the day because of the Irish administration's undisguised expectations that Catholics should behave submissively. The convention voted to go over Dublin Castle's authority and present their petition directly to the king. Tone was one of the delegation who travelled to London via Belfast, where his special relationship with the northerners was applauded by the crowds, who cheered the delegates and accompanied their carriage out of the town. In January 1793 they were well received by the king and the home secretary, Henry Dundas, who privately was trying to overcome the Irish ascendancy's resistance to Catholic emancipation. But war broke out between Britain and France in the following month. The political class on which the governance of Ireland depended was in mutinous mood, and the 'Catholic Relief Act' of April 1793 fell short of Catholic expectations. Although the franchise (removed in 1728) was restored, the right to sit in parliament was rejected, and the tone of the debate was so anti-Catholic that the concessions were robbed of much of their conciliatory effect. The fragile unity of the Catholics fell apart, and Tone openly accused Keogh of having compromised their cause in London. But worse was to come, as the war crisis brought an immediate clampdown on the activities of the reformers and the arrest of a number of the United Irish leaders. 
Tone was seriously disillusioned and spoke to Russell about emigrating to America. He had totally neglected his friends and family for much of the past year in his service to the Catholic Committee and 'muzzled' his own radicalism for fear of harming the Catholics by association. He had argued the Paineite principle that people had the right to vote for the laws by which they were governed, and he had admitted privately his belief that Ireland might fare better as an independent nation. But he was no doctrinaire, and in a broadside written on behalf of the United Irishmen in March 1793 he argued: 'we have no right to force men to be free'. 'If a nation wills a bad government, it ought to have that government' (TNA: PRO, HO 100/34/111). Indeed, given the reputation which he was to acquire as the 'father' of Irish republicanism, Tone's response of July 1793 to FitzGibbon's public revelation of his 1791 letter to Russell speaks volumes for his constitutionalism, even this late. FitzGibbon used it to argue that the Catholic elections of 1792 had been organized by Tone to induce the lower orders to rebel. But, far from feeling in any way threatened, Tone went immediately to press to denounce what he considered a particularly dishonourable use of a private letter. A desire to reduce England's influence on Ireland's government was not treason, he argued; it had been the core of the parliamentary patriot movement in the 1780s and latterly of the whigs. Certainly there was no sign of Tone's contemplating active republicanism at this stage, and, as the United Irish Society continued to fall apart, he stopped attending and decided reluctantly to return to his career as a barrister. 
In April 1794 Tone became involved with a French agent, William Jackson, and his future was changed decisively. Archibald Hamilton Rowan was one of a tiny handful of landed gentry in the otherwise middle-class United Irish Society, and, like his class, he tended to act with an irresponsibility which even Tone (who admired him) criticized. Even so, his arrest, trial, and imprisonment in January 1794 for distributing an address deemed seditious by the authorities was a terrible shock to the reformers, still unattuned to the brutal new realities of a government crackdown in time of war. Tone met Jackson while visiting Rowan in prison. On 14 April, at Rowan's request, Tone did what he had so often done before: he produced a paper on the state of Irish public opinion, in which he restated his belief that Ireland was governed by a protestant aristocracy in the interests of England. But now he thought there would be a popular revolt, led by the Ulster Presbyterians, if France invaded and disclaimed any idea of conquest. It is difficult to know what to make of this undoubtedly militant statement, for Tone had been a voice of restraint in recent months in the United Irish Society. Nor is it clear that he was apprised of Jackson's motivation (though Rowan was) when he wrote the paper, and, when told on 16 April about Jackson's real identity and invited to travel to France as an Irish agent, he quickly backtracked and insisted on Rowan's burning the document. But Rowan had taken copies, and these were sent to France by Jackson. They were intercepted in the post and Jackson was arrested on 28 April. 
What happened next is a remarkable insight into how Tone was viewed by the authorities, for, although he later admitted that he expected to be hanged, he was permitted to make a compact with government, giving a full account of his dealings with Jackson and an undertaking to leave the country, in return for immunity. He refused to compromise others (a refusal made easier by the escape and flight of Rowan on 1 May) and he withdrew entirely to the country for the rest of the year. He was regarded by the authorities as a nuisance, a talented tool in the hands of others, rather than a dangerous conspirator, and Dublin Castle was more anxious to get rid of him than to make an example of him. Indeed, in the early months of 1795, with the prospect of a more liberal regime under the new whig lord lieutenant, Earl Fitzwilliam, it even looked as if Tone might be rehabilitated, and he was invited back as agent by the Catholic Committee and accompanied another delegation to London that March. But the recall of Fitzwilliam, the introduction of a more hard-line regime under his successor, Earl Camden, and, most of all, the trial of Jackson on 23 April 1795 revealed Tone's immunity to be less secure than he supposed. It was the first occasion on which his involvement was made public, and there was an outcry. It was made clear to him that, if he did not speedily fulfil his agreement of quitting the country, he risked being tried for treason. Within weeks Tone had assigned the family cottage in Kildare over to his cousin, resigned from the bar, and made ready to leave for America. There is a real sense of danger in the rushed preparations, and many old friends rallied around. The Catholic Committee in particular raised all the outstanding payment owing to him, and, after settling his debts, he was left with $796 to start his new life. But, having rejected the idea of becoming a secret agent to France a year earlier, this is exactly what Tone now agreed to do. 
The situation in Ireland had dramatically deteriorated on Fitzwilliam's recall and the radicals now despaired of achieving reform constitutionally. Russell was already involved in reorganizing the United Irishmen in north-east Ulster on a more secretive basis and clearly had a major impact on Tone's thinking in these weeks of unreality. In Dublin some leading Catholics and United Irishmen were taking a similar line and asked Tone to negotiate military assistance from France. He, Matilda, their children, his sister Mary, and his brother Arthur arrived in Belfast on 21 May 1795, from where they took ship for America on 12 June. Given the sense of danger and haste surrounding his departure from the south, the send-off which he and his family received in Belfast both testifies to the special esteem with which he was regarded there and amply justifies the warmth with which he speaks of the town and its people in his writings. There was a round of farewell social gatherings and a special subscription which raised some $1500 for Tone and his family. One gathering acquired particular significance both for Tone and the future nationalist tradition. During a large family picnic to the deer park just north of Belfast, Tone and a group of United Irish friends, including Russell, Henry Joy McCracken, Samuel Neilson, and Robert Simms, ascended the Cave Hill to its highest point, McArt's Fort, and there made 'a most solemn obligation... never to desist in our efforts, until we had subverted the authority of England over our country, and asserted her independence' (W. T. W. Tone, 1.127-8). In Irish nationalist tradition this is seen as the symbolic moment when modern Irish republicanism was born, testimony to the influence which Tone's journals and autobiography would later acquire, for his is the only account of the incident. Many in Ireland had felt Tone's treatment far exceeded his crime, and there can be no doubt that the militant republicanism for which he is best known was something of an accident of timing. Certainly the French revolutionary wars had made treasonable ideas which would not have been considered so a few years earlier, and Tone was able to operate unnoticed in France for almost two years because of this perception of him as hardly dangerous. Even so his character predisposed him to the revolutionary career on which he now embarked. 'The genius of Wolfe Tone', wrote David Plunket, the son of his friend and the future lord chancellor William Conyngham Plunket, 'was accompanied by its full share of eccentricity. His mind, powerful and impulsive, rushed at its object without looking to consequences, and foiled in one direction charged with double energy in another' (Plunket, 1.60-61). 
The Tone family arrived in the United States on 1 August 1795 and took up residence in its new capital, Philadelphia. On 10 August Tone had his first audience with the French minister to Philadelphia, Pierre Adet, and over the next three days he wrote two statements, outlining the nature of the help the United Irishmen were seeking from France. But as Adet took his time in responding, Tone set about finding a home for his family. He eventually opted for Princeton, New Jersey, and seemed to be contemplating permanently taking up the life of a farmer. But reminders from his United Irish friends in Ireland about his undertaking sent him back to Adet in November, by which time the French minister was more responsive, and he approved his mission to the French government. Moreover, Tone was deeply unhappy in America. He found its people uncultured, overconfident, and materialistic, its climate too hot, its countryside unnatural. Neither he nor Matilda were keen to bring up their children among people whom he described as 'boorish and ignorant... uncivil and uncouth' (Elliott, 'Wolfe Tone', 267). His witty irreverence disappeared from his writings, as he recognized how much he missed the friendship he had known in Ireland. Although he, like the other United Irish leaders, had eulogized America as the first land of liberty, he found even its politics disappointing. The pro-British, anti-French federalists were in the ascendant. They were the party of big money and executive power, and Tone moved instead in the circle of their political opponents, the democratic republicans. Through the republicans he gained an introduction to France, through their representative in Paris, the future American president James Monroe. He sailed from New York on 1 January 1796, having acquired a false passport under the pseudonym James Smith. Matilda fully supported his decision and, so as not to dissuade him, kept the fact that she was pregnant again secret until after he had set sail. 
Tone arrived at Le Havre on 2 February 1796 and reached Paris ten days later. He was fortunate in the timing of his arrival, for France was seeking revenge on England after its support for the French royalists in recent hostilities. Even so, Tone's success as a secret diplomat in France was remarkable, and other foreign revolutionaries demanding French help were not generally so well received. Tone secured his entree to the French foreign ministry through Monroe. But he quickly sensed the divisions which bedevilled the regime then in power, the Directory, and resented having to deal with subalterns. On 24 February he accordingly took his case to the very top, in a private audience with the director charged with war policy, Lazare Carnot, and through him the Irish campaign was brought to the heart of French military strategy. It was, as ever, Tone's ability as a political writer which won the French over. His memorials on the Irish situation, written in February and making their way through the relevant French ministries over the next two months, outlined how France might use Ireland to combat her main enemy. They told of the alliance between Catholics and dissenters in the United Irishmen. But France must send a large enough force to prevent a civil war. The object was to attain Irish independence, and the French general should issue a manifesto disavowing all idea of conquest, offering protection to property and religion, and inviting the people to establish a national convention which would then form a government. It was a revolution Tone sought, not an insurrection, and he convinced the Directory that an Irish rising prior to a French invasion should be avoided. There is much in Tone's French writings about the need to minimize bloodshed. Although he had not condemned the execution of Louis XVI in 1793 -- thinking it 'necessary' if regrettable -- in Paris he saw the places associated with the excesses of the terror and shuddered. 'If we have a republic in Ireland, we must build a Pantheon, but we must not, like the French, be in too great a hurry to people it' (TCD, MS 2048/21; W. T. W. Tone, 2.40-41). 
Tone was short of money and lacked the friendship and sociability on which he had thrived in Ireland, and his early Paris journals lack the wit of his Irish ones. But the success of his mission had transformed his life by the summer and brought him a new set of friends. Foremost among these was France's top republican general, Lazare Hoche, fresh from his victory over civil war in the west and being courted by Carnot to accept command of an Irish invasion force. Tone was called to the seat of the Directory, the Luxembourg Palace, on 12 July to meet with him. Tone would have been pleased with the communications between Hoche and the Directory after their meeting, for he had clearly won his case about Ireland's independence guaranteeing France an ally in her war against England. There would be no question about Ireland's being retained as a French conquest. Over the next days plans for the Irish invasion force were drawn up and Tone was made an adjutant-general in the French army. He had requested such a commission as a way of ensuring treatment as a prisoner of war. 'I was willing to encounter danger, as a soldier, but... I had a violent objection to being hanged as a traitor' (TCD, MS 2049/27; W. T. W. Tone, 2.71). But it was also the fulfilment of a lifetime's ambition, and he was to prove a good soldier, even though he had feared resentment from other French officers at such obvious inexperience and over-promotion. At Rennes, where he arrived to participate in the invasion preparations on 20 September, he lodged with Hoche and the other officers and was enthralled by the camaraderie of military life. 
It was in the interval between his appointment and departure for the west that Tone wrote the document on which much of his future reputation was based: his 'Memorandums, relative to my life and opinions', or autobiography. This -- with the seventeen notebooks of his journals -- was published thirty years later as 'The Life of Theobald Wolfe Tone'. It was undoubtedly influenced by the situation in which he found himself in the summer of 1796. His mission had succeeded beyond his wildest dreams, and there is a sense of destiny in the autobiography not present in his journals. There are many similarities between it and the propaganda he had been writing for France in preparation for the anticipated invasion of Ireland. In it his youthful rejection by Pitt, the haughtiness of the aristocratic faction in Ireland, his admiration for the Catholic Committee and the Ulster Presbyterians (whom together he envisaged forming Ireland's new government) came together in his 'theory', a theory which he now believed had motivated him since 1791: 'To subvert the tyranny of our execrable Government, to break the connection with England, the never-failing source of all our political evils, and to assert the independence of my country -- these were my objects. To unite the whole people of Ireland, to abolish the memory of all past dissensions, and to substitute the common name of Irishman in the place of the denominations of Protestant, Catholic and Dissenter -- these were my means. (TCD, MS 2046/41'v')' This was to become the most quoted passage in modern Irish history.In the summer of 1796 Tone compiled the various proclamations for the invasion and was also charged with recruiting among the English and Irish prisoners of war. But preparations for the departure of the invasion force were frustratingly slow. The naval command prevaricated, and sufficient supplies were proving difficult to find. News reaching Tone of the deteriorating situation in Ireland and the arrests of most of his friends, including Russell, intensified his frustration, and he persuaded Hoche to dispatch a secret agent to Ireland to let them know of the forthcoming invasion and urge them to do all in their power to defer the trials. The fleet finally sailed from Brest on 15 December, carrying 14,450 troops, 41,644 stand of arms, and a supply of uniforms and cockades for the Irish expected to join them, and the Directory, fired by the successful passage of such a large expedition through an intensified British blockade, ordered a follow-up expedition of 17,000 men. Tone sailed on board the 'Indomptable', the largest ship in the expeditionary force. But the fleet encountered bad weather, and the frigate carrying Hoche and the naval commander (and all the printed addresses which Tone had composed for distribution in Ireland) was blown off course. The remainder of the fleet arrived at Bantry Bay in south-west Ireland on 22 December and Tone spent the evening preparing new addresses. But a storm blew up that night and over the next few days decimated the fleet. In the early days of 1797 fifteen of the original forty-three ships limped back to France. 'England', commented Tone, 'has not had such an escape since the Spanish Armada' (W. T. W. Tone, 2.266). And so indeed it was, for the British navy and defence forces had been taken totally by surprise, and even this failed attempt caused a major political and economic crisis in Britain and Ireland. 
Tone was rescued from his despair only by the return of Hoche. He greeted Tone like a long-lost friend, assured him that he had not abandoned the Irish project, and invited him to join his staff with his new posting on the Rhine. Tone arrived at Cologne on 7 April 1797, but was denied his first taste of active service by urgent family concerns. His family had arrived in Hamburg in January after a protracted and stormy passage from America which had left Matilda extremely ill; she seems to have miscarried the baby she was carrying at the end of 1796. He secured leave from Hoche and travelled to Groningen in the Netherlands, where the family joined him on 7 May. His journals of his journey there show an impressive knowledge of the history and society of the countries through which he passed and a thirst for further information. He disliked the public display of Catholicism during Holy Week in Cologne -- directing a characteristic enlightenment attack on friars, monks, and convents -- and preferred the simpler practice of Dutch protestantism. Indeed the Dutch (Batavian) Republic he thought the model of good government. To this he attributed the country's commercial prosperity and the benefits it brought to the populations of northern Europe. He extolled the cleanliness of the Netherlands, comparing the country with the 'slovenliness' of Ireland, which he attributed to its poverty. The journal also reveals a tough attitude to governing systems. Tone thought republican government should be strong government, even supporting censorship of opposition press. 
But although it took Tone some time to recognize it, his own mission to France steadily fell apart after the Bantry Bay failure. Hoche remained totally committed to another expedition, and his headquarters in Germany became the effective centre for continuing negotiations. It was from there that Tone was sent in June to bring back a new United Irish agent, Edward Lewins. He was a colleague from early United Irish and Catholic Committee campaigning in Dublin, and Tone remained loyal and supportive, despite signs over the next year that Lewins was not as active in his mission as he should have been. They agreed that Lewins should continue the negotiations in Paris which Tone had started, while Tone would work with any expedition to be sent to Ireland. In July 1797 this involved Tone's relocating to the Texel in the Netherlands, where France's Dutch ally had taken up the Irish invasion scheme, while Hoche would accompany another force apparently preparing in Brest. In July, however, Hoche became the scapegoat in a thwarted coup attempt which, if successful, would have seen him installed as the new war minister. He became demoralized by the bitter press attacks which followed, and when Tone arrived at Hoche's headquarters at Wetzlar, on 12 September, he found him in the advanced stages of tuberculosis. Two days later he died, aged twenty-nine, Tone being one of a handful of confidants who attended his deathbed. Hoche had been a good friend to Tone -- as well as his most influential supporter -- and his coterie of republican generals continued such support and friendship. But they lacked Hoche's stature and influence, and his loss left the way clear for the rise of his most bitter rival, Napoleon Bonaparte, for whom republican causes were anathema. 
The threatened coup in France finally came about in September (the 'coup d'etat' of Fructidor) and removed from power nearly all the officials with whom Tone had negotiated, most notably Carnot. Tone -- who had returned to Paris after Hoche's death -- felt he and Lewins were having to start from scratch, and even though they secured audiences with Bonaparte himself, among others, they were receiving little more than generalized statements of support. The truth was that the post-Fructidorean 'second' Directory had adopted a much tougher policy towards foreign revolutionaries of only helping those who helped themselves. There would be no more expeditionary forces sent until the Irish had staged a rising. But Tone and Lewins, ignorant of this sea change in policy, continued to urge the United Irishmen to reserve their strength until the French arrived. That strength was steadily eroded through 1797 and early 1798, and the leadership was weakened by internal disagreement over the issue of rising before or after the French arrived. 
The fallout from this split soon affected Tone's mission, as competing agents began to arrive on the continent from mid-1797. Many of the newer arrivals in France now gravitated to a Paris grouping led by the veteran patriot Napper Tandy, which was increasingly hostile towards Tone and Lewins. Indeed Tandy's public posturing and egotism betrayed Tone's activities in France to the British government for the first time since his arrival in 1796. Although he had made great personal sacrifices in pursuit of his mission, he now found himself the object of petty intrigue and was particularly hurt by accusations that he had sacrificed his country's interest to his own. He had always prided himself on his sense of honour and integrity -- and indeed was recognized for such when he was in Ireland -- and saw his personal sacrifices as part of his republican credentials. The only reward which he sought was in the reputation and gratitude of his countrymen, and the thought of being denied these preoccupied him throughout the early months of 1798. It was something of a relief to be posted to Rouen in April, where preparations were being made to invade England. In fact Bonaparte had already abandoned an English invasion in favour of his ill-fated Egyptian expedition, and Tone was ordered to Le Havre as adjutant to the commanding general defending the town against British bombardment. 
By then Tone thought there was little chance of an Irish expedition, and reports coming through of the deteriorating situation in Ireland, mounting arrests, including those of nearly all his friends, the death of Lord Edward Fitzgerald, the declining state of Russell in prison, all fed a new desperation in his writings. He was not a naturally vengeful person, but he now wrote of avenging these 'martyrs of liberty', and of confiscating the property of the gentry (which he had rejected in the past). On 17 June he learned that a rising had finally broken out in Ireland, and he was recalled to Paris, where the news had reactivated the Directory's plans to invade. But, with the bulk of the army in Egypt, preparations were rushed and piecemeal. Several small forces were to land at different points on the Irish coast, and Tone was sent to join the main force of 8000 men preparing at Brest under one of Hoche's friends, General Hardy. Once again he was sent by the marine minister to recruit among the Irish and British prisoners of war, and on 1 August he arrived at Brest, where he joined Hardy on board the flagship 'Hoche' (74 guns). But it was not until 16 September that the fleet finally sailed, and Tone knew that Britain had full knowledge of its movements and of his own presence on board, for they had been reported in the press. It is clear from his correspondence that he had no hope of its succeeding, but, as his son William recalled, he felt it his duty to accompany it. He told Matilda that 'he knew his life was gone', and he signed over to her full power of attorney. The fleet was tracked along the Irish coast by the British navy, and, on 12 October, as it was buffeted by a storm within sight of its Lough Swilly destination, it was attacked. Battle raged all day and Tone commanded one of the batteries. It was sinking when finally captured. The 'Hoche' was to have been taken to Portsmouth, but it was blown off course by the continuing storm and only finally brought back to Lough Swilly on 31 October. 
Tone was reported to be among the first to step on shore. He had hoped his rank in the French army would have been respected, and he protested to the Irish commanders, to Dublin Castle, and to the French official charged with overseeing the exchange of prisoners of war at being treated like a common criminal and chained in Derry gaol. There was nothing insincere in this. He did expect death. But over the past two years he had been a French officer and by all accounts a good one. Having at first sought such a commission precisely to cover the perilous situation in which he now found himself, he had ended up assuming the persona of a French soldier and had insisted on wearing full dress uniform as he was brought a prisoner to Dublin. 
Tone was imprisoned in the royal barracks and tried by a military court on 10 November. Charges of treason were read. He objected to the word 'traitorously' and read out an explanation of his actions. He spoke of the sacrifices he had made in a cause for which he was now ready to lay down his life, explaining how he tried to end the religious divisions in Ireland, and that when his friends abandoned him the Catholics had stood by him. He spoke of his pride in winning the esteem of his comrades in the French army and regretted the atrocities which had occurred in Ireland: 'I have attempted to establish the independence of my country; I have failed in the attempt; my life is in consequence forfeited' (TNA: PRO, HO 100/79/95-97). And he requested the death of a soldier by firing squad. He spent the following day writing final letters to Matilda, his father, his friends, and Matilda's brother and sister, asking them to take care of her. He learned of his fate that evening. He would be hanged publicly at 1 p.m. the following day, apparently at the insistence of some of his old opponents. But Lord Lieutenant Cornwallis had rejected the request that his head be struck off and publicly displayed. Tone wrote a final letter thanking his gaoler for having acted towards him like an officer and that night cut his own throat. He had written frequently in his journals of his horror of the shame of hanging and had admired the self-discipline of classical figures such as Cato in choosing suicide as an honourable end. He died on 19 November 1798, and his remains were given over to his family immediately following a coroner's inquest. His body was taken from the house of his relatives, the Dunbavins, at 52 High Street, where his parents had been living in straitened circumstances, and was buried at the family plot in Bodenstown on 21 November. His entire wealth on death -- which he asked to be divided between his father and his wife -- consisted of $50, a gold watch, and his trunk of clothes. 
After Tone's death his widow, Matilda, remained in France, where she brought up her three remaining children with the help of a pension, belatedly granted by the Napoleonic government, due to her as the widow of a general in the French army. The only child to survive into adulthood, William, was educated at the cavalry school of St Germain and became a naturalized citizen. He fought in the Napoleonic army as lieutenant and aide-de-camp to General Bagneres and supported Bonaparte after his escape from Elba; he resigned his commission following the restoration of the monarchy in 1815. In July 1816 Matilda married a long-term friend and benefactor, Thomas Wilson (died 1824), a Scottish radical who had been well liked by Tone, at the British embassy in Paris. She and her new husband and her son hoped to settle in Ireland, but the Irish administration refused to allow them to return. Instead they embarked for America and settled at Georgetown. William studied law in New York and briefly served in the artillery before pursuing a career in the War Office. In 1825 he married Catherine Sampson, the daughter of William Sampson (1764-1836), an old Dublin friend of his parents; they had one daughter, Grace Georgiana. William died on 10 October 1828 and was buried on Long Island. Matilda survived into old age and died in 1849, aged eighty. 
In 1826 Matilda and William published Tone's journals and writings. They formed the basis of the cult which by the twentieth century had turned Tone into the most influential inspiration of modern Irish nationalism and republicanism. But the cult had a slow gestation, coming to full maturity only with Fenianism's and Sinn Fein's promotion of the cult of the martyred dead. The tradition of republican speeches at his grave in Bodenstown began during the 1798 centenary celebrations: Patrick Pearse in his 1913 speech pronounced Tone's 1796 'theory' as encompassing 'the entire philosophy of Irish nationalism', particularly its 'blood sacrifice' tradition. But nationalists of all hues look back to Tone as their founding father, many groupings, besides republicans, paying annual pilgrimages to his grave. Today there is no sizeable town in the Irish Republic without a street named after him. 


@@@@@


doc= 27533


William Theobald Wolfe Tone (1791-1828), Francis (1793-1806) -- all of whom died of tuberculosis, a particular scourge of the Tone family -- and Richard (1794-1795), who died in infancy. Early marriage and the decline in his family's fortune added to Tone's natural impatience as he embarked on his career as a barrister in 1789. The Irish legal profession was a recognized route to political preferment. But it required years of deference to and cultivation of the Irish protestant ascendancy to get anywhere, and the Irish bar was most definitely an appendage of the political establishment. Tone had some early success in attracting the patronage of the powerful whig family the Ponsonbys, but soon railed at the way they expected him to act as a hack writer in their cause -- besides which he had by then started to make a name for himself as a talented political writer. 


@@@@@


doc= 27534


Tong, William (1662-1727), Presbyterian minister and nonconformist tutor, was born on 24 June 1662, the son of William Tong, chapman, of Worsley in the parish of Eccles, Lancashire. His father died when Tong was young. Studying originally for the law, Tong through his mother's influence turned to the ministry, and entered the academy of Richard Frankland, then at Natland, on 2 March 1681. He was Frankland's most distinguished student. Early in 1685 he was licensed to preach, and began his ministry in Shropshire. 'He frequently preached to the poor people in the country, when he knew not but at the end of the sermon he might exchange the pulpit for a prison' (Newman, 34). For two years he served the families of Thomas Corbet of Stanwardine and Rowland Hunt of Boreatton as chaplain, thereby becoming acquainted with Philip Henry. He preached occasionally in the chapel of Cockshut, parish of Ellesmere, Shropshire, using a small part of the 'Book of Common Prayer', until threatened with prosecution. Efforts were also made to persuade him to conform, including, later, by the dean of Chester. Tong first met Philip Henry's son Matthew, then a student in London, in May 1686. They formed a friendship broken only by Matthew's death in 1714. 
With the publication of James II's declaration of indulgence in April 1687, the leading dissenters in Chester began to encourage preaching in public again. They chose Matthew Henry to be their minister, but since he was still a student in London they invited Tong 'to preach to them till he [Henry] came among them' (Henry, fol. 7'r'). Tong stayed for about three months, 'preaching with great acceptance' and 'their numbers did daily increase, so that they found it necessary to provide a larger place' even before Henry came to Chester (Newman, 36). At Chester, Tong fell ill with what was feared to be consumption, but he recovered and went first to Wrexham as a supply, but after a few months settled at Knutsford. There he helped establish a new meeting following divisions in the parish over the appointment of a public minister. He was ordained on 4 November 1687 at Warrington. While he was at Knutsford the present meeting-house was built (it was opened in 1689), but early in 1690 he moved to Coventry and was co-pastor first with Thomas Showell (died 1694), then with Joshua Oldfield (1656-1729), who also conducted an academy, and finally with Matthew Warren. At Coventry, Tong maintained an active evangelical ministry, and 'continued long a burning and shining light, diffusing holy light and heat not only in that city, but in the country round about'. Such was his zeal that, in addition to the duties to his own congregation, he frequently preached in the surrounding villages and market towns, and by his serious lively preaching 'laid the foundation of several societies of protestant dissenters in those places, where there were none before' (Newman, 36-7). 
When Frankland died in 1698 Tong was among those considered as his successor, but the academy closed. Tong is usually seen as Oldfield's assistant and successor in the academy at Coventry, but Vincent Carter received a grant of $10 from the Presbyterian Fund in April 1696, while 'under the instruction of Mr Tonge of Coventry' (DWL, MS OD 68, p. 41). When Oldfield became minister at Southwark, London, in 1699, the whole business of the academy fell on Tong. 
On the death of Nathaniel Taylor in April 1702, Tong was elected minister of the Presbyterian congregation meeting at Salters' Hall, Canon Street, London, after Josiah Chorley and Matthew Henry had declined an invitation. The congregation was the wealthiest and most charitable in London. In 1705 Tong succeeded John Howe as one of the Tuesday morning Merchant lecturers at Salters' Hall. With the deaths of more senior ministers, Tong undertook an increasingly important role in the public affairs of the dissenters. He was a member of the Presbyterian Fund board from 1703 until his death, and represented the Presbyterians on the Committee of the Three Denominations after it was revived following the accession of George I. As a consequence he was generally present on those occasions when dissenters addressed the throne. He was named by Dr Daniel Williams (died 1716) as one of the original twenty-three trustees of his charity. He was also one of the first distributors of the English 'regium donum' for poor ministers and their dependants in 1723. 
Tong had considerable antiquarian interests. He corresponded with, and in May 1697 visited, Ralph Thoresby, the Leeds antiquary. He included the antiquary Humfrey Wanley, a native of Coventry, among his friends. His historical interests were certainly influenced by his part in defending dissent in the controversy over schism instigated by the publication of his friend Matthew Henry's 'Brief Enquiry' in 1689. Tong's 'Defence of Mr. M. H's Brief Enquiry into the Nature of Schism' (1693) included 'A brief historical account of nonconformity'. He asked Thoresby for a copy of 'the Lancashire gentlemen's petition in favour of the Puritan preachers in Queen Elizabeth's reign' in June 1697, but it is clear his antiquarian interests were wider than dissent. He gave Thoresby a copy of Sampson Erdswicke's manuscript 'survey of Staffordshire' and was attempting to buy Dr Cuerden's manuscript 'Antiquities of Lancashire' with the intention of 'dressing them up' for publication ('Letters of Eminent Men', 1.287). Pressure of business increasingly prevented Tong from pursuing his historical interests. When Henry Sampson, the nonconformist historian, died in July 1700 his widow promised to preserve his papers. Unfortunately she sent them to Tong, who 'is a fit man, if he had leisure to make a good improvement of them; but his hands are so full of other business, that it will be lost labour to send them to him' (ibid., 1.400). By January 1709 Sampson's collection had been split: part was held by Edmund Calamy, the rest was still with Tong, where Thoresby 'was troubled to find them in such confusion, and so incomplete' ('Diary', 2.36). Nevertheless Tong's contributions to nonconformist history were among his most important published works. His best-known work was the 'Account' (1716) of his friend Matthew Henry. 
Tong took a prominent part on the orthodox side in the 1718 Exeter controversy and in the Salters' Hall debate the following year. His advice was sought by a number of ministers in Devon alarmed at the growth of heterodoxy in the south-west. When the London ministers met at Salters' Hall in early 1719 to debate the issues, Tong was a leading figure demanding subscription to a declaration in favour of the Trinity. He wrote the introduction to the 'Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity Stated & Defended' (1719), published with three other subscribing ministers. He was an attractive figure, a man of learning, free from sectarian feeling, charitable, and 'an utter enemy to all real persecution, and thought that every man who did not hold principles destructive of the civil peace, ought to enjoy full liberty of conscience in matters of religion' (Newman, 39-40). It is not known whether he was married. He died in London on 21 March 1727. 


@@@@@


doc= 27535


Tonge, Israel (1621-1680), informer and Church of England clergyman, was born in Tickhill, near Doncaster, on 11 November 1621, the son of Henry Tong of Holtby, Yorkshire, the minister of that parish. Tonge was educated locally in Doncaster until he went to University College, Oxford, on 3 May 1639. He graduated BA (14 March 1643), proceeding MA (6 July 1648). Tonge claimed that he did not wish to bear arms against the king, and on the outbreak of the civil war he retired to the country to become a schoolmaster at Churchill in Oxfordshire. It was there that he honed his teaching skills that were later to be so much admired by John Aubrey. Aubrey stated that Tonge had adopted, with no sense of irony considering Tonge's later career, the Jesuit methods of teaching, and added to them his own pictorial method of teaching using drawings and Latin verse, breaking up the teaching into two-hour sessions with play for the boys in between. Tonge may also have begun his interest in gardening, alchemy, and chemistry at this time. Aubrey claimed that at his death Tonge left 'two manuscript tomes in folio of alchymie [and that his] excellency lay there' ('Brief Lives', 2.261-2). Tonge was also said to have left numerous manuscripts on chemistry, which were subsequently lost. 
In 1678 Tonge was to claim that he had been 'in armes with & for his Majestie in Oxfordshire, took the Oxfordshire oath or anticovenant, [and] continued all the warre in his majesties quarter' (Tonge, 44). With the close of the first civil war, however, Tonge returned to the university and became a fellow there. In 1649, seeking both marriage and a rectory, he obtained both from Edward Simpson, the rector of Pluckley in Kent, whose daughter, Jane, he married that year. In 1656 Tonge was made a doctor of theology, and in 1657, following the birth of his son, Simpson, he took up a fellowship at the newly constituted Cromwellian College at Durham. There he taught grammar until its closure in 1659. With the Restoration, Tonge was forced to seek other outlets for his talents. He briefly returned to schoolmastering in Islington at an academy for girls, but in 1660, through the assistance of his 'honoured patron', Colonel Edward Harley, Tonge became a chaplain to the garrison at Dunkirk (BL, Add. MS 4365, fol. 24). When Dunkirk was sold to the French in 1661 Tonge obtained further ecclesiastical preferment from Harley at Leintwardine in Herefordshire. On 26 June 1666 he was given the rectory of St Mary Stayning in London, but this burnt down during the great fire of London, and with this catastrophe his mind appears to have become permanently disturbed. 
Tonge became obsessive about the Jesuits, whom he blamed for his own losses as well as those of the nation. In his anti-papal fervour he was somewhat extreme, although many of his ideas were perhaps more typical of the English of the day than historians once believed. While homeless, Tonge took a position as chaplain to the garrison at Tangier. It was claimed by some that Tonge was finally expelled from Tangier after two years because he sowed 'discord in the garrison' (Warner, 1.193). Whatever the truth of this, on his return to England Tonge became rector at St Michael's, Wood Street, London, which he subsequently held jointly with a rectory at Aston in Herefordshire from 1672 to 1677. 
In 1675 Tonge fell in with Sir Richard Barker and his wife; Barker, a physician who was violently anti-Catholic, became his mentor. Tonge himself noted that he was very hospitably received into 'theire family where he continued & had of the knight, besides his diet and lodging, considerable summes of mon[e]y & other great encouragements in his studies' (Tonge, 1). These studies were anti-Catholic, and as a result Barker gave Tonge the rectory at 'Avon Dossett' (Avon Dassett in Warwickshire), although Tonge was to claim that 'illegall practices' prevented him taking the post (ibid.). This only added to Tonge's already growing paranoia and fear of the Jesuits over these years. Barker also became a patron of Samuel Oates and his son Titus about this time, and it was at Barker's home in the Barbican in London in 1677 that Israel Tonge met Titus Oates for the first time. Tonge became a useful sounding board for Oates to exercise his prejudices, as well as a source of money. By now Tonge, although supremely convinced of his own literary abilities, believed that a Jesuit plot, mainly centred around his translation of a work by Nicolas Perrault (published in 1679 as 'The Jesuits Morals'), prevented him from publishing his work. As he continued to strive against publishers, plotters, and their agents Tonge claimed he could obtain 'neither... favour or right in any cause he had in hand for his support & settlement' (ibid., 3). Together with Oates he now planned to write a series of pamphlets against the Catholics, but his co-author, after agreeing, promptly disappeared to France. How much Tonge was aware of Oates's actual activities at the English College at St Omer, or indeed encouraged them, is now difficult to say. Tonge later claimed that he had encouraged Oates to go to St Omer to learn more about Jesuit intrigue, while others maintained that it was really Tonge and not Oates who lay behind the construction of the plot, but at the time Tonge was merely puzzled by Oates's disappearance. Moreover there seems little doubt that Tonge remained throughout the weaker character in the partnership. 
Oates's final failure at St Omer and his expulsion from the college eventually brought him back to London in July 1678. Once there he enthralled Tonge with tales of Jesuit intrigue and his own daring actions in tormenting the Catholics in their very den. Indeed he pandered to Tonge's vanity by claiming that he had been sent back to kill the feared author of the (then unpublished) 'Jesuits morals' for $50, that there had actually been a popish plot since 1639, and it 'still held on & [was] generally true according to what Dr Tonge had described it in his... booke of the 'Royall Martyr'' (Tonge, 5). A suitably flattered Tonge subsequently demanded that Oates write down all he knew of the plot. In the meantime Tonge had moved into William Lambert's house at Vauxhall with Christopher Kirkby, a former assistant in Charles II's scientific experiments. Kirkby had bragged that he had access to the king. This was unfortunate, for it was at this time that Oates, still claiming to be fearful of his life, finally consented to give a copy of the forty-three articles detailing the plot and a number of assassination attempts allegedly made upon Charles II to Tonge. To give added mystery to the affair Oates agreed to leave them behind the wainscot in Barker's house. By 12 August 1678 Tonge had retranscribed the articles and was keen to give a copy to Charles II. Tonge told Kirkby of the articles and the plot, and Kirkby agreed to approach the king. On 13 August 1678 Kirkby finally warned Charles II of the threat to his life, and on the same day both Tonge and Kirkby had an interview with the king. Charles II subsequently left the investigation to his first minister, the earl of Danby, and seems never to have believed the story related by either Tonge or Oates. 
At this point Tonge was keen to keep Oates's name secret, and throughout Danby's investigations into the plot Tonge remained reluctant to expose his source. Instead, Tonge, with his sense of self-importance, sought to make himself the middleman between Oates and the government. Both Oates, still unwilling to reveal himself, and Danby agreed to this for a time, but Danby soon tired of the intrigue. Suspecting Tonge was merely mad, and after six weeks unable to come to the real intelligencer, he began to see the plot as nonsense. Others learning of Tonge's comings and goings began to agree. Gilbert Burnet claimed that Tonge approached him with news of the plot, and when he afterwards enquired at the secretary of state's office they dismissed Tonge as a man only 'making discoveries... [in the hope that he would] get himself to be made a dean' ('Burnet's History', 2.156). At this point the conspirators began to fear that Danby would drop them altogether, and so Oates chose to invent some actual correspondence to sustain the plot. These crude forgeries, with their 'ill spelling of names, and other suspitious marks', were then sent to Father Bedingfield, the duke of York's confessor, at Windsor (TNA: PRO, PC2/66, 392). They detailed more of the plot, although instead of being intercepted by Danby at the Post Office as had originally been planned, the letters actually reached a puzzled Bedingfield, who promptly took them to the duke of York. James now demanded an investigation, the very thing Tonge had actually wished for, and it was this that ultimately brought the Popish Plot into the public domain. 
Tonge, who remained unaware of the investigation, was fearful that Oates would fly from the imaginary assassins he now claimed were pursuing him. As a result Tonge continued to seek further ways to bring the plot to public notice. Initially Tonge brought Oates to the home of Sir Joseph Williamson, the secretary of state, in order to get Oates's testimony sworn before a legal authority; Williamson, however, snubbed the pair. Tonge 'at a losse... advised with some very honourable friends about such a Justice as he might trust with soe weighty a business. They after some consideracion com[m]ended Sir Edmond Bury Godfrey' to him (Tonge, 35). This act was, indirectly, to lead to Godfrey's own mysterious death in September 1678. Ironically, on the same day as Oates swore his second oath before a sceptical Godfrey, Tonge was himself brought before the privy council to relate his tale. While the councillors remained merely amused at Tonge's rambling statements, they were considerably more impressed when Oates himself came before them and narrated his story with growing confidence. Oates, rather than Tonge, now became the 'saviour of the nation', and it was Oates who consequently took the main reward for revealing his spurious plot. 
Although Tonge was afterwards lodged in Whitehall and given a pension suitable to his needs as the man 'to whose memory the nation is not a little indebted', his role in the crisis that unfolded was considerably less than that of Oates ('CSP dom.', '1680-81', 106). Tonge went before the House of Commons a number of times and was commended for his part in discovering the plot, but he had neither Oates's abilities as a liar or his partner's brazen nature to carry him further. As a result little reward came Tonge's way. His attempt to oust Obadiah Walker from the mastership of University College on the grounds of Catholicism did succeed, but Tonge did not, as he had planned, occupy the place in his stead. Instead he was finally allowed to print his rambling pamphlets on the plot, and these later works show some of the increasing inanities concerning Catholicism that he now inflicted on his readers. The works that most explain his thought include 'Jesuits Assassins' (1680), in which Tonge tried his hand at anagrams and verse, alongside a history of the cruelties of the Jesuits. In the 'New Design of Papists Detected' (1679) he argued that the Jesuits only protested their innocence because in the Catholic sense 'the Crime they suffered for were no Treason, because the King was deposed by the Pope [their master] and consequently, so far from needing a Pardon... [their actions] were a matter of merit' (Tonge, 6). The oddest of Tonge's works, however, remains 'The Northern Star' (1680), a collection of prophecies 'collected out of my slender stock' and designed as 'Paper-Bullets in my Countrymen's Mouths' (sig. B2'r'). These pamphlets have little merit in general. Tonge's prose style, where it was not manic, remained turgid and generally unreadable. He tended to regurgitate earlier authors on the Jesuit menace and confirm both his and his readers' abiding prejudice against papists. To many contemporaries, Tonge's prose seems to have become even more muddled than his mind. 
At length Oates stole his former mentor's glory, while the elder man was pushed to one side. The arrival of William Bedloe and Miles Prance, among a multitude of other informers, left Tonge with only a minor role to play. For a time he seems to have become completely intoxicated by the general public acceptance of his long-held beliefs in a Jesuit plot. Bishop Burnet, visiting Tonge in Whitehall, found him 'so lifted up, that he seems to have lost the little sense he had' ('Burnet's History', 2.162). In 1679, however, Tonge quarrelled with Oates and came, it was said, to have a very bad opinion of his erstwhile protege. Tonge subsequently withdrew from association with Oates. As a result, although he appeared before the House of Commons on 21 March 1679 to relate his part in the discovery of the plot and retained his genuine belief that he would have been one of its main victims, no one required him to be a witness in the trials that followed Oates's revelations, and he was left to wallow in his literary efforts. 
The activities of his son, Simpson, whom his father had abandoned in Simpson's youth because of his debauchery and his attempt to join the Catholic church, also distressed Tonge and left him 'Ruined in my name and reputation' (Stowe MS 746, fol. 40). Simpson Tonge was to claim in August 1680 that his father and Oates had concocted the plot between them, but his assertions were discounted mainly because of his own blatant inability to tell the truth. Following the misfiring of his accusations that Sir Edward Dering had corresponded with the papal nuncio Tonge became subject to a 'very dangerous sicknesse [and] deserted of all' in November 1680 (ibid., fol. 40). He died, 'sunk in my disease', at the home of Stephen College, the protestant agitator and pamphleteer, near Bridewell Ditch, London, on 18 December 1680; he was aged fifty-nine (ibid.). Tonge was buried in the churchyard of his former parish, St Mary Stayning, on 23 December 1680. 
It was said that Israel Tonge still persisted on his deathbed in his belief of the plot's truthfulness as well as his own integrity in its discovery. This belief was likely to have been genuine, as he remained yet another dupe of Oates and besotted by ideas of Jesuit conspiracy. His brother John, who was a captain in the army, quickly seized control of the doctor's papers after his death, including his journal, and most of these documents fell into the hands of the government. They reveal that in the early stages of the plot Tonge had an almost blind faith in Oates's revelations and maintained enough of his egotism to claim that both he and his literary endeavours were central to the Popish Plot. 


@@@@@


doc= 27536


Tonkin, Thomas (bap. 1678, d. 1741/2), antiquary and Cornish scholar, was born at Trevaunance, St Agnes, Cornwall, and baptized in the parish church there on 26 September 1678, the eldest son of Hugh Tonkin (1652-1711), landowner, and his first wife, Frances (1662-1691), daughter of Walter Vincent of Trelevan, near Tregony. His father served as vice-warden of the stannaries in 1701 and as sheriff of Cornwall in 1702. Tonkin matriculated from Queen's College, Oxford, on 12 March 1694, and was entered as a student at Lincoln's Inn on 20 February 1695. At Oxford he struck up friendships with Edmund Gibson, afterwards bishop of London, and, importantly for his future interests, with Edward Lhuyd, whose work has been regarded as the foundation of modern Celtic linguistic studies. Tonkin corresponded with Lhuyd between 1700 and 1708, when Lhuyd was working on aspects of the Cornish language. 
Tonkin returned to Cornwall about 1700 and devoted himself to research into the history, topography, and genealogy of Cornwall. He is said to have become fluent in Welsh as well as Cornish. He married Elizabeth (died 1739), daughter of James Kempe of the Barn, near Penryn, about 1710, although no exact date has been verified. It is reported that they had several children but the male line became extinct on the death of their third son, also named Thomas Tonkin. 
Tonkin, at the time of his father's death, became faced with financial difficulties. He had discovered that his father and grandfather had spent large sums on improvements to their estates, especially on the erection of a quay at Trevaunance Porth, in Trevaunance Cove, to ship ore from the local mines. By 1710 Tonkin had spent a further $6000 on the quay's upkeep and he made attempts to raise money by seeking a patent for a weekly market and fairs at St Agnes but this was stopped by local opposition and he fell into debt. The quay at Trevaunance Cove was destroyed through lack of repair in 1730. Tonkin fell into the hands of a creditor and he lost a lawsuit against him and with it his family estates at Trevaunance. His later years were spent at his wife's estate in Gorran parish. 
Partly through the influence of his in-laws, Tonkin won a by-election to represent the borough of Helston in the House of Commons from 12 April 1714 until 5 January 1715. However, he preferred to devote his time to academic pursuits. In 1737 he made a preliminary announcement of the publication of a three-volume history of Cornwall, priced at 3 guineas. He also planned to publish a collection of writings in Cornish, together with his own translations. Neither of these projected works was published; his lack of finances seemed the principal stumbling-block. His wife died at Pol Gorran, in Gorran parish, on 24 June 1739. Tonkin died at Gorran and was buried in the local church on 4 January 1742. 
It is unfortunate that Tonkin's lifelong collection of material on the topography, natural history, parochial history, and language of Cornwall was never published during his lifetime. In spite of this, his contribution in gathering the literary fragments of the dying Cornish language played a major part in saving it from oblivion. In a letter to Lluyd, in which he criticized the poor standard of William Hals's Cornish dictionary, 'An Lhadymer ay Kernou', Tonkin commented that the Cornish language, at that time, was reduced to a small area of Cornwall. Moreover, the language had become corrupted and even native speakers were illiterate in it. At his death, Tonkin's manuscripts were bequeathed to his family. In 1761 the Cornish scholar Dr William Borlase managed to get access to Tonkin's manuscripts, of which he found nine volumes, and made a list of them, subsequently printed in the 'Journal of the Royal Institution of Cornwall' (vol. 6, no. 21). On the death of Tonkin's niece Miss Foss in 1780, the manuscript of his 'History of Cornwall' became the property of Lord de Dunstanville, who published an edition of Richard Carew's 'Survey of Cornwall (1602), with Notes Illustrative of its History and Antiquities by Thomas Tonkin' (1811). Lord de Dunstanville subsequently allowed Davies Gilbert to edit and embody the Tonkin manuscript in his 'Parochial History of Cornwall: Founded on the Manuscript Histories of Mr Hals and Mr Tonkin' (4 vols., 1838). The manuscript was passed from Lord de Dunstanville to Sir Thomas Phillips and sold by Sothebys to a Mr Quaritch in 1898. Several owners seemed then to possess sections, and many of them, such as W. C. Borlase, had the good sense to donate them to the museum of the Royal Institution of Cornwall. 
Because of its now fragmentary manuscript nature, and its incorporation into other works, Tonkin's major contribution to the study of Cornish historiography and Cornish linguistics has often been overlooked. The value of his collections was, however, well understood by the late eighteenth-century Cornish historian Richard Polwhele, who described Tonkin as 'one of the most enlightened antiquaries of his day' (Polwhele, 1.182). 


@@@@@


doc= 27537


Tonna, Charlotte Elizabeth (1790-1846), writer and social reformer, was born on 1 October 1790 in Norwich, the daughter of Michael Browne, who was the rector of St Giles's Church and minor canon of Norwich Cathedral. Her father was also a staunch tory, and this family background, in addition to the paranoid political atmosphere of the Napoleonic era, probably caused her hostility to Roman Catholicism and her political Conservatism. She also lost her hearing at the age of ten and as a result became fascinated with imaginative literature, especially Shakespeare. Later in life she came to see this fascination as sinful because it served no useful, religious purpose, but her early reading in drama, poetry, and fiction provided excellent preparation for her future writing career. 
Charlotte Elizabeth married an army officer, Captain George Phelan (died 1837), and eventually accompanied him to his estate in Ireland. She developed a sincere affection for the Irish people but at the same time grew increasingly severe and evangelical in her religious convictions. She began publishing religious tracts through the Dublin Tract Society, using the name Charlotte Elizabeth. In 1824 she separated from her abusive husband and returned to England; she lived at first with her brother, Captain John Browne, at Clifton, where she met the evangelical writer Hannah More. She continued to write tracts such as 'Conformity: a Tale' (1841) and 'Falsehood and Truth' (1841) for children and the lower classes, and didactic fiction on subjects that interested her. Her stay in Ireland had only intensified her antipathy towards the Catholic church, since she saw it as the means by which the Irish people were enslaved in ignorance and superstition, a view she professed in her novel 'Derry' (1833). In contrast, her attitude towards Judaism was more complex. In her novel 'Judah's Lion' (1843) she argued that the Jews could fulfil their religion only by recognizing Jesus Christ, but she also recognized them as recipients of God's covenant. There is some evidence to suggest, however, that she eventually abandoned this conversionist attitude towards Judaism and devoted her efforts towards fighting antisemitism. In July 1844, for example, she presented a petition, signed by many of her influential friends (such as Lord Shaftesbury), to Tsar Nicholas I on behalf of his 'oppressed and burdened Jewish subjects' (Rubinstein, 14). 
After Phelan's death Charlotte Elizabeth on 5 February 1841 married Lewis Hippolytus Joseph Tonna (1812-1857), a religious writer twenty years younger than herself, who encouraged her literary efforts. She was prolific as a writer and editor, publishing continuously and editing the 'Christian Lady's Magazine' from 1834 to 1846, 'The Protestant Annual' in 1840, and the 'Protestant Magazine' from 1841 to 1846. 
During the 1840s Tonna became convinced that industrialism threatened the physical and spiritual welfare of the poor, and she attacked the factory system in 'Helen Fleetwood' (serialized 1839-40), 'The Wrongs of Woman' (serialized 1843-4), and the anonymous, non-fictional 'Perils of the Nation' (1842). Tonna died of breast cancer at Ramsgate on 12 July 1846, leaving a legacy of many literary works and active involvement with social causes, much of which is documented in her 'Personal Recollections' (1841). Some of these causes, like her anti-Catholicism, are offensive to modern readers, but Tonna was also indefatigable in her support of the poor and oppressed. She wrote poetry and one novel, 'The System' (1827), exposing the evils of slavery, but found an even more passionate voice in support of factory reform. Tonna's best works, 'Helen Fleetwood' and 'The Wrongs of Woman', contain moving portrayals of physical and emotional suffering that are used to evoke audience sympathy. Tonna's contributions to social reform literature and her use of the 'Christian Lady's Magazine' as a forum to influence politics through her female readers mark her as a significant nineteenth-century figure, especially for other women social reform writers, such as Harriet Beecher Stowe (who wrote the introduction for her collected works in 1844) and Elizabeth Gaskell. The rise of more formalist standards in literary criticism caused Tonna to fade quickly from literary history, however, and her work was almost entirely ignored until the women's movement created new interest in women's literature. 


@@@@@


doc= 27538


Tonna, Lewis Hippolytus Joseph (1812-1857), protestant controversialist, was born on 3 September 1812 at Liverpool, where his father was vice-consul for Spain and consul for the kingdom of the Two Sicilies. His mother was the daughter of Major H. S. Blanckley, consul-general in the Balearic Islands. In 1828 he was at Corfu as a student when the death of his father left him to fend for himself. He found work as an interpreter, with the rating of 'acting schoolmaster', on board the 'Hydra', then in the Gulf of Patras. In January 1831 he was transferred to the 'Rainbow' with Sir John Franklin, and in October 1833 to the 'Britannia', flagship of Vice-Admiral Sir Pulteney Malcolm. Tonna returned to England in 1835 and the following year obtained -- apparently through Malcolm's influence -- the post of assistant director and, from 1845 until his death, of secretary of the Royal United Service Institution. He acquired a mastery of many foreign languages, including French, Italian, and Greek, and was elected both fellow of the Society of Antiquaries and, in 1855, fellow of the Royal Geographical Society. 
On 5 February 1841 Tonna married the widow of Captain George Phelan, Charlotte Elizabeth Browne (1790-1846), the well-known writer of a wide range of popular protestant literature ['see 'Tonna, Charlotte Elizabeth]. Tonna shared her religious sentiments and he, too, was the author of numerous small books and pamphlets, almost all on religious and controversial subjects, written from an uncompromisingly ultra-protestant point of view. In 1848 he married Mary Anne, daughter of Charles Dibdin the younger, who survived him. There were no children of either marriage. He died in London on 2 April 1857. 


@@@@@


doc= 27539


Tonneys, John (d. 1514), prior of the Austin friars, London, and grammarian, was a native of Norfolk and received his early education at the Augustinian friary in Norwich. It was probably here that he entered the order. He is said by Blomefield to have become prior of the Norfolk house 'c'.1478, but this date has been disputed. Tonneys prepared for the priesthood at the Oxford convent, and was ordained there on 25 May 1485. He was sent to Cambridge for his further education, and began his studies for the doctorate of divinity there in 1501-2. On 16 July 1503 Tonneys was elected vicar-general of the English province for the next general chapter. In July 1505 he was elected prior provincial of the order for a three-year term. But although he was re-elected prior provincial for life in August 1508, in April 1510 he was forced to resign the 'magisterium' by the prior-general, Egidio da Viterbo, on the grounds that he had accepted the office without permission, and contrary to the order's regulations. 
Tonneys duly resigned and called for a new chapter, but by the end of 1510 his fortunes had turned. He was appointed vicar-general and 'reformer' of the English province on 24 September, and was once more appointed prior provincial on 22 November. The prior-general also created a new position for him; Tonneys was made 'director of all houses of studies in England' (Roth, 'English Austin Friars', 129). He thereby became responsible for the appointment of regents and professors of both the 'studia provincialia' and the 'studia generalia'; he also had the authority to place student-friars where he saw fit, and to compel their priors to pay for the students' upkeep. Tonneys's learning made him an appropriate choice for the position. He studied Greek, and Bale told Leland that he had seen a Greek letter by him. Bale attributes ten works to Tonneys, including sermons, lectures, letters, 'collectanea', verses, and 'Rudimenta grammatices' said to have been printed by Richard Pynson; none of these is extant. In May 1513 Tonneys became prior of the Augustinian friary in London. He died in 1514 and was buried in his London convent. In the same year the prior-general decided that Tonneys's possessions should be given to the London convent. They included 100 pieces of silver, and in July 1522 an inquiry was held into their disposal -- the money had been spent without permission by Master Edmond Bellond, the convent's prior. 


@@@@@


doc= 27540


Tonson, Jacob, the elder (1655/6-1736), bookseller, was born in London, the second son of Jacob Tonson (1620-1668), a barber surgeon, and his wife, Elizabeth Walbancke ('b'. 1631), whose brother was the bookseller Matthew Walbancke; Kathleen Lynch claims that he was baptized at St Andrew's, Holborn, on 12 November 1655. Little is known about Jacob's youth, but his later ease with Latin suggests he was given a good classical education. In 1668 his elder brother Richard (1653- 'c'.1700) was apprenticed to the Walbancke firm, and on 6 June 1670 Jacob was apprenticed to the stationer Thomas Basset. Richard Tonson set up his own publishing firm in 1676, and Jacob did the same when he completed his apprenticeship on 7 January 1678. For some time, the brothers published books jointly, and in partnerships with other publishers. Jacob's first publication on his own was an undistinguished, anonymous fictional piece, 'God's Revenge Against the Abominable Sin of Adultery' (1678). 
Tonson, however, quickly moved to more important books when in 1679 he began publishing the works of John Dryden, soon becoming his exclusive publisher; 'Absalom and Achitophel' (1681) was Tonson's first widely celebrated publication. He began to buy up the rights to Dryden's earlier works during the 1680s, and he also began publishing a wide range of the most important writers of the age, including Aphra Behn and the earl of Rochester. During these years Tonson also learned the power of publicity, and he was one of the first booksellers to advertise in the newspapers. This combination of shrewd business practices and first-rate literature soon made Tonsons the most prestigious place for authors to be published. By collecting and reprinting the works of authors like Dryden, he helped turn them into accepted modern classics. 
Dryden and Tonson collaborated on a highly significant series of anthologies and compilations of translations. The first was Ovid's 'Epistles' (1680), with translations by seventeen different hands; owing to Dryden's literary intelligence and Tonson's business sense, the book had far greater success than translations usually did, going through numerous editions. Between 1683 and 1686 (the year in which he became a liveryman of the Stationers' Company) Tonson and Dryden produced a five-volume set of Plutarch's 'Lives', which employed forty-two translators; it too sold very well, and went into later editions. In the mid-1680s about half Tonson's list consisted of translations; he and Dryden were creating a public taste for such work. Even more important, however, were the anthologies or miscellanies that the two devised. The first, 'Miscellany Poems', included Dryden's 'MacFlecknoe' as well as work by many other contemporary poets. The book's success led to sequels, and it is no exaggeration to say that Tonson created the modern anthology as a genre, one which also whetted the public's appetite for other works by the poets included. One such poet was Alexander Pope, whose first publication came in Tonson's sixth miscellany (1709); Tonson's anthologies guaranteed the poet, especially the young poet, a much wider audience than he might otherwise have been able to find. 
Another major author associated with Tonson was John Milton. Tonson read Milton's 'Paradise Lost' when it was originally published in 1667. When Milton died in 1674, Tonson was still apprenticed to Basset, and he once spent his weekly free day -- Sunday -- going to the recently deceased poet's house in the hope of buying some books from his library. In 1683 Tonson purchased half the rights to the poem, and acquired the other half in 1690. 'Paradise Lost' had had moderate success before Tonson, some 3000 copies having been printed, but it by no means occupied the place it does today in the canon of English literature. Tonson was highly instrumental in creating and nurturing an audience and an appreciation for the poem and for Milton, keeping the poet's reputation alive in a period dominated by a very different literary taste. 
Tonson bought not only the rights to the poem but the first edition's corrected manuscript as well, indicating that he saw 'Paradise Lost' as having serious, lasting literary value. He did not print the poem, however, until 1688 -- perhaps because the political atmosphere before that date would not have favoured the work of a puritan revolutionary poet. Tonson approached the 1688 edition with great care: he was careful about the text itself, consulting the three previous printings as well as Milton's manuscript, and making some important emendations. The book was printed, by subscription, in a large folio, with careful and attractive typography. Tonson also paid for illustrations by John Baptist Medina, which, together with the sumptuous look of the book, made a possibly daunting poem more immediately interesting and approachable. As a frontispiece, Tonson printed an engraving of Milton, with six lines by Dryden below it, designed to claim Milton as the great 'English' poet, transcending his puritan times and deserving celebration by the new aesthetic and political regime. Tonson remained closely involved with Milton's works for the rest of his life, and in the famous Kneller portrait he is depicted holding the folio edition of 'Paradise Lost'. He was protective not only of his copyright but of the quality of Milton's text, and he bitterly criticized an edition put out in the 1730s for its mangling of the poem. Much later in life, when he was asked what poet had made the most money for him, he replied, 'Milton'. There is no doubt that Tonson valued Milton for the money he could make, but it is also clear that he was committed to Milton's literary excellence, which he had perceived early on. Tonson's enthusiasm led him to continue to promote Milton, whom he printed in a variety of editions over the years. His edition of 1695 included scholarly annotations by Patrick Hume, effectively declaring Milton a permanent classic. It is not too much to say that Milton's literary reputation was in large part nurtured and ensured by Tonson's efforts. 
After the revolution of 1688 Tonson's political sympathies turned increasingly whiggish, while his most famous living author, the Catholic and pro-Stuart Dryden, fell out of political favour. None the less, their relationship remained strong in the 1690s, though Dryden at least once complained of Tonson's stinginess. He sent Tonson a triplet that served as a threat of the sort of satire he could write if Tonson did not agree to his demands; the lines provide an interesting caricature portrait: '
With leering look, bull faced and freckled fair 

With frowsy pores poisoning the ambient air, 

With two left leggs, and Judas coloured hair. 
('Poems of John Dryden', 1766)' 'Two left leggs' refers to Tonson's odd manner of walking; he had experienced trouble with his feet since his childhood. Later satirists used the image as well, referring to Tonson's shop as under the sign of two left feet. None the less, for all their occasional quarrelling, Dryden and Tonson remained on good terms. 
Dryden continued to do translation work for Tonson. The translation of Juvenal and Persius (1693) ushered in the notion of translation as a kind of modernization, of making the translated author, as Dryden put it, 'speak that kind of 'English', which he wou'd have spoken had he liv'd in 'England', and Written to this Age' ('The Satires of Decimus Junius Juvenalis', lii). Translation as imitation came to dominate English verse for the next couple of generations; the Persius and Juvenal volume again sold very well, with several succeeding editions. But the most important project Tonson and Dryden undertook was a translation of all of Virgil, first mentioned in 1694. Tonson paid Dryden $200 in advance, a very significant sum, and set about publicizing the work in advance. Using the experience of the Milton volume of 1688, Tonson found over 500 subscribers for the book, which appeared in June 1697 as one of the most eagerly awaited books of the season. The book is one of Tonson's finest achievements in terms of typography, layout, and illustrations (over 100 of them); Dryden added an essay on Virgil, and Joseph Addison contributed a brief introduction to each section. King William was one of the many looking forward to the book, and hinted that he would look favourably on its being dedicated to him, a suggestion that Dryden, naturally, found intolerable. But Tonson cleverly worked around the issue: he had some of his workmen alter the illustrations slightly so that Virgil's Aeneas resembled William. Tonson's main profits from the book came with later, cheaper reprints, but his gain in prestige as the country's finest publisher of literary works was beyond valuation. 
After Dryden's death in 1700 Tonson printed many editions and collections of his works; as with Milton, Dryden's work was a matter of financial profit as well as something to be guarded and promoted for its high literary value. Tonson never abandoned Dryden, despite the political gulf that widened between them. Having become closely involved with the leading whigs during the 1680s, Tonson was a founding member of the Kit-Cat Club, which included virtually all the most powerful whig politicians from 1688 to 1710. An anonymous satire from 1704 calls Tonson the founder of the club, and it quickly became the best-known of the exclusive men's clubs, with much gossip circulating about its members and their doings. Tonson was evidently an enthusiastic and well-liked host, and was nicknamed Bocaj (Jacob backwards) in poems about the club. By 1703 the group had grown too large for Christopher Cat's tavern, and soon thereafter Tonson used the members' dues to build a special clubroom at his residence in Barn Elms, Surrey. Tonson commissioned Sir Godfrey Kneller to paint portraits of forty-eight of the Kit-Cats -- including the dukes of Newcastle and Somerset, the earls of Dorset and Essex, and others including Cornwallis and Godolphin -- as well as Tonson himself. The club included writers as well, such as Congreve, Addison, and Steele. 
Robert Walpole once referred to the Kit-Cats as the men who had saved the kingdom, meaning that they had played a central role in establishing the Hanoverian succession. Tonson himself was never directly involved in politics, but he seems to have been respected by the other members, and it is possible that he at least gathered some intelligence for the group when he went to the continent to purchase paper and other printing necessities. Vanbrugh believed that Tonson secretly went to Hanover in 1703 to carry some messages, and he may have spied on Matthew Prior in France in 1714 when Prior was negotiating between the tory administration and the exiled Stuarts. If the latter is true, there was evidently no ill will between the two men, as Tonson went on to publish a luxurious edition of Prior's poems in 1718. But the exact extent of Tonson's involvement in any espionage remains, not surprisingly, uncertain. In any case, whatever political activity he involved himself in never got in the way of his continuing dedication to his publishing. 
Tonson continued to publish plays including the most popular play of the period, Addison's 'Cato' (1713), for whose copyright he paid Addison the then astronomical sum of $107. Tonson spearheaded the Kit-Cats' efforts to fund the building of the new Queen's Theatre in Haymarket, London, as well as other projects, including one to encourage the production of better-quality plays. But the Kit-Cats, despite their cultural endeavours, became increasingly a group dedicated to party politics, and there were purges of anyone in any way connected with the tories. Their strong solidarity, with Tonson as host and organizer, produced some of the whigs' greatest triumphs, such as the 'Act of Settlement' with the Regency (1701), which established the legal basis for the Hanoverian succession, and the 'Act of Union' with Scotland (1707). When George I took the throne in 1714, he rewarded the club members generously; but without the binding pressure of being in opposition the group began to weaken, meeting less and less regularly. When Tonson made an extended trip to France in 1718-20, the club evaporated altogether. 
Among Tonson's major publications during the Kit-Cat years is his great folio edition, in Latin, of the works of Julius Caesar; some nine years in the making, it finally appeared in 1712. No English publisher had ever produced so lavish a book before, with its careful scholarship (the texts were edited by Samuel Clarke), its numerous maps, and its eighty-seven engravings done in superb detail by Dutch artists. The book was dedicated to the duke of Marlborough, and had as its frontispiece Kneller's portrait of Marlborough. Again, this was published by subscription, and in this case Tonson arranged to have each subscriber's coat of arms printed on each double-plate page. He employed John Watts as printer for this edition, and the two worked together on several classical texts over the succeeding decade. In 1713, for instance, Tonson published editions of Lucretius, Terence, Justin, Salust, Pompey, and Aesop, and in 1714 an edition of the Greek 'New Testament'. In the following years he put out editions of Ovid, Catullus, Horace, and Lucan, among many others. His greatest achievement in these years was a sumptuous English edition of Ovid's 'Metamorphoses' which, as in the early years of the Dryden partnership, employed a set of different translators. Tonson reprinted many of his existing Ovid translations (including some by Dryden), but he also employed Samuel Garth to find new translators and to oversee the project. Alexander Pope satirized the project in his 'Sandys' Ghost' (1717), referring to George Sandys, the Elizabethan translator of Ovid. Pope finds comedy in the idea of Tonson and Garth beating a drum for volunteer translators: '
I hear the beat of 'Jacob's' Drums, 

Poor 'Ovid' finds no Quarter! 
('Minor Poems', 172)' When the troops of volunteers are finally lined up, Tonson goes out to review them: '
Now, 'Tonson', list thy Forces all, 

Review them, and tell Noses; 

For to poor 'Ovid' shall befal 

A strange 'Metamorphosis'. 

A 'Metamorphosis' more strange 

Than all his Books can vapour; 

'To what, (quoth 'Squire) shall 'Ovid' change?' 

Quoth 'Sandys': 'To Waste-Paper'. 
('Minor Poems', 174)' The edition appeared in 1717, dedicated to Princess Caroline, with a Kneller portrait of her as frontispiece, in quarto format with numerous illustrations; a nice marketing touch was having each of the fifteen books of the 'Metamorphoses' dedicated to a different noblewoman. The edition proved highly successful despite Pope's sneers (Pope himself being engaged in the translation of Homer that was to make his own fortune); indeed, Tonson's Ovid was reprinted as late as the nineteenth century. 
About 1700 Tonson's nephew 
The elder Jacob Tonson looked on Shakespeare's works as he had Milton's and Dryden's, both as being works of great literary and national value, and as being generators of profit for his firm. He hired Nicholas Rowe, the dramatist, to edit an edition of Shakespeare, which appeared in 1709. Rowe was a responsible editor, if not the most scholarly one, and many of his textual emendations and stage directions remain accepted today. Moreover, his biographical essay was designed to interest the general reader in Shakespeare, and both it and the edition were highly successful in popularizing the plays. The edition was reprinted many times in the coming years. 
The younger Jacob Tonson, however, thought the market for Shakespeare insufficiently tapped, and in 1721 he approached Alexander Pope to put together a new edition. The elder Tonson was also enthusiastic about the idea, and he acquired a copy of the 'First Folio' (1623) to help Pope deliver an edition with greater textual integrity than ever before. The Pope edition came out in 1723 (volumes 1-5) and 1725 (volume 6). But Pope, brilliant poet though he was, proved disastrous as an editor: he frequently made 'improvements' in Shakespeare's verse, going as far as dropping entire scenes and soliloquies that he felt violated the plays' unity. Lewis Theobald, an inferior poet but a superior scholar, published an attack on the Pope edition in 1726, entitled 'Shakespeare restored'; Pope was enraged by Theobald's presumption, and set about making him the central figure in his dark satire 'The Dunciad'. This left the Tonsons to choose which side they ought to be backing, and to their credit they joined several other publishers in producing Theobald's new edition (1733). In this, however, they were merely facing up to reality, for the 'Copyright Act' of 1709 dictated that their own rights to Shakespeare expired in 1731. 
Jacob Tonson the elder, before leaving for his trip to France, signed over all his copyrights -- a list that included some twenty-three authors -- to his nephew, for $2597 16's'. 8died The younger Tonson hoped he would be heir to his uncle's fortune, even conferring with his uncle's long-time servant about how best to stay on the old man's good side (the servant recommended gifts of food). When the uncle returned in 1720 he gave his Barn Elms estate to his nephew, moving to a new estate, The Hazels, in Ledbury in 1722, where he entertained many of his old Kit-Cat associates. Pope visited him at The Hazels, once inviting his friend the earl of Oxford along, promising him that he would find old Tonson fascinating, 'the perfect Image & Likeness of Bayle's Dictionary [that is, a virtual encyclopedia]; so full of Matter, Secret History, & Wit & Spirit' ('Correspondence', 176). During these years Tonson the elder also speculated in the stock market, his canny business sense helping him again: he sold out his shares in the doomed South Sea project before the crash, making a profit on a scheme that ruined many others. The younger Jacob Tonson's hopes for his inheritance came to nothing, for he predeceased his uncle, at Barn Elms on 25 November 1735, leaving a fortune of $100,000. His uncle died soon after, on 18 March 1736, at The Vineyard, an estate between Gloucester and Ledbury; his fortune was reported as much less, $40,000, though it certainly was much greater than that. Tonson the elder was buried at St Mary-le-Strand, London, on 1 April 1736. 
With his wife, Mary Hoole, the younger Jacob had two sons, 
The Tonson house made significant contributions both to publishing and to English literature. In particular, the elder Jacob Tonson's concern with textual integrity in authors such as Milton and Shakespeare marked his house as one concerned with high-quality publishing defined in the broadest possible way; the typography and layout in his greatest works -- such as the Dryden 'Virgil' or the edition of Julius Caesar -- set new and distinguished standards. Combining such values with excellent business sense made the Tonson company highly profitable for the better part of three generations. 


@@@@@


doc= 27541


Jacob Tonson (1714-1767) and 


@@@@@


doc= 27542


Richard Tonson (1717-1772), and they inherited the business. Of the two, Jacob was by far the more engaged in publishing. He carried on his father's and great-uncle's enthusiasm for Shakespeare, hiring William Warburton for his important edition of 1747, and publishing Samuel Johnson's of 1765. Johnson spoke warmly of him, and there are anecdotes of his helping indigent authors such as Henry Fielding with their debts. The firm also produced editions of authors from the old list, such as Milton and Congreve. But the two brothers never had any major impact on publishing, and seemed content to maintain the reputation gained by the preceding generations. Jacob Tonson died on 31 March 1767, in London; he had no children. His brother Richard, who had little to do with the publishing business, was elected MP for Wallingford in 1747, and for New Windsor in 1768. He lived near Windsor, building a special room for the display of Kneller's Kit-Cat portraits. He died on 9 October 1772, also leaving no children. The Tonson copyrights passed on to the Rivington publishing firm. According to the 'Dictionary of National Biography', letters of administration of the goods of Jacob Tonson were left unadministered by his brother and were granted in 1775 to William Baker, MP for Hertfordshire; he too failed to administer and they were granted to Joseph Rogers in 1823. 


@@@@@


doc= 27543


Tooke, Andrew (bap. 1673, d. 1732), schoolmaster and translator, was baptized in the parish of St Gregory by Paul, London, on 22 January 1673, the second of the three sons of Benjamin Tooke, citizen and stationer, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Juell. He attended Charterhouse School from 1686 until 1690, when he entered Clare College, Cambridge, as a scholar; he graduated BA in 1693 and commenced MA in 1697. In 1695 he became usher, or assistant master, at Charterhouse, a post he retained when on 5 July 1704 he was appointed to succeed Robert Hooke as professor of geometry at Gresham College, London. In November that year he was elected fellow of the Royal Society, whose members met in his rooms at the college until 1710, when they acquired premises elsewhere. 
On the death of his brother Benjamin (1671-1723), Tooke inherited an estate of several thousand pounds. He continued to teach at Gresham College and at Charterhouse, where he was effectively in charge from 1723 during the terminal illness of the headmaster, Thomas Walker (died 1728), whom he succeeded on 17 July 1728. Having taken deacon's orders, he occasionally preached and officiated in the Charterhouse chapel, but most of his time was spent teaching the boys. On 7 May 1729 he married Elizabeth, widow of Henry Levett (1668-1725), the former physician at Charterhouse, and resigned as Gresham professor on 26 June that year. 
A prolific writer, Tooke was best known for 'The pantheon, representing the fabulous histories of the heathen gods and most illustrious heroes' (1698), translated from the 'Pantheum mythicum' of the Jesuit father Francois Antoine Pomey, which went through twenty-two editions. He probably intended his 'Synopsis Graecae linguae' (1711) and his edition of William Walker's 'Treatise of English Particles' (1720) for his students. He also reprinted some accounts of Gresham College and a copy of Sir Thomas Gresham's will, which he had contributed to Stowe's 'Survey of London'. His other publications were translations from French and Latin works of a moral or religious nature. Tooke died of dropsy on 20 January 1732 and was buried in the Charterhouse chapel, where a monument was erected to his memory. His large library was sold by auction in May 1732, and his estate passed to his brother Richard (1685-1737). 


@@@@@


doc= 27544


Tooke, George (1595-1675), army officer and writer, was the fifth son of Walter Tooke (died 1609), administrator, and his wife, Angelette (died 1598), second daughter and coheir of William Woodliffe, citizen and mercer of London. He was the grandson of William Tooke, auditor-general of the court of wards and liveries for forty-four years until his death in 1588, an office which his father, Walter, inherited. There are memorials to Angelette Woodliffe, Walter Tooke, and to their eight sons and two daughters at St Lawrence's Church, Wormley, Hertfordshire. 
In 1625 Tooke took part in the unsuccessful expedition against Cadiz, led by Sir Edward Cecil, commanding a company of eighty volunteers. Tooke's own account, 'The History of Cales Passion', written in prose and verse, appears not to have been published until 1652, with new editions in 1654 and 1659. Detailing the shortcomings of logistical preparations prior to the expedition, Tooke wrote 'lest After-ages might unhappily wander into the same gravily way' ('Cales Passion', 'To the reader'), and did not shrink from acknowledging the errors nor pass over the unfortunate exigencies which all helped contribute to the adventure's miserable outcome. Tooke's role in the debacle merits no mention in the official relation written by John Glanville, Cecil's secretary, and he seems to have taken greatest pride in having brought his men home without loss. 
A lengthy illness, contracted during the expedition's return, put paid to Tooke's own active military career. He took up residence on the family estate of Popes, at Essenden, near Hatfield, Hertfordshire, and there enjoyed the illustrious company of John Selden and John Hales. Tooke succeeded to the estate on the death of his eldest brother, Ralph, on 22 December 1635. That year he published his 'Legend of Brita-Mart: otherwise Britaines Mars', dedicated to his Hertfordshire neighbour, William, second earl of Salisbury, kinsman of the English commander at Cadiz in 1625. In the dedicatory epistle Tooke addressed Salisbury, remarking that 'the manage of a reall war is now familiarly every mans tract; the premises unconsulted, and our provisionall musters and militia still left at large, without any paraphrase' ('The Legend', A3). The tract was written in the form of a conversation between three characters, Publicola, Infortunio, and Epimetheus, on the subject of England's military defences. The argument was first that it was mistaken to rely on either the kingdom's natural defences, or its military establishments overseas in Ireland and on the continent; and second that the ancient system of trained bands was in serious need of reform. In an extended passage Infortunio defended the emergence of that controversial figure in Caroline military reform, the county muster-master. The whole reads very much as a justification of Charles I's ambitious design to establish a 'perfect militia'. The tract was published a second time in 1646, this time offering 'a paraphrase upon our provisionall British discipline. Inditing it of many severall distempers and prescribing to[o] the cure', and with the conversants renamed 'Mickle-Worth the Patriot, Peny-Wise the Worldling, and Mille-Toyle the Souldier' (title-page). 
Tooke also composed eulogies to some of the heroes of early modern protestant internationalism. In 1647 he published 'The Eagle Trussers Elegie', an encomium on the career of King Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden which he dedicated to Ferdinando, Lord Fairfax, as well as a eulogy to Captain (or Major) William Fairfax, slain at Frankenthal in the Palatinate in 1621. Tooke also ventured some thoughts on Dutch history, in his 'Chronological revise, of those three successive princes of Holland, Zeland and Freisland, Floris the fourth, his sonne William king of the Romans, and Floris the fifth' (1647), dedicated to Charles Fairfax. Verses written on John, Lord Harrington, baron of Exton, keeper of the household of Princess Elizabeth, daughter of James I, were also published in 1647. Rounding off an extremely fruitful year Tooke then published a volume of poetry, 'Annoe-dicata, or, A miscelanie of some different cansonets, dedicated to the memory of my deceased very deere wife' (1647). Anne, or Anna, Tooke ('bap'. 1615, died 1642) was the daughter of Thomas Tooke of Bere Court in Kent, a distant relation of the Tookes of Hertfordshire. It is not known when she and George Tooke married. Anne died on 9 December 1642 and was buried at St Lawrence's, Wormley. Tooke's second wife was Margery, daughter of Thomas Coningsbry of North Mimms, Hertfordshire. 
Although Tooke lived for many more years little else is known of him. His allegiance during the civil war is difficult to ascertain, as he was neither appointed to administrative office by parliament nor punished for delinquency. Most of the historical works of 1647 found their way back into print in 1659 or 1660. Tooke died without issue at Popes in 1675. He has not inspired as a writer. Both his prose and his poetry are undoubtedly impaired by a love of far-fetched metaphor and obscured by a painfully involved style, though some have claimed that he has been unduly disparaged. 


@@@@@


doc= 27545


Tooke, John Horne (1736-1812), radical and philologist, was born on 25 June 1736 in Newport Street, Westminster, the third of the seven children and the youngest son of John Horne, a prosperous poulterer, and Elizabeth, 'nee' Horne. He was baptized John Horne at St Anne's, Soho, on the following day. 
Horne was born into a respectable middle-class family. His mother was a benevolent figure, persuading her husband to donate money to the Middlesex Hospital, of which he later became one of the first treasurers. Horne's father was a man of singularly independent character, exemplified by a lawsuit with Frederick, prince of Wales, who lived next door to the Horne family in Leicester House. When some of the prince's officials sought a passage to Newport market by making an opening through a wall belonging to the Horne property without seeking permission, Horne's father brought the case to court and won. Having achieved his purpose, John Horne senior allowed the doorway to be reopened and was accordingly appointed by the prince as the official supplier of poultry to his household. Despite the immediate honour of this appointment, the prince's sudden death in 1751 saw a debt of several thousand pounds unrecovered. 
Horne as a child was decidedly unique, possessing a maturity beyond his age. An old lady who knew him in his youth recollected how he 'never was a boy: with him there was no interval between childhood and age; he became a man all at once upon us' (Stephens, 1.22). He had no particular interest in games or sport, finding instead the most exciting moment of his childhood to be a military expedition on which he joined his father, who was a commissioned officer of the trained bands. As to education, Horne was well grounded yet never really showed signs of distinction. At the age of seven he was sent to Soho Square Academy, and a year later found himself attending school in Westminster. In 1746 Horne entered Eton College, where he spent the next six years. He was elected to the distinction of king's scholar and lived in the college. While his origins distinguished him from so many of the boys at Eton whose families were of the upper classes, Horne apparently felt for the most part at ease among his peers. As a scholar he was bright -- more so than brilliant -- and as an adult admitted to employing some of the other boys to do his homework. While he neglected the set curriculum, Horne prescribed his own readings, and it is no surprise therefore to find him later advocating that it 'is best to let children read what they like best, till they have formed a taste for reading; and not to direct what books they shall read' (Rogers, 165). In his youth, Horne's imagination was captured by the writings of Shakespeare and Milton, although reading would have become something of a chore following an accident during his schooldays in which he lost the sight of his right eye during a struggle with a fellow student. He was subsequently sent to school in Kent for a time, but disliked the institution intensely and ran away from his tutor, justifying his actions to his father on the grounds that his mentor was ignorant of grammar. 
In 1753 Horne was sent to private tutors at Sevenoaks and, the following year, at Ravenstone in Northamptonshire in preparation for admission to Cambridge University. On 12 January 1754 he was admitted as a sizar to St John's College and was senior optime in the tripos of 1758, graduating that year with a BA honours degree in mathematics. During his undergraduate years Horne became well acquainted with Richard Beadon, tutor to the future duke of Gloucester, who later became master of Jesus College, bishop of Gloucester, and finally bishop of Bath and Wells. Despite their divergent careers after university, Horne and Beadon remained close friends. Like Beadon, Horne was reared for the clergy, that being the wish of his father, who was a devout member of the Church of England. But Horne had ambitions for a legal career, and as early as 9 November 1756, while an undergraduate, he enrolled as a member of the Inner Temple, during which time his parents refused to support him. 
After graduating from Cambridge, Horne worked briefly as an usher in a school at Blackheath. As a young man at this stage he had a fairly regular physical appearance, with an athletic build, a high forehead, and brown hair. He enjoyed the company of women, but during his time at Blackheath was involved in a love affair with a young woman living in the same house. The relationship was aborted and Horne later recalled how he 'luckily escaped from two evils -- matrimony and misery at the same time' (Stephens, 1.28). During this time his father continued to insist on his religious calling, and Horne finally conceded, being ordained deacon on 23 September 1759 and becoming a curate in Kent. He was not, however, fully committed to his post and resigned within a few months following a sudden attack of ague. On his recovery, Horne began to frequent his inn of court on a daily basis, determined 'to eat his way to the bar' (ibid., 1.30). He was befriended at this time by John Dunning, who would later act as his defence counsel, as well as Lloyd Kenyon, who ironically later presided at a trial of Horne and became chief justice of the king's bench and master of the rolls. 
Pecuniary circumstances forced Horne to abandon his legal interests, and on 23 November 1760 he was ordained a priest. His father purchased him a living at New Brentford said to be worth between $200 and $300 a year and he was offered further inducements to remain in the church. Although as a preacher Horne was said to be proficient, his sermons were orthodox discourses, as exemplified by the one published in 1769 and entitled simply 'A Sermon'. His religious creed is indeed elusive, perhaps on account (as he later admitted) of having no real interest in theological issues. He was, however, a fervent opponent of Roman Catholicism and had no desire to advocate the cause of dissenters. Apart from these convictions, Horne's creed was, according to John Wilkes, believed 'to be 'non credo'' (Wilkes, 'Controversial Letters', 29). Nevertheless, Horne conducted his duties with characteristic professionalism and care. With only a half-hearted interest in spiritual matters at best, he studied medicine in the hope of improving the physical well-being of his parishioners and opened a dispensary for their benefit. Despite these efforts and his sobriety at this time, some of his flock found cause to criticize him for what they saw as inappropriate enthusiasm for whatever entertainment the neighbourhood offered and, more particularly, for his fondness for playing cards. 
Horne was never completely settled in his duties as curate and in February 1763, not long after the end of the Seven Years' War with France, he eagerly accepted the position of travelling companion to France of the son of the eccentric John Elwes, MP for Berkshire. The sojourn lasted for around twelve months, nine of which Horne spent learning the French language. While there he was introduced to Jean le Rond d'Alembert, the mathematician and 'philosophe', and by chance became acquainted with the Scottish philosopher David Hume. On his return to England, Horne was promised an appointment as king's chaplain, principally through the influence of Elwes and his brother-in-law, the natural philosopher Stephen Demainbray, but his interests were captured by prevailing politics. 
When Horne returned from France in 1764 he was imbued with patriotism, a detestation of Lord Bute, a delight in the popular apotheosis of William Pitt at the time, and a sense of outrage at the treatment of Wilkes over the infamous 'North Briton' affair. In the following year he published an anonymous pamphlet, 'The Petition of an Englishman', which comprised twenty-three pages of bold and vindictive satire against Bute and Lord Mansfield and offered a defence of Wilkes. It was a deliberately provocative piece, openly inviting prosecution, and as such was not welcomed by most printers. While the work was offensively critical in its rhetoric, Horne remained unprosecuted -- perhaps, as Alexander Stephens contended, owing to the government's desire not to publicize Horne's insinuations about Bute's insidious relationship with the dowager princess of Wales, which the author supported by including a map of Kew Gardens showing the path by which Bute could discreetly attend upon the princess. 
In the autumn of 1765 Horne once more ventured overseas, this time in the company of the son of a Mr Taylor, a gentleman from near Brentford. Having abandoned his clerical dress, Horne began 'flaunting through the continent in very unclerical suits of flowered silk and gold lace' (Bleackley, 176). At Calais he met Thomas Sheridan and his wife, and at Paris met Wilkes for the first time through an introduction he carried from Humphrey Cotes, a Westminster wine merchant. Both men soon struck a close relationship, which Wilkes conveyed to Cotes in a letter dated 7 October 1765: 'I have had the pleasure several times of seeing Mr Horne, and I thank you heartily for so valuable an acquaintance' ('Letters of John Wilkes', 2.207). Before Horne left Paris the two men agreed to remain in contact with each other. 
From Paris, Horne travelled to Ferney to meet Voltaire, but the influential French writer did not inspire Horne, who later declared him to be 'inferior in everything' (Stephens, 2.435). He then visited Lyons for a week, where he was frequently in the company of Laurence Sterne, with whom Horne acquired a friendship despite the former being 'clearly bored' by the latter's constant praise of Wilkes (Cross, 375). In Italy, Horne probably got to know the Italian language and became fascinated with Machiavelli. He visited all the principal cities but spent most of his time in Genoa, where he fraternized with a distinguished local family. During this time he became fascinated by a Genoese beauty, Signora Durazzo, but not all of her family approved of his affections. On leaving the city Horne was fortunate to escape death when some of the signora's family mistakenly shot another Englishman. 
Back in France, Horne and his companion went to Montpellier, where they became known to Adam Smith, who was then tutor to the duke of Buccleuch. Horne, however, was not well disposed towards Smith, remarking later that he was inferior to Hume and that some of his writings were 'nonsense' and 'written with wicked views' (Rogers, 160). It was from this resort city that Horne also decided to write to Wilkes, on 3 January 1766, in a language not befitting his clerical standing: 'It is true I have suffered the infectious hand of a bishop to be waved over me; whose imposition, like the sop given to Judas, is only a signal for the devil to enter' (Stephens, 1.76). Wilkes never replied, and when Horne reached Paris in 1767 he questioned Wilkes as to his reticence. Wilkes at first tried dismissing Horne's enquiries as a joke, then denied ever receiving the letter, even though it was known to Horne that he had seemed determined to publish it on several occasions. Despite this incident the two men remained on friendly terms, and it was to Wilkes that Horne entrusted five of his fashionable suits upon his departure for England on 25 May 1767, presumably on the assumption he would be soon returning. 
During summer 1767 Horne made an effort to apply himself to his clerical duties at Brentford, preaching popular charity sermons and often accepting invitations to speak at London churches. Yet his real enthusiasm was for the world of politics, and it was the return of Wilkes in spring 1768 in time for the general election which rekindled his political passions. When Wilkes decided to stand for Middlesex, Horne was in a position to promote the Wilkesite cause. He organized the use of the two best inns at Brentford by Wilkes's supporters and threw himself earnestly into the political fray, covering the whole constituency on foot or horseback. Under the rousing banner of 'Wilkes and Liberty', Horne used his powerful oratory to sway the electors and his virulent wit to attack the sitting members, George Cooke and Sir William Beauchamp Proctor, in the press. In the end Wilkes won the election, but was soon after arrested on outstanding charges and imprisoned. 
As the government continued to refuse Wilkes the right to take his seat in parliament, Horne became an outspoken activist in the ensuing agitations. He made concerted efforts to have a magistrate, Gillam, prosecuted for ordering soldiers to shoot innocent bystanders on 10 May 1768 during the riots in St George's Fields. In the autumn he helped Wilkes draw up a petition to parliament, and during the next Middlesex election campaign, following the death of Cooke, Horne published a series of sarcastic letters in the 'Oxford Magazine' attacking Proctor and upholding the Wilkesite candidate. The death of another innocent bystander, George Clarke, in an election riot in December 1768, again saw Horne rally for justice by calling for the prosecution of Edward M'Quirk. A pamphlet entitled 'An Appeal to the Public Touching the Death of Mr George Clarke' (1769) was published under the name of the surgeon who examined Clarke, John Foot, but was apparently written by Horne. 
In 1769 Horne was elected burgess of Brentford and on 20 February of that year, under Horne's auspices, the Society of Gentleman Supporters of the Bill of Rights was formed at the London tavern. An advertisement for the society drawn up by Horne states that 'their 'sole aim' is to maintain and defend the 'legal', 'constitutional liberty'' of the people (Wilkes, 'Controversial Letters', 150-51), but its primary objective was to assist a financially crippled Wilkes through subscriptions. Supported by some of London's wealthiest and most prominent agitators, the society managed to raise considerable amounts towards retrieving Wilkes's finances. Horne was at this time occupied with an exhausting interest in political contests, such that one critic later commented that he was acting 'as a kind of travelling counsel to every man who thought himself capable of being made an object of public commiseration' ('Blackwood', 969). Horne, however, had a genuine interest in public liberty and justice. On several occasions he disclosed violations of justice in the courts, including the case of two Spitalfields weavers hanged for murder, which Horne published as 'Genuine Copies of All the Letters... Relative to the Execution of Doyle and Valine' (1770). He was even more frequently concerned with political grievances, for instance attacking George Onslow, a former friend of Wilkes and MP for Surrey, in a letter published in the 'Public Advertiser' on 11 July 1769 in which he accused Onslow of accepting a bribe in the process of making an appointment to a position in America. On 24 August, Onslow initiated a civil suit against Horne which was tried at Kingston before William Blackstone on 6 April 1770, but the case was deemed nonsuited on legal technicalities. A new trial was brought before Lord Mansfield on 1 August 1770 with the added charges of Horne using defamatory words at a meeting of Surrey freeholders. The jury acquitted Horne over the letters, but ordered he pay $400 in damages for his words. Horne appealed against the judgment, and the case was finally set aside in the court of common pleas on 17 April 1771. 
Despite the distractions of these legal engagements, Horne remained active in the political scene. On 30 March 1770 he made a speech to Middlesex freeholders, published as an 'Oration Delivered by the Rev. Mr Horne' (1770), in which, 'inter alia', he humorously foreshadowed his legal battle with Onslow. He was also co-author of an address presented to George III by the City of London on 14 March 1770 and the author of another remonstrance presented on 23 May 1770. There is some unlikely speculation that Horne wrote the reply often attributed to William Beckford to the king's answer to the last petition. By the end of 1770 a rift between Horne and Wilkes had opened. It seems that hostilities between the two began after a meeting of Westminster electors on 31 October when Horne published in the newspapers a slighting account of Wilkes's performance. An exchange of written retorts continued until the end of 1770. At much the same time there were suggestions among some Bill of Rights Society members that Wilkes was abusing the society's financial generosity, which came to a head on 12 February 1771 when Horne carried a motion that $500 be raised to help William Bingley, a printer imprisoned in 1768 for publishing the 'North Briton'. Two weeks after Horne's motion was passed, another resolution was made that no new subscriptions would be entered into until Wilkes's debts were discharged. On 9 April 1771 Horne moved that the Bill of Rights Society should be disbanded, and when his proposal was rejected by a vote of twenty-six to twenty-four, the minority withdrew and soon formed the Constitutional Society. 
In May 1771 Horne published two articles in the 'North Briton' on electoral reform advocating annual parliaments, but stopping short of calling for universal suffrage. It was at this time, as Wilkes announced his candidacy for the office of sheriff of London, that Horne reopened their dispute. For two months the men again exchanged offensive letters, in which Horne was variously accused of misappropriating Bill of Rights Society funds and his letter to Wilkes from Montpellier in 1766 was brought to public attention. Horne reacted by accusing Wilkes of pawning his suits left in his possession in 1767 and revealing details of his personal extravagances and financial dishonesty. The combatants were, as Horace Walpole observed, engaged in 'a civil war between themselves' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 31.151). In the ensuing election of sheriffs Horne supported Richard Oliver, who was defeated. Horne's effigy was burned before the Mansion House, indicative of the damage his moral and political reputation had suffered in the course of his dispute with Wilkes. 
Soon after this controversy had subsided Horne applied for his MA at Cambridge, and despite opposition from the likes of William Paley, Lord Sandwich, and other religious colleagues the degree was conferred. It was not long before Horne was again embroiled in a heated debate, this time with the scathing critic who published under the pseudonym Junius. Horne was accused of working secretly for the government in the recent election of City sheriffs and was advised to 'go back to his cloisters' (Junius, 253). Horne was quick to react to Junius's claims, and in the written exchanges that followed it was Horne who emerged the victor, having 'sunk Junius at last by law arguments', as William Godwin remarked (Bewley and Bewley, 48). 
Amid the political controversies and legal entanglements, Horne remained a popular social figure. His political clique met at the house of Richard Liver, and he kept rooms in Frith Street near his friends Michael Moser, keeper of the Royal Academy, and Thomas Sheridan. Horne was also a keen backgammon and whist player, and as such became known to Domenico Angelo and his son, Henry, doyen of fencing masters, as well as the musicians Johann Christian Bach and Karl Abel. Despite his affability, Horne's personal life remained somewhat unsettled. By the early 1770s he had fathered a son, Sidney Montague, the eldest of his three children, who later served in the East India Company. He was also the father of two daughters, Mary and Charlotte, both of whom used their mother's surname of Hart, but he never married. He seems to have held a rather facetious attitude towards the virtues of matrimony and monogamy, once asserting that he would never marry a pretty woman since 'she would be studious to be admired by others and to please anybody more than her husband' (Rogers, 154-5). Horne had a certain courtly charm with women and he perhaps revelled in a bachelor's lifestyle. It has also been suggested that Horne's avoidance of marriage may be due to his sensitivity over a lifelong bowel problem. Whatever the reason, Horne was definitely shy of marriage, a fact captured by an amusing anecdote which recounts how he had proposed marriage to a Miss Arabin in a letter, but suddenly realized what he had done and returned to the post office to destroy the note. 
While his personal life was unsettled, Horne's professional career remained equally uncertain. In 1773 he resigned from his clerical post and moved to a house in Windmill Lane in New Brentford, where he studied philology and again determined to study law. His friends offered him an annuity of $400 until he was called to the bar, but Horne never took advantage of their offer. Not long after settling into his new residence, Horne was called to the aid of his friend William Tooke, whose property at Purley, near Croydon, was to be affected by an enclosure bill which his neighbour, Thomas de Grey, was petitioning to present to parliament. Realizing that it was too late to counter-petition, Horne published a letter in the 'Public Advertiser' attacking the speaker, Fletcher Norton, with accusations of partiality in this case and implying that he had been bribed. After the printer of the newspaper gave up the author's name, Horne was ordered to the bar in February 1774. After much deliberation Horne was discharged, de Grey's bill removed, and a measure passed to prevent such bills being so readily presented in future. While Charles James Fox strongly opposed Horne throughout this contest, earning him the lasting wrath of Horne, Tooke was eternally grateful for his assistance and showered him with gifts and promises of inheritance. 
As the Wilkesite cause slowly faded, Horne's attentions were soon focused on the American War of Independence. Although he generally regarded Americans to be 'of a very inferior cast' (Stephens, 2.337), Horne was sympathetic to their constitutional demands, realizing that when 'the people of America are enslaved [Britons]... cannot be free' (Horne, 'Oration', 36). Following a clash between the colonists and British troops at Lexington and Concord in April 1775, the Constitutional Society, at Horne's suggestion, raised a subscription for the Americans concerned. Horne was to convey the money to Benjamin Franklin, and the society's resolutions were drawn up by Horne and published in the newspapers to announce that the subscription was for 'our beloved American fellow-subjects, who... preferring death to slavery, were... inhumanly murdered by the King's troops' (Bewley and Bewley, 60). Horne's efforts in this transaction were recognized on 17 June 1919, when the New England Society of Brooklyn unveiled in St Mary's Church, Ealing, a memorial tablet in his honour and paid for a refurbishment of his grave. Far from being honoured at the time, Horne found himself charged with libel for the advertisement he prepared, and on 4 July 1777 was tried before Lord Mansfield. He defended himself with characteristic forcefulness and audacity but was found guilty and sentenced to one year in prison, to pay a fine of $200, and to find sureties for three years of $400 from himself and $200 from two others. In 1778 he brought a writ of error in parliament to reverse the verdict, which was argued by John Dunning, but the judgment was affirmed on 11 May 1778. 
Horne was confined in the king's bench prison, where he contracted gaol fever and started drinking claret as a cure, although he later attributed the gout from which he suffered for the rest of his life to the alcohol he consumed in prison. He was permitted to pay for decent accommodation outside the prison walls but 'within the rules', and was frequently visited by friends and dined on a weekly basis at the Dog and Duck public house in St George's Fields. During his imprisonment Horne wrote 'A Letter to Mr Dunning on the English Particle' (1778), in which he devotes much attention to the etymologies of words and grammatical standards concerning prepositions and conjunctions. The letter was originally conceived as a means of arguing that his conviction was wrong on account of some grammatical infelicities in the indictment. In time the 'Letter' formed an integral part of Horne's major work, 'Diversions of Purley'. 
After serving eight months of his sentence, Horne was released and rented a room in Vine Street, London, where he continued his legal studies. With promises of many briefs from eminent lawyers, he applied in Trinity term 1779 for admission to the bar, but was rejected by a majority of eight to three benchers of the Inner Temple on the grounds that he was a clergyman. He reapplied in 1782, when Lord Shelburne supported his application, but it was again rejected. In 1794 Horne was once more among the candidates, but no bencher moved for his call. The constant rejections and the inability to fulfil his vocational desires apparently left Horne disgruntled for the remainder of his life, going so far as to sour his relationship with Lord Shelburne, whom Horne held responsible for his rejection. Soon after his unsuccessful application in 1779 Horne moved to a small estate at Witton, near Huntingdon, where he applied himself to farming and spent some of his father's legacy improving the property. Ill health, however, forced him to sell the estate back to the previous owner, and while Horne's movements shortly thereafter remain obscure it is known that at various times during the next nine years he worked as an accountant in Huntingdon for Sir Robert Bernard, lived at 12 Paper Buildings, Temple, and rented a house in Dean Street, London, with his two daughters. Horne also spent time during this period residing with William Tooke at Serjeants' Inn and Purley, and in 1782 added the name of Tooke to his own, which was supposedly an indication that Horne was to be Tooke's heir. 
While Horne Tooke's time, especially in the early 1780s, was divided between London and the country, he remained active in City politics. In 1780 he collaborated with Richard Price to expose the financial corruption associated with the British war effort in America, which was written up as 'Facts addressed to landholders, stockholders... and all the subjects of Great Britain and Ireland' (1780) and was published in eight editions. He was also a prominent member of the extra-parliamentary reform groups that formed around London, including the committees known as the Quintuple Alliance, and he was nominated for membership of the Society for Constitutional Information on 6 July 1781 by its founder, John Cartwright. Horne Tooke was a supporter of William Pitt's calls for parliamentary reform and in May 1782, as head of some Westminster delegates, called on Pitt to congratulate him on his reform stance. That same month he was present at the Thatched House tavern with Pitt, the duke of Richmond, the earl of Surrey, and other leading reformers of the day when it was decided to petition parliament in support of Pitt's reform proposals. Around this time Horne Tooke published 'A Letter to Lord Ashburton' (1782), a work that was published in several editions and republished in 1793, in which he expressed the idea that the aim of good government is the greatest happiness of the individual, a tenet which later became central in Jeremy Bentham's theory of utilitarianism. Although an active reform campaigner at this time, Horne Tooke's political interests were somewhat narrow. He was not inclined to oppose the 'Test Acts' despite having numerous dissenting friends, nor did he take much interest in the Irish cause or the anti-slave trade movement. 
The time Horne Tooke spent residing in London gave him the chance of becoming a member of the Speculative Society, a literary and philosophical debating club, where he came to know Richard Sharp and James Mackintosh. He also fraternized during the 1780s with Edward Topham, founder of 'The World' newspaper (to which Horne Tooke contributed), as well as James Perry, the Scottish journalist, and Joseph Johnson, proprietor of the 'Analytical Review'. It was, however, the friendship between William Tooke and Horne Tooke which was commemorated in the latter's most significant writing, 'Epea Pteroenta, or, The Diversions of Purley', the first part of which was published in 1786 and revised in 1798, with part two published in 1805. A third volume was planned, but Horne Tooke burnt all his personal papers shortly before his death. Aimed at well-educated readers, 'Diversions' was an attempt to democratize language, and as a philological treatise was influential on contemporaries such as the radical grammarians William Cobbett and William Hazlitt and was read by many including Henrietta, countess of Bessborough, who described the second part of the work as a 'strange book', which she thought 'imprudent, ingenious, indecent and entertaining' ('Private Correspondence', 2.136-8). Horne Tooke profited from the publication, having received subscription payments of 2 guineas that he never returned for the unpublished third volume and making a sum of $4000-$5000 from royalties and subscriptions on the first two volumes. 
Although Horne Tooke was never a prolific writer he soon followed 'Diversions' with another work, entitled 'A Letter to a Friend on the Reported Marriage of HRH Prince of Wales' (1787). This eight-page pamphlet was published in London and Dublin and focused on the assumed scandalous marriage of the prince and Maria Fitzherbert. The following year Horne Tooke produced another work, 'Two Pair of Portraits' (1788), in which he derided Charles James Fox and praised Pitt in a satire that was as scurrilous as it was persuasive. At this time Horne Tooke belonged to the Revolution Society and was also involved in the Constitutional Club formed to support Admiral Samuel Hood during the Westminster election of 1788. He had also assumed greater control of a waning Society for Constitutional Information, helping to revive the group with younger members such as the radical Count Alvise Zenobio, Thomas Walker, and Thomas Cooper. 
Following the outbreak of revolution in France, Horne Tooke was present at a meeting of the Society for Constitutional Information on 27 November 1789, when a message of congratulations was agreed to be sent to the French national assembly. The following year he opposed Fox in the election for Westminster, and although a popular candidate his campaign suffered from a lack of official backing. He polled last of the three candidates, receiving 1679 votes, but he claimed a moral victory, attracting nearly half as many votes as Fox or Hood but outlaying only $28 on advertising. John Thelwall served as Horne Tooke's assistant during the election and came to admire him as the first person of 'capacious and highly-cultivated mind' with whom he had associated (Thelwall, 76). Horne Tooke was also unrelenting, and petitioned parliament on 12 December 1790 on the grounds that the Westminster electors were disenfranchised, but by a vote of the house the petition was laid on the table. By an act of 1789 Horne Tooke was liable for the costs incurred, and Fox accordingly brought an action against him for the taxed cost of his expenses. The case was heard before Lord Kenyon on 30 April 1792, and despite Horne Tooke's able harangue on corrupt electoral practices a verdict was found in favour of Fox. The trial proceedings were published as a pamphlet and reissued in 1812 and 1819. 
As the Society for Constitutional Information rose to prominence in the burgeoning reform movement of 1791, so too did Horne Tooke. He was instrumental in organizing the distribution of Thomas Paine's first part of 'The Rights of Man' through the society, and in 1792 he became a member of the Friends to the Liberty of the Press and helped draft the constitution of the London Corresponding Society at the request of its founder, Thomas Hardy. In June 1792 he moved to Wimbledon, where he had earlier purchased a house, later called Chester Lodge, on the west side of Wimbledon Common, and where his neighbours included Henry Dundas and William Wilberforce. His residence became the rendezvous for weekly Sunday dinners, the conversations at which catered for the broad spectrum of political views held by Horne Tooke's guests. Despite the convivial nature of these soirees, the government viewed such gatherings with increasing suspicion, and Horne Tooke himself came under close scrutiny. When he met Charles-Maurice Talleyrand during his diplomatic missions in 1791 and 1792, the authorities declared Horne Tooke's mail to be opened as a suspect person along with Paine and Talleyrand. Horne Tooke's activities during 1792-4 did not give the government any reason to offer mitigation. During 1792 Horne Tooke helped found reform clubs in Aldgate and Southwark calling themselves after the Friends of the People, and with expanding numbers of the Society for Constitutional Information Horne Tooke moved the group's meetings to the Crown and Anchor, where he also organized a dining club every Friday evening before meetings of the society. His failing health and move to Wimbledon did not dampen his enthusiasm, as he continued to attend all the society's meetings and co-authored with John Martin, a lawyer, 'An Address to the People of Britain' (1794), approved on 20 January by the London Corresponding Society. An increasingly nervous government had spies working within Horne Tooke's circle by this time, and the suspicion of him as a subversive is reflected in the many caricatures in which he is portrayed as a revolutionary sansculotte. 
By 1794 Horne Tooke had emerged, according to one scholar, as 'the heart of the reform movement' (Brown, 52), and as such it is little surprise that the authorities kept a close eye on his movements. Soon after the apprehension of Hardy on 12 May 1794, a letter to Horne Tooke from Jeremiah Joyce was intercepted which posed the question: 'Is it possible to get ready by Thursday?' The reference, as Horne Tooke subsequently proved, was to the preparation of a pamphlet listing sinecure places, but the government apparently interpreted the phrase as referring to an insurrection, and Horne Tooke was duly arrested on 16 May 1794. 
On 19 May 1794 Horne Tooke was sent to the Tower along with other radical suspects including Thelwall and Hardy. A personal diary kept by Horne Tooke in his interleaved copy of 'Diversions' records the daily inconveniences and hardships of a regimented prison life, his concerns for the welfare of his daughters, and the physical agony which accompanied the constant and painful treatment of testicular and intestinal problems. Despite the adversities, the veteran reformer was both defiant and heroic. In July he recorded that his confinement had given him 'time to review my life that is passed; and I cannot find any one Action that I have committed, any word that I have written, any syllable that I have uttered, or any single thought that I have entertained, of a political nature, which I wish either to conceal or to recall. (Tooke, 'Diary', 57)' Such a spirit made Horne Tooke a role model for his imprisoned colleagues, with Thelwall encouraged by his 'philosophic firmness' and 'playful vivacity' (Thelwall, 193), and Stewart Kyd dedicating the second volume of his 'Treatise on the Law of Corporations', written within the Tower, to Horne Tooke's friendship and scholarship. 
Horne Tooke and the other prisoners remained in the Tower for five months before being transferred to Newgate on 24 October 1794 to await their trials on charges of high treason. Like most radicals Horne Tooke was prone to self-dramatization, declaring to Thomas Holcroft 'that the best thing our prosecution could have done, for the cause of freedom, was that which they had done: imprison and indict us; except the still better thing which they had yet to do: namely hang us' (Holcroft, 87). Hardy was the first tried, but was acquitted on 5 November 1794. Twelve days later the government proceeded against Horne Tooke, who was ably defended by Thomas Erskine and Vicary Gibbs. The trial lasted six days before Sir James Eyre, with Horne Tooke conducting himself in a 'very cool, clever and witty' manner ('Private Correspondence', 1.105) and playing a part in examining witnesses. He was 'like some amateur actor pleased with his part and resolved to make the most of it... he rarely laughed himself, but glanced around from his keen and arch eyes a satirical look of triumph' (Townsend, 2.24). On 22 November the jury retired for just two minutes before returning a verdict of not guilty. Horne Tooke's acquittal was the cause of celebration, with newspapers printing trial accounts and his portrait for free. The London Corresponding Society issued commemorative medals, and anniversary dinners became a regular event among reformers, ensuring that the treason trials of 1794 and the hardships endured by the accused remained etched in radical memory. 
Following his release Horne Tooke withdrew to Wimbledon, his conduct now more cautious as a result of his failing health, dwindling finances, and the sobering effects of prosecution. According to his own calculations, he had spent a total of 519 days in prison since 1774, which would have had a significant financial and emotional impact. It was not until the general election of 1796 that he showed some renewed passion for politics, when he stood for Westminster against Fox and Sir Alan Gardner. He campaigned against war, taxation, economic depression, and repressive legislation, and held himself out to the electorate as a political martyr who had progressed 'from the hustings to Newgate and from Newgate back to the hustings' (Bewley and Bewley, 192). Horne Tooke polled last of the three candidates, and was fortunate that the $1000 which his campaign cost was offset by a donation from a patron. Around this time Sir Francis Burdett was introduced to the Wimbledon circle, and it was not long before Burdett emerged with 'some degree of intellectuality' from the political initiation offered by Horne Tooke ('Works of Jeremy Bentham', 10.404), whom he admirably referred to as the 'Wizard of Wimbledon' (Bewley and Bewley, 256). More revolutionary elements were also in the habit of visiting Horne Tooke. The new London Corresponding Society leaders, John Gale Jones, Francis Place, and John Binns, were acquainted with the veteran reformer, and several United Irishmen became regular guests at Wimbledon. The weekly dinners at Horne Tooke's house were a haven for plebeian radicals, as well as popular writers such as Anna Barbauld and John Wolcot and liberal-minded literati including William Godwin, Jeremy Bentham, Joel Barlow, and Samuel Taylor Coleridge. 
Despite the popularity of the Wimbledon gatherings their meeting did not raise the same conspiratorial suspicions as those earlier in the decade, perhaps owing to the waning political enthusiasms of the host. Horne Tooke filled his time with gardening, reading, and enjoying the companionship of his daughters and tom cat. He nevertheless maintained an interest in prison reform, campaigning in particular for changes in Cold Bath Fields prison, and took an interest in the case of Gilbert Wakefield, who was imprisoned for libel. Horne Tooke himself was involved in a libel case in 1799, this time prosecuting John Wright, a bookseller, who printed a record of the secret committee of the House of Commons which in the run-up to the treason trials of 1794 had concluded Horne Tooke to be a subversive. Horne Tooke argued that this was a libel since it accused him of a crime of which he had been acquitted, but Lord Kenyon judged that a report of the Commons could not be a libel. 
By the end of the 1790s Horne Tooke was living on slender means, having endured the financial strains of infrequent employment, legal engagements, and imprisonment. He had resigned himself to giving up his Wimbledon home and renting a small cottage, but in 1799 he was the timely recipient of a legacy from Felix Vaughan, and his friends raised a subscription and bought an annuity of $600 from Sir Francis Burdett. Horne Tooke soon after involved himself in organizing a fund to support Marcus Despard and his conspirators, who were arrested in 1801 for planning the assassination of George III. James Moody, Horne Tooke's secretary at the Westminster election of 1796 and government spy, reported that Horne Tooke's house served as the 'Headquarters' for organizing the Despard subscription and that Horne Tooke was 'the High Priest' (Hone, 114). At much the same time he met Lord Camelford, who encouraged him to accept his pocket borough of Old Sarum. Although the two men held opposing political views, they remained friends until Camelford was killed in a duel in 1804. For Horne Tooke the offer to sit in parliament came too late to change his life, but it was still an attraction, and he appreciated the irony and challenge of a political reformer representing a rotten borough. On 16 February 1801 Horne Tooke sat in parliament for the first time. By this time, however, he had lost much of his vigour. Age and ill health made him appear in parliament as 'pale and sickly', although he maintained an 'expression of sagacity and energetic resolution' (Bewley and Bewley, 212). 
Horne Tooke's position in parliament was soon challenged by Lord Temple on the grounds that he held holy orders, and a select committee was appointed to investigate precedents. The committee's report on 4 May 1801 was not favourable, and Addington introduced a bill to exclude clergymen from election to parliament. Horne Tooke proposed an amendment, but the bill was passed on 19 May despite its opposition by Fox, Sheridan, and Erskine, as well as by Thurlow in the Lords. While the process of determining Horne Tooke's eligibility drew on, he took part in proceedings and made his maiden speech before parliament on 18 February 1801. While his speeches lacked the persuasive effect one might anticipate, Horne Tooke managed to impress some with his oratories, including William Cobbett, who thought they contained 'more good sense on political economy than I ever heard of being uttered in that House for the last 30 years' ('Cobbett's Weekly Political Register', 193). Horne Tooke kept his seat until parliament was dissolved in June 1802, and in an address to the Westminster electors he declared that 'nothing short of another miracle could possibly enable me to render you any service' in parliament ('Morning Chronicle', 29 June 1802). 
At the election of 1802 Horne Tooke maintained his interest in City politics, appearing in the Westminster hustings in support of Fox for a time and then John Graham. At Brentford he rallied in support of Burdett. Later that year William Tooke died, but instead of making Horne Tooke his heir he decided to discharge some personal debts and bequeathed his old friend the sum of $500. William Tooke's nephew, William Harwood, and great-nephew, John Beaseley, were to share the greater part of the fortune, although Horne Tooke claimed a verbal agreement was in place to divide the legacy equally between the three men. By this time, Horne Tooke had acquired an advance from Burdett to cover annuities for his daughters, and when Harwood refused Horne Tooke's claim Burdett sued and Harwood counterclaimed in chancery. After ten years the case was finally concluded in favour of Burdett. 
Despite the freedom afforded by Horne Tooke's financial security and semi-retirement from public life, he still laboured under the effects of gout. Indeed the desperate search for a cure perhaps accounts for his eccentric belief that jolting removed impurities from the human body. Thus he was in the habit of hiring a carriage and riding the roughest roads for several hours when he felt it necessary for his health. His infirmities, however, proved so debilitating that at the Westminster election of 1806 he was unable to campaign for James Paull in spite of his desire to help. The following year, after Paull and Burdett duelled, Horne Tooke published his last pamphlet, 'A Warning to the Electors of Westminster' (1807), in which he denounced Paull. Horne Tooke was by this time restricted from playing an active role in politics -- more so by his body than his mind. Rheumatism and other problems had made him a virtual prisoner in his own home, and in January 1808 he was so ill it appeared he would die. Horne Tooke, however, slowly recovered only to relapse in August 1809. Within weeks the Old Price riots at Covent Garden theatre were in the public spotlight, and Horne Tooke was a passive supporter of the rioters' cause. As he continued to struggle for his life in the next three years, he maintained an insatiable appetite, especially for grapes, and lost none of his mental alertness. 
Despite his will to live, Horne Tooke knew his time was quickly passing. He prepared a tomb in his garden and had a tombstone inscribed. In his last eighteen months he treated himself to a refurnished parlour and refurbished parts of his house, but was characteristically benevolent in discharging the taxes of struggling cottagers behind his property. Horne Tooke's last days were spent in suffering, as he endured kidney stones and gangrene in the legs. Under the constant care of his daughters and Burdett, Horne Tooke refused any visit by the clergy and passed his last days correcting a copy of Shakespeare. He died on 18 March 1812 in Wimbledon and, despite his wish to be buried in his garden, his daughters and sister insisted on a traditional Christian funeral, which took place on 30 March 1812 at St Mary's Church in Ealing. His will bequeathed his estate and possessions to his eldest daughter, Mary Hart. 
After his death Horne Tooke was as much revered and reviled as he was during his life. A writer in the 'Quarterly Review' thought his life was 'an unavailing and ungraceful struggle' (p. 315), while the 'Critical Review' found no reason to distinguish Horne Tooke 'among the principal actors in the political theatre during the last half century, yet he has certainly [made]... his influence strongly felt' (p. 462). Lord Brougham, in referring to Horne Tooke's political career, thought that 'no man out of office all his life and out of Parliament all but a few months... ever acted so conspicuous a part in the political warfare of his times' (Bewley and Bewley, 275). Horne Tooke was indeed a central figure in the burgeoning reform movement of the eighteenth century and his name appears in the chronicles of many of the seminal events of British political history during this period. He is perhaps best remembered by historians for his intrepid roles in the Wilkesite cause, in support of the American revolutionaries, and in the treason trials of 1794. While his political career remains well recognized, Horne Tooke's contributions as a philologist are less significant. Despite the contemporary success and influence of his main treatise on the subject, 'Diversions' was outdated by the mid-nineteenth century. Arguably his greatest claim in this respect, as Leigh Hunt suggested, is the fact that he was 'perhaps the first philologist of his nation' (ibid., 275). What cannot be denied is that Horne Tooke, irrespective of the success of his labours in pursuit of his political ideals or philological ideas, was a man whose character ensured he would be influential. His open and hospitable personality attracted to him many friends and disciples, who enjoyed his conversations that could fluctuate freely between humorous wit and caustic criticism. While his physical presence was never particularly imposing and his body fragile and lame in the end, it was his intelligence and mannerisms which ensured him respect in all forums. He was 'a man of independent spirit and upright character' ('Monthly Review', 424), and it is that unchanging feature under all circumstances which remains so memorable about Horne Tooke. 


@@@@@


doc= 27546


Tooke, Thomas (1774-1858), economist, born at Kronstadt, Russia, on 28 February 1774, was the eldest son of William Tooke (bap. 1744, d. 1820), then chaplain to the British factory at Kronstadt, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Eyton. William Tooke was his younger brother. Thomas began working at the age of fifteen in a house of business at St Petersburg, and subsequently became a partner in the London firms of Stephen Thornton & Co. and Astell, Tooke, and Thornton. On 8 September 1802 he married Priscilla (died 1837), daughter of Charles Combe MD of Bloomsbury, London. 
Tooke apparently did not take part in any public discussion of economic questions until 1819, in which year he gave evidence before committees of both houses of parliament on the resumption of cash payments by the Bank of England. He began his career as an economist as a supporter of the principles embodied in the report of the bullion committee of 1810. Those principles, advocated by Ricardo, Horner, Thornton, and Huskisson, were to become the basis of the bullionist position and were later adopted by the currency school. Tooke's approach to monetary issues changed later in his career, and in the 1840s he became a leading figure in the famous banking school. 
During the three years which followed the 'Resumption Act' of 1819 prices of nearly all commodities decreased, and the opinion that the fall in prices was the result of the return to cash payments gained support. Tooke's efforts during his early years as an active economist were devoted to the defence of the resumption and the refutation of the claims that it was responsible for the decline in prices and associated crises. In his first book, published in 1823, 'Thoughts and Details on the High and Low Prices of the Last Thirty Years', he presented data to support his point of view. He pursued the argument in his 'Considerations on the State of the Currency' (1826), which also included an innovative discussion of interest rates, and in his 'Letter to Lord Grenville' (1829), followed by another letter addressed to Grenville in that year, 'On the Currency in Connection with the Corn Trade'. His object was to negate 'the alleged influence of the bank restriction and resumption in raising or depressing general prices beyond the difference between gold and paper', and to show that the act of 1819 was practically inoperative so far as any contraction of the currency was concerned. This line of research led to a detailed examination of the causes which might affect prices, and Tooke claimed to establish the conclusion that the variations, both during the period of restriction and after the resumption, were due to 'real' causes, directly connected with the commodities themselves, and not to monetary factors. 
The same views were maintained in the first two volumes of the 'History of Prices', dealing with the period from 1793 to 1837, which were published in 1838. His conclusions as regards that period were that the high prices which, generally speaking, ruled between 1793 and 1814 were due to a relatively large number of unfavourable seasons, coupled with the obstructions to trade which were created by the Napoleonic wars; while the lower range of prices in the subsequent years was attributable to a series of more prolific seasons, the removal of the adverse influences arising out of a state of war, and the consequent improvement in the processes of manufacture and industry. 
The 'History of Prices' was completed in six volumes; the third, dealing with the years 1838-9, was published in 1840 and contained already some of the formulations of Tooke's transition into a banking school's position. The fourth volume was published in 1848, and the fifth and sixth, in the compilation of which Tooke was assisted by William Newmarch, in 1857, the year before Tooke's death. 
The whole work is an admirable analysis of the financial and commercial history of the period which it covers; and the subject was one with which Tooke was peculiarly well fitted to deal, possessing as he did the rather rare combination of a wide practical knowledge of mercantile affairs with considerable powers of reflection and reasoning. Whatever may be thought of his conclusions, the value of his methods of investigation is beyond dispute. 
The chief interest of the later volumes lies in their record of the steps by which Tooke gradually severed himself from the supporters of the currency theory, who may be regarded as the direct heirs of the bullionists of 1810 and 1819. There is a general agreement that Tooke's early publications, before 1840, reflect an approach to monetary issues quite different from that which characterizes his later works. Tooke's 1844 pamphlet, 'An Inquiry into the Currency Principle', marked a complete departure from the monetary views of his first period. These new views constituted a theoretical declaration of the principles of the banking school. In brief, he now argued that there was no theoretical or empirical basis for the currency school's distinction between banknotes and other means of payment, such as cheques and bills of exchange. Secondly, he argued that the quantity theory of money, which stated that prices were determined by the quantity of the medium in circulation, was wrong. Tooke and the banking school thought that, on the contrary, the quantity of the medium in circulation was determined by prices. Prices, he contended, were determined by the incomes of the consumers. 
The 'Resumption Act' passed in 1819 was a practical recognition of the instability associated with an inconvertible paper currency. But it did not take long to convince policy makers that the measure was incomplete. The experience of the great crisis of 1825, followed by those of 1836-9, showed that it was not enough to impose on the Bank of England the liability of payment in gold unless there was also security that the bank had the means of discharging the liability. Both in 1825 and in 1839 the danger of another suspension of cash payments was imminent. But while all agreed that the management of the currency, so far as it rested with the bank, was unsatisfactory, there was great difference of opinion as to the remedy which should be applied. 
Out of the controversy emerged the act of 1844, the main object of which was to prevent the over-issue of notes and to regulate their quantity so that the volume of the currency should at all times conform in amount to what it would have been under a purely metallic system. Thus, the 'Bank Act', which separated the issuing of notes from other banking activities, implemented the currency school's analysis. 
Tooke was resolutely opposed to the provisions of the act, holding them to be either superfluous or mischievous. He did not dispute that the affairs of the bank had been mismanaged; but he attributed this less to the system than to want of prudence in administering it. He thought that by some changes in the management of the bank, coupled with the compulsory maintenance of a much larger reserve of bullion, more satisfactory results would be achieved than under the inelastic system prescribed by the act. 
The supporters of the 'currency theory', whose principles were adopted by Peel and embodied in the act, were represented by Samuel Jones Loyd, Baron Overstone, Robert Torrens, and George Warde Norman. They contended that banks of issue, by the arbitrary extension of their circulation, could produce a direct effect upon prices, and thus stimulate speculation, with the consequent fluctuations and revulsions of credit; that the mere enactment of convertibility on demand was not a sufficient safeguard against these evils; and that the only adequate remedy was to separate the business of issue from that of banking in such a way that the former should regulate itself automatically, and that the discretion of the directors should be confined to the latter alone. 
Tooke, on the other hand, reinforced later on by John Fullarton and James Wilson, maintained from 1844 that a paper currency which was readily convertible on demand must necessarily conform, so far as its permanent value was concerned, to the value of a purely metallic currency; that for this purpose no other regulation was required beyond ready and immediate convertibility; that under these conditions banks had no power of arbitrarily increasing their issues; and that the level of prices was not directly affected by such issues. 
Tooke's views on the application of free-trade principles to note-issuing were the last to change during his transition from a 'moderate bullionist' to a banking school advocate. Whereas in his early conceptualization he totally rejected the application of 'laissez-faire' to note-issuing, in 1844 he came to the conclusion that, in fact, competition, under certain restrictions, might work. 
In Tooke's earlier writings there were many passages inconsistent with his later opinions; and the process of development was very gradual (see J. Fullarton, 'On the Regulation of Currencies', 2nd edn, 1845, 18). Overstone also observed before the 1857 select committee on the 'Bank Acts' that 'Mr. Tooke is upon this subject of science very like our great artist Mr. Turner upon the subject of art: he has his later manner as well as his middle manner.' 
Tooke was one of the earliest supporters of the free-trade movement, which first assumed a definite form in the petition of the merchants of the City of London presented to the House of Commons by Alexander Baring (later Baron Ashburton) on 8 May 1820. This document, which contains an admirable statement of the principles of free trade, was drawn up by Tooke; and the circumstances which led to its preparation are described in the sixth volume of the 'History of Prices'. The substantial advances in the direction of free trade made by Lord Liverpool's government, especially after the accession of William Huskisson in 1828, were no doubt largely due to the effect produced by the petition; and it may fairly be claimed for it that it gave the first impulse towards that revision of commercial policy which was the work of the next half-century. 
It was to support the principles of the merchants' petition that Tooke, with Ricardo, Malthus, James Mill, and others, founded the Political Economy Club in April 1821. From the beginning he took a prominent part in its discussions, and he continued to attend its meetings until within a few weeks of his death, his last recorded attendance being on 3 December 1857. 
Besides giving evidence on economic questions before several parliamentary committees, such as those of 1819 on the resumption of cash payments, of 1821 on agricultural depression and on foreign trade, and of 1832, 1840, 1841, and 1848 on the 'Bank Acts', Tooke was the chief commissioner of the children's employment commission and a prominent member of the factories inquiry commission of 1833. He retired from active business on his own account in 1836, but was governor of the Royal Exchange Assurance Corporation from 1840 to 1852, and was also chairman of the St Katharine's Dock Company. 
Tooke was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in March 1821, and a corresponding member of the Institut de France (Academie des Sciences Morales et Politiques) in February 1853. He lived in London at 12 Russell Square, afterwards in Richmond Terrace, and at 31 Spring Gardens, where he died on 26 February 1858. He was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. His second son survived him, two other sons having predeceased him. 
In the year after Tooke's death the Tooke professorship of economic science and statistics at King's College, London, was founded in his memory, the endowment being raised by public subscription. 


@@@@@


doc= 27547


Tooke, William (bap. 1744, d. 1820), writer and translator, was baptized at St John, Clerkenwell, on 26 January 1744, the second son of Thomas Tooke (1705-1773), vintner, of that parish and his wife, Hannah, only daughter of Thomas Mann of St James's, Clerkenwell, whom he married in March 1737. The Tookes claimed descent from Le Sieur de Touque, who arrived in Britain with William the Conqueror. After a liberal classical education at John Shield's reputable Islington academy, William Tooke and his lifelong friend the future publisher John Nichols were apprenticed to William Bowyer the younger. Two years later, in 1760, Tooke was turned over to James Harrison: he became free of the Stationers' Company in May 1765. His correspondence from this period gives a unique insight into Tooke's life as a journeyman typographer and printer, his love entanglements, writing potential, and his earliest decision, in September 1767, to enter the church. During 1767 he edited and printed an impressive third edition of John Weever's 'Antient Funeral Monuments of Great-Britain'. Two years later he printed 'The Loves of Othniel and Achsah: Translated from the Chaldee', described by the 'Gentleman's Magazine' as 'a moral poem, in prose, in the manner of Klopstock and Gesner' ('GM', 1st ser., 39, 1769, 261). 
The year 1771 marked a milestone for Tooke, then a resident of St John's Square, Clerkenwell. On 24 February he obtained letters of ordination as a deacon and priest from the bishop of London. He married Elizabeth ('b'. 'c'.1749), daughter of Thomas Eyton of Llangynhaval, Denbighshire, and his wife, Alice Robert. They had two sons: Thomas Tooke (1774-1858), economist, and William Tooke (1777-1863), lawyer. Tooke turned down John Duncombe's offer of the living of West Thurrock in Essex when the Russia Company elected him chaplain to the English Factory's church at Kronstadt, St Petersburg's commercial harbour, on 22 March. A year later he was admitted to a master mason's degree at the 'Perfect Union' lodge in the Russian capital. His edition of 'Mary Magdalene's Funeral Tears', by the Jesuit poet Robert Southwell, was published in 1772. 
In March 1774 Tooke succeeded John Glen King, his influential friend, as chaplain of the English Factory's St Petersburg church, located at the centre of the Galley, or English Quay. He held the post until 1792 and during this time became friendly with the clergy of several different denominations and with many leading writers and academics, stimulating his ambition to make their works known in Britain. In 1777 Nichols printed Tooke's translation, with additional notes, of 'Pieces Written by Mons. Falconet and Mons. Diderot on Sculpture in General', with special reference to Etienne Falconet's sculpting of his famous equestrian statue of Peter the Great. Then, between 1780 and 1783, Nichols published the four volumes of Tooke's anonymous translation of J. G. Georgi's German work, 'Russia, or, A Compleat Historical Account of All the Nations which Compose that Empire'. Extensively reviewed in the 'Gentleman's Magazine', under Nichols's editorship, it provided English readers with their first comprehensive knowledge of the subject. Furthermore, by including Tooke's translation of Pallas's dissertation on the formation of mountains, read in 1777 to the Russian Academy of Sciences, it publicized what Cuvier regarded as the cornerstone of modern geology. 
On leave of absence from October 1783 to June 1784, Tooke travelled overland to Britain, visiting Emanuel Kant at Konigsberg and the Berlin Academy of Sciences 'en route'. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of London on 5 June 1783 and signed its charter book on 21 January 1784. He was admitted to Jesus College, Cambridge, as a sizar in May 1784, and was appointed a corresponding member of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland on 12 June. An informative letter from Tooke to Glen King about ancient Tartar burial sites was read on 25 March at the Society of Antiquaries of London. 
Launching a major project on his return to Russia, Tooke contributed thirty-one letters describing fictitious journeys through central and southern Russia and the Ukraine to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (1785-9 and 1794-1816). He wrote as M. M. M., from his family motto, 'Militia mea multiplex', and adopted the persona of a pseudo-military traveller with a peripatetic lifestyle. Most of his material was drawn from travel accounts by Pallas, Georgi, Gmelin, and other historical, cultural, and ethnographic sources. 
Tooke was a voluminous correspondent, mostly with Nichols, and his letters, both published and unpublished, provide a remarkable picture of the life of an intelligent and observant Russophile. Among unpublished writings that are discussed in his correspondence are a guide to teaching Greek in schools, via Latin (1785), and his translation in 1783 of Carl Friedrich Bahrdt's version of the 'New Testament' from the third Berlin edition, which Tooke presented to Dr Williams's Library (MS Mod., fol. 43) in 1816. Other letters reflect what resulted in two series of Tooke's didactic lectures, published by Benjamin White, in four volumes each, as 'Moral and philosophical estimates of the state and faculties of man; and of the nature and source of human happiness' (1789) and 'Moral and philosophical suggestions on various subjects related to human perfection and happiness' (1790); both were well received. Earlier Daines Barrington had relied on the accuracy of Tooke's data when quoting from his letters of 1774 and 1775 in support of his view that the north pole was navigable from the Arctic Ocean throughout the year. Tooke also supplied Richard Gough and Joseph White with scientific and scholarly material in 1784 and 1785. However, his correspondence with Sir Joseph Banks in 1785, 1786, and 1791 is the clearest evidence of his productive liaison between the Royal Society and the Imperial Academy of Sciences at St Petersburg. In his letter dated 23 September 1791 Tooke informed Banks that over the past four years he had compiled several thousand folio pages of items, not published in English, from every branch of literature. 'I take dry dissertations', he writes, 'and give them an easy dress and entertaining air. I compress elaborate works into a legible compass. I stew down old German professors into a potable soup, distill dull lectures into volatile essence, and extract the marrow of every critical bone. (BL, Add. MS 33982, fols. 320-21)' In December 1791 Tooke told Nichols that he wanted to leave Russia and set up a periodical along the lines of James Anderson's well-known 'Bee, or, Literary Intelligencer', a move that was made possible in 1792 by a substantial legacy from his uncle William Mann of the Middle Temple. At his departure Tooke was elected a member of the Free Economic Society of St Petersburg and, on 3 September 1792, a corresponding member of the Imperial Academy of Sciences. Tooke bought a house in Great Ormond Street, where he lived from 1795 to 1820. He frequently attended meetings at the Royal Society, where he introduced many visitors, signed proposal certificates, and presented the library with nine of his works. He continued to keep Banks posted on Russia through Matthew Guthrie, his St Petersburg correspondent. He composed a memoir of Sir Hans Sloane and his collections, written in French, with English annotations, on Chinese paper from Canton (Guangzhou) made from bamboo cane. He and his son Thomas subscribed to proprietors' shares in the Russell Institution for the Promotion of Literary and Scientific Knowledge, founded in 1808 at Great Coram Street, Brunswick Square. 
Tooke continued to make good use of the eclectic material he had accumulated from Russia. In 1795 'The Repertory of Arts and Manufactures' published his letter (reprinted in the 'Annual Register' and the 'Pocket Magazine') about the fires during the 1780s on a Russian frigate and to hemp at a ropewalk plant caused by self-igniting substances. That year he also published the two volumes of his 'Varieties of literature from foreign literary journals and original MSS.', a broad selection which included Gregory Shelekov's account of his epic voyage from Okhotsk to America between 1783 and 1787. It was followed in 1798 by 'Selections from the most celebrated foreign literary journals and other periodical publications', the second volume of which contained A. L. Schloezer's pioneering dissertations on Russian history. In the same year a new edition of 'The General Biographical Dictionary', revised and enlarged in fifteen volumes, was published under Tooke's overall editorship. Between 1798 and 1801 he translated or compiled four major works about Russia. Jean-Henri Castera's French biography, rendered by Tooke as 'The Life of Catharine II, Empress of Russia: an Enlarged Translation' (1798), appeared in six editions; over half the text consisted of Tooke's additions. Castera incorporated most of these, with his own new findings, in another edition of his biography, from which Tooke produced a fourth edition (1800), exemplifying his firmly held belief that a translator-compiler becomes part owner and author of a translated work in his own right. He also supervised the translation of F. C. P. Masson's anonymous 'Memoires secretes', published in 1800 by Longman and Rees, as a supplement to 'The Life of Catharine II', under the title of 'Secret Memoirs of the Court of Petersburg'. His next compilation, 'View of the Russian empire during the reign of Catharine the Second, and to the close of the present century' (1799), was translated into French from the second edition in 1801. Much praised by contemporaries, this comprehensive work succeeded in promulgating Russia through the systematic translation and reconfiguration of source materials. Tooke followed it up in 1800 with a diligent 'History of Russia from the foundation of the monarchy by Rurik to the accession of Catharine the Great'. His final major translation on a Russian theme, 'The Picture of Petersburg: from the German of Henry Storch' (1801), gave the British reader a well-informed survey of contemporary Russian life, personalities, and institutions, to which Tooke added his own innovatory Russian verse translations. 
An excellent preacher, Tooke published at his own expense the sermon he delivered on Ash Wednesday in 1808 as honorary chaplain to the Stationers' Company. In 1814 the corporation of London printed the five sermons which he preached as the lord mayor's chaplain, prompting Nichols to remark that if he could dispense ecclesiastical preferment, 'Mr. Tooke would not be long without at least a Prebendal Stall' ('GM', 1st ser., 84/2, 1814, 48). Between 1802 and 1814 he published translations of the sermons by Georg Joachim Zollikofer, the celebrated Leipzig reformed church minister, and also translated his 'Devotional Prayers and Exercises' (1815). His wittily prefaced translation 'Private History of Peregrinus Proteus the Philosopher... from the German' (by Christoph Martin Wieland) appeared in 1796. In 1820 Nichols printed the two quarto volumes of Tooke's translation 'Lucian of Samosata: from the Greek. With the Comments of Wieland and Others'. In a long introduction Tooke clearly defined his guiding principles as a translator, enshrined in his 'Illustrations' of Horace's epistles and satires, over 300 pages of which appeared in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' between September 1806 and November 1811. In what would have been a key work, he was revising these for separate publication at the time of his death. 
Tooke died in Guilford Street, London, on 17 November 1820 following a short illness, and was buried on the 23rd in the new burial-ground adjoining the St Pancras churchyard. He was survived by his wife. Nichols was a pallbearer at his funeral. 


@@@@@


doc= 27548


Tooke, William (1777-1863), lawyer and promoter of arts and literature, was born in St Petersburg, Russia, on 22 November 1777. He was the younger son of William Tooke (bap. 1744, d. 1820), historian of Russia and chaplain to the factory of the Russia Company at St Petersburg, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Eyton of Llangynhafal, Denbighshire. Thomas Tooke (1774-1858), economist, was his elder brother. William went to England in 1792, and was articled to William Devon, solicitor, in Gray's Inn, with whom he entered into partnership in 1798. Subsequently he went into partnership with Charles Parker at 39 Bedford Row. He remained there for many years before practising instead in the firm of Tooke, Son, and Hallowes. In 1807 he married Amelia (died 1848), youngest daughter of Samuel Shaen, landowner, of Crix Hall, Hatfield Peverel, near Colchester, Essex. Through her nieces' marriages, he was related to Henry Solly, Unitarian social reformer, G. J. Allman, botanist and zoologist, and the archaeologist W. C. Perry. 
In 1825 Tooke took a prominent part in the formation of the St Katharine's Dock. He was the London agent of George Barker, the solicitor of the London and Birmingham Railway. He also acted for the Society for the Suppression of Mendicity. He assisted in the foundation of University College, London, and was one of the first council (19 December 1823). He represented the interests of the college in the 1830s, pressing in the Commons for legislation to enable London to grant degrees, rather unwillingly accepting the ambivalent title of the college which was granted its charter in 1836. He was its treasurer until 1841. Tooke procured the charter for the Royal Society of Literature without payment for his professional services. For many years he was an active member of the council of the society, and one of the chief promoters of Thomas Wright's 'Biographia Britannica literaria'. In 1826, with Lord Brougham, Dr Birkbeck, George Grote, and others, he took part in the formation of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge; but in 1846, like many others, he disapproved of the publication of the society's 'Biographical Dictionary' on the grounds that it was too ambitious a project, both intellectually and financially. 
Tooke was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 12 March 1818. He was present at the first annual meeting of the Law Institution on 5 June 1827, and was mainly instrumental in obtaining its royal charter of incorporation in January 1832. For some years he was the usual chairman of the meetings and dinners, and when Lord Brougham was considering a measure for the establishment of local courts, he addressed to him a letter in defence of the profession of an attorney. From an earlier period he was a leading member of the Society of Arts; in 1814 he was the chairman of the committee of correspondence and editor of the 'Transactions', and in 1862 he was elected president of the society. For services rendered to the Institution of Civil Engineers he was elected an honorary member of that corporation. From 1824 he was honorary secretary and from 1840 one of the three treasurers of the Royal Literary Fund Society. 
At the general election of 1830, in conjunction with his friend Sir John William Lubbock, Tooke unsuccessfully contested the close borough of Truro. After the passing of the 'Reform Bill', however, he was elected on 15 December 1832, and represented the borough until July 1837. He was afterwards a candidate for Finsbury, but did not proceed to a poll, and on 30 June 1841 he unsuccessfully contested Reading. During the five sessions that he sat in parliament he supported reform, and gave his vote for measures for the promotion of education and for the abolition of slavery; but in later life his views were said to have become more conservative. He died at his London residence, 12 Russell Square, on 20 September 1863, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. He left two daughters and a son, Arthur William Tooke of Pinner, Middlesex. Tooke was fond of literature and wrote several works, ranging from texts on the poet Charles Churchill and the 'ancien regime', to private publications of his own verse. He was a contributor to the 'New Monthly Magazine', the 'Annual Register', and the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. 


@@@@@


doc= 27549


Tooker, William (1553/4-1621), dean of Lichfield and author, was born in Exeter, the second son of William Tooker and Honora Erisey. He received his early education at Winchester College, and proceeded to Oxford, where his matriculation from New College aged eighteen, was entered under the year 1572. He was elected a scholar of New College in 1575 and was a full fellow from 1577 to 1585. On 16 October 1579 he graduated BA, and he incepted MA in 1583. He was admitted BTh and licensed DTh on 4 July 1594. 
From 1580 Tooker was a canon of Exeter Cathedral. He was installed as rector of St James-the-Great, Kilkhampton, Cornwall, in 1584. The following year he resigned his fellowship at New College and took up the position of archdeacon of Barnstaple in Exeter diocese. In 1588 he was made rector of St Andrew's, West Dean, Wiltshire, a position he held until his death. In the same year he was appointed one of the chaplains royal, and probably was also collated prebendary of Salisbury Cathedral. In 1590 Tooker was appointed rector of St Peter's, Clovelly, Devon, a position he held until 1601. 
A loyal supporter of the monarchy, Tooker compiled a Latin refutation of the excommunication of Elizabeth I by Pope Pius V, 'Charisma, sive, Donum sanationis' (1597). In a historical overview from the times of Edward the Confessor to his own age he advocated that English monarchs were endowed with the same gift of kingship that the rulers of biblical times had received. This 'they have accepted directly from God, and have been using from the times of the early Christians' ('immidiate... ab ipso Deo acceperunt, & a primo christianitatis tempore... exercuerunt'; Tooker, 'Charisma', sig. M 3'r'). 
In an age that saw regular debates on whether the Church of England should be remodelled on presbyterian principles Tooker was a firm defender of the establishment of the church, a subject he addressed at length in his 'Of the Fabrique of the Church and Church-Mens Livings' (1604). Advocating that the good estate of the established church depended on the well-being of the state, he emphasized that 'Parity in the Church once established in the governement Ecclesiasticall, will draw on paritie in the politicall and civill estate' (Tooker, 'Fabrique', sig. A 3'r'). Indeed, clergy derived the necessary freedom to exercise their ministry directly from the monarch: 'onely the Prince giveth them publique liberty, without let or disturbance, to doe that which Christ hath commanded' (ibid., sig. H 4'r'). 
In a later publication against the German Jesuit Martin Beck (Becanus), 'Duellum, sive, Singularis certamen cum Martino Becano Jesuita' (1611), he reiterated his strong belief that, although the monarch was the rightful governor of the church, he made no claims to be a spiritual leader of the church: '
God did not bestow ecclesiastical rights on king or emperor. Though a number of church members are subjects of the monarch, the king does not stand above the sacraments, or the Word, or above the spiritual gifts of the church. Therefore he can only ever be her supreme governor. 




(Res ecclesiae Deo dandae sunt, non caesari vel Regi: partes vero Ecclesiae sunt homines... qui sunt regis;... rex non est supra sacramenta, et verbum, nec super Ecclesiae spiritualia charismata, et tamen supremus est in Ecclesia gubernator.) 
(Tooker, 'Duellum', 23)' In recognition of his loyalty to the monarchy Tooker was made dean of Lichfield Cathedral in February 1605. Nine months later, on 25 November 1605, he resigned his archdeaconry. He died at Salisbury on 19 March 1621, and was buried in Salisbury Cathedral on 21 March. He was survived by his son Robert. 


@@@@@


doc= 27550


Topcliffe, Richard (1531-1604), interrogator and torturer, was born on 14 November 1531, the eldest son of Robert Topcliffe of Somerby, Lincolnshire, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of Thomas, third Baron Burgh of Gainsborough. Orphaned at twelve, Topcliffe's wardship was granted to his uncle Sir Anthony Neville. In 1548 he was admitted to Gray's Inn, but he does not seem to have attended university, concentrating instead on administering his inherited estates in Lincolnshire, Nottinghamshire, and at Topcliffe in the North Riding of Yorkshire. By his own account Topcliffe entered the queen's service shortly before her accession. This introduction may have been secured through the family of his wife, Jane Willoughby of Wollaton, one of whose nieces was an attendant to Princess Elizabeth at Hatfield; it may also help to explain the royal favour that Topcliffe enjoyed throughout his life and the peculiar political licence, in more than one sense, that he came to exercise. 
Through the Willoughbys, Topcliffe also had access to the patronage of the earls of Leicester and Warwick. These connections, added to those derived from the service of his guardian Neville to successive earls of Shrewsbury, laid the basis for a career which was relatively unremarkable until Topcliffe was well into his fifties. In January 1570 he raised a band of thirty horses and men at Kenilworth in response to the northern rising, and was later rewarded with stewardship of the lands confiscated from the rebel leader Richard Norton. In 1572 it was probably Leicester who secured for him the parliamentary seat of Beverley and most of what is known of his activities in the 1570s -- in parliament and elsewhere -- relates to the aftermath of the rising and the investigation of the rebels. It seems to have been this line of work, secured for him by Shrewsbury in 1578 and made more widely applicable by the arrival of the Jesuit mission to England in 1580, that set Topcliffe on the road to becoming the most notorious of those government servants who sought out and interrogated enemies of the crown. The queen's encouragement was a spur. In 1578 Topcliffe related how, during one of many royal progresses at which he was present, she informed him personally of 'sundry lewde Popishe beasts' who were resorting to Buxton (Nichols, 217). It was a theme to which he returned in parliament nine years later, blaming religious superstition in Derbyshire on 'ignorance for lacke of learned ministers' (Hartley, 391). This strongly protestant tone was echoed on other occasions. He complained that Staffordshire was 'backwod' in terms of reformed religion (Hammer, 174), and in correspondence with Shrewsbury deplored the silencing of 'good preachers' in East Anglia merely for 'a lytell nycenes' in their theology (Nichols, 217). 
Topcliffe's pursuit of Catholics escalated from the beginning of 1582, and in October of that year he began to be named in Catholic correspondence not just as an interrogator of suspects but also as a torturer. Such work was sanctioned in two ways. Topcliffe was appointed to official commissions, such as those of August 1588 and January 1592, charged with examining imprisoned recusants and priests. Meanwhile, in particular cases he was issued with conciliar warrants authorizing interrogation through the use of torture. In support of these duties Topcliffe was also involved in the search for suspects and in their arrest. This could be as a result of his own initiative, at the behest of the council, or at the request of the House of Commons, as in February 1587, or through official commissions such as that of March 1593. 
Evidence directly linking Topcliffe with the use of torture is sparse in the 1580s. He was reported to have racked a prisoner named John Getter in the Tower in 1582 (Caraman, 'The Other Face', 243) but it was as an interrogator who cowed and bullied victims 'in most railing manner, as is always usual with him' that Topcliffe became widely known in the mid-1580s (Caraman, 'Gerard', 270). By now he was a Lincolnshire justice and MP for Old Sarum, a borough in the patronage of the Shrewsburys. Outside politics he had interests in peat extraction and droving, but at Westminster during the Commons sessions of 1584-5 and 1586-7 he was most active in those committees and debates that discussed the Catholic menace, religious disorders, and state security. His absence from parliament after 1587 seems to have been the result of a rift with Shrewsbury, which may in turn have derived from Topcliffe's developing reputation. From September 1588 privy council records show him regularly employed in torturing government prisoners. 
Torture authorized by government had been in steady use in England since the mid-1530s but it seems to have increased markedly in the 1580s as Catholic missionary activity escalated. Many were now involved in its authorization -- councillors, legal officers, even bishops -- yet it was Topcliffe who in the decade from 1588 came primarily to symbolize this most wretched aspect of the Tudor regime. Catholic correspondents were sickened by the relish with which 'the cruellest tyrant of all England' undertook his duties (Caraman, 'Gerard', 230), while in court circles in the mid-1590s the rack and other officially sanctioned instruments of torture were referred to as 'our Topcliffian customs' (Birch, 160). Questions concerning the legality of these customs, their authorization, and the limits to which they could be taken came together in the case of the Jesuit missionary Robert Southwell. In June 1592 Topcliffe graphically sought the queen's permission for the course he intended to take: the prisoner should be manacled at the wrists with 'his feett standinge upon the grounde, & his hands But as highe as he can wratche [reach] against the wawle [wall]' (BL, Lansdowne MS 72). At his trial in February 1595 Southwell stated that he had been tortured on ten occasions, whereupon, according to Catholic reports, Attorney-General Coke commented that 'Mr Topcliffe has no need to go about to excuse his proceedings in the manner of his torturing' (Heath, 143), and Topcliffe himself justified his own actions by reference to a conciliar warrant authorizing Southwell's torture short of death or maiming. 
This was Topcliffe's most notorious case. In the last years of Lord Burghley, the harshest rigours of conciliar policy against Catholics diminished, as did Topcliffe's protected position. He was briefly imprisoned in 1595 for maligning privy councillors, and while in the Marshalsea complained to the queen of his treatment in characteristic terms: 'by this disgrace... the freshe deade boanes of Father Southwell at Tyburne and Father Wallpoole at Yorke, executed bothe since Shrovetyde, wyll daunce for joye' (BL, Harley MS 9889). Once released, Topcliffe was in further trouble, councillors examining him early in 1596 about his arbitrary treatment of prisoners in the Gatehouse. Nevertheless, now in his mid-sixties and in the eyes of his victims 'hoary and a veteran in evil' (Caraman, 'Gerard', 68), Topcliffe was employed by the council for a further four years in applying the manacles to various of its prisoners in Bridewell -- plotters, thieves, murderers, 'Egipcians and wanderers' ('APC', '1596-7', 325). In August 1597 he was also responsible for initiating a government inquiry into the scandalous play 'The Isle of Dogs', during which he was required to interview Thomas Nash and his fellow players in the Fleet prison. In the event Nash made himself scarce, but Topcliffe did interrogate Ben Jonson and two actors. 
Topcliffe's last years were clouded by lameness and domestic troubles. His nephew Edmund renounced the now odious family name, and his eldest son, Charles, was twice convicted of felony. Nevertheless Elizabeth continued to receive Topcliffe and seek his views on security matters. He retained his house at Westminster churchyard where he kept a 'stronge chamber' and detained suspects in 'hande gyves [fetters]' (BL, Lansdowne MS 72), but increasingly withdrew to his estates at Somerby and Padley Hall, Derbyshire, the latter acquired from the impecunious Catholic Thomas Fitzherbert as part of a contract under which Topcliffe undertook to use persecution as a means of bringing about the early deaths of Fitzherbert's father, uncle, and cousin. Topcliffe died in November or December 1604, leaving most of his possessions to his son Charles. He had three other sons and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 27551


Topham, Edward (1751-1820), journalist and playwright, was born in York in 1751 and baptized there on 17 June 1751, probably the sixth of at least eight children of Francis Topham LLD (c.1713-1770), master of faculties and commissar of the exchequer and prerogative court of the York diocese. When Topham was seven his father, an ambitious and powerful church lawyer, tried to procure, and believed he had obtained, for him the promise of the reversion of his lucrative commissaryship. Dean Fountayne, supported by Archbishop Hutton, flatly denied any such undertaking, and Dr Topham's self-righteous anger at being forsworn erupted into a pamphlet war, initiated by his 'Letter address'd to the dean of York; in which is given a full detail of some very extraordinary behaviour' (1758). Employed by the dean to reply was the vicar of Coxwold, Laurence Sterne, who launched into his own literary career with 'A Political Romance, Addressed to -- --, Esq., of York' (1759; reissued 1769, reprinted as 'The History of a Good Warm Watchcoat'), an extended lampoon, in which Dr Topham was cast as Trim, a village sexton. 
Edward Topham was sent to Eton College in 1756 or 1757 and remained there eleven years. There is some doubt over his reported involvement in the boys' mass protest against Dr Foster's rule in November 1768. Frederick Reynolds, who became a close friend through Topham's interest in the theatre, recounts Topham's story of participation in a subordinate role, but the claims that he was a leader of the rebellion (including in his own over-embellished account in 'The schools', 'World', 15 November 1787) are not substantiated in other sources. Moreover, the Cambridge University records state that he was enrolled as a pensioner at Trinity College (22 April 1767), over a year before the revolt took place, though Topham may not have taken up residence until his admission as fellow-commoner on 23 October 1769. Topham did not study very seriously at Cambridge, where he became known for his ability as an engraver of humorous subjects: his reputation was sufficient for Horace Walpole to want to add examples of his work to his growing collection. He left without taking a degree. 
After a period travelling on the continent Topham spent six months in Scotland, mainly in Edinburgh, and then published 'Letters from Edinburgh, 1774 and 1775' (1776), containing 'Observations on the diversions, customs, manners, and laws of the Scotch nation'. In 1777 he published the tory pamphlet 'Address to Edmund Burke on affairs in America'. In the same year he purchased an army commission, as cornet in the King's 2nd Horse Guards, of which regiment he served for about seven years as adjutant. Having earned the gratitude of George III for his efficiency in bringing his soldiers up to scratch, he was caricatured in print shops as 'the tip-top adjutant'. 
Topham was a leader of fashion of the day. Reynolds describes his 'short scarlet coat, with large cut steel buttons; a very short white waistcoat, top-boots, and leather breeches, so long in their upper quarters, as almost to reach his chin', in contrast to the long coats and waistcoats and short breeches normally worn at this period (Reynolds, 2.39). Conspicuous as a man of fashion even at a period when singularity of dress or manner was not unusual, Topham featured in several of Reynolds's comedies and the playwright later commented that his 'profits on Topham alone... must have amounted to upwards of one thousand pounds' (ibid., 2.46). 
During the Gordon riots in London in June 1780 Topham distinguished himself in command of a small detachment of cavalry, though accounts vary as to whether he acted in defence of Parliament Square or Buckingham House. He was promoted to captain in 1782. In 1783 he acted as second to Captain George Riddell of the Horse Grenadiers in his (illegal) duel with Captain Cunningham of the Scots Greys. Seriously wounded, Riddell was conveyed to Topham's house in Bryanstone Street, where he shortly afterwards died. On his retirement Topham acquired the rank of major. 
Topham was well acquainted with many prominent political and theatrical personalities, including Wilkes, Pitt, the Colmans, and Sheridan. His direct association with the theatre began in the summer of 1779, when he contributed a prologue to 'A Widow and No Widow' by his friend R. P. Jodrell, the first of many prologues and epilogues for plays by Miles Peter Andrews, Mrs Inchbald, Reynolds, Thomas Morton, and others, which (apart from a break between 1786 and 1791) he continued to write on a fairly regular basis until 1795. For his efforts in this vein he became known as Captain Epilogue. Topham turned to playwriting in 1780. He wrote several farces, the earliest of which, 'Deaf Indeed' (1780), was damned on the first night and never performed again. More successful were 'The Fool' (1785), 'Small Talk, or, The Westminster Boy' (1786), and 'Bonds without Judgement' (1787). In all three pieces there were roles for the actress Mary Stephens (Becky) Wells (1762-1829), with whom Topham began a liaison during the mid-1780s. The dedicatee of the published text of his second play, 'The Fool', in which she had a big success as Laura, Mrs Wells also spoke a specially written 'Epilogue-Prologue' in the character of Macheath, her principal role in the main piece of the evening, 'The Beggar's Opera'. In Topham's third play, chosen for a benefit performance, her appearance in the second act dressed as a Westminster scholar caused uproar from the claque of Westminster boys, purposely present, and the remainder of the play could not be heard. 
On 1 January 1787 Topham began a daily newspaper entitled the 'World and Fashionable Advertiser'. Originally it was designed to puff Mrs Wells, but according to James Winston, she took over a large part of its conduct over several years, including sending reports from the Hastings trials. Other associates on the paper included Miles Peter Andrews, the Revd Charles Este, and the publisher John Bell (1745-1831), who had a share in the management. Hannah More, referring to its emphasis on 'elopements, divorces, and suicides', described the paper as full of 'elegant periods and sublimated nonsense' (Walpole, 31.265). The first productions of the mainly Florentine-based band of English poets noted for their flamboyant sentimental verse, known as the Della Cruscans, made their first appearance in the 'World'. Among Topham's own contributions were his sometimes unreliable recollections of Eton and the earliest version of his 'Life of the Late John Elwes' (first published 1790 in book form; 12th edn, 1805), the memoir of a notorious miser who lived at Stoke in Suffolk, close to Topham's villa Cowslip Hall (so-called after the nickname Mrs Wells acquired as heroine of O'Keeffe's 'The Agreeable Surprise', 1781). Topham was proud of his achievement in having persuaded Elwes to settle his money on his children. In Reynolds's opinion this biography exhibited 'so perfect a picture of character and eccentricity, as ever to render any other account of its subject wholly supererogatory' (Reynolds, 2.36). 
The proclivities of Topham's newspaper the 'World' for scandal and gossip eventually and inevitably landed him in trouble with the courts. He was accused of libelling the memory of the late George Nassau Clavering, third Earl Cowper (died Florence, 22 December 1789). When a guilty verdict was returned, Topham appealed, on grounds of misdirection of the jury. After protracted legal wrangling it was allowed ('King v. Topham', 1791) on the grounds that there had been no intention 'to create any ill blood, or to throw any scandal on the family and posterity of Lord Cowper, or to induce them to break the peace in vindicating the honour of the family' (Pollock, 347), a judgment still applied as precedent. Meanwhile, by autumn 1790, the partnership between Topham and Este had broken up after a quarrel over the financial arrangements, Este having allegedly surrendered his quarter share in the paper in 1788 in return for an annuity. A dispute ensued through Topham's refusal to pay, largely conducted through the columns of 'The Oracle', and, in January 1793, by reference to the courts. The British Library copy of Este's 'My Own Life' (1787) includes cuttings of 'The Oracle' letters, headed in manuscript 'The Rev. Mr Este's appeal to the publick'. 
Topham disposed of the encumbrance of the 'World' in 1792, at about the same time abandoning Mrs Wells for another actress. He retreated with their three children (Maria Cowslip, Harriet, and Juliet) -- a fourth died at birth -- to his native Yorkshire, to Wold Cottage, a substantial dwelling near Thwing, where he took to farming several hundred acres of land and breeding greyhounds, among them the pre-eminently swift black greyhound called Snowball. A product of this period of semi-retirement was his publication of a new annotated edition of Somerville's poem 'The Chase' (1804), with a sketch of the author's life. 
An event of major astronomical significance took place on Topham's property at Wold Cottage about 3 p.m. on Sunday 13 December 1795, when a large meteorite weighing 56 lb fell to earth two fields from the house, the noise of impact being heard as far away as Bridlington. Topham was absent in London at the time but his estate workers retrieved the object and Topham soon realized its significance both as a phenomenon worthy of exhibition and as a money-making enterprise. The circumstances of the fall were recounted in Topham's letter to James Boaden's newspaper 'The Oracle' (12 February 1796; later reprinted in the 'Gentleman's Magazine', 1797, with additional testimonials and an engraving). Handbills were distributed and advertisements taken out in newspapers advising of the stone's public exhibition 'for the inspection of the curious' ('The Times', 7 July 1796). It was transported to London, where, opposite the Gloucester Coffee House, at 2 Piccadilly, it was shown to visitors on payment of a shilling fee, for which they received as a souvenir 'an exact Engraving of the Stone' and copies of authenticating testimonials by witnesses (ibid.). A quarto pamphlet entitled 'An account of a remarkable stone which fell from the clouds' was published by Topham in 1798 and in 1799 he erected a brick column on the spot, within sight of Wold Cottage, where the meteor had landed. Several years later, in 1804, Topham sold what was left of the stone -- substantial pieces having already been given away -- to James Sowerby for his private museum in London. After 1837 it eventually passed, via the British Museum and former South Kensington Museum, to the Natural History Museum, London, where it is still exhibited as the 'Wold Cottage meteorite'. In the collections are contemporary illustrations of the meteor, including the tinted engraving originally done by Topham's daughter Harriet for Sowerby's museum. The event's continuing importance lies in the fact that it is 'the oldest recorded fall on the British mainland for which a sample remains' and because it played a significant part in the acceptance of meteorites as stones from the sky (Pillinger and Pillinger, 589). 
A self-described wit and noted conversationalist, Topham was active in the exclusive Lion Club (of which there were only thirteen members, including Reynolds, Miles Peter Andrews, and Robert Merry). He was known to a very wide circle and was described as in temper 'easy and companionable' and 'a warm and zealous friend' ('GM', 1820, 469). In physical appearance he was distinguished by a set of 'immense whiskers', often referred to by the future George IV as 'his great bird's nests' (Reynolds, 2.29). Politically prominent, man of fashion and womanizer, Topham was in youth a continual subject of caricature. He was, for instance, depicted in James Gillray's 'Thunderer' (20 August 1782) as a windmill, together with the prince of Wales and the actress Mrs Perdita Robinson, with whom he had a short relationship in the early 1780s, after she was cast off by her royal lover; and Rowlandson shows him (5 October 1785) as 'Captain Epilogue to the [Mrs] Wells'. 
A more sober side to Topham's personality made him active in the magistracy in Suffolk and in the north and east ridings of Yorkshire, where he was also deputy lieutenant. A devoted father to his daughters and a liberal landowner, he was a keen promoter of the science of agricultural improvement. Topham died unmarried in his sixty-ninth year at Doncaster on 26 April 1820. He was survived by two daughters, Maria and Juliet, who, like their deceased sister Harriet (died 1810), were renowned Yorkshire beauties and accomplished horsewomen. 


@@@@@


doc= 27552


Topham, Francis William (1808-1877), watercolour painter, was born at Leeds, Yorkshire, on 15 April 1808, the son of Richard Topham (1781-1834), pawnbroker, and his wife, Elizabeth Rawson (1784-1861). Apprenticed to an uncle, Samuel Topham, an engraver and future pioneer of portrait photography, he first engraved lettering for cards and monograms for cutlery and, with a few flourishes, commercial bills. In 1830 he moved to London with savings of $5 to take up heraldic engraving, before joining the publishers Fenner and Sears as an engraver of title-pages and illustrations. This led to original illustrative work for books, including Walter Scott's 'Waverley' novels, S. C. Hall's 'Book of Gems' (1836), and George Tattersall's 'The Lakes of England' (1836) -- which was republished in colour under Topham's name in 1869 -- and for the 'Illustrated London News'. In 1851 he engraved frontispieces for the three volumes of Charles Dickens's 'A Child's History of England'. 
In March 1832 Topham married Mary Anne Beckwith (1811-1873) of Clerkenwell, London, the sister of a fellow engraver, Henry Beckwith; they had ten children. The couple lived at 32 Fortess Terrace, Kentish Town and, from about 1854, at 1 Bloomfield Villas, Tufnell Park West. Soon after his arrival in London, Topham joined the Artists' Society, which met in Clipstone Street to draw models picked from street vagabonds. He began to exhibit in 1832 and had seven paintings shown at the Royal Academy. In 1842 he was elected an associate of the New Society of Painters in Water Colours, becoming a full member in the following year. He moved to the Society of Painters in Water Colours in 1848. 
Working almost exclusively in watercolour, Topham proved himself a remarkable colourist. Joseph Jenkins, secretary of the Society of Painters in Water Colours, wrote that: 'Topham's shadows are rich and transparent because he saw light in shadow.... He put on colour and took off colour, rubbed and scrubbed, sponged out, repainted, washed, plastered and spluttered his drawings about in a frenzied sort of way in the effort to produce something lurking in his mind.... Every drawing seemed something like an experiment. (Roget, 2.325)' He soon took peasant life as a favourite -- sometimes sentimental -- subject, and in 1844 and 1845 he visited the west of Ireland with his fellow painters Frederick Goodall and Alfred Fripp. This led to further tours in Ireland in 1860 and 1862 and to Scotland and Snowdonia, where from 1852 he was a regular member of the artists' colony at Betws-y-coed. 
Topham's illustrations for Charles Dickens were not followed by more such commissions; however, he painted a number of Dickensian subjects and presented the author with a watercolour of Barnaby Rudge which eventually hung in Dickens's homes at Broadstairs and Gad's Hill. Dickens recruited Topham to his amateur theatrical company, the Guild of Literature and Art, and the painter frequently performed with Dickens, Wilkie Collins, and the artists Clarkson Stanfield and John Tenniel. The company appeared before Queen Victoria and in country houses, as well as in London and provincial theatres. Topham earned Dickens's praise for his portrayal of Goodenough Easy in Edward Bulwer-Lytton's 'Not so Bad as we Seem' in 1851, and he also shone in Douglas Jerrold's 'The Rent Day'. 
Topham missed most of the following two years' productions as he was touring Spain: in search of the picturesque, he visited Madrid, Toledo, Segovia, Cordoba, Granada, and Seville. He travelled rough and caused bewilderment among innkeepers, who could not understand why he should pay peasants to sit for him instead of charging them for painting their portraits. The squalor of Spain appalled him: ''There is 'but one' 'Madrid'', says the Spaniard; 'So much the better,' says the Englishman,' he wrote in a letter home; he hated, too, the cruelty of the bull-fight. However, he considered, 'Such glorious combinations of landscape and architecture I don't think are to be found in any other country' (Roget, 2.322). Topham's larger Spanish works were painted from sketches on his return to London, his subjects being figures in brightly coloured native dress in settings indicated by such titles as 'The Eve of the Fiesta', 'The Andalusian Letter-Writer', and 'Spanish Gossip'. French subjects dating from 1857, and Italian from 1864, resulted from subsequent visits to Brittany, Venice, and Capri. His paintings commanded good prices from the growing urban middle class avid for colourful paintings of rural life: 'The Gipsy Toilet' fetched $498 in 1865, 'The Picador, Seville' $378 in 1873, and 'Preparing for the Bullfight' $341 in 1874. 
Topham was said to be an amusing companion, and a skilled amateur conjuror and juggler, which caused difficulties in Ireland when the superstitious accused him of casting magic spells, even making coins appear inside potatoes. This talent surprised Charles Dickens, who wrote that 'Topham has suddenly come out as a Juggler and swallows candles and does wonderful things with the Poker' ('Letters of Charles Dickens', 6.539). In appearance Topham was bearded and, when going bald, always wore a skull-cap; retaining his stubborn but humorous Yorkshire character, he was a founder member and vice-president of the Savage Club. 
In 1862 Topham moved to Warwick House, 86 Adelaide Road, London; then in 1873 he built himself a large house and studio at 4 Arkwright Road, Hampstead, which he named Dinas after one he had rented for his family near Betws-y-coed. His happy family life was shadowed by bereavement; one of his children died in 1857, his wife in 1873, and a favourite daughter, Polly, soon afterwards. His eldest son, Francis William Warwick (Frank) Topham (1838-1924), also a painter, married, on 3 May 1870, Helen Lemon, daughter of Topham's friend Mark Lemon, the first editor of 'Punch'. 
In 1877 Topham, whose own health had been failing, made a final visit to Spain, travelling with two friends. In Madrid he was taken ill, but he continued to Cordoba by train, making the seventeen-hour journey with only two biscuits to share between the three of them. On arrival he collapsed and died at the Fonda Suiza, a hotel in the strada Torrijos, on 31 March. He was buried in the protestant cemetery outside Cordoba; when that fell into dereliction he was reinterred on 16 December 1959 at the municipal cemetery of San Rafael in the city, where, in 1994, a nearby square was renamed plaza del Pintor Topham. Examples of his work are in the collections of the British Museum and the Victoria and Albert Museum, London; the Williamson Art Gallery and Museum, Birkenhead; the Art Gallery and Museum, Bury; the Reading Museum and Art Gallery; the Ulster Museum, Belfast; and the municipal collection in Cordoba. 


@@@@@


doc= 27553


Topham, John (1746-1803), antiquary, was born on 6 January 1746 at Emley, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, the third son of Matthew Topham (died 1773), vicar of Withernwick and Mappleton, in Holderness, and his wife, Ann, daughter of Henry Willcock of Thornton in Craven. He spent his childhood at Malton, in the East Riding. His father was the fifth son of Christopher Topham of Caldbergh and Withernwick, and was probably able to use family connections to secure a post for John under Philip Carteret Webb, then joint solicitor to the treasury. Webb, a busy and often unpopular politician, was also a prominent and influential member of the Society of Antiquaries. He thought well of John, who was inclined to historical studies, and found him a place in the state paper office under Sir Joseph Ayloffe and Thomas Astle, later the keeper of records in the Tower of London. 
Webb was keenly interested in the ordering and preservation of the public records, and particularly at that time in printing the parliament rolls, the records of parliament in the middle ages from 1278 to 1503. He may well have introduced Topham to the state paper office to further his campaign. Topham was certainly engaged in the work from its inception in 1767 (when he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries) to the completion, printing, and distribution of the six folio volumes of 'Rotuli parliamentorum' in 1776-7. Together with Astle and Philip Morant he was responsible for a remarkably successful edition of a forbidding mass of parchment. 
Topham was admitted a member of Lincoln's Inn in 1771, and in April 1779 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. In May 1781, having served as secretary to the commission reviewing the records, he was appointed a deputy keeper of the state papers. A year later the papers became a historic archive when responsibility for foreign and home affairs was formally divided between the two secretaries of state, and the new Foreign and Home offices -- the first modern departments of government -- began to keep their own records. In 1771 Topham was made a commissioner in bankruptcy and in 1787 he became a bencher of Gray's Inn; in 1788 he was treasurer of the Society of Antiquaries for the second time, having served briefly in 1783-4. He was not a prudent treasurer, yet regularly attended the committee meetings of the society. He also acted as registrar to a charity for the relief of poor widows and children of the clergy, and was treasurer of the orphan charity school. In 1790 he was appointed librarian to the archbishop of Canterbury, in succession to Michael Lort, canon prebendary of Tottenham in St Paul's. 
On 20 August 1794 Topham married Mary, daughter and coheir of Samuel Francis Swinden (died 1764) of Wimpole Street, London, and Greenwich. Besides his official duties and charitable work he pursued his own studies, contributing a series of papers to 'Archaeologia' and editing texts, including Francis Gregor's translation of Sir John Fortescue's 'De laudibus legum Angliae' (1775) and, with Richard Blyke, Sir John Glanvill's 'Reports of certain cases determined in parliament in the twenty-first and twenty-second years of James I'. He added a historical preface to that volume on the law and practice of determining disputed elections. He also published the daybook of the comptroller of the wardrobe in Edward I's reign, 'Liber quotidianus contrarotulatoris garderobae, AD 1299-1300' (1787), with a useful introduction. 
Topham died at Cheltenham on 19 August 1803 and was buried in the cloisters of Gloucester Cathedral; there is a memorial tablet to him on the wall of the north aisle. His marriage was childless, and his books and collections were sold in 1804. The British Museum acquired numbers of his manuscripts, now in the British Library, including more than fifty volumes of deeds known as the Topham charters, relating to English monastic houses. Topham was learned in the law, and in the middle ages at large, but his chief contribution to scholarship was his work on the rolls of parliament, which served the most rigorous purposes of historical enquiry for more than two centuries. 


@@@@@


doc= 27554


Topham, Thomas (1710-1749), strong man and publican, was born in London; all that is known about his parents is that his father was a carpenter. In 1734, having just completed his apprenticeship in carpentry, Thomas determined to become a publican and began his new career as the landlord of the Red Lion inn near old St Luke's Hospital, London. It seems likely that this change of career was prompted by an awareness of the commercial potential of his feats of strength. These had first come to public attention when, despite lying on his back with his feet against the dwarf wall that divided Upper and Lower Moorfields in London, he had succeeded in winning a tug-of-war against a horse. It was certainly the case that within a very short time of becoming a publican Topham was conducting commercial exhibitions of his feats, notably at Stationers' Hall on 10 July 1734. A woodcut of the event shows him lying extended between two chairs, with a glass of wine in his right hand, and five gentlemen standing on top of his body. 
Topham embarked on numerous provincial tours, as well as exhibiting feats of strength in Ireland and Scotland. During these tours he was often lauded. For instance, at Macclesfield in Cheshire the corporation were so impressed by his feats that they gave him a purse of gold coins and made him a free burgess. On 3 April 1737, as part of an exhibition to which he charged 1's'. admission per head, Topham rolled up a pewter dish of 7 lb 'as a man rolls up a sheet of paper' (Wilson, 8). This astonishing achievement was witnessed by many influential people, including the natural philosopher Jean Theophilus Desaguliers, who had their names inscribed on the dish, which was donated to the British Museum. Later during the exhibition, while lying on two chairs with four people standing on his body, Topham, using just one hand, lifted the 27 stone vicar of All Saints' Church up -- a truly amazing feat. At the end of this exhibition Topham sang 'Mad Tom', though his voice was described as 'more terrible than sweet' (Pinks, 78). 
During his long periods of absence Topham's publican business failed, and although over the next eight years he took on the leases of at least three other London pubs, the Golden Lion and Duke's Head in Islington, and the Bell and Dragon in Shoreditch, all proved commercial failures. This appears surprising because he would sometimes stage public performances of feats of strength, charging 1's'. admission. His most celebrated performance was on 28 May 1741 at the Apple Tree inn (opposite Coldbath Fields prison), a London pub that he might have been running, though this is unclear. The event was a celebration of Admiral Edward Vernon's election to parliament on an anti-Walpole ticket. Standing on a wooden stage Topham on this occasion raised three hogsheads of water weighing 1836 pounds, via a strong rope and tackle that passed over his shoulders. 
Topham appears to have been convivial, joining both the freemasons and the Strong Man Lodge, but despite his 'good nature' (Nelson, 130) much of his life was very unhappy. The chief cause of this was his perpetually unfaithful wife, though this anguish was amplified by his many business difficulties. He seems to have been rather simple and suffered two serious accidents through behaving stupidly. In the first, a failure to assess the dangers of a feat involving two horses led to his knees' becoming damaged, leaving him with a slight limp. In the second, as a joke, he began to tug away scaffolding (much to the anxiety of the builders on top), and a large post struck him on the head. He was also easily duped and lost a bet to an archer in a Finsbury pub when he failed to realize that the only way to hold a bow in order to draw an arrow two thirds of its length was to point it towards his ear not his breast. Tales of such naivety lend credibility to Topham's feats of strength; although he was only 5 ft 10 in., and it was well established that skilful conmen, such as those functioning in Germany, could accomplish some of the stunts that he performed, even the most sceptical contemporaries were convinced that his achievements were 'genuine' (Fairholt, 49). 
In 1745 Topham became master of the Shoreditch pub the Bell and Dragon and supplemented his income by performing exhibitions of strength for public amusement. Unfortunately, his generally mild disposition was excited to frenzy by his unfaithful wife and in early August 1749 he stabbed both her and himself. Topham's wife, whose name is unknown, survived the assault, but after languishing for a few days he died at the Bell and Dragon, and was buried in the church of St Leonard, Shoreditch, on 10 August 1749. 


@@@@@


doc= 27555


Toplady, Augustus Montague (1740-1778), Church of England clergyman and hymn writer, was born on 4 November 1740 at Farnham, Surrey, the only surviving child of Richard Toplady (1713?-1741), army officer, and Catherine (1704-1770), the daughter of Richard Bate (died 1736), incumbent of Chilham, near Canterbury, from 1711 until his death. On his maternal side he was a grandson of the Stanhopes of Mellwood in Lincolnshire. His parents had been married by his mother's brother, Julius Bate (1711-1771), at his church of St Paul's, Deptford, on 31 December 1737. His father, who was from Ireland, probably Enniscorthy in co. Wexford, took a commission first in Moreton's marines in 1739 and then transferred to Cottrell's regiment, serving with which he met his death, probably from yellow fever, at Cartagena in May 1741. Toplady never knew his father and thus came entirely under the care of his mother, who settled in Petty France, London. He became a scholar of Westminster School probably in 1750 (he himself records his attendance there in 1751), where he remained until 1755. 
Toplady and his mother moved to Ireland, perhaps in pursuit of legal claims to her husband's family estate. Toplady matriculated from Trinity College, Dublin, on 11 July 1755 and proceeded BA in 1760. In August 1756 he heard the itinerant James Morris, a follower of Wesley, preaching on 'Ephesians' 2: 13 in a barn at Codymain in the parish of Ballynaslaney, co. Wexford, an occasion which he later recorded in his diary on 29 February 1768 as 'that memorable evening of my effectual call by the grace of God' (A. Toplady, 'The Posthumous Works of A. M. Toplady', 1780, 275). There is a deep irony in this early link with Wesley, for it would not be long before their lifelong controversy would erupt. In a sermon at St Ann Blackfriars on 25 May 1774 Toplady claimed, 'It pleased God to deliver me from the Arminian snare before I was quite eighteen' ('Works', 1825, 3.170), mainly, he asserted, by reading the seventeenth-century puritan Thomas Manton on 'St John's gospel', chapter 17, and then Zanchius of Heidelberg's 'Confession of the Christian Religion' (1562), which he translated and later published in an edited version as 'The Doctrine of Absolute Predestination Stated and Asserted' (1769). 
After graduation Toplady returned to England with his mother; she took up residence once again in Westminster at New Way, where she remained until her death in 1770. He met and was influenced by various Calvinistic ministers, not only Whitefield but also the Baptist John Gill of Horsleydown in Southwark and William Romaine, who preached at the New Way Chapel. Toplady was ordained deacon by Edward Willes, the bishop of Bath and Wells, on 5 June 1762 to serve the curacy of Blagdon, Somerset, in the Mendip hills; he was priested two years later in June 1764. Near to Blagdon is Burrington Combe, a spectacular ravine, where legend and now a metal plaque have it that Toplady wrote 'Rock of ages' -- a very unlikely story. He preached his last sermon at Blagdon on 29 April 1764, returned briefly to London, and was then licensed as curate of Farleigh Hungerford, some 7 miles from both Bath and Frome, where he remained for just over a year. He was back with London friends in the winter of 1765-6, but in May 1766 he began a two-year incumbency of the Devon villages of Harpford and Venn Ottery. Being troubled by the circumstances under which this living had apparently and without his knowledge been purchased for him, Toplady exchanged it for Broad Hembury, also in Devon, to which he was instituted on 6 April 1768. Despite several absences he remained vicar there for the rest of his life. 
Toplady never married, but two women of very different character and interests appear to have attracted him. One, not surprisingly, was Selina, countess of Huntingdon, whom he first met in 1763 and in whose chapels, and in whose presence, he preached several times after leaving Broad Hembury in 1775. The other, much more surprisingly, was the worldly Catharine Macaulay, historian and egalitarian controversialist, whom Toplady met probably in 1773 and with whom he spent some time in May 1774. She was in Devon for three months in that year and heard him preach in Wells Cathedral in October, and he expressed the hope of staying in Bath near to her house in the winter of 1774-5. He even warned her against her friend, 'the dapper doctor', Thomas Wilson, rector of St Stephen Walbrook, who had placed his house in Bath at her disposal. Toplady also saw her later when she lived in Berners Street, London, but by 1777 he could dismiss her with what he called her 'such contemptible vanity and such childish affectation' ('Works', 6.290-91). At this time Toplady upbraided himself for having been 'unusually idle, both as a preacher and as a writer' (ibid., 281). That judgement must have been very relative in one so prolific. Of his preaching it has been said that 'his voice was melodious and affecting; his manner of delivery and action were engaging, elegant and easy. His explanations were distinct and clear; his arguments strong and forcible; and his exhortations warm and animating' (A. C. H. Seymour, 'Life and Times of Selina, Countess of Huntingdon', 1840, 2.63-4). 
The Calvinism which Toplady preached from the pulpit suffused his polemical writings. 'The Church of England Vindicated from the Charge of Arminianism' (1769) was directed against Thomas Nowell, the professor of modern history at Oxford, who had criticized the six students expelled from St Edmund Hall for their evangelical views. This apart, most of Toplady's work formed a protracted quarrel with Wesley, who had dismissed his 'Doctrine of Absolute Predestination' as suggesting that only one in twenty would be saved and that 'The elect shall be saved, do what they will -- the reprobate shall be damned, do what they can' (J. Wesley, 'The Works of the Rev. J. Wesley', 14 vols., 1872, 10.370). Toplady replied with 'A Letter to Mr John Wesley Relating to his Pretended Abridgement of Zanchius on Protestantism' in March 1771. Wesley responded with 'The Consequence Proved' (August 1771) and Toplady came back with 'More Work for Mr Wesley' (28 November 1771). Others joined in and the controversy culminated in Toplady's greatest work, 'The Historic Proof of the Doctrinal Calvinism of the Church of England' (1774), a massive study tracing the doctrine from the early church and devoting 500 of its 700 pages to the Reformation and the Laudian reaction. In 1775 he published his 'Scheme of Christian and Philosophical Necessity Asserted' in reply to Wesley's 'Thoughts upon Necessity' (May 1774) and followed it in the same year with 'An Old Fox Tarred and Feathered', a scurrilous attack exposing Wesley's alleged plagiarism. In his footnote on the Synod of Dort in 'The Historic Proof', Toplady isolated his five fundamental tenets of Calvinism as election, limited redemption, the spiritual incapacity of the human will because of sin, the invincible efficacy of regenerating grace, and the final perseverance of the truly converted. 
Toplady took over the editorship of the 'Gospel Magazine' from Charles de Coetlogon in December 1775 and ran it until July 1777, continuing here also his attacks on Wesley. It was in this publication that the first verse of 'Rock of ages' appeared in September 1775, to be followed by the full hymn in March 1776. Toplady had written verses from his youth, his first book being 'Poems on Sacred Subjects' (1759), but the main body of his work is to be found in 'Psalms and Hymns for Public and Private Worship' (1776). Toplady's last three years were spent mainly in London, where he occupied the pulpit of the French Calvinist chapel in Orange Street. There on 14 June 1778, during his final illness, he made a dramatic entry to deny reports being spread about by Wesley and his followers that he had renounced his Calvinistic beliefs. This final address was published as 'The Rev. Mr Toplady's Dying Avowal of his Religious Sentiments' (1778). He died, a victim of tuberculosis, at Knightsbridge, on 11 August 1778 and was buried six days later at Whitefield's Tabernacle (later the Whitefield Memorial Church) in Tottenham Court Road, London. 
Most of Toplady's hymnody is now forgotten. Three pieces still minimally survive -- 'A debtor to mercy alone', 'Deathless principle, arise', and 'Object of my first desire'. Only in 'Rock of ages' are the dramatic power, emotional tension, and sheer vividness of physical suffering so compelling. It is a hymn so well known that it is almost standard for those film scenes of the kind found, for example, in John Ford's westerns where, as the congregation is singing it confidently, there is suddenly threat and danger from the enemy at the door. Toplady's hymns match his preaching; there are no half measures. For him assurance was complete; his was faith in the furnace, religion at perpetual white heat. 


@@@@@


doc= 27556


Topley, William (1841-1894), geologist, was born on 13 March 1841 in Greenwich, Kent, the son of William Topley and his wife, Carolina Georgina Jeans. He was educated at local private schools and entered the Royal School of Mines for three years' study in 1858. He was appointed assistant geologist to the geological survey of England and Wales in 1862 and started fieldwork in the weald of south-east England under the supervision of Clement le Neve Foster (1841-1904). The survey of the weald had begun in 1855 under H. W. Bristow, and eventually involved nine geologists over a period of twenty years. Topley mapped the Hastings beds of the central weald as well as river deposits of the Darent, Stour, and Medway. His work on the river deposits led to an abiding interest in denudation, and to an important joint paper with Foster in the 'Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society' (1865) which gave convincing evidence that the land surface of the weald was shaped by rain and rivers rather than by the sea. He thus became part of a group of survey geologists, including Archibald Geikie, Joseph Jukes, and Andrew Ramsay, who opposed Roderick Murchison, then survey director, on this topic. 
In 1867 Topley married Ruth Whiteman. The following year he was promoted to the rank of geologist and sent north to work in Northumberland under Henry H. Howell. There he mapped considerable areas of Carboniferous rock and the overlying glacial drift, and gave the name Rothbury Grits to one of the subdivisions of the Carboniferous Limestone. He also mapped part of the Whin Sill, and published a paper with G. A. Lebour demonstrating that it is an intrusion and not a lava flow. Between 1871 and 1874 Topley took what spare time he had to write up a comprehensive memoir on the geology of the weald from the notes left by the geologists who had worked on the project, seven of whom either were dead or had resigned from the survey. The work was published as a memoir of the geological survey in 1875, and is his chief memorial. In 1880 he was recalled to survey headquarters in Jermyn Street, London, to superintend the publication of maps and memoirs, and in 1893 he succeeded Edward Best with the entire charge of the office. Although not a great traveller, Topley paid geological visits to France, Belgium, Switzerland, Canada, and Algeria at different times. 
Topley had many interests and commitments outside his official duties. He assisted with, and later edited, the enormously time-consuming 'Geological Record', he was secretary to the geological section at fifteen meetings of the British Association between 1872 and 1880, and sat on the committee on sub-wealden exploration, and on that enquiring into the rate of erosion of sea coasts. Topley was president of the Geologists' Association from 1885 to 1887 and was secretary of the London International Geological Congress in 1888, in which capacity he contributed to the congress's geological map of Europe. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1888. He was also interested in the engineering aspects of geology, and published on landslips and on plans for a channel tunnel, as well as in mineral resources and water supply. The relationship of water supply to human health also concerned him, and he lectured to the Sanitary Institute Congress on geology in its relation to hygiene in 1890. Finally, the influence of geology on agriculture had interested Topley since his early work in the weald, and he published papers on the agricultural geology of that area (1872) and on the comparative agriculture of the counties of England (1871). Topley died at his home, 13 Havelock Road, Croydon, on 30 September 1894 of disease thought to have been caused by drinking contaminated water while in Algeria. 


@@@@@


doc= 27557


Topsell, Edward (bap. 1572, d. 1625), Church of England clergyman and author, was born in Sevenoaks, Kent, and was baptized there on 3 February 1572, the son of John Topsell (died 1573). He matriculated as a sizar at Christ's College, Cambridge, in 1587, graduated BA in 1591 or 1592, and probably proceeded MA, though there is no record of this. He held a variety of cures and livings in Sussex (Hartsfield, 1592; Framfield, 1593-6; East Hoathly, 1596-8; Mayfield, 1605-6; East Grinstead, 1610-15), Hertfordshire (Datchworth, 1598-1601), and Northamptonshire (Syresham, 1602-8). The name of his first wife is not known, but a daughter, Mary, was baptized at Datchworth in 1600 and a son, Abel, matriculated at Trinity College, Oxford, in 1617, aged fifteen; both survived him. From 7 April 1604 Topsell was perpetual curate of St Botolph, Aldersgate, London, and on 12 August 1612 he married Mary, widow of Gregory Seaton, stationer, of the adjacent parish of St Anne and St Agnes. 
Topsell's early publication 'The Reward of Religion: Delivered in Sundrie Lectures upon the Booke of Ruth' (London, John Windell, 1596) is addressed to Margaret, Lady Dacre of the South, whose husband, Sampson Lennard of Chevening, promoted his early studies. The book reflects upon marriage and duty; it was reissued in 1601 and in 1613. 'Time's Lamentation, or, An Exposition of the Prophet Joel in Sundry [42] Sermons or Meditations' (London, by E. Bollifant for G. Potter, 1599), dedicated to Charles Blount, Lord Mountjoy (described by Topsell as 'the meane of my preferment'), condemns 'vanity and frivolity', that is, worldly preoccupations of all kinds. Topsell warns his audience not to doubt plagues or grow impatient at these tales of 'a muster of fraybugs, and little worms an inch long'; we must not 'weigh [such matters] in the ballance of natural reason but lay them to a sound spirituall judgement. The waies of God are not like the waies of men' (p. 68). The same note is struck in 'The Householder, or, Perfect Man: Preached in Three Sermons' (London, by Henry Rockyt, 1610, 16mo), addressed to Richard Sackville, third earl of Dorset, his wife, Anne, and to four other noblemen of Topsell's acquaintance. 
Insistence upon a spiritual reading of the book of nature is to be found prominently in the prefatory material, and less prominently in the text, of Topsell's most celebrated publications, 'The Historie of Foure-Footed Beastes' (London, W. Jaggard, 1607) and 'The Historie of Serpents' (London, W. Jaggard, 1608), both dedicated to Richard Neile, dean of Westminster. Topsell's declared purpose in collecting together pictures of animals, and stories about their ways, is to entertain, to inform, and above all to edify. He envisages 'The Historie of Foure-Footed Beastes' as suitable sabbath reading-matter in the godly home (epistle dedicatory, final paragraph). These books have usually been seen, and criticized, as contributions to natural history -- indeed, it was in this light that they were reissued by John Rowland, together with Thomas Mouffet's 'History of Insects', in 1658. But Topsell made no claim to be a naturalist. He was an industrious compiler, collecting information out of 'divine Scriptures, fathers, Philosophers, Physitians and Poets' amplified with 'sundry accidental Histories, Hierogliphycks, Epigrams, Emblems, and Aenigmatical Observations'. He relied heavily on the 'Historia animalium' of the mid-sixteenth-century Swiss protestant encyclopaedist Conrad Gesner, from whose work most of the text and the pictures in both books is derived. He reproduces much of Gesner's text verbatim, but also paraphrases, digests, or omits passages without warning. He adds material from the English writers John Caius (on dogs), Thomas Blundeville and Gervase Markham (on the horse), and Thomas Penny via Thomas Mouffet (on insects), as well as remarks of his own. 
Topsell has rightly been judged to have been 'a man of very little originality, who reproduced what his authorities gave to him', and who was guilty on occasion of blurring the distinction between citation and commentary, in such a way as to lay himself open to the charge of plagiarism (Raven, 218, 167, 223-6). His work is ignored by the later seventeenth-century naturalist John Ray. When Topsell and the printer William Jaggard collaborated on the 'Foure-Footed Beastes' it was, no doubt, on the assumption that 'there was a public ready to enjoy and able to pay for large illustrated books of this kind' (Raven, 218). That this public was ready to complain about printers' errors was perhaps an unwelcome surprise. In his preface to 'The Historie of Serpents' Topsell apologizes for the shortcomings of the first volume, and explains that neither he nor the printer could afford to pay for a scholarly proof-corrector. Clearly, the project had proved to be both expensive and difficult. Signs of haste, and perhaps of boredom, are evident already in the book on serpents. Despite the fact that Topsell lived on for another twenty years, the intended volumes on birds and fishes never appeared. He died, probably in London, in 1625, and was buried at St Botolph. 


@@@@@


doc= 27558


Torkington, Richard (fl. 1511-1518), Catholic priest and pilgrim, is of unknown origins. In 1511 he was presented by Sir Thomas Boleyn, later earl of Wiltshire, to the Norfolk rectory of Mulberton, and he was still parson there when in 1517 he undertook a pilgrimage to the Holy Land. According to his own account of his experiences he left Rye on 20 March, and passed through France to northern Italy. After some time in Turin, Milan, and Pavia (where he noted the tomb of Lionel of Antwerp, second son of Edward III), on 29 April he arrived in Venice. There he witnessed the ceremony of the city's 'marriage to the sea' and also observed the building of new ships in the arsenal, recording that twenty-three new ships were then being constructed by over a thousand workmen; a hundred hands were busy at rope making alone. 
On 14 June Torkington sailed from Venice with other pilgrims. They travelled by way of Corfu, Zante, Cerigo, and Crete, sighted the Holy Land on 11 July, and landed at Jaffa four days later. On 18 July they reached Jerusalem and stayed for just over a week, until the 27th. Torkington lodged in the hospital of St James on Mount Sion and visited all the holy places, both in Jerusalem and in Bethlehem. His response to the various shrines and relics seems to have been uncritical, recording without comment the legends attached to them; thus he accepts that the Dome of the Rock was the veritable Temple of Herod. He notes many times his fear of Muslim attack, and expresses strong views on Turkish misrule in Palestine. Nevertheless, it was in a spirit of rejoicing and gratitude that his company sailed for home on 31 July. 
Torkington's return to England was considerably more troubled than his outward passage. The ship was detained for a month in Cyprus, and he was later left behind ill in Rhodes, where he stayed for about six weeks in September and October, in the care of the knights of St John. Further progress was hampered by storms, which drove his ship back down the Adriatic. On 20 February 1518 he witnessed a Jewish wedding on Corfu, but eventually returned north by way of Sicily and the west coast of Italy, where he visited Naples and Rome. He did not reach Dover until 17 April, when he reckoned that he had been out of England for one year, five weeks, and three days. He concluded his pilgrimage at the shrine of St Thomas in Canterbury Cathedral on 18 May following. 
The rest of Torkington's life is as obscure as its earlier years, and it is only possible to say that he was no longer rector of Mulberton by 1526, when a successor was appointed. His account of his pilgrimage remained in manuscript until the late nineteenth century. Two transcripts survive in the British Library, London, as Add. MSS 28561 and 28562: the former is of the sixteenth century, the latter is the work of Robert Bell Wheler, who also published an account of the text in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' for October 1812. The journal was finally edited for publication by W. J. Loftie in 1884, with the title 'Ye Oldest Diarie of Englysshe Travell... the Pilgrimage of Sir Richard Torkyngton'. Subsequent comparisons have revealed a marked lack of originality on Torkington's part. His descriptions of Candia seem to have been copied from early editions of 'Informacon for Pylgrymes unto the Holy Londe' (editions of 1498, 1515, 1524), including an erroneous reference to 'Acts' instead of 'Titus' for St Paul's condemnation of the Cretans. And his account of the wonders of Venice and the Holy Land, and of what he saw between the two, agrees almost verbatim with that written by the chaplain of Sir Richard Guildford, as it was published by Pynson in 1511. Torkington does, however, add the occasional observation of his own, especially on the subject of relics. 


@@@@@


doc= 27559


Torporley, Nathaniel (1564-1632), mathematician, was born in Shropshire of unknown parentage and admitted to Shrewsbury's Free Grammar School as an 'oppidan' in 1571. He matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 17 November 1581 as a 'plebeian' and graduated BA on 5 February 1584. He then departed to France where his mathematical knowledge equipped him to serve as secretary to the famous French mathematician Francois Viete (1540-1603). He was probably the link between Viete and the English mathematician Thomas Harriot; in a letter to Harriot from Paris, probably written in 1586, Torporley refers to his journey via Gravesend, Calais, and Amiens. He probably returned to Oxford in 1587 or 1588, and proceeded MA from Brasenose College on 8 July 1591. 
Torporley entered holy orders and was appointed rector of Salwarpe, Worcestershire, on 14 June 1608, a living he held until 1622. He was also rector of Liddington, Wiltshire, in 1611. For most of the time, however, he resided chiefly at Sion College, on London Wall. Torporley's knowledge of mathematics and astronomy attracted the notice of Henry Percy, ninth earl of Northumberland, who may have supported him, although the only recorded payment dates from 1627. On 27 November 1605, just after the discovery of the Gunpowder Plot, Torporley was examined by the council for having cast the king's nativity. At Harriot's death in 1621 he was named in the will as overseer of Harriot's mathematical writings. 
Apart from several mathematical works left in manuscript, Torporley published 'Diclides coelometricae' (1602), in which he expounded a simplified spherical trigonometry designed for computing astronomical tables. While accepting the Copernican system, he briefly presented a bizarre explanation for the planetary orbits. The French astronomer J. B. J. Delambre, writing in 1821, found the entire book tedious, and described Torporley's so-called new and simplified astronomical tables as the most obscure and difficult which he had ever encountered. Torporley also designed a new type of semicircle, and his sundial and perpetual calendar was constructed by the instrument maker Charles Whitwell (died 1611). 
Torporley died in Sion College and was buried in the adjacent church of St Alphege on 17 April 1632. He left a nuncupative will dated 14 April, by which he bequeathed to Sion College all his mathematical books and manuscripts, astronomical instruments, notes, maps, and a brass clock. Administration was granted to his married sister, Susanna Tasker. 


@@@@@


doc= 27560


Torr, William (1808-1874), agriculturist, was born on 22 December 1808, one of at least two sons of a yeoman family which had been settled for several generations at Riby in north Lincolnshire. His education was interfered with by a severe strain affecting the spine while pole-jumping, and he gave up plans to study law. He left school at sixteen and travelled through various parts of Great Britain and the continent. 
Torr began farming in his native parish of Riby in 1833. In 1848 he moved to Aylesby Manor Farm, which had been well known for eighty years for its breed of Leicester sheep. Its reputation was successfully maintained and increased under Torr's management. Animals from the Aylesby flocks and herds were sent to all parts of the United Kingdom and to the continent, the colonies, and even Japan. In 1854 Torr also took a farm of 420 acres at Rothwell. In 1856 he succeeded his uncle in the occupation of the Riby Grove farm. The total area of his three farms was over 2400 acres, most of which had been rented by his family for 150 years. He managed all three farms himself. 
The main feature of Torr's farms consisted in his magnificent breeds of livestock. He was especially proud of his flock of Leicester sheep, direct descendants of Robert Bakewell's original Leicester. He had also a stud of thoroughbred ponies, which had been bred at Riby since 1804. But what gives Torr's name its importance in the history of agriculture was his famous breed of shorthorn cattle, carefully bred over a thirty-year period. Torr began to lay the foundations of his herd in 1844, hiring bulls from Richard Booth of Worlaby, another famous shorthorn breeder of the time. After his death 84 animals, from stock bred (for several generations) on his farm, were sold, in the presence of about 3000 people, for a total of $42,919 16's'. This sale resulted in the scattering of Torr's herd over the whole of the United Kingdom. 
Torr acquired a well-deserved reputation as an agriculturist, and was widely in demand as a judge of livestock at agricultural shows. He became a member of the Royal Agricultural Society in 1839, and continued to be closely connected with it throughout his life. In May 1857 he was elected to the council. He was a regular member of the inspection committee appointed to visit the sites offered for the annual country meetings, and he was one of the judges of farms in the first competition carried out under the auspices of the society in connection with the Oxford meeting of 1870. Torr was also an active member and trustee of the Smithfield Club, as well as honorary director of the Lincolnshire Agricultural Society, and a member of the Highland Agricultural Society. 
Following the outbreak of cattle plague in 1865, Torr gave expert evidence to select committees of the House of Commons on the various ways of transporting live cattle and dead meat. He also invented many improvements in the details of farm management, and designed one of the first convex mould-board ploughs, a farm gate (which won a prize at the Warwick meeting of the Royal Agricultural Society in 1859), a spring wagon, and a pig trough. Torr died at Aylesby Manor on 12 December 1874, and was buried in Riby churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 27561


Torre, James (1649-1699), antiquary, was the son of Gregory Torre of Bourne, Lincolnshire, and Anne, the daughter of John Farr of Epworth, Lincolnshire. He was born in April 1649 and baptized at Haxey, Lincolnshire, on 30 April 1649. He was educated at Belton School and entered Magdalene College, Cambridge, in June 1666. He matriculated in 1667 and was admitted to the Inner Temple the following year. Among his contemporaries at the Inner Temple was the London antiquary Henry Keepe, who shared Torre's interest in ecclesiastical antiquities and genealogy and whose works include a manuscript account of the city of York compiled in the 1680s. It is uncertain when or why Torre settled at York, but the reason may be linked to his marriage to Elizabeth, daughter of William Lincoln DD of Bottesford, Lincolnshire. 
In York, Torre devoted himself to research on the ecclesiastical antiquities of Yorkshire. The first of the resulting five folio volumes of his collections is entitled 'Antiquities ecclesiastical of the city of York concerning churches, parochial conventual chapels, hospitals, and gilds, and in them chantries and interments, also churches parochial and conventual within the archdeaconry of the West Riding, collected out of publick records and registers, AD 1691'. The subsequent volumes cover the other archdeaconries in the county and the peculiar jurisdictions. All the volumes are indexed and provide indexes for the ecclesiastical records he used as well as preserving material that would otherwise have been lost. He compiled lists of parochial incumbents from the records of institutions in the registers of the archbishops of York and supplemented this material from the registers of the dean and chapter. He also searched the wills proved at York, extracting from them all clauses relating to the interments of testators and appending these to the accounts of the relevant churches. He omitted little and his errors in relation to dates are rare, although he is less reliable on names. The date given in the first volume corresponds with the appointment of John Sharp as archbishop of York; this consolidation of Torre's researches was presumably instigated by the archbishop, who shared his antiquarian interests and subsequently acquired the volumes. Sharp used Torre's collections in the production of his own account of the rights and revenues of his office, and after the archbishop's death they were presented to the chapter library by his executors. Torre was never a purely ecclesiastical antiquary, as is suggested by his interest in the location of interments, and his interest in genealogy led him to compile five folio volumes entitled 'English nobility and gentry, or, Supplemental collections to Sir William Dugdale's 'Baronage''. These represented amended transcriptions of Dugdale's work with the addition of the genealogies of less socially elevated families. Torre was a friend of Ralph Thoresby, who used his manuscripts in the compilation of 'Ducatus Leodiensis' (1715), and they have been widely used by subsequent topographers of Yorkshire and those working in neighbouring counties. Francis Drake, who was particularly beholden to his predecessor's work, described his own history of York as 'but a key to some part of Torre's collections' ('Eboracum', 1736, preface). 
Torre's first marriage was childless. On 24 April 1694 he married Anna, the daughter of Nicholas Lister of Leeds, and a son, Nicholas, was born the following year. In 1699 he purchased the manor of Syndale, near Wakefield, but died on 31 July 1699 of a contagion then prevalent in the area. He was buried at Normanton, Yorkshire. His continuing status as a local antiquary is attested by the association of his name with a slim volume entitled 'The Antiquities of York' (1719), presumably to give the work spurious authority twenty years after his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 27562


Torrens, Sir Arthur Wellesley (1809-1855), army officer, second son of Major-General Sir Henry Torrens (1779-1828) and his wife, Sarah ('c'.1781-1863), daughter of Robert Patton ['see under 'Patton, Philip], governor of St Helena, was born on 18 August 1809, and was a godson of the duke of Wellington. In 1819 he was appointed a page of honour to the prince regent. After attending the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, he was commissioned ensign in the Grenadier Guards and lieutenant on 14 April 1825. He was appointed adjutant of the 2nd battalion with the temporary rank of captain on 11 June 1829. He was promoted lieutenant in the Grenadier Guards and captain on 12 June 1830. He continued to serve as adjutant of his battalion until 1838, when he was appointed brigade major at Quebec on the staff of Major-General Sir James Macdonell, commanding a brigade in Canada, and took part in the operations against the rebels in late 1838. He was promoted captain in the grenadiers and lieutenant-colonel on 11 September 1840, when he returned to England. 
Torrens exchanged into the 23rd Royal Welch Fusiliers, and obtained the command on 15 October 1841. On the augmentation of the army in April 1842 a second battalion was given to the regiment. The depot was moved from Carlisle to Chichester, where, with two new companies, it was organized for foreign service under Torrens, who embarked with it at Portsmouth for Canada on 13 May, arriving at Montreal on 30 June. In September 1843 he went, in command of the 1st battalion, from Quebec to the West Indies, arriving at Barbados in October 1843. The battalion was moved from time to time from one island to another, but for two and a half years Torrens commanded the troops in St Lucia and administered the civil government of that island. The sanitary measures he adopted to preserve the troops' health met with unprecedented success, and were considered so admirable that correspondence on the subject was published in November 1847 by order of the duke of Wellington, commander-in-chief, for the guidance of officers commanding overseas. Torrens declined the offer of the lieutenant-governorship of St Lucia as a permanent appointment, preferring to continue his service in the Royal Welch Fusiliers. 
Torrens sailed with his battalion from Barbados in March 1847, arriving at Halifax, Nova Scotia, in April. The battalion returned to England in September 1848; it was initially stationed at Winchester, and from 1850 at Plymouth. In 1851 Torrens relinquished the command, and in 1852 published 'Notes on French infantry and memoranda on the review of the army in Paris at the Feast of Eagles in May 1852'. On 1 January 1853 he was appointed assistant quartermaster-general at the Horse Guards, and became a member of a commission which in the spring of that year investigated the organization of the French, Austrian, and Prussian armies. 
On his return Torrens was nominated a brigadier-general to command an infantry brigade in the British army in Turkey in the war with Russia. He joined the 4th division under Sir George Cathcart at Varna just before its embarkation for the Crimea. He was at the head of his brigade at the battles of the Alma and of Balaklava, where he was engaged in support of the cavalry and lost some men in recapturing two redoubts. On the morning of 5 November 1854 he had just returned from the trenches when he was told of the enemy's attack from the valley of Inkerman, and, under the direction of Cathcart, he attacked with success the left flank of the Russians, his horse falling under him, pierced by five bullets. Just before Cathcart was struck down by his mortal wound he called out, 'Nobly done, Torrens!' Torrens was still in front, cheering on his men, when he was struck by a bullet, which passed through his body, injured a lung, splintered a rib, and was found lodged in his greatcoat. He was invalided home. He received the thanks of parliament, was promoted a major-general for distinguished service in the field on 12 December 1854, and was made a KCB, military division. 
On 2 April 1855 Torrens was appointed deputy quartermaster-general at headquarters, and on 25 June the same year was sent as a major-general on the staff to Paris as British military commissioner. His health, enfeebled by his wound, broke down, and he died in Paris on 24 August 1855; he was buried in the cemetery of Pere Lachaise. His widow, Maria Jane, youngest daughter of General John Murray, whom he had married in 1832, erected a monument to him in St Paul's Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 27563


Torrens, Sir Henry (1779-1828), army officer, was reportedly, but questionably, descended from a Swedish Count Torrens, a cavalry captain in the army of William III who settled in Ireland after the battle of the Boyne (1690). Sir Henry's great-grandfather Thomas Torrens, of Scottish descent, was settled at Dungiven, co. Londonderry, early in the eighteenth century. Thomas's third son, Dr John Torrens (died 1785), Sir Henry's grandfather, was prebendary of Derry, headmaster of Derry diocesan school, and rector of Ballynascreen. Sir Henry's father, the Revd Thomas Torrens, married Elizabeth, daughter of Samuel Curry of Londonderry. The eldest son, John (1761-1851), was archdeacon of Dublin; the second, Samuel, captain of the 52nd regiment, died of wounds received in action at Ferrol in 1800. The third son, Robert (1776-1856), was a justice of the court of common pleas in Ireland. 
Henry, the fourth son, was born in Londonderry. Both his parents died during his infancy. He and his brothers were brought up by their maternal grandfather, the Revd Dr Thomas, before Henry went to his father's cousin, Thomas Torrens. He was educated at the military academy of Dublin where 'from the hilarity of his disposition, he was universally designated 'Happy Harry'' ('GM', 374). He received a commission as ensign in the 52nd (Oxfordshire) foot on 2 November 1793, became a lieutenant in the 92nd on 14 June 1794, and was transferred to the 63rd on 11 December 1795. He accompanied the 63rd to the West Indies and took part in the expedition under Abercromby against St Lucia; he was also present at the attack on Morne Chabot on 29 April 1796, and at the siege of Morne Fortune and its surrender on 26 May, before which he was severely wounded in the right thigh. Despite this wound Torrens joined the 63rd in time for the attack on St Vincent, and on 8 June took a prominent part in the assault of three French redoubts, when the French were driven out and took refuge in the New Vigie; they capitulated on the following day. He was employed for seven months in command of an outpost in the forests of St Vincent against the Charib Indians of the island, and, on their defeat on 28 March 1797 the commander of the forces rewarded him with promotion to a company, with which he served in Jamaica as captain and paymaster until June 1798, when he returned to England. 
In August 1798 Torrens was appointed aide-de-camp to Major-General John Whitelocke, second in command under the earl of Moira and lieutenant-governor of Portsmouth. In November he went to Portugal as aide-de-camp to Major-General Cornelius Cuyler, who commanded the auxiliary troops sent by the British government against the threatened Spanish invasion. On 8 August 1799 he was transferred to the 20th foot, then forming part of the force under the duke of York for the expedition to The Helder. Torrens served with the 20th throughout the campaign; he landed on 28 August, and took part in the repulse of the French attack at Crabbendam, under General Daendels, on 10 September, when the regiment was complimented by Sir Ralph Abercromby for its gallantry; he was also engaged in the battle of Hoorne on 19 September, and in the two battles of Egmont-op-Zee on 2 and 6 October. At the latter Torrens was wounded by a bullet which passed through his right thigh and lodged in his left thigh; the bullet was never extracted. 
Torrens returned to England in November 1799, and was promoted on 3 November to a majority in the Surrey rangers, a fencible regiment then being raised. Its formation devolved upon Torrens, who subsequently embarked with it for North America. He commanded it for a year in Nova Scotia, and returned to England in the autumn of 1801. 
On 4 February 1802 Torrens exchanged, as major, into the 86th foot, then forming part of the Indian force in Egypt under Sir David Baird. He accompanied it across the desert to the Red Sea, and embarked with it on the return to India of Baird's expedition in the summer. On arrival at Bombay, Torrens was so ill from sunstroke that he was obliged to sail at once for Europe. The ship touched at St Helena; he remained there, recovered his health, and married, about May 1803, Sarah ('c'.1781-1863), daughter of the governor, Colonel Robert Patton of Kirkcaldy, Fife; they had four sons, including Sir Arthur Wellesley Torrens and Henry Whitelocke Torrens, and two daughters. 
Torrens rejoined his regiment in India in 1804, and commanded in the field during the Second Anglo-Maratha War. He was promoted brevet lieutenant-colonel on 1 January 1805, and returned to England. Torrens was made assistant adjutant-general on 17 October 1805, and was employed on the staff of the Kent military district. He was transferred as regimental major to the 89th foot on 19 February 1807. On 11 May he was appointed military secretary to Major-General John Whitelocke, who had been nominated to the command of the army in South America. Torrens arrived at Montevideo in June, and took part in the disastrous attack on Buenos Aires on 5 July, when he received a contusion from a bullet which shattered his sabretache. He returned to England with Whitelocke, and was reappointed on 27 November an assistant adjutant-general on the staff in Great Britain; in December he became assistant military secretary to the commander-in-chief, the duke of York. He gave evidence at Whitelocke's court martial in January, February, and March 1808. His position as a member of Whitelocke's personal staff was a delicate one, but he acquitted himself with credit at the hearing. 
In June 1808 Torrens was appointed military secretary to Sir Arthur Wellesley (later Viscount Wellington), and accompanied him to Portugal; they arrived in July. He was present at the action of Rolica on 17 August and at the battle of Vimeiro on 21 August. Torrens received the gold medal for these victories, and was made a knight of the order of the Tower and Sword by the Portuguese regency. He returned to England in October with Wellesley on the latter's supersession, and resumed his duties as assistant military secretary at headquarters. 
Torrens was promoted military secretary to the commander-in-chief on 2 October 1809. On 13 June 1811 he was transferred from major of the 89th foot to a company (captain and lieutenant-colonel) in the 3rd foot guards. On 11 January 1812 he was appointed aide-de-camp to the prince regent, and promoted colonel in the army; and on 4 June 1814 he was promoted major-general. In 1815 he was made a KCB, military division (15 January), and appointed to the colonelcy of the second garrison battalion (5 April); later that year (27 November) he was transferred to the colonelcy of the Royal African Colonial Corps. On 21 September 1818 he was transferred to the colonelcy of the 2nd West India regiment, and on 25 March 1820 he was appointed adjutant-general of the forces. Because he now earned less than when a military secretary, a civil-list pension of $800 a year was bestowed on his wife to compensate him. 
In 1824 was published Torrens's revision of the official 'Regulations for the Exercise and Field Movements of the Infantry of the Army'. Intended to consolidate, not innovate, it incorporated changes made by regiments during the war, so that drill would again be uniform. It retained repetitive movements and long words of command, and its main provision was for a line of two ranks, not three. It was criticized, and again revised in 1833. 
On 26 July 1822 Torrens was transferred to the colonelcy of the 2nd or Queen's Royal regiment of foot. On 23 August 1828 he was out riding with his wife and two daughters while on a visit to a friend at Danesbury, Hertfordshire, when he was 'seized with apoplexy' ('GM', 375) and died two hours later. He was buried in Welwyn church, Hertfordshire, on 28 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 27564


Torrens, Henry Whitelocke (1806-1852), administrator in India and author, eldest son of Major-General Sir Henry Torrens (1779-1828) and his wife, Sarah ('c'.1781-1863), daughter of Robert Patton ['see under 'Patton, Philip], one-time governor of St Helena, was born on 20 May 1806 at Canterbury, Kent. Sir Arthur Wellesley Torrens was his brother. He was educated at Charterhouse School and Christ Church, Oxford, where he was rusticated along with the duke of Wellington's sons for painting the doors of the college red. He left a more lasting mark on the college as one of the founders of its choral society. In 1828, having first tried law and a Foreign Office clerkship, he accepted a writership in the East India Company's service. 
Torrens arrived in Calcutta in November 1828 and by the following July had made sufficient progress in Arabic, Persian, and Hindustani to be given an appointment in Meerut district as assistant to the magistrate. He remained in Meerut until 1835 and, with Henry Miers Elliot, helped found the 'Meerut Observer', one of the North-Western Provinces' first newspapers. In this period, he was twice married: firstly, on 21 November 1832, to Eliza Mary (1803-1834), daughter of Sir Walter Roberts, bt, with whom he had one son; and secondly, on 20 November 1835, to Louisa Anne Rebecca ('bap'. 1817), daughter of George Law of the Bengal civil service, with whom he had two sons and three daughters. 
In 1835 he returned to Calcutta to a place in the secretariat and while there threw himself into the agitation for greater freedom for the press. From October 1837 until February 1840 he accompanied Lord Auckland on his extensive up-country tour as deputy secretary in all the civil departments in attendance on the governor-general. His linguistic skills shone brilliantly on this tour, and many of the princes and dignitaries meeting Auckland asked specifically for Torrens as their interpreter. It was while in this post, according to J. W. Kaye, that Torrens exercised a baneful influence on Auckland and, along with John Colvin and William Macnaghten, persuaded him to invade Afghanistan. Kaye's portrait of Torrens in his 'History of the War in Afghanistan' (1851) is a somewhat catty one, noting, for example, his popularity with the women of the governor-general's suite. In a reply published posthumously in the 'Friend of India' in September 1852, Torrens stated that although he had supported the decision to reinstate Shah Shuja in Afghanistan, at least until it transpired that an army of occupation would be required to keep him there, he had never been sufficiently close to Auckland actually to influence the content of the policy. 
In October 1840 Torrens became secretary to the board of customs in Calcutta. In April 1847 he was shunted into a dead-end job as agent to the governor-general at Murshidabad, where he remained until his death in 1852. Torrens's friends lamented this snubbing of an extremely talented officer, but Torrens himself had never made any secret of his antipathy for the service and had disdained to cultivate the patrons necessary for promotion. 
Torrens had always devoted much of his leisure to literature. In 1838 he published what would eventually be seen as his most substantial work, the first volume of a translation of the 'Arabian Nights'. Torrens's version is noteworthy for its liveliness and the absence of the earnestness and scholarly pretensions that characterized other translations of the day. He contributed several articles on ancient coins, inscriptions, and gems to the journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, and also served as secretary to the society from 1840 to 1846. In 1846 the 'Eastern Star' began publishing instalments of his wide-ranging 'Remarks on the Scope and Uses of Military Literature and History', which was subsequently reissued as a book, and in 1848 he published a novel, 'Madame de Malguet', which was favourably received in London. A collection of his shorter pieces along with a memoir of his life was published by James Hume in London in 1854. 
Torrens died at Calcutta on 16 August 1852, and was buried the next day in the Lower Circular Road cemetery there. 


@@@@@


doc= 27565


Torrens, Robert (1780?-1864), political economist, was the first of three children of Robert Torrens ('fl'. 1758-1790) and his wife, Elizabeth ('fl'. 1762-1790), third daughter of the Revd Skeffington Bristow and his wife, Elizabeth Gore Grattan. He was born either at his paternal grandfather's house, Hervey Hill rectory, near Kilrea, Londonderry, or at the house of his maternal grandfather, Hazelwood, Resharkin, co. Antrim. He was probably educated at Derry diocesan school. 
On 1 February 1796 Torrens was commissioned second lieutenant in the corps of marines; he was promoted first lieutenant on 18 November 1797. He served at Plymouth, Chatham, and Woolwich divisions and in detachments aboard Royal Navy ships on escort service and policing British waters. He was with HMS 'Glenmore' on the Cork station when he married Charity Herbert ('c'.1784-1854), second daughter of Richard Chute ('fl'. 1770-1820), of Chute Lodge, Cork City, and Chute Hall, Roxborough, co. Kerry, at St Fin Barre's Cathedral, Cork, on 8 November 1801. Their four children, born in Cork and co. Kerry, included Robert Richard Chute Torrens, first premier of South Australia and author of the 'Torrens Act'. By September 1819 Torrens had 'long been separated and for some time divorced' and was robbed of 'a fortune more than sufficient' by the death of his intended second wife (Torrens to Place, 30 Sept 1819, BL, Add. MS 37949, fol. 79). He somehow nullified his Irish marriage (but legitimized his children by having them rebaptized at St Mary's, Woolwich, in 1819). On 12 December 1820 he married a minor English heiress, Esther Sarah Serle (1778-1874), second daughter of Ambrose Serle RN, commissioner of transport, and his wife, Martha Priaulx. 
Torrens was promoted captain on 26 July 1806. While participating in the economic warfare of Britain's 'continental blockade', he began writing the first of about ninety books and pamphlets on economics, politics, and social questions. 'Thoughts on the Catholic Question' (1808) supported Catholic emancipation and described his Irish nationalism. Six months later his debut in political economy, 'The Economists Refuted' (1808), grounded his thinking on free trade and colonies. Two 'delightfully naive' (Corry), 'very bad' (Allibone, 'Dict.') novels followed. 'Coelibia Choosing a Husband' (1809), the heroine of which is a budding political economist, advocated higher education for women and pilloried Hannah More's 'Coelebs Choosing a Wife' (1808) and its imitators. 'The Hermit of Killarney: a Catholic Tale' (1813) fictionalized Torrens's frustration at the failure of emancipation, his support for which cost him a seat in the Commons. 'Habits of patient investigation' were interrupted by Torrens's appointment in August 1810 to the Isle of Anholt in the Kattegut off Copenhagen under Captain J. W. Maurice RN. On 27 March 1811 Torrens's 380 marines repelled a Danish landing involving 4000 personnel. Wounded slightly, he was gazetted brevet major on 9 April and the Admiralty promised him a major's pay and the Anholt command after Maurice. Relations with Maurice soured and Torrens was relieved in January 1812 for insubordination, yet pressed charges against Maurice; Torrens used his accommodating withdrawal in August for patronage over the next twenty years. He led his marines at the storming of Antwerp in February 1814 and sought, unsuccessfully, a variety of commands and staff appointments. Recruiting (mainly) and a new bayonet drill (briefly) were all the corps offered after 1815 as duties collided with aspirations. Annual applications (1815-22) to retire owing to ill health were denied. He became lieutenant-colonel by brevet on 12 August 1819. 'Private interests' forced the Admiralty to give him half-pay in September 1823. He returned to full pay in 1830 and on 4 June 1831 was appointed major. Three times he tried to sell out as a lieutenant-colonel, but was allowed to dispose only of a majority (17 October 1834). 
Meanwhile, fuelled by his brand of Irish nationalism and a thinly veiled desire for personal advancement, Torrens consolidated his contemporary reputation. The anti-bullionist 'Essay on Money' (March 1812) led to an offer of a Treasury borough that lapsed because of his refusal to abandon emancipation. Converted to the bullionist credo by 1826, Torrens went on to lead the currency school. More important in his early career was his systematic and creative critique of Ricardo, which asserted that capital rather than labour was the better measure of value. 'An Essay on the External Corn Trade' (1815) discovered the principle of comparative advantage in international trade and shared with Ricardo and Malthus the discovery of the law of diminishing returns. Torrens also subverted Malthus by advocating colonization to alleviate overpopulation. His publications of this period culminated in his most general treatise, 'An Essay on the Production of Wealth' (1821), but this neither lived up to earlier promise nor received its advertised sequel on distribution. 
Torrens was politically unorthodox too, as he courted men of all parties to have his economic views pass into public policy. He endorsed Francis Burdett's reform proposals in 1809 and, after failing to win Rochester in June 1818, bore them out in his justificatory 'Letter to the Freemen' (1819). He won Ipswich for the whigs in mid-June at a cost of $5000, determined to be independent, though friends feared he would 'feel his way to some place'. His maiden speech occurred during a corn law debate (24 November 1826), but he was unseated the following February. Unsuccessful at Pontefract (July 1830), he won Ashburton for its owner, without party support (June 1831). King William wanted him cashiered for suggesting, in September 1832, the abolition of the House of Lords. Instead, the 'Reform Act' abolished Torrens's seat at Ashburton -- not before a 'tipsy speech' preceded being 'as sick as a dog in the Long Gallery' ('Letters of Thomas Babington Macaulay', 11 March 1833, 2.232). He topped the polls at Bolton in December 1833 but was defeated in January 1835 and did not contest a further seat. He was 'generally listened to with attention in the house', though an 'unmusical' voice (his Ulster burr?) and affected manner detracted from his otherwise 'effective speeches' (Grant, 188-91). 
Newspapers gave Torrens his livelihood and his chief conduit for receiving and giving patronage, as a publicist for reform and economics. During 1820 Torrens led a syndicate that made 'The Traveller', a London evening paper, whig and a mouthpiece of political economy. Merging it with 'The Globe' (30 December 1822) also made it England's second-largest daily; by 1828 it monopolized the evening paper market. Torrens retired as manager by mid-1826 but, 'chief though dormant partner' still, he continued to influence policy and management as late as 1858. Even under Brougham's sway, the paper was usually 'ministerial' on the Liberal side. For professional debate -- fellowship of the Royal Society (10 December 1819) being inadequate to the purpose -- Torrens helped form the Political Economy Club, and chaired its inaugural meeting on 30 April 1821. The club broke Ricardo's dominance of discussion. 
Ricardo's death (September 1823) enhanced Torrens's standing as a theoretician and freed him to do his greatest work: to force the Colonial Office's hand on colonization and emigration, thereby modernizing the empire. From March 1825 he promoted the idea of commercial colonization through the New Zealand Company and kept the government's focus on the subject throughout 1826-31. He had petitioned (1816) to be governor of New South Wales or Van Diemen's Land; to a renewed application for the latter he added another for a large land grant and a senior post at Swan River (1828-31). Under-secretary Wilmot Horton promised him a seat on any 'colonial board' that eventuated (1826) and, in the Commons on 15 February 1827, Torrens supported Horton's successful motion for another emigration committee. Torrens sought 'parliamentary or official employment' from liberal ministers (1827-32) but received only the contract for the new 'Police Gazette' (28 January 1828). Denied membership of the colonial land board (1828) and the Irish and emigration commissions (1831), Torrens was by 1832 the acknowledged leader of the 'systematic colonisers' clandestinely dominated by E. G. Wakefield, though Torrens's variant, 'self-supporting colonisation', encouraged the peasant proprietorship that Wakefield abhorred. He chaired the National Colonization Society (formed in 1830), led its negotiations with the Colonial Office, and helped float the South Australian Land Company (1832-3). He was integral to the South Australian Association's wrangles with four successive colonial secretaries (1833-5). When the 'South Australia Act' established a commission to sell colonial land and dispatch emigrants (August 1834), he used political credit to be gazetted chairman (5 May 1835). Three weeks later he completed 'The Colonization of South Australia' and the commissioners set about preliminary land sales, recruiting emigrants and raising loans. Torrens alienated Wakefield over the appropriate price for land and became the experiment's chief manager. 
Torrens then proposed additional remedies for Ireland. Early in 1836 he lobbied to set aside a portion of all colonial land revenues for an Irish emigration fund. The resulting select committee on the disposal of colonial lands was a victory for Wakefield's opinions over Torrens's. Wakefield went on to colonize New Zealand, though he had to compromise with Torrens's New Zealand Company of 1825. Torrens failed to have emigration included in the new Irish poor law (1837-8), so in Dublin, in July 1839, he helped form the South Australian Colonization Society. Adversaries called him the 'Irish exterminator', as Irish investment and emigration picked up during 1840-42 to Torrens's envisioned 'New Hibernia'. By then Lord John Russell had replaced the South Australian commission with the colonial land and emigration commission (15 January 1840). Torrens was chairman, making him (briefly) the chief executive officer of the British empire. When South Australia's bankruptcy was clear (January 1841), he agreed to resign for purchasing land in the colony contrary to an 1835 ruling by Lord Glenelg. He gave up office when Russell's committee of inquiry reported unfavourably (9 April), though without indicting him. He began lobbying immediately for reinstatement and compensation, relenting only when, on Torrens's resignation from the Political Economy Club in February 1851 owing to ill health, Russell granted him a civil-list pension of $200 p.a. (July 1851) not as South Australian compensation but for 'services to political economy'. 
In 1841 Torrens began the notorious series of pamphlets 'The Budget: on Commercial and Colonial Policy' (1844), which abrogated classical doctrine by proposing a theory of reciprocity of import tariffs as a protectionist exception to international free trade. Torrens cultivated Benjamin Disraeli along these lines (1847-52). He also renewed pressure for colonization to aid famine-stricken Ireland in 'Ireland Saved' (1847, 1849). But it was banking that dominated Torrens's last twenty years. Peel's 'Bank of England Charter Act' 1844 owed much to Torrens's 'currency scheme' and 'bank arrangement' of 1836 (for which he sought a $10,000 gratuity from the Bank of England), and to his currency controversy with Thomas Tooke, 1840-44. Torrens's classic defence of the act went through six manifestations (1847-58). During 1856-7 he worked on 'a treatise on money' and in July 1860 on a reply to Michael Chevalier on the value of gold, but he admitted to 'failing powers'. His last original work was his review of 'Lord Overstone on metallic and paper currency' in the 'Edinburgh Review' (January 1858). His final public activity was to dispute the withdrawal of his 'Police Gazette' contract, and compensation, with the Treasury and Home Office (1858-62). 
Torrens settled at 36 Regency Square, Brighton, in 1857 after living in London in coffee houses, hotels, clubs, and rooms, and since the age of sixty in Welsh mountain towns and at the English seaside to combat perennial bronchitis. In 1861 he moved to 16 Craven Hill, Bayswater. He died there of an abscess on the lung on 27 May 1864 and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery on 30 May. His estate, 'under $16,000', consisted of annuity interests in a freehold estate, considerable funds, and some railway shares, his colonial investments having been long since realized or conveyed to his surviving son, Robert. 
Torrens has undergone a respectable rehabilitation since his work was adjudged 'devoid of interest' (Harris, 550). His writings may be grandiloquent, pompous, and clogged with arithmetical examples, but his intellectual positions place him 'high up in the second class' among classical economists (Robbins, 1-2). Torrens, 'gentlemanly and prepossessing', had a 'finely proportioned figure' and 'an intellectual expression' (Grant, 191). Politicians did not always esteem his support yet they underrated his tenacity; economists found him combative though courteous in debate; colonizers found him inconsistent and indecisive; South Australian historians blame him for corrupting Wakefield's vision and bringing the colony to its knees. Friends and family thought him tender and generous, and his great-nephew William Torrens McCullagh Torrens, a reforming politician and writer on free trade, added Torrens to his surname in 1863 as a mark of respect. 


@@@@@


doc= 27566


Torrens, Sir Robert Richard Chute (1812-1884), land reformer, was the second son of Lieutenant-Colonel Robert Torrens (1780?-1864) and his first wife, Charity Herbert Chute. He was born in Cork on 31 May 1812, educated at Trinity College, Dublin (BA, 1835), and became a customs officer. On 19 February 1839, at St James's Church, Westminster, he married Barbara Ainslie, 'nee' Parks, the widow of George Augustus Anson. In 1840 they emigrated to South Australia, where he became collector of customs at $350 a year and built a handsome house, St Clair, at Woodville. Successive governors of the colony repeatedly censured him for irregularities, but he was answerable only to the customs board in London, which rebuked but did not displace him. While his quarrelsome, sometimes violent, behaviour and his land speculations throughout Australasia made him despised as a rogue and swindler, by 1850 he had a bank balance of $18,000. 
Appointed a legislative councillor in 1851 and colonial treasurer in 1852, Torrens emerged as the most reactionary of the colony's legislators. After building the mansion Torrens Park (later Scotch College) at Mitcham, he was so disgusted by the introduction of manhood suffrage, the ballot, and an elected upper house when a new constitution was adopted in 1855-6 that he decided to quit the colony. He found, however, that he could not sell his land because so many of his deeds were of dubious validity. So in 1857 (in which year he briefly acted as premier, from 1 to 30 September) he joined a twenty-year-old crusade to simplify, cheapen, and expedite all dealings in land, by introducing the registration of titles, and won election to the house of assembly promising to champion that cause. Several colonists had drafted bills to implement the reform. Torrens took up one of these, the handiwork of a German immigrant, Dr Ulrich Hubbe, who had modelled it on the system operating in the Hanseatic cities. Torrens effectively countered criticisms from lawyers fearing a loss of income and secured the bills' enactment in January 1858. He then resigned from parliament to become registrar-general, with a salary of $1000. He incurred fresh censures because his continued land-jobbing seemed inappropriate now that he could definitively determine ownership disputes. When he travelled to other colonies badgering their parliaments to copy the 'Real Property Act', members of the Adelaide chamber of commerce claimed he was doing so to make his own bad titles indefeasible. 
Having realized his Australasian assets, Torrens returned to England in 1862 and undertook lecture tours advocating land-title reform. After two unsuccessful attempts he was elected MP for Cambridge in 1868, but he won little support for the registration of land titles in Britain. He lost his seat in 1874. At his country home, Hannaford, near Ashburton, Devon, he engaged in ceaseless self-promotion and fruitless attempts to secure a pension from the South Australian parliament. Despite a warning from Governor Sir Dominick Daly in Adelaide that he had been 'the occasion of much mischief in this community and honours conferred on him would certainly not give general satisfaction' (Adelaide, State Records Office, GRG 2/14/1/30-31), Torrens was appointed KCMG in 1872 and GCMG in 1884. He died, of pneumonia, at Falmouth, Cornwall, on a journey from the Isles of Scilly, on 31 August 1884 and was buried in Leusdon churchyard, Devon. His wife died in 1899 and was interred with him. They had no children. 
In a series of pamphlets explaining the South Australian system of conveyancing by registration of title, Torrens claimed to be the originator of the reform. This influenced his first biographers and writers of legal textbooks. South Australians, knowing that some twenty other people had prepared the way, long before Torrens became interested, and had helped to get Hubbe's bill enacted, for more than a century insisted on speaking of their ''Real Property Act' titles'. Wherever the legislation was copied, the terms ''Torrens Act'' and 'Torrens titles' were prevalent from the beginning. Since the 1970s those usages have gained general currency in South Australia too. 


@@@@@


doc= 27567


Torrens, (William) Torrens McCullagh (1813-1894), politician and author, born at Delville House, near Dublin, on 13 October 1813, was the eldest son of James McCullagh of Delville, near Dublin, and Jane, daughter of Andrew Torrens of Dublin, the brother of Robert Torrens. Torrens McCullagh -- as he was known until 1863 -- was educated at Trinity College, Dublin (BA, 1833; LLB, 1842). On 31 October 1832 he was admitted a member of Lincoln's Inn; in 1836 he was called to the Irish bar at King's Inns, Dublin, and on 6 June 1855 was called to the English bar. He married in 1836 Margaret Henrietta, daughter of John Gray of Claremorris, co. Mayo, and sister of Sir John Gray MP. 
Brought to the attention of Archbishop Whately for his support of Irish poor relief, in 1835 McCullagh was given the post of assistant commissioner to the special commission on relief of the Irish poor. He travelled extensively through Ireland, and presented thorough and valuable reports on the condition of the destitute poor, which contributed to the decision in 1838 to extend the workhouse system to Ireland. 
In 1842 McCullagh assisted Sir Robert John Kane in founding the first Irish mechanics' institute, in Dublin; on its opening he delivered a course of lectures on the use and study of history, published in 1842. He joined the Anti-Corn Law League, and at the suggestion of Cobden published 'The Industrial History of Free Nations' (1846), which attempted to prove that world progress had been achieved only by the industry of urban, non-feudal peoples and that the corn laws were restrictive of independence and self-culture. 
From 1847 to 1852, when he and Sir Charles Napier failed to win Great Yarmouth, McCullagh was MP for the borough of Dundalk. In 1857 he was returned for Yarmouth, and in 1865 (having adopted his great-uncle's surname) for the old and undivided borough of Finsbury, where he retained the seat for twenty years. In parliament he was an independent Liberal, opposed to the introduction of a branch-based mass party, and his independence was to cause severe financial problems in later life. Though winning Finsbury on a platform of extension of the suffrage, the ballot, and the abolition of church rates, from 1865 he earned a reputation as a campaigner for metropolitan social reform. He supported Disraeli's proposal for household suffrage in 1867, and in committee on the bill moved and carried an amendment establishing the lodger franchise. In 1868 he introduced the landmark 'Artisans' Dwellings Bill', enabling local authorities to clear away overcrowded slums and erect decent dwellings for the working classes, which was passed despite a powerful opposition. In 1869 he obtained for London boards of guardians the power to board out pauper children. He was a defender of the right of political asylum; the 'Extradition Act' of 1870, which prevented prisoners from being extradited on one plea and tried on another, was based on the report of a select committee appointed at his suggestion. During the discussions in committee of William Edward Forster's 'Education Act' of 1870, he proposed and carried an amendment establishing a school board for London, and he served on the Finsbury school board from 1870 to 1872. In 1885 he carried an act making the charge for water rates in the metropolis leviable only on the amount of the public assessment. 
McCullagh Torrens was a tireless lobbyist and pamphleteer. He was a founder member of the Liberty and Property Defence League, established in 1882 to combat state socialism, the Clerkenwell Emigration Club, and the National Emigration League, set up in 1870. He also served on the Jamaica Committee and was vice-president of the Aborigines' Protection Society. He was a member of the executive of the Association for the Improvement of London Workhouse Infirmaries in 1866 and the executive of the Travelling Tax Abolition Committee from its inception in 1877. He was also a member of the Reform Club. His 1872 publication 'Our Empire in Asia: how we Came by it' served as a critique of imperialism and a manifesto for self-rule. 
McCullagh Torrens wrote several works of history and biography, including memoirs of R. Lalor Sheil (1855), Sir James Graham (1863), Viscount Melbourne (1878), and Lord Wellesley (1880), as well as the autobiographical 'Twenty Years in Parliament' (1893) and the posthumous 'History of Cabinets' (1894); the latter was based on twenty years' work, and to it he had devoted the last seven years of his life. 
In 1878 McCullagh Torrens married his second wife, Emily, widow of Thomas Russell of Leamington Spa, and the third daughter of William Harrison of the same town. In 1885 he withdrew from parliament, the expense of which precipitated his bankruptcy, owing $6630, in 1886. On 25 April 1894 he was knocked down by a hansom cab in London and severely injured. He died the following day at 23 Bryanston Square, the residence of his daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 27568


Torrigiani, Pietro (1472-1528), sculptor and draughtsman, was born 'sopr' Arno' at noon on Sunday 22 November 1472 and began life probably in the family town house (first rented, later purchased by 1480) at the top of Borgo San Jacopo (near the Ponte Vecchio), Florence. Pietro, or Piero as he was baptized in Florence Cathedral on 24 November 1472, was the fifth of the eight children of Torrigiano di Antonio Torrigiani (1429- 'c'.1500) and Dianora di Francesco Tucci ('b'. 'c'.1449). His parents were both Florentine, and Pietro's uncle, Luca di Antonio Torrigiani, was responsible for establishing the main branch of the well-known Torrigiani family in Florence, whose roots can be traced back to 1258. Pietro's father worked as a silk merchant in Florence and also owned smaller country homes and vineyards in nearby Signa, known for the production of clay and terracotta. 
Although several new documents have been discovered, still relatively little information about Pietro Torrigiani's family background, youth, and early training is known. According to the later sixteenth-century Florentine source Giorgio Vasari, as an adolescent Pietro Torrigiani studied drawings and terracotta, bronze, and marble sculpture with Bertoldo di Giovanni in the Florentine academy of Lorenzo de' Medici in the gardens near San Marco until about 1492. Vasari described Pietro's early works as 'very beautiful' and thought his personality was strong and powerful, even haughty ('superbo'), overbearing, and prone to violence. The rivalry between Torrigiani and Michelangelo (nearly four years younger) led to the famous fist fight probably just before or during early 1492 in the Brancacci chapel in Santa Maria del Carmine, Florence, where Torrigiani broke Michelangelo's nose, permanently disfiguring him (an incident recorded by Vasari and Benvenuto Cellini). Consequently, Vasari reports that Lorenzo de' Medici banished Torrigiani from Florence; by August 1492 he is recorded in Bologna making a terracotta bust of a physician, Stefano della Torre. Vasari further records that Torrigiani then moved to Rome to work with Andrea Bregno and Bernardino Pinturicchio and their workshops on the stucco and marble decoration of the Torre Borgia apartments in the Vatican for Pope Alexander VI (who reigned from 1492 to 1503). Recently discovered documents dating between 1493 and 1506 establish that Torrigiani was active as a sculptor in Rome, Florence, Siena, and elsewhere in Italy and in Avignon, and that he may not have moved northwards to northern Europe and England until after 1506. 
Documented in Rome as 'Magistro Petro Scarpelino Florentino', and also called 'Petrus Scarpelinus florentinus', Torrigiani was commissioned by Cardinal Adriano Castellesi, Pope Alexander VI's papal secretary, to produce a series of large marble sculptural monuments and architectural sculptures, including a cantoria, marble doorways, tombs, and monuments for San Giacomo degli Spagnoli, now called Nostra Signora del Sacro Cuore, on Piazza Navona in Rome. Torrigiani also produced at least three finely carved busts, of Santa Fina, St Gregory, and Christ for his landlord in Rome, the priest Stefano Coppi, who later donated these to his native town of San Gimignano. These were produced about 1498 in Rome, the same year Torrigiani wrote his will with Coppi as executor. Vasari records that concurrently Torrigiani supplemented his income by enlisting as a mercenary in Cesare Borgia's army in the war of Romagna (1499-1500); he then joined the Florentines in their battle against Pisa (autumn 1499) and later fought at Gagliano, in December 1503, with Piero de' Medici and the French forces. He was lauded as a valiant soldier and returned to Florence at least by early to mid-1503, when he married Felici di Francesco di Niccolo Mori Ubaldini (died 1541), with whom he had one child, a son, Torrigiano (1503-1528). During this time Torrigiani carved the marble statue of St Francis ('c'.1501) for Cardinal Francesco Piccolomini's family altar (Siena Cathedral, completed by Michelangelo). Francesco Todeschini Piccolomini (died 1503), the cardinal protector of England from 1492 to 1503, before being elected as Pope Pius III, and Cardinal Castellesi, Torrigiani's two main patrons during his formative years in Rome, were highly influential with the church and courts in England and Spain. They, along with the Florentine banking families Baroncelli, Bardi, Cavalcanti, and Frescobaldi, who also had branches in Rome, London, and throughout Europe, helped to arrange a network for the necessary introductions for the prestigious commissions Torrigiani would later receive in England. 
In February 1504 Torrigiani is documented in Avignon, where he was commissioned to sculpt three statues for a 'Crucifix with the Virgin and St John' for members of the Baroncelli family. In and out of Florence also during these years, Torrigiani made many drawings and marble and bronze sculptures 'with nobility and good style' (Vasari, 4.260) for merchants. In January 1506 he purchased in Rome two large blocks of marble which Michelangelo had previously owned, suggesting the two sculptors maintained professional contacts during this period. Thus, until 1506 Torrigiani travelled and worked as a talented sculptor throughout Italy and southern France while remaining active in Rome and Florence, probably with the workshops of Andrea Bregno, Giuliano da Maiano, and Antonio Pollaiuolo. 
About 1506-7 Torrigiani travelled north, perhaps with Florentine merchants or members of banking families. In April 1510 he is documented working for Margaret of Austria, regent of the Netherlands. In Bruges he repaired a bust of Mary Tudor, the daughter of Henry VII, king of England, and advised Margaret on the tomb of Mary of Savoy and unnamed funerary commissions, most probably for her priory church at Brou. He is first recorded in England on 23 November 1511, when he received the commission to make the tomb of the mother of Henry VII, Lady Margaret Beaufort (died 1509), in the newly built Henry VII chapel in Westminster Abbey, London. 
Torrigiani was, however, probably in London by about 1507, from which date he is thought to have advised Henry VII on plans for the king's family monuments, modelled the bust of Mary Tudor for her proposed marriage of 1507-8 to Margaret of Austria's nephew Charles I, and then produced about 1509-11 the three superb polychromed terracotta busts 'King Henry VII' (V&A), the young 'Henry VIII', and 'John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester' (Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York), as well as the polychrome plaster and wood 'Death Mask' and 'Funeral Effigy of Henry VII' (Westminster Abbey Museum, London), on the king's death in April 1509. 
The documented sculptures Torrigiani produced in England were all made for Westminster Abbey between 1511 and 1522/5, when he left to work in Spain. Working in the abbey precinct, Torrigiani collaborated with various northern craftsmen on the distinctive black touchstone, white marble, and gilt bronze tomb of Lady Margaret Beaufort. Verrocchio's earlier Medici tomb in San Lorenzo, Florence, and Pollaiuolo's papal tombs in St Peter's, Rome, probably inspired this new combination of precious materials. The surviving contract and documents establish that, for Lady Margaret's tomb, for a fee of $500 Torrigiani designed and carved a new Italianate-inspired timber model of the tomb chest and the chest itself, incorporating Italian Renaissance decorations. He also made the life-like gilt bronze effigy and canopy based upon a two-dimensional design by Maynard Vewicke, a London painter. This system follows the more traditional medieval collaborative process then prevalent for the production of late Gothic tombs in England and northern Europe rather than the Italian Renaissance practice of allowing the sculptor greater artistic autonomy. As a result, the design of the Beaufort tomb is somewhat unbalanced, and the monument exhibits an uneven visual tension between the northern late Gothic tabernacle and the new Italianate-inspired tomb chest. 
However, Torrigiani's next major work, the tomb of Henry VII and Elizabeth of York, commissioned on 26 October 1512 from Henry VIII, his next English patron, allowed Torrigiani considerably more freedom in design and execution to demonstrate further his many artistic talents. Torrigiani agreed 'to make and worke, or doo to be made and wrought, well, surely, clenly, workemanly, curiously and substancyally, for the sum of $1,500 sterling, a tombe or sepulture of whit marbill and of black touchstone wt. ymags, figures, beasts and other things of cuppure gilt. ('LP Henry VIII', 3/1, no. 7)' For this central monument in the newly built chapel of Henry VII in Westminster Abbey, Torrigiani rejected the earlier estimate and design of 1506 which Guido Mazzoni had submitted based on the tomb of 'Charles VIII of France' (St Denis, Paris). For the Henry VII tomb Torrigiani designed four elegant gilt bronze Italianate seated angels holding the epitaph and royal arms to flank the two gilt bronze life-size effigies which lie on a sarcophagus with Italian Renaissance motifs (naked Verrocchiesque putti, grotesques, garlands, and birds) and six roundels with reliefs representing pairs of the king's patron saints. The Henry VII monument and chapel were lauded as early as 1530 as one of 'the wonders of the world' ('orbis miraculum') in John Leland's description of Westminster Abbey ('De rebus Britannicis collectanea', 6 vols., 1530, ed. T. Hearne, 1715). More recently it was described as 'the finest Renaissance tomb north of the Alps' (Pope-Hennessy, 219). Its Italian Renaissance design was influential on tombs in sixteenth- and seventeenth-century England. 
The success of this tomb led Torrigiani to receive other important commissions in England. On 5 January 1519 he was commissioned by the king to design and produce for a fee of $2000 an even larger and more monumental tomb (later abandoned) for Henry VIII and Katherine of Aragon. On 5 March 1517 he received the commission for $1000 to produce the high altar for Henry VII's chapel (mainly destroyed 1644, but reconstructed with surviving pieces, 1932-5). This was a sumptuous monument of gilt bronze reliefs, polychrome and white glazed terracotta statues, marble, and black touchstone. In June 1519 Torrigiani travelled from London to Florence and later that year returned with additional assistants and collaborators to work on these and other commissions, one of whom was probably Benedetto da Rovezzano. He contracted the painter Antonio Toto del Nunziata and the sculptors Antonio di Piergiovanni di Lorenzo da Settignano and Giovanni Luigi di Bernardo di Maestro Jacopo da Verona to return with him to London. Cellini refused Torrigiani's invitation to the Tudor court but described their meeting in his 'Vita', where he records that Torrigiani unsuccessfully attempted to enlist him to make 'a great work for my king', and boasted of his 'gallant feats among those beasts of Englishmen' (Cellini, 18). During these years Torrigiani designed and produced several other distinguished portrait busts and tombs in England in marble, bronze, and terracotta, including the wall tomb of Dr John Yonge (died 1516) for the Rolls Chapel, Chancery Lane, the first completely Renaissance-style monument in England; the wall tomb of Dean John Colet (died 1519) in St Paul's, Covent Garden (destroyed); the marble head and roundel of Christ the redeemer ('c'.1520/22; set before 1532 in the western exterior wall of Abbot Islip's chapel, Westminster Abbey, now in the Wallace Collection); the bronze profile bust of Sir Thomas Lovell (died 1524); and other works, for example, at Hampton Court. Torrigiani's Florentine followers, including Giovanni da Maiano the younger and Benedetto da Rovezzano, continued to produce Italianate sculpture at the Tudor court for several decades after his departure. 
Torrigiani left England for Spain either in 1522, when Charles V visited Henry VIII and his aunt, Katherine of Aragon, in London, or about 1525, when he is recorded after modelling a terracotta bust of Empress Isabella of Portugal (1503-1539) for her marriage in 1526 to Charles V in Seville. Torrigiani may have worked for Isabella in Portugal and/or also on the Spanish royal tombs in Granada Cathedral. He is documented at the royal monastery of Guadalupe (Extremadura, Spain) in 1526 producing a polychrome terracotta statue of St Jerome (now in the sacristy), originally placed on the high altar. In Seville, Torrigiani modelled and painted masterful and influential life-size polychrome terracotta statues of the 'Penitent St Jerome' and two 'Virgin and Child' groups (one of these for the Hieronymite convent of San Jeronimo de Buena Vista outside Seville -- both it and the 'St Jerome' are now in the Museo de Bellas Artes, Seville). These powerful, expressive statues influenced later Spanish sculptors and painters, especially Montanes, Velasquez, Zurbaran, and Goya. 
While in Spain in 1525, Torrigiani transferred ownership of a family farm in Tuscany to his nephew for 1100 gold Florentine ducats. According to Vasari, Torrigiani was so incensed after being tricked with an inadequate payment of sacks full of worthless 'maravedis' as payment from the duque de Arcos in Seville that he destroyed a life-size terracotta statue of the Virgin and child that he was creating. He was imprisoned for this sacrilege, and due to his melancholic spirit he then starved himself to death. While this story remains unsubstantiated, estate documents refer to Torrigiani's widow receiving restitution of her inheritance, including various properties, and indicate that he died in the summer (July or August) of 1528. 
Although Vasari, Cellini, and other supporters of Michelangelo created an unsympathetic image of Torrigiani and his work in Italy, his modelled and carved sculptures, especially his sepulchral monuments in Westminster Abbey and his polychrome sculptures made in England and Spain, are among the best Florentine Renaissance sculptures anywhere. He may rightly be credited as being one of the first Italian Renaissance artists to bring the new Italianate style and new combinations of sculptural materials and techniques into Tudor England. His influence in England continued with the work of other Italian sculptors and inspired later tomb monuments by Hubert Le Sueur, court sculptor to Charles I, in the Henry VII chapel in Westminster Abbey. Torrigiani was a brilliant and versatile Florentine Renaissance artist, whose most significant, innovative, and influential works were produced in early sixteenth-century England and Spain. 


@@@@@


doc= 27569


Torry, Patrick (1763-1852), Scottish Episcopal bishop of St Andrews, Dunkeld, and Dunblane, born on 27 December 1763 in the parish of St Edward, Aberdeenshire, was the son of Thomas Torry, a woollen cloth manufacturer at Garneston, and his wife, Jane, 'nee' Watson, daughter of a farmer in the same parish. He was raised as a member of the Church of Scotland, but his uncle James Watson, who had joined the Jacobite rebellion of 1745, influenced him in the direction of Episcopalianism. After schooling at Lonmay, Aberdeenshire, Torry began teaching at the age of eighteen, first in Selkirk parish school under his uncle, and then at Lonmay. In June 1782 he went to live with John Skinner of Linshart (1721-1807), under whose tutoring he read for Episcopalian orders, and in the following September he was ordained deacon of the Scottish Episcopal church by Bishop Robert Kilgour of Aberdeen. Though only nineteen years old, Torry was put in charge of a congregation at Arradoul, Banffshire, and in 1783 he was ordained priest. In 1787 he married Kilgour's daughter, Christian, who died childless in 1789. In the same year Torry became Kilgour's assistant in his charge at Peterhead, and on Kilgour's death in 1791 Torry succeeded to his charge, which he held until 1837. He married his second wife, Jane, daughter of Dr William Young of Fawsyde, Kincardineshire, in September 1791; they had three sons and four daughters, of whom the eldest son, John, became dean of St Andrews. In 1807 Torry was made treasurer of the Scottish Episcopal Friendly Society. 
On 6 October 1808 Torry was elected bishop of Dunkeld in succession to Jonathan Watson, and was consecrated bishop on 12 October at Aberdeen. As bishop he retained his pastoral charge at Peterhead, where he lived. George Gleig was originally chosen bishop, but the hostility of Bishop John Skinner (1744-1816) kept Gleig out of the see. Torry retained his bishopric for forty-four years; towards the end of his life he was one of the last survivors of the penal years of Scottish Episcopalianism and the nonjuring tradition of the eighteenth century. In 1837 he resigned his charge of the congregation at Peterhead, though he continued to reside there. Torry's age prevented his being elected in 1841 as primus in succession to Bishop James Walker. Following the revival of the medieval episcopal title of St Andrews at a synod held at Edinburgh in September 1844, Torry was henceforth known as bishop of the united dioceses of St Andrews, Dunkeld, and Dunblane. 
The most important incident of Torry's episcopate was the publication in April 1850 of his 'Prayer-Book', which claimed to be the embodiment of the usages of the Scottish Episcopal church. Torry had throughout his life been a staunch champion of the Scottish communion office, which was derived, through Laud's prayer book of 1637, from the first prayer book of Edward VI. The office was used by those Episcopalians in communion with the Scottish bishops who remained illegal nonjurors until the death of Prince Charles in 1788, when they took the oath to George III and were subsequently joined by the juring Episcopalian congregations in Scotland. The latter, while becoming members of the Scottish Episcopal church, retained the use of the English prayer book and looked to conformity with the Church of England. In 1847 a petition was presented to Torry from some of his clergy requesting that he patronize the compilation of a service book comprising the nonjuring liturgical usages. Torry's 'Prayer-Book', as it was known, was recommended by him and published in April 1850 as though it were the authorized service book of the Scottish Episcopal church. A storm of opposition led by Charles Wordsworth at once arose because of the minority use of the Scottish communion office among Episcopalians, the threat to Episcopalian similarity with the Church of England, and the lack of canonical sanction for some of its usages. During a struggle between the formerly nonjuring and Anglicized traditions of the Scottish Episcopal church, the publication was censured by a majority of the Scottish Episcopal synod, by the St Andrews diocesan synod on 19 June 1850, and again, after Torry had published a protest, by the Episcopal synod on 5 September. 
Other questions on which Torry came into conflict with his fellow bishops were the support he gave to the European mission to Anglicans of Bishop Michael Luscombe and his favourable reception of the appeal of William Palmer (1811-1879) in connection with Palmer's exploration of the intercommunion of Anglicanism and Eastern orthodoxy. Torry was regarded by English Tractarians as the most sympathetic figure among the Scottish bishops, apart from Bishop Alexander Forbes of Brechin. They therefore sponsored a number of initiatives in his diocese, including the foundation of Trinity College, Glenalmond, and the building of St Ninian's Cathedral, Perth, an early outpost of Anglo-Catholic ritualism in Scotland, the statutes of which Torry formally approved on 6 January 1851. Torry died at Peterhead on 3 October 1852, and was buried in St Ninian's Cathedral on 13 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 27570


Torshell, Samuel (1605-1650), Church of England clergyman, was born on 4 June 1605, the son of Richard Torshell, a London merchant tailor, and his wife, who was a midwife. He was at Merchant Taylors' School from 1617 until 1620 and matriculated as a sizar at Christ's College, Cambridge, at Easter 1621. He graduated BA in 1625 and proceeded MA in 1628. In 1628 Torshell was appointed lecturer at St Bartholomew by the Exchange in London with a salary of $50. The following year he was appointed preacher at Bunbury in Cheshire by the London Haberdashers' Company. His first publication, 'The Three Questions of Free Justification, Christian Liberty, the Use of the Law' (1632), was dedicated to the company. The following year he published nine sermons preached at Bunbury, under the title 'The Saints Humiliation' (1633), and dedicated them also to the master and wardens of the company. It was probably Torshell who on 25 July 1632 had married Prudence Stock, at St Vedast, Foster Lane, or St Michael-le-Querne. A Prudence, daughter of Richard Stock, had been baptized in 1608 at St Matthew, Friday Street, and it is likely that the 1632 bride was the daughter Prudence mentioned in the will of Richard Stock (1568/9-1626), rector of All Hallows, Bread Street, and famed puritan minister. 
In 1633 Archbishop Neile complained that as a result of the company's patronage Bunbury was 'a good nursery of Novelists' (Richardson, 12). Torshell himself was later to assert that 'I never thought Episcopacie to be Divine Right... yet I looked upon it as the most antient and prudentiall way of government, and so obeyed it and spoke well of it, though not its mad and furious ways.' In particular Torshell disliked the altar policy of the 1630s, the suppression of godly preachers, and the overuse of excommunication. He claimed that he was finally persuaded of the 'inconveniencies and mischiefes' of episcopacy by John White's speech against it in parliament ('The Hypocrite Discovered and Cured', 1643, A3'v'). Torshell was also entrusted with Richard Stock's papers. In 1641 he prepared Stock's 'A Learned and Very Usefull Commentary upon the Whole Prophesie of Malachy' (1641) for the press and it appeared in the same volume as Torshell's own 'Exercitation upon the Same Prophesie of Malachy'. 
At the end of 1642 Torshell left Bunbury for London 'to seeke refuge in these more safe coverts' (Torshell, 'A Helpe to Christian Fellowship', 1644, foreword). In 1643 he clarified his support for parliament in two publications, 'The Hypocrite Discovered and Cured' and 'A Case of Conscience, Concerning Flying in Times of Trouble', in which he complained of those who 'came up to the Parliaments sense in the head of the Tyde, [but] are willing to shrinke away in the Ebbe of things' and argued that 'if we love the publicke cause, wee must not onely keepe it company in its health, but stand by it and comfort it in its faintings' ('A Case of Conscience', A2'r'- 'v'). Torshell had not forgotten his godly contacts in Cheshire, however, and in the following year he published two sermons dedicated to Jane Done of Utkinson in testimony of 'how deare your religious family and all our Christian neighbourhood, are unto my thoughts' ('A Helpe to Christian Fellowship', foreword). 
In the spring of 1644 Torshell was appointed tutor to the king's two youngest children when they were committed by parliament to the custody of Algernon Percy, tenth earl of Northumberland. His sermon delivered that year on 28 December on the birthday of Princess Elizabeth was published as 'The Womans Glorie: a Treatise, Asserting the Due Honour of that Sexe' (1645), in which he argued that women were 'capable of the highest improvements' and that 'the whole Sexe [was] unduly reproached'. Although Torshell took a positive view of women's abilities, he was also wholly conventional in arguing that these could best be developed by the pursuit of piety and that women were in subjection to men. On 12 May 1646 he delivered a sermon, 'The Palace of Justice', to the House of Commons in thanksgiving for the taking of several garrisons as the first civil war reached its close. That year Torshell was admitted as vicar of St Giles Cripplegate, London, but a successor was admitted the following year. He also published 'A Designe about Disposing the Bible into an Harmony' (1647), a plan for transposing the order of biblical books and chapters to create a continuous history. On his deathbed he appointed his wife, Elizabeth, as his executor. He had already provided for his eldest son, Richard, who had been apprenticed at the cost of $50, and he left $40 each to his four other children. Torshell died on 22 March 1650. 


@@@@@


doc= 27571


Tostig, earl of Northumbria (c.1029-1066), magnate, was the third son of Godwine, earl of Wessex (d. 1053), and Gytha ['see under 'Godwine]. He had two elder brothers, Swein and Harold (later King Harold II), and at least four younger ones, AElfgar, Gyrth, Leofwine, and Wulfnoth. He also had at least two sisters, Edith and Gunnhild, and perhaps one more. In 1051 Tostig married Judith of Flanders, daughter of Baudouin (IV), count of Flanders, and his second wife, Eleanor of Normandy, who was first cousin to Edward the Confessor. The marriage seems to have been contracted during the exile of Tostig's father, Earl Godwine, at the court of Count Baudouin (V) in the autumn of 1051. Although the author of the life of King Edward calls Tostig 'earl', it is the sole direct evidence for his status at his wedding. If he had not yet attained this rank, then the marriage contracted was a considerable coup for the Godwine clan. At Easter 1053 Tostig and his brothers Harold and Gyrth carried their father's body into the king's chamber at Winchester after Godwine had collapsed and died. 
Before mid-Lent 1055 Tostig had succeeded Siward as earl of Northumbria and his accession may have earned the Godwine family the enmity of AElfgar of Mercia, who coveted the earldom for himself. The life of King Edward claims that Tostig was held in special affection by Edward the Confessor and his appointment may have owed much to the combined influence of his elder brother Harold and his sister Queen Edith. Tostig is described as a man of courage, endowed with great wisdom and shrewdness of mind. He was favourably compared with his brother Harold, both being distinctly handsome and graceful, similar in strength and bravery. The life of King Edward goes on to add that Tostig was endowed with very great and prudent restraint, although he tended to be rather overzealous in attacking malefactors. He carefully weighed up situations and once he had decided on a course of action he embarked upon it without discussing matters further with his fellows. Occasionally it seemed that he acted without planning and so caught his opponents unawares. He shared with his brother Harold the ability to disguise his true feelings, thus keeping people guessing as to their intentions. For the biographer of King Edward, Tostig and Harold were the twin pillars upon which peace in England rested. 
Tostig and his wife were well known for their alms giving. During the period of Tostig's rule in Northumbria, they forged close links with the community of St Cuthbert at Durham. The 'Libellus de exordio atque procursu istius hoc est Dunelmensis ecclesie' of Symeon of Durham (written between 1104 and 1107) describes the gifts they made to St Cuthbert, among which was a crucifix and images of the Virgin and of St John the Evangelist executed in gold and silver, together with many other precious ornaments for the church. Symeon also preserves the story of Judith's desire to worship at Cuthbert's shrine. Owing to an injunction against women entering the precincts of the church, Judith sent one of her maidservants to attempt an entry. On crossing the boundary of the churchyard the girl fell ill and died soon afterwards. It was in order to make amends for her temerity that Judith and Tostig made their gifts to the community. The links with Durham seem to have been close and Bishop AEthelwine provided Judith with some of St Oswine's hair. Judith was famed as a patron of the arts and at least four gospel books have been associated with her. In one of these (New York, Pierpont Morgan Library, Morgan MS 709, fol. 16) she is depicted in a line drawing. It does not seem likely that the community of St Cuthbert led the attack upon Tostig in 1065, as under him it had enjoyed the benefits of his strong rule. Durham tradition also preserved the story of the escape from prison of a certain Aldan-hamal whom the earl had incarcerated for robbery. The thief invoked St Cuthbert's aid, escaped his prison, and claimed sanctuary within the cathedral. One of Tostig's officers, Barcwith, was struck down by the saint for daring to violate the sanctuary. Despite this attack on the church, Tostig and his wife are commemorated in the Durham 'Liber vitae'. 
The author of the life of King Edward suggests that Tostig remained faithful to his wife and that their marriage was chaste. In 1061 they led an embassy to Rome which included Ealdred, archbishop-elect of York, who was journeying there for his pallium. On the outward and return journeys Tostig demonstrated his piety by worshipping at each shrine he came across. Pope Nicholas II ('r'. 1059-61) received Tostig and his companions honourably and invited the earl to attend a synod, presumably that of Easter (15 April) 1061, called to deal with the problem of simony in the church, at which, it is said, Tostig sat immediately next to the pontiff. During the dispute over Ealdred's election to York, it seems that the earl threatened to withhold the Peter's Pence which he had brought with him from England. Tostig's embassy became embroiled in the local struggle between the Tuscan nobility and the papacy when members of his party were attacked on the via Cassia shortly after leaving for home. The earl had sent Judith and most of his retinue on ahead and they were unaware of what had happened to their fellows. The attackers were led by Gerard, count of Galeria, who was later excommunicated by Pope Nicholas II for this act of aggression. During the attack a certain nobleman, Gospatric, enabled his lord, Tostig, to escape by pretending that he was the earl. The name Gospatric was common in the north in this period and this holder of it cannot be identified with certainty, but it is possible that he was either the post-conquest earl of Northumbria or the Gospatric, son of Uhtred, who was slain on Queen Edith's orders in 1064. On their return to Rome, Tostig and his companions were treated with compassion by the pope, who gave them gifts from the treasury of St Peter, whereupon they departed with the apostolic benediction. The party reached England safely in the autumn of 1061. 
During Tostig's absence, Malcolm III of Scotland had attacked the north of England, pillaging Holy Island in particular. It has been suggested that Malcolm timed the raid to coincide with Tostig's journey to Rome so that, apart from the military advantage, he might not break his oath of sworn brotherhood with the earl. The life of King Edward suggests that earlier, perhaps in 1058, the Scots had made raids on Tostig's earldom in order to test him. Tostig had responded by wearing the Scots down by cunning schemes rather than by military campaigns, until Malcolm agreed to serve Tostig and King Edward. Malcolm is said to have given Tostig hostages and it may have been at this time that he became the earl's sworn brother. In 1059 Malcolm was conducted to Edward's court by Tostig, the archbishop of York, and the bishop of Durham, and it seems likely that the agreement was made on this occasion. Some time after his return from Rome, in the last week of May 1063, Tostig invaded north Wales, probably from Chester, in support of his brother Harold's campaign launched from Bristol. The success of the campaign probably induced the Welsh to kill their king, Gruffudd ap Llywelyn, and present his head to Harold and Tostig. 
Tostig seems to have been a trusted minister of the crown and was at Edward's court in 1065, either hunting with the king or possibly completing a task that Edward had entrusted to him, when revolt broke out in his earldom. Tostig had delegated the government of Northumbria north of the River Tyne to his lieutenant, the Yorkshire thegn Copsi, but their regime seems to have provoked a violent rebellion. According to the life of King Edward, some of the Northumbrian nobles who had suffered under Tostig's rule conspired to bring him down late in 1065, after Michaelmas or perhaps in October. The 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' charges Tostig with robbing churches, depriving men of their lands and lives, and acting against the law. As King Edward promised the rebels that he would restore the laws of Cnut to the north, it may be that Tostig had tried to introduce West Saxon law into the region. John of Worcester suggests that the combination of a great tax levied on the Northumbrians and the murder of the Northumbrian nobles Gamel, son of Orm, and Ulf, son of Dolfin, who were linked to the house of Bamburgh, was at the heart of the revolt. The murder of another Northumbrian noble, Gospatric, at the behest of Queen Edith on 28 December 1064 has also been seen as a contributing factor. It is possible that during the Northumbrian revolt against the Normans in 1069-70, the memory of this murder provoked the earl of Northumbria, who was Gospatric's nephew and namesake, to despoil the gilded cross which Tostig and his wife had presented to the community of St Cuthbert. 
On 3 October 1065 the rebels, led by Gamelbearn, Dunstan, son of AEthelnoth, and Glonieorn, son of Heardwulf, who may have been intriguing with Earl Eadwine of Mercia and his brother Morcar, broke into Tostig's residence in York and killed those of his soldiers who did not escape. John of Worcester names two of the victims, the housecarls Amund and Reavenswart, and suggests that some 200 men lost their lives. The rebels then nominated Morcar as their earl, invited his brother Eadwine to join them, and marched south. Anyone associated with Tostig's regime was killed and there was much slaughter both in York and in Lincoln. The life of King Edward sees the revolt as heralding the return of the robber bands that had dominated the north before the imposition of order by earls Siward and Tostig. The rebels marched to Northampton, where they were met by Earl Harold, and then as far as Oxford where, on 28 October 1065, they were met by envoys from King Edward. The rebels demanded the exile of Tostig, charging him with being too cruel in the exercise of his authority and with punishing miscreants more out of a desire to confiscate their property than out of a love of justice. They also demanded that the king accept Morcar as earl of Northumbria. According to the biographer of King Edward, Tostig alleged that his brother Harold had conspired with the rebels against him. Tostig made the accusation in the presence of the king but Harold purged himself with a public oath of exculpation. Edward decided to crush the rebellion, in support of his brother-in-law, but was deserted by Earl Harold and the English thegns, who refused to provoke a civil war. Harold conveyed Edward's acceptance of the rebels' terms and agreed that the laws of Cnut would be re-established in Northumbria. 
This was a pragmatic response to the situation but it marked a final fissure between Harold and his brother. The twelfth-century historian Henry of Huntingdon believed that the rift between Harold and Tostig had occurred shortly after their successful invasion of Wales in 1063. Jealous of his brother's higher place in the king's affections, Tostig went to Hereford, where Harold was preparing a banquet to entertain the king, and had Harold's servants dismembered and served up for the royal guest. Tostig was thus forced into exile along with his wife, Judith, and his lieutenant, Copsi. It may be at this date that the shires of Northampton and Huntingdon were detached from the earldom and granted to Siward's son, Waltheof, who had been denied the earldom of Northumbria in 1055 and now again in 1065. The author of the life of King Edward sees the failure of Edward to reinstate Tostig as marking the beginning of his physical decline. Queen Edith also tried to intervene on her brother's behalf, but in vain. Tostig took leave of his mother and crossed the channel, with his wife and infant children and members of his immediate retinue, after 1 November 1065. According to the life of King Edward the exiles were welcomed by Count Baudouin (V) of Flanders a few days before Christmas and given a house and estate in St Omer, together with the revenues of the town as maintenance. Orderic Vitalis, writing in the early twelfth century, believed that during his exile Earl Tostig had visited Duke William of Normandy in an attempt to forge an alliance against Harold. Similarly Snorri Sturluson's 'King Harald's Saga', written at the end of the twelfth century, suggests that Tostig had travelled to Denmark and then Norway in order to enlist the aid of kings Swein and Harald in his attack on England. After Tostig's departure, his brother Harold may have formed an alliance with earls Eadwine and Morcar and began to advance his own claims to the English throne. The enmity between the brothers was not ended by Harold's coronation and Tostig was absent from the ceremony. 
Shortly after the appearance of Halley's comet on 24 April 1066, Tostig attempted to recover his place by making raids on England. He attacked the Isle of Wight, taking plunder and provisions before moving along the coast to Thanet, where, according to Gaimar, he was met by Copsi. They attacked 'Brunemue' before entering the Humber. Driven out of Lindsey by earls Eadwine and Morcar and deserted by his Flemish allies, Tostig made his way to Scotland. He seems to have joined up with King Harald Hardrada of Norway at the mouth of the River Tyne early in September 1066. The two entered the Humber and by way of the Ouse landed at Riccal. On 20 September they defeated the forces of earls Eadwine and Morcar at Gate Fulford but were themselves defeated and killed by King Harold at Stamford Bridge, on the Derwent, on 25 September. Tostig's lieutenant, Copsi, may have been with his master at the battle, but he survived and was later to hold the earldom under William I. After Tostig's death, his widow, Judith, remained in Flanders until late 1070 or early 1071, when she married Welf (IV), duke of Bavaria. 

'Domesday Book' records lands held by Earl Tostig and values them at $492, which ranks him among the wealthiest landholders of Edward's reign. This figure is almost certainly an underestimate, as the survey probably failed to record every instance of the transference of Tostig's manors after his exile. In addition, the northern half of his earldom was not surveyed by the Domesday commissioners. Apart from his estates in the earldom of Northumbria, which seems to have included Nottinghamshire, Tostig held land in the south, mainly in Hampshire, the south-west, and the east midland shires, particularly Northamptonshire and Huntingdonshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 27572


Toto, Anthony (1499-1554), artist, was the son of the Florentine artist Toto del Nunziata, whom Vasari described as a 'dipintore di fantocci', as a maker of fireworks, and as a practical joker. In Florence Toto was a pupil of the painter Ridolfo Ghirlandaio at the same time as Perino del Vaga. With his master he painted an altarpiece of the Virgin and child with two saints in San Piero Scheraggio, while in friendly competition with del Vaga he painted a figure on the triumphal arch erected for the entry of Pope Leo X into Florence in 1515. In 1519 he was engaged by the sculptor Pietro Torrigiano to come to England and work on a projected tomb for Henry VIII and his queen. 
Although this tomb was never executed Toto entered the service of the king as a painter, and his name subsequently appears in the account books of the royal household in conjunction with that of another Florentine painter, Bartolommeo Penni. Vasari states that Toto executed numerous works for the king of England, some of which were in architecture. In particular he refers to Toto's work on the 'principal palace' of Henry VIII (probably Nonesuch Palace, near Cheam in Surrey). In 1530 Toto painted nine religious pictures for the library and the king's closet of Hampton Court Palace, and in the same year he also painted and gilded four antique heads brought from Greenwich to 'Hanworthe'. Two years later he was paid with 'John de la Mayn' (perhaps Giovanni da Maiano) for work on 'certen antique hedes'. From at least 1536-7 Toto lived in the parish of St Bride, Fleet Street, London, and in the latter year he executed a heraldic painting for the funeral of Jane Seymour. 
Toto was married twice, first to Ellen, and then to Katherine. Presumably with his first wife he had three children, Anthony (also a painter), Ellen (who married the painter Lewes Williams), and Winifred (who married Sir Charles Calthrope, attorney-general for Ireland). Toto received letters of naturalization and free denization in June 1538, in which year he and his first wife also received a grant of two cottages at Mitcham in Surrey as well as the lease of the manor of Ravensbury. 
In 1540 Toto received payment from Henry VIII for 'a table of the story of King Alexander' and for a 'table of Calomia' (probably a 'Calumny of Apelles'). In 1541 he received a licence to export 600 tons of beer which he later sold on. Toto is perhaps the 'Mr. Anthony, the kynge's servaunte of Grenwiche', bequeathed 10 pounds in the will of Hans Holbein in 1543. In 1544 he succeeded Andrew Wright as the king's serjeant-painter and he also became a member of the king's privy chamber. In the same year he produced heraldry and other decorations for Sir Thomas Cawarden, master of the king's tents. The document that records this commission carries the only known example of Toto's signature and, on the reverse, a drawing of a prancing horse presumably, although not certainly, by the artist. In 1547 Toto worked on the decorations for the funeral of Henry VIII as well as those for the coronation of Edward VI, during whose reign he worked on costumes and settings for revels at court. Ultimately he also designed decorations for Edward's funeral. As a new year's gift in 1552 Toto presented Edward VI with a portrait of a duke, 'steyned upon cloth of silver' (Auerbach, 66-7). In 1551 he and John Leades supervised two teams of painters who erected a temporary banqueting house in Hyde Park for the reception of a French embassy. Toto died intestate before 1 November 1554 and the following year the crown paid his widow, Katherine, outstanding debts for the painting of ships. 
Anthony Toto was the most prominent of a number of Italian artists who worked at the English court during the sixteenth century, nearly all of whom showed extreme versatility in the range of commissions they were willing to undertake. The artist's career demonstrates this quality, encompassing work on sepulchral monuments, the design of architecture, religious and secular painting on both walls and independent supports, and the decoration of sculpture, as well as the design of revel and funeral decoration. 


@@@@@


doc= 27573


Tottell, Richard (b. in or before 1528, d. 1593), printer and bookseller, was the third son of William Tothill, fishmonger and citizen of Exeter, and his wife, Elizabeth ('nee' Matthew). Richard was one of eleven children, with seven sisters and three brothers, Geoffrey (died 1574), who would later become recorder and MP for Exeter, John, and Robert. Their father was prosperous, becoming bailiff, sheriff, and eventually mayor of Exeter in 1552. The family name was written variously as Tathill, Tothill, Tottel, Tottell, Tottle, Tottyll, or Toutell; Richard referred to himself as Tothill but signed himself Tottyl. 
Tottell served his apprenticeship successively with the printers William Middleton (died 1547) and William Powell, who married Middleton's widow, Elizabeth, and he was admitted as a freeman of London and a member of the Stationers' Company on 19 January 1552. His career flourished from the outset. He seems to have been well connected with the London legal elite and on 12 April 1553, a few months before Edward VI's death, he was granted the exclusive right to print for seven years 'almaner bokes of oure temporall lawe called the Common lawe' ('CPR, Edward VI', 5.47); in 1582 the city's remembrancer, Thomas Norton, claimed that Tottell had gained the privilege 'at [the] sute of the Judges' (Arber, 'Regs. Stationers', 2.775). When Mary came to the throne in 1553, Tottell was able to benefit openly from the patronage of a clique of eminent lawyers hitherto in exile on the continent, among them William Rastell, Thomas More's nephew, and Tottell's patent for common-law books was renewed on 1 May 1556. 
When the Stationers' Company was formally incorporated on 4 May 1557, Tottell was listed sixty-seventh out of the ninety-seven members named in the charter. A month later he printed the work with which he has since become most associated, a collection of early Tudor court poetry that included poems by Sir Thomas Wyatt and Henry Howard, earl of Surrey; entitled 'Songes and Sonettes', it is better known today as 'Tottell's Miscellany'. It was reprinted at least eight times before 1600 and it was one of seven titles whose rights of publication were yielded by Tottell to the company in 1584 for 'the reliefe of the poore of the saide Companie' (Arber, 'Regs. Stationers', 2.786). The year 1557 also saw the publication by Tottell, John Cawood, and John Walley of the first English edition of the works of Thomas More, and the printing by Tottell of Surrey's translation of the 'Aeneid', and Thomas Tusser's 'A Hundreth Good Pointes of Husbandrie'. 
On 12 January 1559, Tottell's common-law patent was renewed by Elizabeth for as long 'as he shall behave and demesne him selfe well in using of the said priviledge', effectively for life; his name also appears in her general coronation pardon dated three days later (Byrom, 223). It seems to have been at about this time that he married Jane, or Johan (that is, Joan), the daughter of Richard Grafton, who had been the king's printer during the reign of Edward VI and whose 'Chronicle' Tottell would later publish. A son, William, was born in 1560, who entered Middle Temple in 1576 with Richard Grafton the younger, and later became one of the six clerks in chancery; he married Catherine, the daughter of Sir John Denham. Tottell's other known children were Alice (who married Thomas Colthurst in 1582), James, Anne (who married William Pennyman in 1594), Judith, and Richard. 
To the aggrievement of other less prosperous stationers who claimed in a 1577 petition that he sold law books 'at excessive prices, to the hinderance of a greate nomber of pore studentes', Tottell profited over the years by shrewdly taking advantage of his law-book monopoly, publishing 'The Bookes of Yeares and Termes' and other innovative and improved educational legal texts such as an annotated 'Magna Carta'; in all he published over 100 items relating to the common law (Arber, 'Regs. Stationers', 1.111). In 1577 a dispute with the newly appointed queen's printer, Christopher Barker, over the publishing rights of abridgements of statutes was resolved by the Stationers' Company: Barker was 'to have but half the benefitt During his lief' and all copies were to carry his imprint only (ibid., 1.115). Barker's own report on printing privileges submitted to Lord Burghley in December 1582 claimed that 'the patent of the Common Lawe hath ben very beneficiall... but nowe it is of much lesse value then before': in other words, Barker felt that Tottell had effectively exploited it to the full (ibid., 1.116). It was perhaps in response to this report that on 18 February 1583 Tottell took the precaution of retrospectively entering, at a cost of 17's'. 6died, at least fifty titles in the company's register, most having been printed under his patent, and some published many years before. As Christopher Knott argues, the increasing value of Tottell's patent meant that he was 'less willing to risk capital on other types of publishing' as his career progressed (Knott, 311). However, he did make unsuccessful attempts to gain patents for the printing of cosmographical books and tables, and for the domestic manufacture of paper which was at this time all imported; an earlier effort to set up a paper mill with other stationers had failed. In 1583 he was noted as having three printing presses although he 'useth but one' (Arber, 'Regs. Stationers', 1.248). After 1587 he printed very little. 
Throughout his career Tottell was a man of considerable substance, able to make sizeable financial contributions to the Stationers' Company and other official causes. In 1588 he was one of only two members of the company able to contribute $100 towards a royal loan, in addition to $30 he had already contributed through the company. He was also an important member of the company, rising swiftly through the corporate offices and serving as master in 1578-9 and 1584-5. In 1587-8 he was noted as having joined with other wealthy stationers in promoting the passage of the 1586 decrees of Star Chamber for the regulation of printing, paying $5 towards the company's costs. 
For all of his career Tottell worked at the sign of the Hand and Star, formerly the premises of Henry Smith (died 1550), located on the north side of Fleet Street, within Temple Bar and conveniently close to the inns of court and the law courts. In 1556 he bought two houses and three shops near the Hand and Star; in July of that same year Ellen Cowper was indicted for stealing $3 from his house. From 1572 onwards he also began to acquire land piecemeal in Little Missenden and Amersham, Buckinghamshire, hoping to found a family estate. In July 1580 he leased a mansion house, Pury Place, in Harmondsworth, Middlesex, and in 1588 he retired to Wiston, Pembrokeshire. In September 1589 his absence from London led him to be formally discharged of his responsibilities as a member of the Stationers' Company's governing body but 'havinge bene alwayes a lovinge & orderly brother in the cumpany, & nowe absent [not] for any cause savinge his infyrmytie & farr dwelling from the cyty', these were to be restored to him whenever he was in the city (Greg and Boswell, 33). As late as 1591 he was still able to contribute towards a company assessment for the provisioning of royal ships. He died in Wiston, either in early July or on 1 September 1593, survived by his mother, his wife and six children, and a brother, John. The common-law patent passed to Charles Yetsweirt, to whose father, Nicasius, one of the clerks of the signet, a reversion had been granted in 1577. Tottell's son, William (1560-1626), was the father of the puritan exemplar Joan Drake. 
During his lifetime Tottell had benefited from friends on both sides of the Tudor religious divide and had proved himself both cautious and clever in politically unstable times. Probably a Roman Catholic, he chose to settle his affairs by means of a family settlement rather than will and testament, although this may merely have been because he preferred to keep his affairs private. An extremely prosperous 'new man' of much influence in his day, he ultimately failed in his great venture to found a county dynasty, his hard-won estates eventually leaving the Tottell family through his granddaughter Joan's marriage into the Drake family. His legacy lies in his reputation and achievements as an innovative publisher. 


@@@@@


doc= 27574


Tottenham, Charles (1685-1758), politician, was the only child of Edward Tottenham (died 1712), landowner, of Tottenhamgreen, Ballyloskeran, near Taghmon, co. Wexford, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Samuel Hayman (died 'c'.1713) of Youghal, co. Cork. By 1713 he had married Ellinor (died 1745), the daughter of John Cliffe, of Mulrankin, co. Wexford, a prominent tory member of the Irish House of Commons. Tottenham had to wait until the general election of 1727 before he himself acquired a seat in the Irish parliament, for the borough of New Ross, possibly on the interest of Arthur Annesley, fifth earl of Anglesey. 
Except for one famous incident, Tottenham made little mark in public life. It seems likely that he shared the high-church proclivities of his family and connections, who included the Wexford families of Loftus and Colclough. By 1727 their brand of toryism had been transmuted into die-hard support for the 'patriot' opposition. Tottenham's moment of glory probably came in November 1731, when it would appear that he gave the crucial vote to defeat a proposal from government to secure long-term funding of the Irish national debt. According to legend (which does not identify correctly the particular division concerned), he had only arrived at the last minute to vote, after an overnight ride from co. Wexford, having heard that the question was to come on sooner than expected. He had been obliged to force his way past the serjeant-at-arms, since he was 'undressed, in dirty boots, and splashed up to his shoulders', and it was contrary to the rules of the House of Commons for a member to appear improperly attired. But, so the story went, the speaker decided that he had no power to exclude Tottenham, who strode into the chamber in his riding boots 'to vote for the country'. Little was heard of this curious episode at the time, and nothing subsequently until 1749, when an engraving was made of 'Tottenham in his boots', carrying a riding crop, on the steps of the Parliament House. This was based on a portrait by Justin Pope Stevens, evidently painted in 1749 but dated as 1731. The probable occasion for the engraving was a parliamentary fracas in the 1749 session over the appropriation of the surplus in parliamentary funds. Tottenham was briefly to regret his renown when he voted with the government in favour of the altered money bill four years later, in 1753, and was subjected to a stinging rebuke in the 'Dublin Spy', which accused him of exchanging his hallowed boots for 'Court stilts and dirty spatter-dashes' and declared that his name would 'stink on the dunghill of bad fame to all ages' ('Dublin Spy', 24 Dec 1753, 7). In fact, this indiscretion was soon forgotten, and in the later eighteenth century his reputation not only recovered but steadily grew. Indeed, the toast 'Tottenham in his boots' became a staple of Irish patriotic conviviality. Though his was not the only vote delivered in boots in the Irish parliament, it was by far the most often remembered. 'This anecdote could not die while the Irish parliament lived' (Barrington, 1.105-6), wrote Sir Jonah Barrington, whose account of the episode related it to a division on the appropriation of a revenue surplus. Later still, opponents of the Anglo-Irish Union of 1801 depicted 'Tottenham and his boots' as having successfully resisted the efforts of an English minister 'to deprive Ireland of a resident legislature' (obituary notice of Lord Arran, 'c'.1809, Arran MSS, T 3200/2/48). 
Tottenham and his first wife had six sons and two daughters. His second marriage, in 1746, to Mary ('c'.1694-1777), the twice-widowed daughter of John Grogan of Johnstown, co. Wexford, who had been previously married to two other Wexford gentlemen, Major Andrew Knox and William Hore of Harperstown, produced no children. Tottenham died on 20 September 1758 and his eldest son, John, later first baronet, succeeded him and served as MP for New Ross and Fethard in the Irish parliament. His son Charles Tottenham (afterwards Loftus) enjoyed a long and successful political career, but as a ministerialist and pro-unionist rather than a patriot, and received no less than five separate peerage creations, as Baron and Viscount Loftus, then earl (1794) and marquess (1800) of Ely in the Irish peerage, and Baron Loftus (1801) in that of the United Kingdom. 


@@@@@


doc= 27575


Touchet, George (d. before 1689?), Benedictine monk, was born at Stalbridge, Dorset, the second son of Mervin Touchet, twelfth Baron Audley and second earl of Castlehaven (1593-1631), who was convicted and executed for rape and sodomy in 1631, and his first wife, Elizabeth Barnham (1592-1622x4). He made his monastic profession at the English Benedictine priory of St Gregory, Douai, on 22 November 1643, taking the name Anselm in religion. He worked on the English mission and may have taught, from 1657, at the College of St Vedast in Douai. However, it is possible that he remained in England, as he became chaplain to Queen Catherine of Braganza with rooms at Somerset House and a stipend of $100 a year; he was performing weddings at St James's from 1662 until 1672 and at Somerset House during 1674-5. In 1675 Touchet was banished, and in 1678 he was expressly excluded by an act of parliament from the succession to the earldom of Castlehaven, which passed to his brother Mervyn, in 1684. In 1682 Touchet wrote a letter to the Brussels nuncio concerning the oath of allegiance, but was 'never employed in official [monastic] life and appears to have died before the Chapter of 1689' (Athanasius, 1999, 103). 
Touchet was the author of a work of Catholic controversy, 'Historical collections out of several grave protestant historians concerning the changes of religion and the strange confusions following from thence', first published (without a place of publication) in 1674; an amended edition appeared in London in 1684. Such historical work was typical of the Benedictine approach of the time: an assertion that England could be saved from perdition not so much by theology as by an exploration of historical continuity and by a demonstration of Catholic authority. In this Touchet was in the company of Hugh Serenus Cressy, James Maurus Corker, and John Dryden's 'Defence' of the duchess of York's conversion. A copy of a manuscript of Touchet's, a translation of the work of the Capuchin Constantine Pauret de Barbanson (1581-1632), was published in an abridged form in 1928 as 'The Secret Paths of Divine Love'. Touchet's spiritual writing associates him closely with the tradition of the English Benedictine mystic, Augustine Baker. 


@@@@@


doc= 27576


Tuchet, James, seventh Baron Audley (c.1463-1497), rebel leader, was the second son, and heir, of John Tuchet, sixth Baron Audley (died 1490), and Anne Echingham. James Tuchet's first wife was Margaret Dayrell and his second, by 1488, was Joan Bourchier (died 1532), daughter of Fulk, Lord Fitzwarine, and Elizabeth, Lady Dinham. In the 1470s and 1480s the Audley family was part of the Yorkist political connection. Tuchet's elder brother, Edward (died 1478), was a godson of Edward IV and henchman to Edward, prince of Wales, while John, his younger brother, was married to an illegitimate daughter of Edward IV. Tuchet himself was created a knight of the Bath at the investiture of Edward as prince of Wales in 1475. His father became lord treasurer of England in 1484. 
The first mention of James Tuchet in Henry VII's reign is at the baptism of Prince Arthur in 1486, when he helped to bear the infant's train. Tuchet fought at East Stoke on 16 June 1487. In 1490 he inherited his title. The Audleys were a north Staffordshire family, but they had residences at Shere, Surrey, and at Nether Stowey, Somerset. Tuchet lived there having, to all intents and purposes, severed any connection with Staffordshire. He was a justice of the peace in the early 1490s, and attended parliaments in 1491, 1495, and 1497. In 1492 he took a small retinue -- three men-at-arms, twenty half-lances, twenty foot and twenty mounted archers -- to France. Here he set his name to a petition by which the Lords requested Henry VII to settle his differences with Charles VIII. It is possible, though unlikely, that this action gave rise to the story that Audley lost his fortune in France, became bitter, and therefore rebelled in 1497. His last recorded public act, before rebellion, was in August 1496. As one of a group of important westerners he stood bail for Thomas Grey, marquess of Dorset, to ensure his loyalty during the forthcoming campaign against James IV of Scotland. Audley himself was appointed to serve in the royal vanguard in June 1497. 
Rebellion broke out in Cornwall in May 1497 when taxes were levied to pay for the war with Scotland. The rebels marched to Somerset and established headquarters at Wells. Here Lord Audley became one of the leaders with Michael Joseph the Blacksmith and Thomas Flamank. The commanders attempted to secure Bristol for their cause, but failed, and may have sent letters inviting Perkin Warbeck to invade England. From Wells they marched on London, via Salisbury, Winchester, Farnham, and Guildford. It is possible that some opposition was encountered in Hampshire, but no important fighting occurred until the rebels reached Guildford. None the less, a force of between 8000 and 10,000 men arrived at Blackheath on 16 June 1497. On the next day the rebels were defeated in battle and Lord Audley was captured. Along with Michael Joseph and Thomas Flamank, Audley was examined by Henry VII and his council. On 27 June he was tried at Whitehall. Found guilty of treason, he was taken to Newgate prison. The next day he was marched through London in a surcoat of paper bearing his coat of arms cut to shreds -- a slight on his treacherous nobility. He was beheaded on Tower Hill and his mortal remains were buried at Blackfriars, Ludgate. 
Lord Audley's reasons for joining the rebellion have always been obscure. A context for his involvement is provided by the knowledge that more than twenty-four Somerset gentlemen were also involved. The normal suggestion -- that Audley was poor -- must be dismissed as speculation since the value of his lands at his death was reckoned at $1200. Political alienation at displacement from power by Sir John Cheyne, a mid-western favourite of Henry VII, is a possible explanation. Audley's action is placed in a wider context by the wavering allegiance of George Neville, Lord Bergavenny, and the welcome given by some of Audley's servants to Perkin Warbeck when he arrived to begin a second, autumn, rebellion. Audley's background -- his father's intimacy with Edward IV and his brother John's marriage to one of Edward's bastard daughters -- might argue overtly political motives. If by John Audley's marriage to Edward's daughter the Audleys are considered within the extended Yorkist royal family then James, Lord Audley, was brother-in-law to the putative Richard, duke of York, Perkin Warbeck. An invitation to Warbeck to enter England, and the June rebellion, might in this light be seen as an attempt to engineer a coup either for Warbeck or for the Yorkist heir to the throne, Edward, earl of Warwick. 
In the event Audley's action was a disastrous miscalculation of the political will of the realm. He was attainted in 1504, but the breakup of the family estates began even before his execution. His heir John was restored to the blood in 1512, but the price of his restoration was so high that he was plunged into a humiliating cycle of debt, terminated only by sales of the family lands in 1535. James Audley's widow fared even worse. By 1510 she was described as prostrated and in the care of her mother-in-law. In 1515 her prostration was termed insanity. Her death in 1532 allowed James's son John to recoup some of the family fortune, but not before his uncle, another John, who had accompanied his father in rebellion, and supported Warbeck in 1498 and 1499, contested his right. The ruination of the Audleys was the direct result of James's wild misjudgement of 1497. 


@@@@@


doc= 27577


Touchet, James, third earl of Castlehaven (bap. 1612, d. 1684), army officer, was the eldest son and heir of Mervin Touchet, second earl of Castlehaven (1593-1631), and his first wife, Elizabeth (1592-1622x4), daughter and heir of Benedict Barnham, alderman of London. In 1631, after a trial in the House of Lords, his father was executed for 'unnatural offences' involving gross sexual misconduct against his second wife, Lady Anne Brydges, 'nee' Stanley, daughter of the fifth earl of Derby, and her daughter from her first marriage, Elizabeth Brydges (1614/15-1679), who had been thirteen years old when she was married to James, her stepbrother, in 1628. Arrangements in the Touchet household were not conducive to filial piety, and James was instrumental in bringing his father to justice. He succeeded to the Irish earldom of Castlehaven with the swing of the headsman's axe, but most of his father's English patrimony was lost to Lord Cottington. The title Baron Audley of Hely was granted to him in 1633, but in so far as the creation was virtually a restoration to an ancient dignity it lay outside the power of the crown alone to make it, and it was not confirmed until parliament passed an act in 1678. 
Castlehaven began a military career on the continent before returning home in 1638 by royal command and attending the king to Berwick. After another season on the continent the earl was in Ireland at the outbreak of the rising there on 23 October 1641. When he offered his assistance to put down the rising, his treatment at the hands of the protestant lords justices Sir William Parsons and Sir John Borlase contributed to the growing mistrust between the Catholics of the pale and the Dublin administration, helping to propel the former into the rebel camp. Indicted of high treason in May 1642, Castlehaven was placed in the custody of one of the sheriffs of Dublin, whence he fled the following September, having learned of an intention to place him under more strict confinement in the castle. He later professed that he had intended to go to England via France, but in the event he was persuaded to accept a command as general of horse under Sir Thomas Preston in the army of the confederate Catholics when he came to their headquarters at Kilkenny. Suspicious of the confederate organization, the Ulstermen believed that Castlehaven was, in effect, an Ormondist plant, and that his 'escape' had been contrived as a means of opening a line of communication between Dublin and Kilkenny whereby Ormond, Castlehaven's kinsman by marriage, might reach an agreement with the confederates. 
Castlehaven served with Preston at the capture of Burros Castle on 30 December 1642, and of Birr on 19 January 1643. Entrusted with the execution of the articles of capitulation of the latter, he conveyed the garrison safely to Athy. On 18 March he commanded the horse at the battle of Ross, where the confederates were defeated by Ormond. When Preston, having rallied his forces, sat down before Ballynekill, Castlehaven intercepted and routed a strong detachment sent to raise the siege under Colonel Crawford near Athy on 13 April. Although he was primarily concerned with the defence of Kilkenny, he was sent into Munster later in the spring to counter Murrough O'Brien, earl of Inchiquin, scourge of the rebellious south-west. On 4 June he fought with the forces of Sir Charles Vavasour near Castlelyons, inflicting very heavy losses and capturing Vavasour himself, as well as his cannon and baggage. Having returned to Kilkenny, he was afterwards employed in reducing the outstanding fortresses in co. Kildare between the Barrow and the Liffey, but his further progress was stopped by the conclusion of the cessation, in promoting which he had taken an active part, on 15 September. 
Having helped in the shipment of Ormond's Irish forces to assist the king in England, in 1644 Castlehaven commanded a force of 6000 foot and 600 horse sent to Ulster to aid Owen Roe O'Neill against the New Scots commander there, Major-General Robert Monro, who refused to recognize the cessation. After suppressing a rising in co. Mayo 'en route', Castlehaven joined up with O'Neill at Portlester, and towards the end of July both armies marched towards Tanderagee. Failing to engage Monro, the campaign fizzled out in the trenches before Charlemont, ending in mutual recrimination when Castlehaven withdrew his forces, their supplies exhausted, into co. Cavan. Having seen his army into winter quarters, and having arrived at Kilkenny, he found the supreme council in a state of consternation owing to the defection of Lord Inchiquin and the surrender of Duncannon fort by Sir Laurence Esmonde. Castlehaven served as a volunteer under Preston at the siege of Duncannon, and was present at its rendition on 18 March 1645. The truce with Inchiquin drawing near its expiration, Castlehaven was sent with 5000 foot and 1000 horse into Munster, speedily reduced all the castles in the baronies of Imokilly and Barrimore, and, having wasted the country up to the walls of Cork, sat down before Youghall, 'thinking to distress the place' into a surrender ('DNB'). But the town was relieved, leaving Castlehaven little to do beyond destroying the harvest until placing his army in winter quarters. He returned to Kilkenny in late November. He was one of the signatories to the contract made with Rinuccini on 19 February 1646, agreeing not to conclude a peace until provision had been made for the full exercise of the Catholic religion. Predictably, however, he supported the subsequent first Ormond peace, and was even employed by the lord lieutenant in a futile attempt to persuade the nuncio to accept it. Castlehaven then accompanied Ormond on his withdrawal to Dublin, bearing the sword of state before him at his entrance on 13 September. 
Castlehaven lent his support to Ormond's negotiation with the Westminster parliament, and had already left Ireland by the time the English commissioners arrived. He went to France, and was present at the battle of Landrecies, fighting in Prince Rupert's troop. Afterwards he retired to St Germain, and remained in attendance on the queen and prince of Wales until returning with Ormond into Ireland. When the lord lieutenant secured his second treaty with the confederates in January 1649, Castlehaven took command of the horse, and with an army of 5000 foot and 1000 cavalry he was sent to reduce O'Neill's outposts in the Irish midlands. After seeing off a challenge for his command from Lord Taaffe, whom some members of the general assembly plainly preferred to Castlehaven, the earl was on hand to share in the ignominy of Ormond's defeat at Rathmines in August 1649. He signed the order for the defence of Drogheda, and, having been entrusted with a special command over forces destined for the relief of the southern towns, he succeeded on 6 October in throwing 1500 men into Wexford, a dubious achievement which enabled the commander of that place, Synnot, to break off his correspondence with Cromwell. A few days later Castlehaven forced Ireton to raise the siege of Duncannon. He was then appointed governor of Waterford, with 1000 men under his command to reinforce the garrison, and was refused admittance by the citizenry. 
In the following year Castlehaven was appointed commander-in-chief of the Leinster forces, taking the field in March with some 4000 men. But he was too weak to confront Hewson, contenting himself with watching his movements, and when Kilkenny fell to Cromwell at the end of the month, he withdrew to the borders of King's county, and in June made an unsuccessful attempt to relieve Tecroghan, which 'was by the confession of all parties, even of the enemy, allowed to be the gallantest action that had been performed since the beginning of the war' ('DNB'). Afterwards finding it impossible to keep an army together, he granted commissions for horse and foot to all who applied for them, whereby, although managing to keep up an appearance of war, he gave to it the character of a freebooting campaign, which caused as much harm to his own party as to the enemy. When the citizens of Limerick refused to co-operate with the lord lieutenant, Castlehaven did what he could to deflect Ormond's growing determination to quit the kingdom, but to no avail. Having appointed Clanricarde his lord deputy, and Castlehaven commander-in-chief in Munster and Clare, Ormond sailed for France in December. The approach of Ireton persuaded the townsmen of Limerick of the need to co-operate with the confederate command, enabling Castlehaven to undertake a successful offensive into co. Kerry. Early in the following year he crossed the Shannon into co. Tipperary, but the object of the expedition was frustrated by the plundering propensities of his officers, and, being compelled to retreat before Ireton and Broghill, he recrossed the Shannon at Athlone. He failed to prevent Ireton from besieging Limerick, and the capitulation of that city on 27 October, followed by the loss of Clare, forced him and Clanricarde into Iar Connaught. But with the situation growing daily more desperate, he was on 10 April dispatched by the lord deputy into France for the purpose of soliciting aid to enable the latter to maintain 'a mountain war' (ibid.). 
Castlehaven reached Brest after a sharp encounter with an English vessel in the channel, and was posted to St Germain. Having failed to obtain the supplies required, he was granted permission to enter the service of the prince of Conde in the war of the Fronde. He was appointed to the command of a regiment of horse and was present at the fight in Faubourg St Antoine on 2 July 1651; after quitting Paris with Conde, he was taken prisoner at Comercy by Turenne. Thanks to the intervention of the duke of York he was shortly afterwards exchanged and was placed at the head of the Irish regiments fighting for the French crown in the war with Spain, holding the rank of 'marechal-de-camp', or major-general. He was present at the sieges of Rocroi in 1653 and of Arras in 1654, the relief of Valenciennes and the capture of Conde in 1656, the siege of St Guislain and the relief of Cambrai in 1657, and the battle of the Dunes in 1658. He returned to England with Charles II. On the outbreak of the war with the Netherlands, Castlehaven served as a volunteer in several naval actions, and in June 1667 landed at Ostend with 2400 recruits for the Old English regiment, of which he was appointed colonel. His men were used to strengthen the garrisons at Nieuport, Lille, Courtrai, Oudenarde, and other places. He returned to England with the conclusion of the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle on 2 May 1668. He took a commission in the Spanish army in 1676, serving in the trenches before Maastricht -- 'by much the bloodiest siege that I ever saw' ('DNB') -- and was at the siege of Charleroi in 1677 and the battle of Mons in 1678. After the treaty of Nijmegen, he returned to England. On 19 or 20 June 1679 Castlehaven obtained a settlement for his second marriage -- to Elizabeth (died 1720), apparently daughter of one Graves -- within just over three months of burying his first wife. 
In 1680 Castlehaven published his 'Memoirs', in which he described the Irish wars, discussing at length the various cessations and treaties between Charles I and Charles II, their lord lieutenant, and the Catholic rebels in Ireland during the 1640s. The publication at the time of the crisis over the Popish Plot was somewhat inopportune, although not without calculation. The earl's dedication of the book to the king was described as presumptuous. The 'Memoirs' sparked a violent controversy when the lord privy seal, Arthur Annesley, earl of Anglesey, stung by the imputations of treason and disloyalty which Castlehaven laid at the door of New English protestants in Ireland, replied to Castlehaven's recollection of the events of the 1640s in 'A Letter from a Person of Honour in the Country'. Anglesey's own recollections were felt to have calumnied the late king, and at the request of Charles II the duke of Ormond replied to Anglesey in turn. When Anglesey retorted in another 'Letter', the duke appealed to the privy council to appoint a committee to examine the matter, which eventually ended with Anglesey's dismissal and the transfer of the privy seal to Lord Halifax. Coincidentally, about the same time there was a move to have Castlehaven struck off the Irish establishment. His one reliable source of post-Restoration income in jeopardy, in the spring of 1683 it was rumoured that the earl intended to join several other noblemen in volunteering to take up arms in the 'holy war' with the Turks in Hungary. However, he appears never to have set out, and died at Kilcash, co. Tipperary, his sister's house, on 11 October 1684, and was succeeded by his youngest brother, Mervyn -- the second son, George Touchet (d. before 1689?), a Benedictine monk, having been expressly passed over in the act formally restoring the barony of Audley in 1678. 


@@@@@


doc= 27578


Crosland, Camilla Dufour (1812-1895), writer, was born on 9 June 1812 at 45 Aldermanbury, London, daughter of William Toulmin (died 1820), a solicitor, and his wife, 'nee' Wright (died 1862), who was related to the author Mary Berry (1763-1852). She had a younger brother, Edward (died 1845) and a much older half-brother, Henry (died 1838). She was a precocious child who apparently could read at the age of three. After her father's death in 1820 the family was left in straitened financial circumstances: they moved lodgings several times, and Mrs Toulmin attempted unsuccessfully to start a boarding-house. Camilla Toulmin's education was interrupted by illness and limited by poverty, although she attended a ladies' academy for a time. She began to earn her living by making jewellery, before becoming a daily governess in 1834. 
In 1837 some of Camilla Toulmin's verses were accepted by Lady Blessington for inclusion in the 'Book of Beauty'; she also published poetry and short stories in 'The Keepsake', 'Bentley's Miscellany', the 'Court Magazine', and 'Friendship's Offering', for which she was sub-editor from 1842 to 1844. She became a friend of the Chambers brothers, whom she visited in Edinburgh in 1845, and contributed to 'Chambers's Journal' until her death. Many of the poems which she published in these early years were reprinted in her 'Poems' (1846), among them 'On the Completion of the Thames Tunnel'; they show her mediocre talent and taste for topical subjects. Her editors and publishers introduced her to a range of literary and artistic circles: her acquaintances came to include Samuel Carter Hall and his wife, the Brownings (whom she visited in Florence in 1857-8), Douglas Jerrold, Grace Aguilar, Richard Hengist Horne, Mary Mitford, Geraldine Jewsbury, and Margaret Fuller. 
By the late 1840s Camilla Toulmin was writing for a variety of annuals and journals, as well as publishing novelettes such as 'Partners for Life: a Christmas Story' (1847) and 'The Little Berlin Wool Worker' (1844). Despite her modest literary success, she never forgot the 'gnawing anxiety' of these difficult years (N. Crosland, 348): living with her mother in lodgings in New Ormond Street, she rarely made more than $60 a year by her teaching and $50 a year by her pen. Her concern with the economic plight of women was reflected in her topical fiction such as 'The Orphan Milliners' (1844) and 'A Story of the Factory' (1846). 
When Camilla Toulmin became engaged in 1848 to Newton Crosland (died 1899), a London wine merchant, she was unwell and in debt. The marriage took place on 22 July 1848: Crosland had vacillated between Toulmin and Dinah Mulock, later Craik, who was their bridesmaid. The couple lived in London: for fourteen years at 3 Hyde Vale Cottages in Greenwich, before moving in 1863 to Lynton Lodge in Blackheath. In 1885, after Crosland had sold his business, the couple moved to a smaller house, 29 Ondine Road, in East Dulwich, London. 
In 1854 Camilla Crosland published 'Memorable Women', a collection of short biographies of famous women including Fanny Burney, Rachel, Lady Russell, and Margaret Fuller: she stressed that her subjects were as eminent for their domestic as their intellectual qualities, which ensured 'The Athenaeum''s praise for the work as one which 'may be placed with safety in the hands of young women' ('The Athenaeum', 4 March 1854, 278). In 1857 Camilla Crosland published the poorly received 'Light in the Valley', a fervent defence of spiritualism, which she and her husband had been investigating since 1854. Part 1 argued that spiritualism could be reconciled with Christianity, while part 2 dwelt on the experiences of the Croslands themselves and their circle of spiritualist friends, among whom were Sophia De Morgan and the Howitts. 
Camilla Crosland continued to publish fiction: 'Lydia: a Woman's Book' (1852) presented a critique of contemporary education. 'Mrs Blake: a Story of Twenty Years' (1862) contained a thinly veiled account of her early years as an impoverished writer. This novel and 'Hubert Freeth's Prosperity' (1873) -- the tale of an upwardly mobile family -- represent her best fiction: 'well-written, high-toned works' (N. Crosland, 367) as her husband described them, they are intelligent and painstaking examples of the mid-century realist novel. However, Crosland's more considered works did not meet with great acclaim. Steeped in contemporary sensation novels, 'The Athenaeum' critic damned 'Hubert Freeth's Prosperity' with faint praise, commenting that it was 'life-like; though the life is for the most part of a humdrum and unromantic colour' ('The Athenaeum', 25 Oct 1873, 524). 
In the last fifteen years of her life Camilla Crosland was in bad health, suffering from asthma, a weak heart, and impaired vision. She translated the dramatic works of Victor Hugo (1887), and in 1893 she published 'Landmarks of a Literary Life', a fascinating memoir of her literary acquaintances. She gave little detail here of her writing career, which was more fully treated in her autobiographical fragments published by Newton Crosland in his 'Rambles Round my Life' (1898): together, they provide an unusually full picture of the career and literary milieu of a mid-nineteenth-century female hack writer. She died at 29 Ondine Road on 16 February 1895: as her husband quaintly put it, 'at half past seven she had a cup of tea; and at a quarter to eight she was in Paradise' (N. Crosland, 370). She was buried in Camberwell cemetery, London, and a window was erected in her memory in St Albans Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 27579


Toulmin, Joshua (1740-1815), Unitarian minister and historian, was born in Aldersgate Street, London, on 30 April 1740. He was the son of Caleb Toulmin of Aldersgate Street and his wife, Mary, daughter of Thomas Skinner. In later life he acknowledged his debt to the religious values of his nonconformist upbringing. In 1748 he entered St Paul's School, London, where he acquired a classical education. In 1756, his early inclination towards the dissenting ministry having been confirmed, he spent five years in training for that profession in London, under the tuition of David Jennings and Samuel Morton Savage, with the latter of whom he had a family connection. The classes were conducted under the auspices of the Coward Trust at Savage's residence in Wellclose Square. Like several of his fellow students Toulmin began to depart from Calvinist orthodoxy and encountered 'severe remonstrances' from his parents, together with the disapproval of Jennings ('Monthly Repository', 10.665). 
On leaving Hoxton, Toulmin became minister of the Presbyterian congregation of Colyton, Devon, in succession to an Arian, Samuel Slater. He quickly acquired a wide circle of friends, notably in Exeter and Bridport. In 1764 he married Jane (died 1824), the youngest daughter of Samuel Smith of Taunton; they had twelve children, of whom their eldest son, Henry (Harry) Toulmin (1766-1823), served as a dissenting minister in Lancashire before emigrating to the United States where he became a judge of the Mississippi territory and a member of the Alabama state assembly. 
According to Murch, Toulmin's efforts increased the size of his flock at Colyton. But he disturbed some of its members by his opposition to infant baptism and his adoption of Baptist opinions. Consequently he left Colyton in March 1765 to become minister of Mary Street General Baptist Chapel, Taunton. Here he remained for almost thirty-nine years. The small (and declining) size of the congregation obliged Toulmin to augment his income by taking pupils, while his wife ran a successful bookshop. He also maintained a steady stream of publications; his obituary in the 'Monthly Repository' lists fifty-eight separate items. By his revision and enlargement of Daniel Neal's 'History of the Puritans' (1793-7), Toulmin earned a reputation as a historian of dissent, while his 'History of the Town of Taunton' was published with a respectable list of subscribers in 1791; subsequent editions appeared in 1810 and 1822. He published numerous sermons, including collected editions in 1789 and 1810. His sermon 'The American War Lamented' (February 1776) deplored the government's use of force against the colonists and placed Toulmin firmly in the radical camp. 
Like many General Baptists of the later eighteenth century Toulmin came to adopt anti-Trinitarian opinions. In 1777 he published an admiring biography of Faustus Socinus and subsequently defended Socinian opinions in a pamphlet controversy with Andrew Fuller. He demonstrated his commitment to philanthropy by his promotion of Sunday schools, on which subject he published a sermon in 1789. He was a founder member of the Western Unitarian Society in 1792 and won the respect of Joseph Priestley and Theophilus Lindsey; it was partly through their influence that he was awarded the degree of DD by Harvard College in 1794. He was already (1769) the holder of an MA from Brown University, a Baptist institution. 
Toulmin involved himself fully in the political campaigns of the Unitarians. His 'Letter to the Bishops' (1789) strongly advocated the repeal of the 'Test and Corporation Acts', and he obtained more than 200 signatures in Taunton for the Unitarian petition for improved legal rights in 1792. He shared in the opprobrium which fell upon Unitarians during the French Revolution and, like Priestley at Birmingham, he encountered mob violence. According to one report an effigy of Thomas Paine was burnt outside his door, his windows were broken, and his house threatened with fire. His life was thought to be in danger and his wife was obliged to relinquish her bookselling enterprise. Unlike Priestley, however, he was not obliged to leave his chapel, and he remained in Taunton until 1804, although he made no secret of his opposition to the war with revolutionary France, declining to contribute to patriotic subscriptions. 
In 1803 Toulmin received an invitation to the New Meeting at Birmingham, which had previously been Priestley's chapel. After some thought, and after other invitations from Gloucester and Great Yarmouth, he accepted and moved to Birmingham in January 1804. His pastoral efforts at the New Meeting seem to have been much appreciated. He continued to preach and write in defence of Unitarianism and to travel extensively in its support. On 15 July 1802 he preached before the Southern Unitarian Society at Portsmouth, and published his sermon under the title 'The Doctrine of the Scriptures Concerning the Unity of God and the Character of Jesus Christ' (1802). It is said to have converted Robert Aspland from Arianism to the belief in 'the simple humanity of Christ' that characterized the Unitarian theology of this period (Aspland, 122-3). While in London for a meeting of the British and Foreign Bible Society in 1815 Toulmin aggravated his physical ailments, of which the chief was 'an affection of the lungs' (Kentish, 34). He died in Birmingham on 23 July of that year at the age of seventy-five, having previously indicated his intention to retire, and was buried with full dissenting honours in the burial-ground of the Old and New Meetings, Birmingham, on 1 August. His widow died on 8 July 1824. Toulmin was an important figure in the development of English Unitarianism as a separate denomination, and was a significant, if relatively minor, figure in the history of radicalism. It was characteristic of him that he disapproved of George III's jubilee in 1809 and that he wrote in that year: 'Our Dissenters and Whigs are timid. They fear the influence of the clergy' (Aspland, 237). 


@@@@@


doc= 27580


Toup, Jonathan (1713-1785), classical scholar and Church of England clergyman, was born in December 1713 at St Ives, Cornwall, where he was baptized on 5 January 1714, the only son of Jonathan Toup (died 1721), curate and lecturer of St Ives, and Prudence (1691-1773), daughter of John Busvargas of St Just, Penwith. His father's family came from Dorset and his grandfather Onesiphorus Toup, rector of Bridport, appears to have lost most of the family property. Following his mother's marriage in September 1723 to John Keigwyn (died 1761), vicar of Landrake and St Erney, Toup was adopted by his maternal uncle William Busvargas. He was educated at St Ives grammar school and afterwards at the Revd John Gurney's private school at St Merryn. From March 1733 to November 1739 he was a batteler of Exeter College, Oxford, where John Upton (1707-1760) was his tutor throughout. He graduated BA on 14 October 1736 but did not proceed MA until 1756, when he took the degree from Pembroke College, Cambridge. He was ordained deacon on 6 March 1736 and three days later was licensed curate of Philleigh in Cornwall. There he remained until 29 May 1738, when he was licensed as curate of Buryan in the same county, having been ordained priest the previous day. Through his uncle's influence he was presented on 28 July 1750 to the rectory of St Martin by Looe, which he held until his death. 
Toup's tenure of a curacy in a remote village gave him ample leisure to pursue his researches. His first publication was devoted to a recondite encyclopaedia containing important information of value for specialists, 'Emendationes in Suidam' (3 pts, 1760-66), and it established his reputation as a textual critic. The first two parts, dedicated respectively to George Lavington, bishop of Exeter, and Jacob Harris, brought him to the notice of William Warburton, bishop of Gloucester, who recommended him for preferment to Archbishop Secker, Lord Shelburne, and Frederick Keppel, bishop of Exeter. It is said that Warburton asked Keppel whether he had taken care of Toup. 'Toup, who is Toup?' replied the bishop. 'A poor curate in your diocese', said Warburton, 'but the first Greek scholar in Europe' (W. Warburton, 'Works', new edn, 1811-41, 14.247-8). In return for his support Toup dedicated the third part of the 'Emendationes' to Warburton. His 'Epistola critica' (1767), addressed to Warburton, is generally considered as the fourth part of the 'Emendationes'. 
Toup contributed to an edition of Theocritus by Thomas Warton in 1770 and made similar contributions to various other editions issued later in that decade. His best-known work appeared in 1778; it was an edition of Longinus's 'On the Sublime' and made this outstanding essay of ancient literary criticism far more accessible than it had been hitherto. It was the gift of a copy of this edition that stimulated Richard Porson to take up research in Greek. Toup's scholarship was greatly admired both at home and abroad but his critics claimed that his reputation was marred by a churlish, conceited, and supercilious nature. He praised few classicists other than Bentley, and his intemperate attacks on fellow scholars such as Robert Lowth, Benjamin Kennicott, and Johann Jacob Reiske led the last to describe him as 'homo truculentus et maledicus' (Brink, 93). 
Following his mother's death in 1773 Toup inherited the property formerly owned by his stepfather and by his uncle and thus enjoyed a handsome income; at his own death his personal wealth was estimated at over $12,000. Warburton's patronage finally won him further preferment in the church in May 1774, when he was appointed to a prebend at Exeter by Bishop Keppel. Keppel then nominated him to the vicarage of St Merryn, which he held from 29 July 1776 until his death. In the same month he was appointed chaplain to his old friend Bishop Hurd of Lichfield. Toup never married and from 1763 he had shared his house with his half-sister Ann (1730/31-1814), widow of John Blake (died 1763), and her three daughters, all of whom married into the Nicolas family. His sister Mary had married Charles Worth, an attorney of St Ives, who then married Toup's other half-sister, Prudence ('b'. 1727). Toup spent his last twenty-five years in St Martin and declined all inducements to move to London or Oxford. From 1780 his mental faculties deteriorated markedly and in his final months he was unable to perform his ministerial duties. He died at St Martin rectory on 19 January 1785 and was buried under the communion table of the church: his eldest half-niece, Phillis Blake, erected a small marble tablet to his memory in the church. His property passed to John Toup Nicolas (1788-1851), eldest son of his youngest half-niece, Margaret Blake. His library of classical, historical, and critical works, many of which contained manuscript notes by him, was sold by Leigh and Sotheby between 10 and 13 May 1786. Toup had left his manuscript notes on Polybius to the Clarendon Press in Oxford and Phillis Blake bequeathed the rest of his manuscripts to the Bodleian Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 27581


Tournai, Simon de (c.1130?-1201?), schoolman and theologian, undoubtedly took his name from Tournai in what is now Belgium. However, although Matthew Paris styles him 'a Frenchman by birth named Simon, taking his 'cognomen' from Tournai' (Paris, 'Chron'., 2.476), he was often considered by English scholars before the nineteenth century to have been a native of Cornwall, who was educated at Oxford before he went to Paris. Polydore Vergil, in his 'Anglica historia', published in 1534, lists Simon Thuruaius as a celebrated man of learning who lived in the reign of King John, and implies that he was English. Surnames such as Torney and Torway are found in Cornwall in the sixteenth century, and this might be the reason why John Bale, in his 'Illustrium maioris Britanniae scriptorum... summarium' of 1548 (Bale, 'Summarium, centuria secunda', fols. 99b-100a), as well as following Vergil in claiming Simon for England, also reports the suggestion -- albeit as one made by others -- that Simon Thuruaius (as he follows Vergil in styling Simon) was Cornish, and moreover that the alternative name, Simon de Tornaco or Simon de Tournai, rested on a confusion caused by the similarity of the two names. By the time the first volume of his 'Scriptorum illustrium maioris Brytanniae... catalogus' was published in 1557, Bale had abandoned conjecture for certainty, and he listed Simon simply as 'an English priest, a native of Cornwall' (Bale, 'Cat.', 1.243). In this he was followed by such seventeenth- and eighteenth-century bibliographers as Thomas Fuller, Anthony Wood, and Thomas Tanner. 
Simon is named in contemporary sources as 'of Tournai' because he received his early education at that city's chapter school. Probably born about 1130, before 1155 he entered the cathedral school of Notre-Dame in Paris, perhaps initially as a student under Odo of Soissons. He writes of himself as a grammarian as well as a theologian. Odo complained to Pope Alexander III in 1166 or 1167, after his retirement in 1165, that Bishop Maurice had gone back on a promise to grant his canonry or another benefice to one of his former students. This student, who may well have been Simon, was provost of the schools, and had taken over Odo's teaching. Odo writes that he taught scripture vigorously and orthodoxly, and that he himself had supported him financially for twelve years. The pope was asked to intervene with the bishop or to provide a prebend for him. It appears likely that it was at about this time that Simon obtained a canonry at Tournai. Peter Comestor was appointed in Paris, but Simon none the less stayed in the city, using his revenues from Tournai to support himself, contrary to a diocesan statute forbidding non-residence. For doing this the bishop and chapter tried to deprive him of his office. The abbot of Ste Genevieve, Etienne de Tournai (1176-92), intervened on his behalf with Guillaume, the archbishop of Rheims, and wrote warmly of his good name and scholarship. He appears as a master in 1172-3 in the cartulary of Ste Genevieve and is recorded as having assisted Cardinal Pietro da Pavia in formulating a settlement favourable to Ste Genevieve in 1174-8. He also appears, along with Gerard Pucelle, as Magister Symon de Tornaeo in the witness list of an undated document of 'c'.1180. Simon may have taught theology in Paris until almost the end of the century. 
Simon de Tournai shows himself in his surviving writings to be one of the influential group of Porretani who followed in the tradition of Gilbert de la Porree rather than in that of Peter Lombard. It is not known whether Gilbert, bishop of Poitiers from 1142 until his death in 1154, ever taught him; this seems unlikely, but in his 'Sentences' Simon sometimes copied closely from Gilbert's writings, though without revealing his source. He was well acquainted with, and liked to cite as other Porretans also did, the works of Boethius, St Augustine, St Hilary, and John the Scot (Eriugena). His major theological writings include a collection of 102 theological 'Disputationes' with 371 questions, written after 1160, and the earlier 'Institutiones in sacra pagina' or 'Summa', which may not have been finished and is largely unpublished but is found in the Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris (MSS Lat. 3114A and 14886). The former manuscript is incomplete; a portion of it, 'Sermo de Deo et divinis', has often been cited as a separate work. The relationships, chronological and other, between Simon's works and those of his contemporaries (such as Ralph Ardens and Alain de Lille) who shared many of his outlooks, present complex problems, but if his 'Summa' is dated to 1160-65, then Simon was an especially influential teacher of theology at a time when the numbers of identifiable teachers of theology at Paris were increasing. The part of the 'Summa' that concerns the Trinity influenced closely the 'Sentences' of Pierre de Poitiers. Simon drew upon the teaching on marriage of the 'Summa decretorum' of the Bolognese master, Rufinus of Assisi, and of the anonymous 'Speculum ecclesiae'; and he influenced the writing of the 'Summa' of another Porretan, Master Martin, which survives in the Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris (MS Lat. 14526), and was written after about 1195. His writings also influenced Lothar of Segni, who was to become Pope Innocent III ('r'. 1198-1216). 
Only one of the sermons of Simon de Tournai survives. An exposition of the Athanasian creed, written in the 1160s, it enjoyed a certain popularity until the mid-thirteenth century. Simon began this work with an observation that prompted discussion of the relationship between faith and reason during the thirteenth century: for Aristotle an argument is a reason that generates faith, but for Christ an argument is faith that gives a reason which leads to understanding. Also ascribed to him, but tentatively, are commentaries on the Lord's prayer and on the apostles' creed. 
Simon de Tournai did not gain further promotion. He occasionally shows a mordant wit -- 'I would rather be a Catholic yokel than a heretical curialist' ('Disputationes', 39); 'the church has canonized in error many of the damned' (ibid., 267). He fell victim to gossip by other writers. According to the Monk of Afflighem in his 'Catalogue of Illustrious Authors' (written 'c'.1270-73), Simon's favourite master was Aristotle, and his adherence to Aristotle's views led to accusations of heresy against him 'by some moderns'. Simon was, in fact, one of the earliest theologians to study the newly available translations of Aristotle's books on 'Physics', the 'Soul', and 'Metaphysics'. At the end of the twelfth century, and later, stories circulated that attributed to him, but in conflicting detail, arrogance, blasphemy, and the possession of a concubine named Adelaide. Many of them appear in British sources, demonstrating not only Simon's own notoriety, but also the way in which leading masters in the Parisian schools became celebrities on the English side of the channel. According to Gerald of Wales, Simon wondered how long the superstition of Christianity could endure, and also brashly criticized the venality of the papal curia, on the occasion of a visit there, by saying publicly that access to Simon Peter was through Simon Magus. Gerald also reports that God punished him with loss of speech and memory; this probably followed a severe stroke. The Dominican friar Thomas de Cantimpre (1201-1270) wrote that Simon spoke of Moses, Christ, and Muhammad as alike impostors. 
Matthew Paris sketches the career of Simon de Tournai in terms of rise and fall: for ten years regent of arts at Paris, he then turned his attention to theology, in which he showed a speculative bent and achieved so much proficiency that he obtained the master's chair in a few years. His tenacity of memory, natural abilities, and the brilliance with which he solved disputed theological questions, brought to his lectures audiences that more than filled the largest available room in the schools. But, while lecturing one day, he was so much elated at the acclaim that greeted his orthodox determination of questions concerning the Trinity, that he exclaimed that he could demolish his own solutions with stronger arguments if he wished to be mischievous. Whereupon he was suddenly struck dumb and bereft of his mental faculties, so that he never taught again. Nearly two years later he could barely learn from his son, or say, the 'Pater noster' and the creed. This story, in which suspicion is also cast on Simon's orthodoxy, Matthew says came from an eyewitness, Nicholas of Farnham, afterwards bishop of Durham -- one of the many English students who went abroad and attended lectures given by famous masters in Paris and elsewhere. Matthew Paris places Simon's death in 1201. 


@@@@@


doc= 27582


Tourneur, Cyril (d. 1626), writer and soldier, is of obscure origins. It seems possible that he was either a son of Edward Tournor of Canons, Great Parndon, Essex, and his second wife, Frances Baker (died 1600), or (less likely) a grandson, his father, also named Edward (1559-1623), a barrister of the Middle Temple, being a son of Tournor's first marriage. What suggests this (summarized by Nicoll, 2-4) is twofold. First, both Cyril Tourneur and a Captain Richard Turnor, of Canons, brother of the younger Edward Tournor, were closely associated with Sir Francis Vere and with the Cecil family: Richard Turnor serving in the Low Countries under Sir Thomas Cecil (later earl of Exeter) and Sir Francis Vere, and Cyril Tourneur under Vere and Sir Edward Cecil, later Viscount Wimbledon, third son of Sir Thomas. Second, Cyril is an exceedingly rare name in Elizabethan England, and the Tournor / Tourneur family (whose name was variously spelt, as was Cyril Tourneur's) were given to naming their children unusually as the unfortunately incomplete parish register of Great Parndon indicates: thus Nicoll (pp. 4-5) lists, among others, a Maurice, a Joshua, a Lydia, and a Demetrius. 
The little that is known of Tourneur's life indicates two aspects to his career: literary and military. He first appears in 1600 as author of 'The Transformed Metamorphosis', an obscurely allegorical poem about the state of the arts in England. Showing the influence of Edmund Spenser and John Marston, the poem is in some respects obscure, and there has been considerable debate (see Schuman, 41-6) over the identification of the island of Delta, almost certainly England, and of the figure of Mavortio, most plausibly Henry VIII. But the general drift seems clear enough: Mavortio rid Delta of the corruption of Roman Catholicism, and under his protection ''Mars' and the Muses had their dignity'. After Mavortio's death, however, corruption set in once more and the muses were reinfected, with ''Nilus Crocodiles'... bathing in the pure 'Castalian' head' (548-9). But in the last four of the poem's eighty-seven stanzas, the rock of truth on which the poet has taken refuge metamorphoses into Eliza (Elizabeth I), who effects a new metamorphosis. Tourneur's 'Epilogue', with its emphatic contrast between now, when '
Heav'ns sacred lights agree in one consent 

To drive the cloudes from foorth the firmament 
(13-14)' and the dark night of the soul in which he originally wrote, suggests that circumstances might have changed before the poem's publication, with a call for reform somehow transformed into a statement of hope, perhaps by an event such as the calling in and burning by the ecclesiastical authorities in June 1599 of satiric and erotic works by Marston and others. 
Following 'The Transformed Metamorphosis' nothing certain is heard of Tourneur until 1609, with the publication of his 'Funerall Poeme upon the Death of the most Worthy and True Souldier, Sir Francis Vere', but two works published in the interim have with varying degrees of confidence been attributed to him. 'Laugh and Lie Downe' (1605) is a prose pamphlet in the dream-vision tradition, in which C. T. exposes folly in such figures as the lover, the henpecked husband, the profligate, the soldier, and the whore. In its didacticism it sorts well with works undoubtedly by Tourneur. Whether 'The Revenger's Tragedy' (1607) was also Tourneur's has long been debated. Published anonymously, it was first attributed to him in a play list of 1656, and until recently it constituted his chief claim to fame, since of its kind -- a tragedy of blood shot through with black comedy, which indeed employs many of the techniques of comedy in presenting a fierce critique of revenge and revengers, along with a bitter expose of court corruption -- it is a masterpiece. There now, however, appears to be an overwhelming case for the authorship of Thomas Middleton. The earlier balance of pro-Tourneur and pro-Middleton articles was based on impressionistic assessments, on parallels, and on literary judgement (see Schuman, 62-76), but these approaches have given way to an impressive series of analyses, computer-assisted since the 1970s, of the language of 'The Revenger's Tragedy', and its likeness to that of Middleton (see Lake, 136-57, and Jackson, 33-40 and 161-8). 

'A Funerall Poeme upon the Death of... Sir Francis Vere' is a plain but eulogistic memorial to a great soldier. It displays a close knowledge of Vere's methods of command, and it shrewdly analyses what made them so successful, but Tourneur's primary focus is on the man, and on the personal qualities that marked him as exceptional. 'His 'Minde'', Tourneur writes, 'was like an 'Empire', 'rich' and 'strong'': he was modest, temperate in judgement, and flexible in his approach to commanding men, and waging war. It is this, for Tourneur, that makes Vere great. 
In 1611 there appeared Tourneur's first (as it now seems) play, 'The Atheist's Tragedy'. Strongly didactic, it demonstrates in terms both comic -- the subplot involving Levidulcia and Sebastian -- and serious, the fatal implications of atheism (embodied in the villainous D'Amville), and the rewards that accompany a patient adherence (by the hero, Charlemont) to Christian principles. As with 'The Transformed Metamorphosis' it may be that Tourneur is responding to a particular stimulus, in this case 'The Revenge of Bussy D'Ambois' by George Chapman. For, as H. H. Adams has argued ('Cyril Tourneur on revenge', 'Journal of English and Germanic Philology', 48, 1949, 82-6), Charlemont, the hero who refuses to revenge, seems to be a remodelling in Christian terms of Chapman's Clermont, who likewise abstains from revenge, but on Stoic principles. Clifford Leech, taking the case further, suggests (''The Atheist's Tragedy' as a dramatic comment on Chapman's 'Bussy' plays', 'Journal of English and Germanic Philology', 52, 1953, 525-30) that D'Amville, Tourneur's supreme atheist, may be based on Chapman's Bussy, whose surname he echoes. 
Viewed realistically, the principal characters in 'The Atheist's Tragedy' seem somewhat stiff and lifeless, but as dramatic exempla they serve Tourneur's purposes well. The ending, in which D'Amville brains himself as he attempts to execute Charlemont, marks the summation of the non-naturalistic mode that 'The Atheist's Tragedy' employs. It is unfortunate that there has been only one modern production to test the dramatic viability of Tourneur's one undoubted surviving play, since it might well succeed if sympathetically produced. There is no shortage of dramatically effective scenes, and plenty of humour, associated particularly with the hypocritical tallow-chandler turned preacher, Languebeau Snuffe. 
Hard on the heels, it seems, of 'The Atheist's Tragedy' came Tourneur's second play, a tragicomedy entitled 'The Nobleman'. Ironically, given that it has not survived, save for a single piece of incidental music, more is known about the stage history of 'The Nobleman' than about any other play with which Tourneur is associated. Performances at court by the King's Men were recorded on 23 February 1612 and at Christmas of that year, and the play was still in the repertory of the company in 1641 (Bentley, 1.65-6). 
The death on 24 May 1612 of the great Robert Cecil provided the occasion for Tourneur's prose 'Character of Robert Earle of Salesburye', probably written for the family and never published, though extant in five manuscript copies. The 'Character' demonstrates close personal knowledge of Cecil, such as the ruin to which devotion to affairs of state nearly brought him -- ruin from which he was rescued by the good management of his steward. The importance of Cecil's service to the realm is declared, but as in the elegy on Sir Francis Vere, Tourneur is more interested in praising his subject's character: his generosity, prudence, self-control, and denial of self in the interests of the state. It is a moral summation of the man, rather than an account of his statesmanship, and accordingly it stresses Cecil's religious faith declared (as Tourneur must have known) in his will, and his peaceful end, in the tradition of the 'good death'. 
Later in 1612 another death, that of Henry, prince of Wales, occasioned deep national grief. Tourneur was one of many poets who marked the event, his 'A Griefe on the Death of Prince Henrie', published in January 1613, appearing both separately and with elegies by John Webster and Thomas Heywood. In 'A Griefe' Tourneur again dwells on the personal and the moral. Without ignoring the loss to the realm -- indeed including a poem 'On the Succession', in which he develops the imprudent conceit of Henry's dying in order to simplify and thus strengthen the succession to the throne, a poem deleted from most surviving copies of the elegy -- he makes Henry's death the occasion for what Ruth Wallerstein ('Studies in Seventeenth Century Poetic', 1950, 84) calls 'spiritual drama', in which the death of the exemplification of Virtue exposes the world for the worthless thing it is, and in which the primary focus is on Henry's exemplary life and death. 
The final literary record relating to Tourneur is a mention in a letter written in June 1613 by Robert Daborne to Philip Henslowe, the theatrical entrepreneur, that he had 'given Cyrill Tourneur an act of the Arreignment of london to write' (W. W. Greg, 'The Henslowe Papers', 1907, 72). If completed, the play has not survived. It may have been based on 'The Bellman of London', a prose pamphlet by Thomas Dekker. Though there are no records to support the supposition, it is possible that in the same year, 1613 (see Chambers, 3.227), Tourneur may also have been collaborating on another, extant play, 'The Honest Man's Fortune', this time with Nathan Field and John Fletcher. Gerritsen argued Tourneur's authorship of the first four scenes (assigned by Hoy, 100-08, to Field), and Jackson (pp. 216-20) has strongly supported the case for Tourneur's part-authorship of the tragicomedy, which has as its hero a paragon of Christian patience akin to Charlemont, and a title intriguingly like the subtitle of 'The Atheist's Tragedy', 'The Honest Man's Revenge'. 
The remaining records relating to Tourneur all concern military or diplomatic activity. On 23 December 1613 Tourneur was granted $10 for 'his chardges and paines in carrying letters for his Mats service to Brussels' (Cunningham, xliii); in August 1614 he is mentioned in a letter written from Nijmegen by James Bathurst as having been there and at Brussels, but now 'gone to the army with his Colonel' (J. R. Sutherland, 'Cyril Tourneur', 'TLS', 16 April 1931, 307). In 1617 he was, for unknown reasons, arrested on the order of the privy council, but he was shortly released on the bond of Sir Edward Cecil. Then, in 1625, Tourneur was appointed secretary to the council of war on the Cadiz expedition, though he was later displaced by a royal appointee. The expedition was a dismal failure, and it returned to Britain with its ships ravaged by fever. One of those put ashore at Kinsale, Ireland, was Cyril Tourneur, who died there on 28 February 1626, leaving a widow, Mary, who petitioned the council of war for a pension, and was supported by Sir Edward Cecil, now the earl of Wimbledon, who attested to her husband's good service. 
Since all the records relating to Tourneur's literary activity predate those concerning his military and diplomatic service, it may appear that he lived a life in two halves, literary and then military, but there is fortunately enough in the later documentary evidence to contradict this. Bathurst's letter, for instance, relates that 'Mr Cirrill Turner... belongs to General Cecil and was in former times Secretary to Sir Francis Vere', thus confirming that he was in the Low Countries in the first years of the seventeenth century, and may even have been in the service of Vere as early as the Cadiz expedition of 1598. That he served long and well in the Netherlands is also attested by Mary Tourneur's statement in her petition that her husband 'heretofore was ymployed under the States of Holland, & had settled meanes of 60li p annum by his place, beside the dayly hopes he had of some greater pferment there' (Nicoll, 31). 
With the attribution of 'The Revenger's Tragedy' to Middleton, Tourneur's literary standing has shrunk markedly. But the loss of what was once regarded as his masterpiece enables modern readers to see him in a clearer light. The author of 'The Revenger's Tragedy' was long regarded (if wrongly) as cynical and nullifidian, but the Cyril Tourneur of 'The Atheist's Tragedy', of the lucid and thoughtful elegies on Sir Francis Vere and Henry, prince of Wales, and of that confusing but powerful outcry against the prostitution of the muses, 'The Transformed Metamorphosis', shows himself to be a traditional Christian moralist, with a consistent didactic bent. As such, he has a deserved, if minor, place in English literary history, appropriate to a man who seems to have written for gain only when not employed in his chosen profession of soldier. 


@@@@@


doc= 27583


Tours, Berthold (1838-1897), composer and music editor, whose baptismal name was Bartolomeus, was born on 17 December 1838 in Rotterdam, the son of Bartolomeus Tours, organist of the church of St Laurent in that city. He was a pupil of, and assistant to, his father and also studied under J. J. H. Verhulst; later he became a student at the conservatories of Brussels and (in 1857) Leipzig. After accompanying the music-loving Prince Yury Galitzin to Russia, he remained there in the prince's service from January 1859 to April 1861. He then migrated to London, where he remained for the rest of his life, though he retained his Dutch nationality. In June 1868 he married Susan Elizabeth Taylor, a native of Hackney; they had a daughter and five sons. 
Besides writing and teaching, Tours played the violin in various theatre and concert orchestras, and in 1862 joined the orchestra of the Royal Italian Opera at Covent Garden. He also held the post of organist at St Helen's, Bishopsgate (1864-5), St Peter's, Stepney (1865-7), and the Swiss church in Soho (1867-79). In 1872 he joined the editorial staff of the music publishing house of Novello, Ewer & Co., as assistant initially to Joseph Barnby and then, from 1875, to John Stainer. In 1877 he became chief editor, an influential position which he held until his death and in which he was able to use his critical acumen, judgement, and perseverance to considerable effect. For Novello he made many piano reductions from full scores of operas, oratorios, and the like, and he was himself a prolific composer of services, anthems, songs, and instrumental pieces. He also produced a 'Primer of the Violin' (1879) for Novello that was highly regarded. Of his instrumental compositions, the 'Gavotte moderne en ut' (1870) achieved some popularity, but it was above all for his morning and evening service in F (1885) that he became esteemed as a composer. However, the currency of his compositions faded with that of Victorian music generally. According to his obituary in the 'Musical Times', Tours was a modest, retiring man and a natural editor, being 'learned, laborious and accurate in a remarkable degree'. He died at his home, 26 Rivercourt Road, Ravenscourt Park, on 11 March 1897 and was buried in Highgate cemetery. 
His fourth son and fifth child, 


@@@@@


doc= 27584


Tovey, D'blossiers (1692-1745), historian and antiquary, son of John Tovey, a citizen and apothecary of London, was born in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields on 1 March 1692. He matriculated from Queen's College, Oxford, on 12 March 1709, and graduated BA in 1712. He was elected fellow of Merton College in the same year and proceeded MA in 1715. He was called to the bar of the Inner Temple in 1717 and took the degree of DCL at Oxford in 1721. He was ordained in the Church of England soon afterwards. From 1723 to 1727 he was rector of Farleigh, Surrey, and from 1727 to 1732 vicar of Embleton, Northumberland. In 1732 he returned to Oxford on his election as principal of New Inn Hall, and he held that office until his death in 1745. 
Tovey was interested in history and archaeology, and devoted much time to a history of the Jews in medieval England. He freely utilized the numerous documents which William Prynne had first published in 'A Short Demurrer to the Jews' Long Discontinued Remitter into England' (1656), but he supplied much additional information derived from his own research. His book, published in Oxford in 1738, was entitled 'Anglia Judaica, or, The history and antiquities of the Jews in England, collected from all our historians, both printed and manuscript, as also from the records in the Tower and other publick repositories'. It was dedicated to George Holmes, deputy keeper of the records in the Tower of London. 
Tovey's work has remained a major source for the history of the Jewish community in Britain. He estimated that the number of Jews in London (both Ashkenazim and Sephardim) totalled 6000, and that in 1738 there were no permanent settlements outside the capital. 'Anglia Judaica' continues to be cited in modern histories of British Jewry. A letter from Tovey to Dr R. Rawlinson, dated 18 June 1744, 'concerning a Roman brick found in Market Lane', was printed in 'Archaeologia' in 1770. 


@@@@@


doc= 27585


Tennent, Hamilton Tovey- (1782-1866), army officer in the East India Company, born at Garrigheugh, Comrie, Perthshire, on 20 August 1782, was the second son of John Tovey of Stirling and his wife, Hamilton, daughter of Sir James Dunbar of Mochrum and Woodside, third baronet, judge-advocate of Scotland, and his wife, Jacobina, 'nee' Hamilton. He was educated at Stirling, and on 28 December 1798 was commissioned as lieutenant in the Bombay military service. In 1801 he was posted to the 24th regular native infantry at Goa and was employed on active service against the Marathas. In 1805, while serving under Lord Lake at the siege of Bharatpur, he was severely wounded in an assault on the town. On 17 January 1811 he was promoted captain. In 1813 he was placed in command of Ahmednagar, and appointed brigade major at Poona. After more service against the Marathas he was appointed in 1819 private secretary to Mountstuart Elphinstone, governor of Bombay. He was promoted major on 19 January 1820, and accompanied Elphinstone on his tour through the province until November 1821, when he was compelled by the effect of his wounds to return to England. He retired from the service on 24 April 1824, being promoted lieutenant-colonel. In 1832 he succeeded to the estates of his cousin, James Tennent, of The Pynnacles, Great Stanmore, Middlesex, and of Overton, Shropshire, and assumed his surname and arms. In 1836 he married Helen, only daughter of General Samuel Graham, lieutenant-governor of Stirling Castle. They had no children. Tovey-Tennent was a large contributor to charitable objects. Among other gifts he presented a site for a new church at Stanmore in 1854, and contributed $1000 to erect a school at Stirling. He died at The Pynnacles, on 4 March 1866. He was succeeded in his estates by his nephew, James Tovey-Tennent. 


@@@@@


doc= 27586


Towers, John (d. 1649), bishop of Peterborough, was born in Norfolk; his parents are unknown. In 1595 he went up to King's College, Cambridge, but migrated to Queens' College, graduating BA in 1602, proceeding MA in 1606, and being elected a fellow in 1608. In 1615 he proceeded BD and by 1616 the courtier William Compton, later first earl of Northampton, had employed him as his domestic chaplain, a position which continued under Spencer Compton, the second earl, after 1630. Before 1617 Towers married Mary (died 1672); they had nine children, one of whom was called Spencer and another, Compton. On 26 March 1617 Compton appointed Towers rector of Castle Ashby, Northamptonshire, whereupon he resigned his fellowship. Here he first encountered King James I, who promoted him to royal chaplain in appreciation of a sermon on the sanctity of the material church. Towers joined a clique of avant-garde conformists led by John Lambe which dominated the Peterborough church courts. Through David Owen's influence, Northampton presented Towers to the rectory of Yardley Hastings on 12 August 1623. Having proceeded to DD by royal edict dated 13 December 1624, Towers acquired the living of Halifax, Yorkshire, on 4 July 1628. He next obtained from the crown the deanery of Peterborough, to which he was instituted by John Pocklington on 14 November 1630. 
The vacancy of the see in 1634 encouraged Towers to lobby for the position, suggesting that another conformist friend, Robert Sibthorpe, replace him as dean. The strategy failed, but Towers achieved a prebendal stall at Westminster on 3 April 1634. He was known at the new court of Charles I and contributed to a series of Lenten lectures there. As Peterborough's dean he strictly regulated the cathedral clergy and charged $5 for burial before the altar. A zealous supporter of the royal prerogative, he requested in 1637 that he, and not the bailiff, be put in charge of the collection of ship money in the town. He succeeded his friend, Francis Dee, as bishop in 1639, being consecrated on 13 January after resigning his prebend. 
Towers ranks among the most combative of Laudian bishops. An aggressive consecration sermon preached by Peter Heylin was echoed by the bishop when he launched a tirade against the 'puritan faction' at his visitation of 1639 (TNA: PRO, SP 16/474/80). His piety emphasized compulsory participation in altar-centred worship while downplaying the word-centred piety most characteristic of the Jacobean episcopate. His visitation articles, which were borrowed from Matthew Wren's notorious set for Norwich in 1636, stipulated the full Laudian ceremonial -- the priest administering communion from within the rails of an east-end altar to communicants receiving there kneeling. Dee had enforced this during his episcopate, but had never openly published the requirement, and the result of Towers's doing so was open opposition by the local magistracy. Towers also recommended the pre-Reformation practice of confession and enjoined all parishes to purchase silver communion services. William Prynne singled out Towers as a threat to the favourite Jacobean ordinance of preaching and, indeed, Towers's policy was one of severe regulation. He intervened in a local dispute between Sibthorpe and opponents at Brackley by erecting a new combination lecture but one whose continued existence he linked, uniquely, to performance of the liturgy in the Laudian fashion. He was a vigorous enforcer of the regime's position during the bishops' wars; prosecutions were initiated against one minister accused of holding a fast in support of the invading Scots and against a ministerial conference which met at Kettering to support the Scots and condemn the oath legitimizing the new canons. 
The Long Parliament impeached Towers on 4 August 1641 (with twelve other bishops) for approving in convocation the clerical benevolence to fund the bishops' wars and the canons of 1640, which were regarded as illegal. He was also a signatory of the protest signed by twelve bishops in December complaining that it was not safe for them to attend parliament and that, in their absence, all votes taken were void. The protesters were impeached for high treason for this attempted veto, and were committed to the Tower, but in April 1642 Towers, having been released, returned to Peterborough and soon after joined the king's headquarters at Oxford where he remained during the civil war until the city's surrender in 1646. By that time he had been ejected by parliament from his livings and was reported in 1647 for harassing one replacement minister. Returning to Peterborough he died in obscurity on 10 January 1649 and was buried the next day in the cathedral. 
The bishop's eldest son, 
At the Restoration, Towers published two sermons of thanksgiving, the first preached on 29 May, the day of Charles II's entry to London, and the second, 'Obedience Perpetually due to Kings' (1660), a month later. Towers himself was restored to his preferments through the friendship of the former royalist Mountjoy Blount, earl of Newport, while maintaining the family connection with the Comptons by dedicating his edition of his father's 'Four Sermons' (1660) to James, the third earl of Northampton. In 1662 he was appointed rector of Fiskerton, Lincolnshire, and the following year published a sermon preached at the bishop of Lincoln's visitation. He died on 20 October 1666 while visiting nearby Uffington, where he was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 27587


John Towers (c.1747-1804), Independent minister, younger brother of Joseph Towers, was born in Southwark. He went to sea as a lad, but after two voyages was apprenticed to a packer of Turnwheel Lane, Cannon Street, London. He taught himself Greek and Hebrew, and began to preach as an Independent. A secession from Jewin Street Independent congregation chose him as pastor and leased the Presbyterian meeting-house in Bartholomew Close, where he was ordained in 1769. For some years he also conducted a day school. In 1784 the congregation moved to a new meeting-house in the Barbican, where his ministry proved remarkably successful. He was twice married: first to Miss Reynolds of Bridewell precinct on 10 October 1769 and for a second time in September 1782. He published 'Polygamy Unscriptural' (1780), an answer to Martin Madan's 'Thelephera', and several sermons. He died on 9 July 1804 and was buried on 17 July in Bunhill Fields. 


@@@@@


doc= 27588


Towers, Joseph (1737-1799), biographer and Presbyterian minister, was born on 31 March 1737 in Southwark, where his father was a secondhand bookseller. At the age of twelve he was employed as an errand-boy to a stationer at the Royal Exchange and in 1754 was apprenticed to Robert Goadby, a printer of Sherborne, Dorset. Here he taught himself Latin and Greek and, under Goadby's influence, became an Arian. 
In 1764 Towers returned to London, where he worked for a short time as a journeyman printer. On 19 August 1767 he married Margaret Lomas, a relative of Caleb Fleming, at St Luke Old Street, Finsbury. With the money acquired from his wife's marriage settlement he bought a bookshop in Fore Street, Cripplegate, in London. He continued in this business for nine years, but with no great success. During this time he began to acquire a reputation as a biographer and writer of political pamphlets. He was appointed editor of the 'British Biography', the first seven volumes of which were compiled by him (1766-72). The biography was based on information in 'Biographia Britannica', but also contained much original work, the fruit of his research in the British Museum. 
In 1774 Towers gave up his business and was ordained as a dissenting minister; he became pastor of the Presbyterian congregation in Southwood Lane, Highgate, but the opening of a rival meeting-house in the same street (1778) saw his congregation dwindle away. He left Highgate to become, in 1778, morning preacher at Stoke Newington Green, where Richard Price preached in the afternoons. While at Newington Green he assisted Andrew Kippis in the production of a new edition of 'Biographia Britannica' (1778-93), to which he contributed between fifty and sixty articles which were signed 'T'. On 19 November 1779 he was awarded the degree of LLD from Edinburgh University and from 1790 to 1799 was a trustee of Dr Williams's foundation. 
Towers's contributions to the biographies mentioned above were but a small part of his literary output. He was a prolific writer of pamphlets and treatises, which reflected his passionate belief in liberty, both religious and political. Many of these were republished in 1796 in a three-volume collection entitled 'Tracts on Political and other Subjects'. His most respected single work was 'The Life and Work of Frederick the Great' (2 vols., 1788), which ran to a second edition in 1795. Towers's health began to decline from the beginning of 1795 and he began to suffer in particular from jaundice. He died on either 18 or 20 May 1799 at his home in St John's Square, Clerkenwell. 
His only son, 




@@@@@


doc= 27589


Joseph Lomas Towers (bap. 1770, d. 1831), Unitarian preacher, was baptized on 18 April 1770 at Bartholomew Close and Pinner's Hall Independent Chapel, and was educated at St Paul's School, London, and New College, Hackney, which he entered in September 1786. He preached for a short time as a Unitarian minister, but without a settled congregation. In 1792 he succeeded Roger Flexman as librarian of Dr Williams's Library. After resigning this post in 1804 he led an eccentric life, busy with literary schemes and the collection of books and prints. He became insane in 1830, and died on 4 October 1831 at the White House, Bethnal Green. He was buried in a vault at Elim Chapel, Fetter Lane. Although allegedly the author of several publications, only two can be credited to him with certainty. These are 'Illustrations of Prophecy' (2 vols., 1796) and 'The Expediency of Cash Payments by the Bank of England' (1811). 


@@@@@


doc= 27590


William Towers (1617?-1666), Church of England clergyman and author, was educated at Westminster School as a king's scholar. Having matriculated on 1 September 1634 from Christ Church, Oxford, he graduated BA on 11 April 1638 and proceeded MA on 22 May 1641. His father ordained him a priest on 19 April 1641 and instituted him to a prebendal stall the next day. In 1644 he was appointed rector of Barnack, Northamptonshire, but the course taken by the war led him to move to Oxford, where he obtained a BD in 1646. Ejected from his preferments by parliament in 1646, he supported himself by serving as curate to Edward Reynolds at Upton near Northampton, and obtained additional patronage from Sir Justinian Isham of Lamport. He published three works in the 1650s -- 'Atheismus Vapulans, or, A Treatise Against Atheism' (1654), 'Polytheismus Vapulans' (1654?), and 'A sermon against murder: by occasion of the Romanists putting the protestants to death in the dukedom of Savoy' (1655). 


@@@@@


doc= 27591


Towerson, Gabriel (bap. 1576, d. 1623), naval officer and agent for the East India Company, was baptized on 27 February 1576 in the parish church of St Michael Cornhill, London, the tenth of twelve children of William Towerson (d. 1584), member of the Skinners' Company and common councilman of London. His father led three pioneering voyages to equatorial west Africa in the years 1555-8 and was subsequently a prominent member of the Muscovy, Eastland, and Spanish companies, and a principal promoter of the Fenton expedition of 1582. Towerson's mother, William's second wife, was Parnell (died 1615), a younger daughter of Nicholas Wilford (died 1551), gentleman, merchant tailor, and member of parliament for London. Her eldest brother, and William Towerson's close associate, was Thomas Wilford, esquire, of Wandsworth, Surrey, common councilman, 1561-99, and City chamberlain, 1591-1603. The marriage, in 1565, produced four daughters and four sons. Gabriel outlived all but two of his siblings and his half-brothers and sisters: William the younger (1563-1630), the commander of a privateer in 1587 and later a City alderman, member of parliament, and director of the Spanish Company, 1604, and the East India Company, 1619; and Robert ('b'. 1580), the youngest child, who in 1621 sought employment with the East India Company. 
Towerson's early life is obscure. About 1580 his father moved the family to St Gabriel Fenchurch, London, where his mother lived as a widow until her death. Under the terms of William Towerson's will Parnell was to have the custody and bringing up of his children, with the benefit of their portions until each reached the age of majority. For Gabriel, this date was February 1597. His equal share of the estate would have been substantial, but was in large measure delayed until his mother's decease. Parnell Towerson exercised her widow's right to engage in commerce and register apprentices up to at least 1614, and all her sons sought out their freedoms by patrimony in the Skinners', Spanish, and other companies, although specific information for Gabriel has not come to light. William the younger was a founding member of the East India Company in 1600. Gabriel Towerson sailed to the East on the first company voyage; he is mentioned in the last will of John Badby, William Towerson's apprenticed factor, composed at Sumatra on 6 July 1602, and at Bantam in the wills of other factors, composed on 30 January and 12 April 1604. He was, therefore, one of the first resident factors, and remained at Bantam until he returned to England in November 1609 aboard the 'Red Dragon'. In 1611 Towerson sailed from London as captain of the 'Hector', and resumed his work at Bantam, returning home in the 'Hector' in September 1613 in company with Nicholas Downton. In January 1614 he was accused of private trading, but the penalty was remitted upon his payment of freight charges. Later in the year, with his account not yet cleared, Towerson was none the less admitted to the freedom, in reward for his long service. By 1617 he was in India, and active in the Red Sea ports, where he provoked the ire of Sir Thomas Roe, the English ambassador. He apparently married and maintained an Armenian wife at Agra, but returned to England alone in 1618. 
On 24 January 1620 Towerson was ordered to proceed to the East as a principal factor. Lengthy delays ensued. During the voyage out the experienced captain was placed in command of the 'Lesser James', after quarrels between the master, John Wood, and the pilot, John Davis, proved to be irreconcilable. The situation in the Indies was perilous. On 29 June 1621 the council at Jakarta had observed 'the Dutch... never will performe annie thing on the Agreement [with the English], further then to serve their own purposes' (BL OIOC, G/40/1, p. 81). Meanwhile the junior factors refused to continue at their posts beyond the expiration of their apprenticeships, and the factories and vessels were convulsed with infighting and personal recriminations. The letter sent home from Jakarta on 6 November 1621 by Towerson and the council despaired of peaceful co-existence with the Dutch, a sentiment repeated in every dispatch over ensuing months. On 11 January 1622 the council at Jakarta dispatched Towerson to Amboyna 'for a linguist and an accomptaunt' to replace the departing George Muschamp. This communication concluded ominously: 'The dutch growne a most evell and bloudy nation & murthering all they take, and take all they meete friende and foes' (BL OIOC, G/40/1, p. 104). 
The English narrative of events at Amboyna in February of 1623 is straightforward. On 15 February Towerson and his colleagues were arrested by Dutch authorities on suspicion of plotting to seize the castle of Amboyna. Confessions were extracted under torture. The English commander and nine countrymen, one Portuguese, and nine Japanese were executed on 27 February, all except Towerson being buried in a common grave. The East India Company departed the Moluccas, leaving the spice trade to their rivals. Survivors claimed English innocence and Dutch perfidy and this cry was reported at the court of directors and at Whitehall, with calls for reparations. Amboyna was long a byword in the British Isles for Dutch dishonesty and cruelty. John Dryden played upon these sentiments with his propaganda drama, 'Amboyna', of 1673; the play reflected the context of the Third Anglo-Dutch War, rather than the events of 1623, but Gabriel Towerson was immortalized as a devout, honest protestant. All those executed died intestate; when the administration of Towerson's estate was secured by his brother William in November 1624 the deceased was described as unmarried. The fate of his wife is unknown, although in the following January it was noted that the company would pay to send Towerson's son to the Indies. 


@@@@@


doc= 27592


Towerson, Gabriel (bap. 1635, d. 1697), Church of England clergyman, was baptized at Stoke Newington, Middlesex, on 2 July 1635, the son of William Towerson. After attending St Paul's School, Westminster, he was admitted to Queen's College, Oxford, in Michaelmas term 1650, where he was the Pauline exhibitioner until 1659. He matriculated on 27 February 1651, graduating BA on 17 June 1654 and proceeding MA on 21 April 1657. In 1657 his father petitioned Richard Cromwell, then chancellor of the university, to use his influence with the warden and fellows of All Souls to admit his son to a fellowship. He was admitted fellow there in 1659, losing his fellowship in 1663 following his appointment to the college rectory of Welwyn in Hertfordshire, a living he held until his death. At some point he married, and between 1670 and 1687 he baptized fourteen of his children at Welwyn, seven of whom survived him. From 1680 their mother is named in the register, Ann, though it is not as yet known whether she was his only, or a second, wife; Towerson was a widower by the time he died. 
Towerson regarded writing as an important part of his ministry and pursued a long-term goal of adult education in the basics of the Christian religion. His work 'An Explication of the Catechism of the Church of England' (published in four parts between 1676 and 1688) was rewarded with a Lambeth DD in 1678. He felt this huge compendium to be necessary because the prayer book catechism was 'written only for the younger sort', and that therefore something more substantial was required for adults (Towerson, 'Explication', pt 1, introduction). He wrote that catechists should require from their audience as they grew 'some further deductions, and applications, and illustrations, so, to contribute to so useful a work, as well as to build men up in their most holy Faith, I have undertaken the following Explication' (ibid.). Towerson defined belief as primarily an 'inevident perswasion of the mind' (ibid., 1.20), but asserted that belief needed to be supported by a secondary appeal to evidence, to provide which he engaged in an expansive and reflective use of quotations from the 'Bible' and the fathers. 
Towerson's 'Explication' reached nearly 1500 pages in folio. Repeat editions of various sections of the work, in both folio and octavo, showed that he succeeded in supporting adult readers anxious to grow in their understanding of the faith. Out of the strong catechetical tradition in the literature of English Christianity, Towerson was one of the few authors who abandoned the pattern of question and answer and opted for a text in continuous prose. His work evinces the didactic drive of the Church of England in this era. There was a determination to resource the faithful with the means of their own improvement. The 'Explication' also underlined the commitment of the Church of England to the 'Book of Common Prayer'. When the 'Explication' is considered in conjunction with Thomas Comber's 'Companion to the Temple', which explained church services, the Anglican prayer book was reaffirmed in grand style in a century within which it had not only been doubted but even proscribed, in the 1640s and 1650s. Even though his work was not reprinted after his death Towerson remains important because his massive work, for all its discursiveness, showed the effort that the Church of England was willing to expend in an age that was regarded as being marked by popular ignorance and apathy. 
Towerson received an additional appointment as rector of St Andrew Undershaft, London, in 1692. He was alarmed at the inability of most people there to sing and an organ was installed. His 'Sermon Concerning Vocal and Instrumental Musick in the Church' (1696) was delivered on the day that the new organ was first used. He remarked that 'The Organ... both by the Lowdness, and the Harmoniousness thereof doth, with a kind of grateful Violence, carry the Voices of Men along with it' (p. 26). Towerson not only wanted people to have an informed faith, but he also wanted them to be able to express themselves as a congregation as part of their duty to God. Towerson died on 14 October 1697 and was buried at Welwyn a week later. The funeral sermon, delivered by George Stanhope, recalled that Towerson had only ever sought preferment so that he could better provide for his family. His estate was divided among his surviving children. 


@@@@@


doc= 27593


Towerson, William (d. 1584), merchant, was the son of Robert Towerson, yeoman, of Calder in Cumberland. In 1551 he was apprenticed for seven years to Miles Mording, a London skinner. On 15 January 1560 he married Margery, eldest daughter of James Hawes, a prominent and well-connected London merchant, with whom he had four children. After the death of Margery on 18 January 1565, he married Parnell Wilford (died 1615), whose brother Thomas had been involved in the Guinea trade; they had twelve children, one of whom was the naval officer Gabriel Towerson (bap. 1576, d. 1623). 
During the 1550s Towerson played an important role in the development of the African trade, leading three trading voyages to Guinea. His first voyage, made with the 'Hart' and the 'Hind', each of about 60 tons burden, set out on 30 September 1555. After trading peacefully along the coast of west Africa, he returned to London with a profitable cargo of about fifty ivory tusks and 127 lb of gold. His second voyage, set out in September 1556, was a more ambitious undertaking, being made up of the 'Tiger' of 120 tons, the 'Hart' of 60 tons, and a small pinnace. In Guinea he entered into an informal alliance with a French captain, Denis Blondel (or Blundell), who was in charge of an expedition of five vessels. The combined fleet sailed on to the Gold Coast, where an indecisive battle was fought with five Portuguese ships, though the latter succeeded in scattering the Anglo-French fleet. Despite quarrelling between the English and French leaders, Towerson continued trading along the coast, possibly reaching Beraku, east of the Portuguese fort at Sao Jorge da Mina, where one of the native chiefs, described by the English as King Abaan, apparently invited the English to build a fort in his territory. He returned to London in April 1557 with a lading of 69 lb of gold and various amounts of ivory and pepper. 
Towerson's last recorded voyage to Guinea, which set out in January 1558, was made with the 'Minion', the 'Christopher', the 'Tiger', and a small pinnace. The 'Minion' and 'Christopher' were both owned by the queen, and according to the Spanish ambassador the expedition sailed with the approval of the lord admiral, William Howard, despite objections from the Portuguese. After a skirmish with five Portuguese vessels along the Guinea coast, Towerson attacked three French ships, seizing one as prize, though it was so leaky that it was sunk. Towerson wanted to sail on to Benin, to test the commercial openings in a region as yet little known to the English, but was prevented from doing so by his company. Unfortunately, his late arrival in Guinea that year meant that many African rulers had already disposed of their limited gold supplies to rival French traders. Though some trade occurred, it was also limited by African suspicions of the English, and fear of Portuguese retaliation. After burning the town of Shama, sickness and disease broke out among Towerson's men. The 'Tiger' had to be abandoned because the crew were too weak to man her. Shortly afterwards the 'Christopher' was lost at sea. The two surviving vessels reached the Isle of Wight on 20 October 1558. Though Towerson may have returned with more gold than in 1557, the difficulties he encountered during this voyage led him to abandon the Guinea trade. The accounts of Towerson's Guinea voyages, which Richard Hakluyt published in 'The Principall Navigations' of 1589, were almost certainly written by Towerson himself shortly after the voyages ended. They contain valuable information about commercial and political conditions along the Guinea coast. Towerson's account of the second voyage is also of some importance in naval history, providing the earliest description in English of a broadside artillery duel at sea. 
Towerson was made free of the Skinners' Company in 1559, and sat on the common council of London from 1561 to 1583. During the 1560s he was heavily involved in trading with Antwerp. In 1564 he wrote a useful, though unpublished, account of the navigation to Friesland. He was active in the Iberian trades, becoming a leading member of the Spanish Company, established in 1577. He was also a member of the Russia Company, and one of the original members of the Eastland Company, incorporated in 1579. During the early 1580s he was involved in developing English trade with Constantinople. In 1582 he was one of the commissioners appointed by the Russia Company to supervise the preparations for Edward Fenton's (abortive) voyage to the East Indies. The following year he met John Dee, Adrian Gilbert, and John Davis to discuss the north-west passage. Soon afterwards he was appointed to a committee of Merchant Adventurers to examine Christopher Carleill's plans for a voyage of discovery to North America. Towerson was buried in St Michael's Church, Cornhill, beside his first wife, on 17 June 1584. One of his sons, William, sailed with Fenton in 1582 and went on to become a prominent merchant in the City of London. 


@@@@@


doc= 27594


Matthew Towgood (c.1690-1757), Presbyterian minister and tutor, was the eldest son of Stephen Towgood (died 1722), dissenting minister at Axminster, and the first cousin of Michaijah Towgood. His place of education is unknown, but he kept an academy first at Colyton, where he also assisted the minister, Samuel Short, and then at Shepton Mallet, offering a classical and theological education. It has been suggested that it was a continuation of the academy established at Lyme Regis by Samuel Short's brother John, and brought by him to Colyton some time before 1698. 


@@@@@


doc= 27595


Towgood, Michaijah (1700-1792), Presbyterian minister and religious controversialist, was born on 17 December 1700 at Axminster, the second son of Matthew Towgood MD (died 1715) and the grandson of Matthew Toogood, an ejected minister. He attended Thomas Chadwick's Grammar School at Taunton with Thomas Amory (1701-1774) until 25 March 1717. They were both educated for the nonconformist ministry at Taunton Academy under Stephen James and Henry Grove. 
On the death of Angel Spark in October 1721, Towgood succeeded him as minister of the Presbyterian meeting at Moreton Hampstead, Devon, where he was ordained on 22 August 1722 under the authority of the Exeter assembly. The charge by John Withers was afterwards published. Towgood fell ill with what was feared to be consumption, but he recovered and devoted himself systematically to pastoral work. He maintained a religious exercise in his own house, engaged in regular pastoral visiting, and catechized the children of the town by rotation. As a result of the Exeter controversy Towgood came to examine the doctrine of the Trinity, and became convinced that 'the commonly received opinion' could not reasonably be considered a fundamental article of faith, especially as it was not required by scripture. 'He did not call in question its truth, but the subject seemed to him so abstruse and difficult, that he could not imagine God had made the salvation of men' to depend upon holding it exactly (Manning, 9). He therefore suspended his judgement. Originally orthodox, in time he became a high Arian, still regarding Christ as a proper object of worship. On 28 May 1723 he married Mary (died 1759), the daughter of James Hawker of Luppit. They had four children, but only a daughter survived him. His son Matthew (1732-1791), educated at Bridgwater under John Moore, was minister at Bridgwater (1747-55), and afterwards a merchant and, ultimately (1773), a banker in London. He was a manager of the Presbyterian Fund (1773-91) and a trustee of Dr Williams's Trust (1780-91). Matthew died in January 1791, and his son, John, also a banker, succeeded him as a Dr Williams's trustee (1791-1837). 
At Christmas 1736 Towgood accepted a call to Crediton, Devon, to succeed Josiah Eveleigh who had died in September 1736. He maintained there the same vigorous pastoral ministry. Shortly afterwards he published his first work in defence of dissenting principles, 'High-Flown Episcopal and Priestly Claims Freely Examin'd' (1737), followed by 'The Dissenters Apology' (1739). His reputation was established with 'The Dissenting Gentleman's Answer' (1746) in reply to the charge of schism made by John White, perpetual curate of Nayland, Suffolk, which became a classic digest of nonconformist argument. In response to White's replies he published 'The Dissenting Gentleman's Second Letter to... Mr White' (1747) and 'The Dissenting Gentleman's Third Letter to... Mr White' (1748). These three letters went through many editions and were abridged by Towgood as a 'Dissent from the Church of England Fully Justified' (1753; 11th edn, 1809) and also as 'A Calm and Plain Answer' (1772, 1798). Anglicans were still trying to refute the arguments more than fifty years after the original was published. He also published a number of practical works. His 'Recovery from Sickness' (1743) was reprinted many times in Britain and America. His 'Baptism of Infants, a Reasonable Service' (1750) and 'Dipping not the Only Scriptural and Primitive Manner of Baptizing' (1751) were more controversial and provoked responses from Grantham Killingworth and John Gill. He was the author of three papers in 'The Old Whig' (1739) under the pseudonym Paulus. 
In 1750, following the death of James Green, Towgood was chosen joint minister of James's Meeting in Exeter with his first cousin, Stephen Towgood. With John Lavington and John Walrond of Bow Meeting, Exeter, the four ministers preached to the two united congregations in rotation. Opposing all religious tests, Towgood persuaded James's Meeting to drop the formal account of faith required of candidates for admission to communion. As a consequence Bow Meeting would allow its own ministers to officiate only in the latter. But Towgood was ideally suited to oversee the doctrinal changes in his congregation. A less charitable man would have brought about a secession of one party or the other. He published for the use of James's Meeting a 'Collection of Psalms and Hymns' (1757), with the second edition in 1779, which was extensively used by other Presbyterian congregations. 
In 1760 James's Meeting was replaced by a new chapel in South Street, called George's Meeting after George III. The same year Towgood helped establish an academy at Exeter following the closure in October 1759 of the nonconformist academy at Taunton. There he taught biblical exegesis. It closed in December 1771 on the death of the divinity tutor, Samuel Merivale. The academy was briefly revived under Timothy Kenrick, Towgood's successor at George's Meeting. The names of forty-eight students are known, but only twelve entered the ministry; the majority entered trade or the professions. They included two future ministers of George's Meeting, Joseph Bretland and Merivale's stepson, James Manning. Towgood resigned as minister in 1782, when he was presented with a magnificent silver cup by the two congregations, engraved 'in testimony of respect' for Towgood's 'eminent and faithful service... during the course of more than thirty years' (Manning, 74). He was a person 'above the middle size, and extremely slender; his eye lively and penetrating.... He had, in early life, a little impediment in his speech, but he almost entirely conquered this defect' (ibid.). On 26 February 1791 he had a stroke which affected his speech. He died in Exeter on 1 February 1792. His portrait by John Opie and the silver cup were presented by his great-grandson to Dr Williams's Trust. The cup is displayed at the trustees' dinner after every general meeting of the trust. 


In 1715 Towgood was minister at Wilton, Wiltshire, but moved to the much larger congregation at Shepton Mallet, Somerset, in 1716, where he was ordained on 24 October. According to the 'Evans List' there were 700 hearers in 1715. Something of his religious sentiments is evident from his willingness to allow the ordination of the avowed Arian Hubert Stogdon to take place in his meeting-house in August 1718. He continued the academy, and among his students was William West, minister of the Mint Meeting, Exeter (1744-61). In 1729 he moved to Poole to become assistant to William Madgwick, on whose death in 1734 he became sole minister. He quarrelled, however, with those members who, in order to qualify under the 'Corporation Act', were occasional conformists. In 1739 he preached a bitter sermon from 'Proverbs' 26: 11 directed against them. They locked him out, and he and his supporters established a new meeting, which they registered in March 1739, but it lasted but a few years. Towgood received a grant of $10 a year from the Presbyterian Fund between 1741 and 1743, but in March 1744 it was 'not paid for this time', probably because he had left the ministry and moved to Swanage. He became a brewer, but 'by his habits of study, he was ill-qualified for trade, and did not succeed in it' (Toulmin, 242). He supplied Wimborne, Dorset, but refused an invitation to become minister. Shortly afterwards, in 1753, he became minister of Swanage, where he remained until his death in 1757. He was buried in St James's parish, Poole, on 24 June 1757. He published a defence of William Nation, the Presbyterian minister of Puddington, who had attacked the orthodox sentiments of the four Exeter ministers over the doctrine of the Trinity. In 1734 he published 'A Letter to the Reverend Dr Waterland', who became involved in the reappearance of the earlier Exeter controversy of 1718. He is remembered principally for his 'Remarks on the Profane and Absurd Use of the Monosyllable Damn' (1746). 


@@@@@


doc= 27596


Towgood, Richard (1594/5-1683), dean of Bristol, was born near Bruton, Somerset. He entered Oriel College, Oxford, as a servitor in 1610 and matriculated on 19 April 1611, aged sixteen. He graduated BA on 1 February 1615. Ordained about 1615 he preached in the Oxford neighbourhood and pursued his studies, proceeding MA on 4 February 1618. For a period he was master of the grammar school in College Green, Bristol, and then successively vicar of the Bristol churches of All Saints, from 1619, and of St Nicholas, from 1626. He became a chaplain to Charles I about 1633; that year, on 7 November, he proceeded BD. At an unknown date he married Elizabeth, a daughter of the Hickes family. They had two sons, Richard and William. 
Towgood published his sermon 'Disloyalty of Language Questioned and Censured' in 1643. On 20 February 1645 he was sequestered from his vicarage 'for his great disaffection to the parliament' (Walker, 4). He was several times imprisoned, under unusually severe conditions, was ordered to be shot, and with difficulty reprieved. Once released he retired to Wotton under Edge, Gloucestershire. Through Archbishop James Ussher's mediation he preached at Kingswood chapel, near Wotton (using the Anglican prayer book), and in 1654 was presented to the neighbouring rectory of Tortworth. 
At the Restoration, Towgood returned to St Nicholas at the parishioners' request. He was installed on 25 August 1660 in the sixth prebend in Bristol Cathedral, to which he was nominated before the civil war, and was sworn chaplain to Charles II. In 1664 he was presented to the vicarage of Weare, Somerset. On 1 May 1667 he became dean of Bristol in succession to Henry Glenham, and in October 1671 he declined the bishopric. He published 'The Almighty's Gracious Token of Love' in 1676. He died on 21 April 1683, aged eighty-nine or in his eighty-ninth year, and was buried in the north aisle of the cathedral choir. The main beneficiaries in his will were his wife, his surviving son, Richard, and his grandchildren. 


@@@@@


doc= 27597


Towne, Charles (bap. 1763, d. 1840), animal painter, was born in Wigan and baptized there on 7 July 1763, the third of the five children of Robert and Mary Town. The family were poor, but probably had artistic leanings, for Charles was selling drawings to bring in money by the age of eight, and at twelve he walked to Leeds to work for the landscape artist John Rathbone. His elder brother Robert having moved to Liverpool, Charles joined him there, becoming a coach-painter and for a time a japanner and ornamental painter. He worked for periods in Lancaster and Manchester but by 1785 he had returned to Liverpool, where on 8 May he married a widow, Margaret Harrison. 
In the marriage register Towne's occupation is given as coach-painter, but the register recording the birth of the first of his five children, Ellen, in 1786, calls him 'painter', and by 1789, at the birth of his second daughter, Elizabeth, he is described as a horse painter. This turn perhaps reflects a conscious decision on Towne's part to follow in the footsteps of Liverpool's most famous artistic son, George Stubbs. In 1787, at the second exhibition of the Liverpool Society for Promoting Painting and Design, Towne showed a small landscape, but he created a greater stir by copying from memory Stubbs's exhibits, 'Haymakers' and 'Reapers'. The equestrian portraits of 1792-4 which are his earliest securely dated works are clearly indebted to Stubbs's example. 
Although Towne is recorded at a Liverpool address in 1796, he had for several years been working extensively around Manchester. Joseph Farington, on a trip to the town in November 1796, noted that Towne had copied a painting by Richard Wilson at Platt Hall as part of a commission from Henry Blundell of Ince (Farington, 'Diary', 3.687), and the following July he reported that 'Towne is much employed at Manchester, has 6 months work bespoke' (ibid., 3.872). Towne had in the meantime been to London, where he had 'improved much' (ibid.) from seeing the 1797 Royal Academy exhibition and had visited the studio of Philip de Loutherbourg. The latter's influence is manifest in Towne's 'The Monarch of the Glen' of 1797 (Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool), a grand view of highland cattle in a mountain landscape. 
Towne appears to have lived in London from 1799 to 1804, for he showed nine works, chiefly cattle in landscapes, at the Royal Academy between these dates from addresses in the city and in Camberwell. In 1799 he began adding the 'e' to his surname (although the form Town is found on signed works after this date). At this time too, as a Liverpool obituarist later put it, 'he associated intimately with the celebrated George Morland, mastering his principles of composition, and imbibing much of his feeling for colour' ('Liverpool Mail', 9 Jan 1840). This influence extended beyond the artistic to the whole tenor of Towne's later life; for like Morland, Towne appears to have chased work continuously, to have spent money as quickly as he earned it, and to have had regular encounters with burglars, bailiffs, and unscrupulous dealers. Farington stated that Towne was making as much as $600 a year in 1798 (Farington, 'Diary', 3.990) and thereafter his output of work, carefully tailored to the tastes of conservative provincial patrons, was prodigious; yet in later life he operated from the small parlour of a two-room house, and he died -- according to the testimony of Catherine King, who was perhaps his second wife -- worth less than $300. 
Towne worked in the home counties before returning to Liverpool in or shortly before 1810. He was probably drawn back by news of the imminent creation of the Liverpool Academy, under the patronage of Henry Blundell. Towne is listed as one of the academy's founder members, showed at its first four exhibitions, 1810-13, and served as vice-president in 1812-13. His failure to exhibit in the following year was probably connected with the academy's impending temporary demise; when it was revived in 1822, he showed at its next three exhibitions. After 1825, however, he withdrew from its affairs altogether, and between 1827 and 1833 he sent to the exhibitions of the Royal Manchester Institution instead. 
An advertisement in the 'Liverpool Mercury' in January 1813 announced that Towne was setting up as a picture restorer. 'He also continues to paint Portraits of Horses, Dogs and Cattle in general, at various prices from Six, to Sixty Guineas, according to the size of the Picture, style of finishing, &c. -- Views of Park and other Scenery, painted in a superior style.' For the next twenty-five years (although there are signs of increasing delicacy and refinement and a gradual abandonment of warm 'old master' tonalities in the 1820s and 1830s) his art scarcely altered. Some of the buildings in his later works suggest that patrons came from as far afield as Yorkshire and Scotland, but the majority of them were from Lancashire and Cheshire; and although Towne may have travelled to visit them, he remained based in Liverpool. His latest known dated paintings, from 1838, show no sign of decline, although by then he must have been seriously afflicted by the dropsy from which he died at his home in Norton Street, Liverpool, on 6 January 1840. Ninety-seven paintings by Towne, covering all aspects of his career, are in the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool. 


@@@@@


doc= 27598


Towne, Francis (bap. 1739, d. 1816), landscape painter, was baptized at All Saints, Isleworth, Middlesex, on 19 August 1739. His parents, William Towne, a corn chandler, and his wife, Lydia, had four other children, three certainly older than Francis. Towne must have shown early evidence of an inclination towards the arts, for on 5 August 1752 (probably his thirteenth birthday), he was apprenticed for seven years to the London coach-painter Thomas Brookshead. In 1759, just as his indenture was coming to an end, Towne won the first prize awarded by the Society of Arts for 'an original design', which Towne later recalled as 'the best drawing of landscape' (letter to O. Humphrey, 1803; Wilcox, 163). 
Towne is then said to have studied under the court portraitist John Shackleton, but he also continued to earn his living in the trade of the coach-painter. In 1763 he was working for Thomas Watson in Long Acre, London, and it was probably not long after this that he went to Exeter, initially to work in the same line. The reasons for Towne's departure to Exeter, the city with which he remained associated for the rest of his life, are obscure. The city's low cost of living certainly suited his frugal habits; yet his friend James White commented in 1781, 'As to painting, you know this is no place for it' (Wilcox, 31), and Towne resented any suggestion that he was merely a provincial. He had begun to contribute to the exhibitions of the Society of Artists in 1762, followed in 1763 by a 'large landscape, with a scene from Shakespear's 'Cymbeline'' at the Free Society (Bury, 'Towne', 115). Later in life, Towne appeared to claim he had been invited to become one of the founder members of the Royal Academy in 1767, but had declined. Following his first application for membership as an associate in 1775, he made ten more between 1788 and 1803. He was never admitted, a source of evident bitterness. 
Towne's first Devon landscape was shown at the Free Society in 1767. He became the preferred artist of the county's great estates, painting views of their parks and often newly remodelled gardens. At Ugbrooke Park, Devon, he drew or painted a dozen views for Hugh, fourth Lord Clifford, between 1773 and 1780. Towne was also popular as a teacher of drawing to leisured amateurs. These were mainly young women, but in John White Abbott (1763-1851), an Exeter apothecary, he found a committed and assiduous pupil whose reputation even outstripped his teacher's. Abbott's uncle, James White, a local lawyer and leading nonconformist, accompanied Towne on a tour of north Wales in 1777. The drawings, chiefly of waterfalls and castles, have a spare, tense quality which sets them apart from the conventions of the picturesque. 
In 1780 Towne travelled to Rome. He joined the artist William Pars, an old friend, and also painted alongside the much younger John (Warwick) Smith. James Irvine, another British traveller who encountered him there, described him as 'one of the strangest genius's I have seen. With a very indifferent understanding he has all the gravity and formality of a profound philosopher and deep reasoner, but he is I believe what we call a good sort of man and applies his art with great industry. (letter to George Cumberland, 16 Dec 1780; Wilcox, 56-7)' In March 1781 Towne was being shown around the Bay of Naples by the painter Thomas Jones, but, unlike Jones and many other British artists who remained for several years in Italy, Towne was unhappy and after spending the late spring and early summer in and around Rome he decided to return home. He did, however, time the journey to have the best opportunity of visiting the Alps, inspired, no doubt, by the account by Pars of his tour of 1770. Towne travelled with Warwick Smith via the Italian lakes and the Splugen Pass to Lucerne, then on to Geneva. The climax of the tour was reached in the Vale of Chamonix with two watercolours of the source of the Arveyron (Tate collection and V&A). Never before had the medium evoked such hugeness of scale and such a heart-stopping sense of awe. 
Far from capitalizing on these experiences, Towne failed to exhibit any continental views until 1788. He had by then also made a tour of the Lake District in 1786, in the company of White and another Exeter nonconformist, John Merivale. The sketchbook pages fully worked up in watercolour (now scattered), and the larger sheets probably painted on the spot, are among his most vibrant creations. In their lengthy inscriptions, Towne left evidence of a modern preoccupation with the authenticity of the painted image. This emerges forcibly in the one-man exhibition of his watercolours he mounted at 20 Lower Brook Street, London, in February 1805, where some 200 of his original sketches were shown, individually mounted by the artist. This singular event, presented in the rooms which two months later were to house the first exhibition of the Society of Painters in Water Colours, attracted very little attention. 
On 5 August 1807 Towne married Jeannette Hilligsberg, a French dancer aged only twenty-seven, who had been a dancing-mistress in Exeter since about 1801. The couple took up residence in London but only eight months later, in April 1808, she died. Towne then began a series of annual summer sketching tours which took him to Wales, Cornwall, and Devon in 1809, to Wales again in 1810, to Scotland in 1811, to Oxford in 1813, and finally to Devon in 1815. Towne died on 7 July 1816 at 31 Devonshire Street, his London home, following two years of failing health. He left provision in his will for his body to be conveyed with great pomp to Exeter, to be laid beside his wife in Heavitree church. This was accomplished on 22 July. He also instructed his executor to deposit his Italian drawings in the British Museum (where they remain), to be housed with the works of Pars, a further sign of his self-awareness as an artist and sure expectation that posterity would accord him the recognition denied to him in life. 


@@@@@


doc= 27599


Towne, John (bap. 1711, d. 1791), religious controversialist, son of Leonard Towne, Church of England clergyman, and his wife, Margaret Hill, was born in Boothby Graffoe, Lincolnshire, where he was baptized on 23 October 1711. He matriculated as a sizar at Clare College, Cambridge, on 26 July 1729, and graduated BA in 1733 and MA in 1736. He was ordained deacon on 22 December 1734 and priest on 21 September 1735. At about this time he became rector of Little Ponton in Lincolnshire, where he lived for the rest of his life. On 22 June 1740 he also became vicar of Thorpe-Ernald in Leicestershire, a post he likewise held until his death. Towne married Anne Parnham on 3 November 1741. They had three daughters, Margaret, Anne, and Martha, and two sons, John, who died young, and Benjamin, who became a painter. Towne's wife died on 31 January 1754. 
In 1747 Towne published his first work, 'A critical inquiry into the opinions and practice of the ancient philosophers concerning the nature of the soul', the preface of which was written by his friend William Warburton, whom the work defended. Warburton held Towne, whom he described as a 'reasoning engine', in high esteem (Warburton, 49). According to Bishop Richard Hurd, Towne was 'an ingenious and learned man, and so conversant in the bishop's writings, that he used to say of him, 'he understood them better than himself'' ('Works of Richard Hurd', 1.114). Most of the rest of Towne's works, such as 'The Argument of the 'Divine Legation' Fairly Stated' (1751), were likewise devoted to supporting Warburton against Robert Lowth and others. 
Towne became archdeacon of Stowe on 5 September 1765, and was collated as a prebendary of Lincoln, probably through Warburton's influence. He died on 15 March 1791 at Little Ponton, where he was buried and 'universally lamented' ('GM', 61, 1791, 286). A mural tablet to his memory was erected in the church. 


@@@@@


doc= 27600


Towne, Joseph (1806-1879), anatomical modeller, was born in Royston, near Cambridge, on 25 November 1806, the middle of the five sons of the Revd Thomas Towne (died 1830), pastor to the New Meeting-House and also a director of the London Missionary Society, and his wife, Mary (died 1839), a schoolteacher. His father was an accomplished painter and in his later years a writer on painting and the camera obscura. Little is known of the youth of Joseph Towne but almost certainly he benefited from the teaching of both his father and his mother. The former, as well as being a minister, ran the local boys' school, and the latter a school for middle-class young ladies. 
Through his literary work and his great interest in art, his father would have encouraged Joseph Towne's enthusiasm as a child for modelling animals in clay. He later arranged for Joseph to take his 33 inch high wax model of a human skeleton to Cambridge to show the professor of anatomy, William Clark. Encouraged by his favourable reception in Cambridge, at the age of nineteen Towne travelled to London intending to enter the Society of Arts competition in wax modelling. His brother Jireh and cousins Jonah and Alexander (the latter training as a surgeon at the Webb Street school) were living in the City area. On 17 February 1826 Towne was introduced to three doctors, including W. O. Grainger, lecturer in anatomy and physiology in Webb Street, who referred him to Sir Astley Cooper, a surgeon at Guy's Hospital. Cooper responded positively to Towne's evident skill and authenticated his wax model as an accurate rendition of the human skeleton. Towne was given a letter of recommendation to Mr Harrison, the treasurer of Guy's Hospital, who engaged him as the modeller for the new medical school. He was to remain at Guy's for fifty-three years. 
Towne's skeleton in wax was subsequently entered in the Society of Arts' competition and won second prize, the silver medal. A year later Towne exhibited models of the brain, highly praised by Astley Cooper, which secured him the gold medal. He settled into his work at Guy's and five years later, in 1832, he married Mary Butterfield. 
During the many years he worked at Guy's Hospital Towne completed a prodigious amount of work. Modelling human anatomy in wax from the careful dissections of John Hilton, who was appointed lecturer in anatomy in 1828, he produced in the next ten years over two hundred anatomical wax models. The work was carried out in a room in the old anatomy theatre at Guy's which he always kept locked. During this time he trained his younger brother Elihu who became a wax modeller himself. No one else was privy to the technique that was used and the secrets of his skills in preparing and colouring the wax died with him. His brother Elihu died at an early age in 1834. 
In the middle period of his work at Guy's, Towne produced in association with Dr Addison, physician to Guy's, over five hundred models of skin diseases. In 1834 he exhibited for the first time a marble bust at the Royal Academy. Throughout his working life he exhibited altogether thirteen sculptures in marble at the Royal Academy and another seven which were privately commissioned. Included among these were two busts of the duke of Wellington (one, exh. 1837, is in Guy's Hospital, London; the other, exh. 1842, is in the Junior United Service Club, London), and busts of Benjamin Harrison, Sir Astley Paston Cooper (1841), and the physician Addison (1852) (the last two in Guy's Hospital, London). His bust of Florence Nightingale (marble, 1850) is in the Russell-Cotes Art Gallery and Museum, Bournemouth. He produced a small equestrian statue of the duke of Kent, which was presented to Queen Victoria by Benjamin Harrison on 1 November 1837. Towne himself was presented to the young queen. 
In his later years Towne gave a course of lectures at Guy's on the brain and intellect. From 1862 to 1870 he gave lectures on stereoscopic and binocular vision and was still exhibiting at the Royal Academy at the age of sixty. Towne died at his home, Sefton House, Eltham, Kent, on 25 June 1879, and was buried in Norwood cemetery in a grave next to that of his father. His wife and descendants are buried close by. Thomas Bryant (1828-1914), surgeon to Guy's Hospital, wrote a memorial and short biography: 'of my old friend Joseph Towne, the late well-known, highly esteemed, skilled modeller of Guy's Hospital... all who ever walked round Guy's Hospital can testify... the magnitude of the work he has left behind... [the] magnitude in respect to the number of works executed, upwards of one thousand... [and] with respect to their importance and scientific value...' Whereas France was the main source of expertise in this medium, with skills being transferred to England via Madame Tussaud who arrived in England in 1802, Towne's wax models are some of very few nineteenth-century British anatomical waxes to survive. The majority of his models are on display in the Guy's Hospital medical school museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 27601


Townley, Charles (1737-1805), collector of antiquities, was born on 1 October 1737 at Towneley Hall, near Burnley, Lancashire, the eldest in the family of three sons and a younger daughter of William Towneley (1714-1742) and his wife, Cecilia (1714-1777), the fifth daughter and eventual heir of Ralph Standish and his wife, Lady Philippa Howard, the daughter of Henry, sixth duke of Norfolk. The spelling Towneley is now usual for both the family and the place, but Charles, his brother Edward, and their mother all signed themselves Townley. 
Townley was four when his father died on 2 February 1742, and he did not take control of the estate until he came of age. The family had remained Catholic after the Reformation, and Townley was sent abroad to the English College at Douai, entering with his brother Ralph (1739-1766) in 1747. After leaving Douai in 1753, he was tutored in Paris by the Revd John Turberville Needham and was introduced to Parisian society by an uncle of his father's, the Chevalier John Towneley (bap. 1697, d. 1782). Having taken possession of Towneley Hall about 1758, he spent some years in the social and sporting activities of a country squire before undertaking the grand tour. 
Townley arrived in Rome on 25 December 1767 and stayed until the following August, visiting Naples and Paestum during March. In Rome he began to collect antiquities, especially marble sculptures. Many early acquisitions were mere tourist souvenirs or outright fakes, but he gradually established himself as a serious collector with purchases from the printmaker Giovanni Battista Piranesi and other Roman dealers, and especially from the English dealer in art and antiquities Thomas Jenkins. Shortly before leaving Rome he paid Jenkins $400 for a fragmentary group of two boys quarrelling over a game of knucklebones, 'Astragalizontes'. 
During Townley's second and longest visit to Italy, in 1771-4, he spent a year in Rome and nine months based in Naples, and made extended journeys in southern Italy and Sicily. In Naples he acquired from the family of Prince Laurenzano a marble bust traditionally identified as the nymph Clytie, which later appeared with busts of Homer and Pericles on an ornate calling card engraved by William Skelton. In Rome he bought antiquities including sculptures from Jenkins, Thomas Byres, and several Italian dealers, and began to buy direct from the painter and excavator Gavin Hamilton. From 1773 some expensive items were bought on credit from Jenkins, on whose death in 1798 Townley was hard pressed to settle a debt of over $500 with his heir. Among these expensive sculptures were a statue of Diana at $250 and a group with a nymph struggling to escape the attentions of a faun, for which Townley paid $350, perhaps influenced by the group's erotic qualities. Although this work doubtless had a certain piquancy for an eighteenth-century collector, in a British Museum inventory of 1848 the group is annotated 'not exhibited'. 
After returning to London, Townley corresponded regularly with Jenkins and Hamilton and expanded his collection with purchases from both, especially with sculptures excavated by Hamilton at Monte Cagnolo, Ostia, and elsewhere. Correspondence with Hamilton was sometimes acrimonious, as Townley complained of the quality of the sculptures he sent. With Jenkins he was on better terms: for many years Jenkins supplied Roman gossip as well as sculptures, and Townley undertook purchases in London for him and his friends, obtaining anything from scientific instruments to silk stockings. In 1777 Townley spent another three months in Italy, mainly in Rome, buying as before from Jenkins, Hamilton, and Italian dealers. Following this last trip to Italy the rate of Townley's acquisitions decreased, but he continued to receive consignments of antiquities of all kinds from Jenkins, including a monumental caryatid (BM), similar to one retained for the papal collection, and other sculptures from the Montalto collection at Villa Negroni in 1786 and a Roman marble copy of the bronze discus-thrower ('discobolus') by the Greek sculptor Myron (fifth century BC), found in Hadrian's villa in 1791. He also bought sculptures, coins, and other antiquities in London, either privately (for example, from Lyde Browne in 1773) or at auction. Over a period of more than twenty years Townley bought at some of the most important public sales of antiquities, among them those of Henry Constantine Jennings (1778), the duchess of Portland's museum (1786), Lord Cawdor (1800), and Lord Bessborough (1801). 
From about 1771 Townley lived in a house in Crown Street (now Whitehall). Early in 1778 he moved into 7 Park Street (now 14 Queen Anne's Gate), designed by Samuel Wyatt and built for him by Michael Barrett. Townley was a compulsive collector. A financial summary drawn up in 1779 shows that he had by then spent about $11,600 on his collections and almost as much on successive houses, accounting for almost three-quarters of the $27,700 that he had borrowed on mortgage and bonds. With experience he became discriminating in his purchases, rejecting objects wrongly restored with alien heads. 
In 1783 Johan Zoffany painted Townley in the midst of an imaginary arrangement of his sculptures in the library at Park Street, along with the Hon. Charles Greville, Thomas Astle, and Pierre Hugues, better known as the Baron d'Hancarville. Having fallen under the spell of d'Hancarville's over-ingenious speculations on ancient religion and mythology, Townley engaged him to catalogue his marbles and supported him for some years from 1777 with hospitality and frequent 'loans'. 
Townley was elected fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1786 (and to its council in 1798) and fellow of the Royal Society in 1791. In 1786 he was also elected to the Society of Dilettanti, and from 1799 served on a committee appointed to publish engravings and descriptions of 'Specimens of Antient Sculpture' (drawn largely from his own collection and that of Richard Payne Knight), which eventually appeared in 1809. In 1791 he was elected a trustee of the British Museum, where he influenced the design of the extension planned to house the museum's growing collection of antiquities. 
Townley's youthful sojourn in Paris has been seen as the origin of a dissolute lifestyle. To his mother's distress he remained unmarried, but very explicit letters from Richard Payne Knight and various ladies confirm a hint in his travel diary that he led a far from celibate life. He even became a freemason, but towards the end of his life he returned to the practice of his childhood faith. 
Townley was reputed a good landlord, considerate of his tenants. He improved the estate, overseeing the planting of many trees, and was involved in the construction of the Leeds-Liverpool canal. In London he lived relatively frugally, having few servants and keeping no carriage (his coach house provided storage for sculptures). He was, however, a generous host, his Sunday dinners being highly praised by the sculptor Joseph Nollekens. Other members of his circle included Sir Joseph Banks, Richard Payne Knight, Sir Joshua Reynolds, and Richard and Maria Cosway. 
Townley's collection became one of the sights of London. Dr Johnson wrote for an appointment, and in 'The Picture of London for 1802' visitors to the metropolis were advised to apply at the house to learn the hours of admission to 'the finest collection of antique statues, busts, etc, in the world... collected with the utmost taste and judgment' (Cook, 'The Townley Marbles', 7). While no private collector outside Italy could in fact hope to rival the great Roman collections, it remains true that the Townley marbles could bear comparison with any collection in the noble houses of England, even Lansdowne House and Petworth, both of which included sculptures rejected by Townley's taste and judgement. Visitors were freely admitted to see the collection. Some were given conducted tours by Townley himself; for others from about 1786 he provided manuscript catalogues, which were rewritten as the collection grew and the arrangement changed. 
Barred from public life for his religion, Townley devoted much time and energy to learning, but his only publication was an account of an ornate Roman helmet found in 1796 at Ribchester in Lancashire, first issued in 1799, and later appearing in 'Vetusta monumenta' (4, 1815, 1-11, pl. 1-4). He was also a talented amateur artist. Some of his sculptures are now known only from the drawings he made before disposing of them, and a miniature of the Medici Venus on ivory remains in the possession of the Towneley family. 
Townley died without legitimate issue at his house in Park Street on 3 January 1805 and was buried in the family vault at St Peter's Church, Burnley, on 17 January. His estates passed first to his brother Edward Townley Standish (1740-1807), to whom he had already made over the Standish estates when their mother died, and then to an uncle, the bibliophile John Towneley (1731-1813). 
In his will, dated 29 November 1802, his marbles were bequeathed to the British Museum, but in a codicil dated 22 December 1804 he left them in trust for his brother or his uncle on condition that a gallery be built to display them either at Towneley Hall or in London, and failing that for the British Museum. John Towneley wished to build a gallery, but Edward was unwilling to undertake the expense, and a compromise was eventually negotiated under which the marbles (including all those mentioned above), with some terracottas and bronzes, passed to the British Museum for $20,000 and (until the passage of the 'British Museum Act', 1963) the right to nominate a trustee. After John Towneley's death the small antiquities and drawings were sold to the British Museum by his son Peregrine Edward Towneley (1762-1846). The arrival at the British Museum of more than 300 antiquities transformed its collection. From 1808 the marbles and terracottas were exhibited in a new wing, which had been planned in Townley's lifetime, but within a decade Townley's mainly Roman sculptures, many of them copies of earlier Greek works, were overshadowed by the museum's acquisition of Greek originals, the Bassae frieze and the Elgin collection. New acquisitions were merged with Townley's sculptures, and, although they remained 'the nucleus of the Graeco-Roman series' (Smith, 3.v), it was many years before the intrinsic value of Roman sculptures was fully appreciated, and it was not until 1984 that the museum again had a gallery dedicated to the Townley marbles. 


@@@@@


doc= 27602


Towneley, Christopher (1604-1674), antiquary, the third surviving son of Richard Towneley (1566-1628) of Towneley Hall, Lancashire, and his wife, Jane (died 1634), daughter of Ralph Ashton of Great Lever in the same county, was born at Towneley on 9 January 1604. As the family was Roman Catholic, his education was probably provided privately; he may also have gone abroad for the purpose, as his elder brother did. The statement in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' that he became 'an attorney, but probably did not long follow his profession... disabled by being a recusant' derives from the nineteenth-century local historian F. R. Raines, who did not note his sources (Raines, 'Journal of Nicholas Assheton', 26-7n.). 
After his father's death in 1628 Towneley probably lived with his mother at Hapton, helping her to run her estates, until her death in 1634; an inventory of her goods assigns his name to a chamber there, and notes that he owed his mother over $60. He was one of her executors. He then lived at Moor Isles, about 4 miles north of Towneley, until his marriage towards the end of 1640 (or early in 1641). His wife was Alice ('bap'. 1593), daughter of John Bradyll of Portfield, Whalley; she was Towneley's second cousin on his mother's side, and the widow of his distant relation Richard Towneley of Barnside and Carr. In 1644 Towneley is again described as of Hapton, but soon afterwards he and his wife moved to Carr Hall, south-west of Colne, where they lived until her death (which is said to have occurred in 1657). He then returned to Moor Isles. 
In the civil war Towneley's brother Charles died in the royalist cause 'at the battle of Hesom Moor, at the raising of the siege of York, 2 or 3 August 1644' (Whitaker, 2.190). Christopher also fought (Webster says he was captured at Marston Moor) and the estates of both were sequestered, with respectively a third and a fifth of the annual profits allowed for the support of their families. Alice's receipt of $80 indicates that Towneley was reckoned to enjoy an annual income of $400. He petitioned to compound on 30 April 1646, but was listed among 'imperfect cases' when his petition could not be found. Family property in Lincolnshire and Lancashire was subsequently declared forfeit and sold, but Towneley Hall was preserved; Towneley seems to have had charge of it as a trustee for his nephew Richard until the latter came of age in 1649. In 1650 Towneley was in the Upper Bench prison, presumably as a royalist. 
Towneley is remembered for two of his intellectual interests: the encouragement of astronomy and the collection of documentary evidence for local history. Both these pursuits were aided by resident amanuenses. The young Jeremy Shakerley lived at Carr Hall in the late 1640s and complained that, in return for his work, 'meat and drinke is all I can expect'; one of his letters to William Lilly also records that Towneley was committed to a highly mathematized astrology, 'loves Calculations well, and... will scarcely so much as erect a figure (though about any trivial occasion) without his Diagrams and Logarithms' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 423, fol. 121'r'). An unfinished list of Towneley's books compiled between 1647 and 1649 confirms his interest in mathematics, astronomy, and astrology; the same volume also contains medical notes. The benefits of access to the books were acknowledged by Jonas Moore in the preface to one of his treatises, which said the content was translated from an original supplied by 'Mr Christopher Towneley of Carr (a great promoter of Arts and lover of all Ingenuity and ingenuous men', who had given 'not onely the use of his Library, but Copies of such Mathematical Manuscripts as he had by him' ('Conical Sections', appended to 'Moor's Arithmetick', 2nd edn, 1660). 
A later account in Edward Sherburne's historical catalogue of astronomers makes Towneley the pivotal figure linking Jeremy Horrocks, William Crabtree, William Gascoigne, and William Milburne: 'happily brought to the Acquaintance of one another by the means of Christopher Townley of Carr in Lancashire Esquire, who stuck not for any cost or labour to promote as well Astronomical as other Mathematical Studies by a diligent Correspondence kept and maintained with the learned Professors in those Sciences; upon which account he was very dear to All the Four; and for which Reason, as for the Particular Respect I owe him, he merits to be named in this Catalogue. (Sherburne, 92-3)' Sherburne was a biased witness, but his claims were not without foundation. Towneley certainly helped to make the astronomical work of some of this group known, as Flamsteed later recalled: 'after all their deaths Mr Christopher Towneley of the Car in Lancashire and Sir Jonas More went to Mr Crabtree's house where his Widdow gave them all his papers these they secured and afterwards sorted' (CUL, RGO 1/65A, fol. 112'v'). Letters passed on to Richard Towneley included the final version of Horrocks's lunar theory, which Flamsteed eventually published in Horrocks's 'Opera posthuma' (1673). 
Towneley's passion for collecting documentary evidence found its main expression in antiquarian studies. He assembled material for a history of Lancashire in collaboration with Dr Richard Kuerden, who reported about the end of 1659: 'We muster our Antiquityes or paper forces (I mean Mr T. and myself) very neare an Hundred Thousand strong, in transcript' (Ormerod, 8). No publication resulted, but Towneley shared information with other antiquaries, particularly Roger Dodsworth and William Dugdale; he was also a friend of John Hopkinson of Lofthouse, Yorkshire. The collection he built up has been much used by later local historians, especially Thomas Whitaker, who dubbed Towneley 'the indefatigable transcriber'. It was dispersed on the sale of the Towneley library in 1883, and is now divided between Chetham's Library, Manchester Central Library (the Farrar collection), and the British Library. 
Towneley died at Moor Isles in August 1674 and was buried at Burnley on 30 August 1674. An inventory of his goods survives; his manuscripts were valued at 40's'. (the figure of 11's'. in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' derives from a misreading), a further 80's'. was included for printed books, $3 6's'. 8died for a clock, and 10's'. for surveying instruments. 


@@@@@


doc= 27603


Towneley, Francis (1709-1746), Jacobite army officer, was born on 8 June 1709 at Towneley Hall, Lancashire, the fifth and youngest son of Charles Towneley (1658-1712) and Ursula, 'nee' Fermor, who married in 1685. Towneley's family were Roman Catholics with a strong attachment to the Jacobite cause. His uncle Richard took part in the rising of 1715. As was common in recusant families Francis, as a younger son, sought his fortune abroad. In August 1721 he was admitted to Douai College, though further details of his education are unknown. Six years later he returned to France and in 1728 he was commissioned into the French army as his elder brother John Towneley had been before him. 
Towneley served with distinction at the siege of Phillipsburg in 1734 under the duke of Berwick and was ultimately promoted to a colonelcy by Louis XV. He returned to Britain about 1743 and would doubtless have married and settled but for the second Jacobite rising of 1745. Reviving his French rank he recruited some three hundred men in Manchester and formed them into a regiment of foot and joined Prince Charles's army (in which John Towneley was also serving) on its southward march to Derby and its almost immediate retreat in December. The Jacobites withdrew from Carlisle into Scotland on 21 December leaving Towneley, who had volunteered to act as rearguard, to hold the city with his regiment, now reduced to 117 men, and Captain John Hamilton, governor of the castle, in command of 275 Scots and eight Frenchmen. 
On 22 December the duke of Cumberland came up and laid siege to the city. Towneley, well known for his soldierly language, declared that 'it would be better to die by the sword than fall into the hands of those damned Hanoverians' ('State trials', vol. 18, 339) and prepared to hold out to the last man. Cumberland requisitioned artillery from Whitehaven and on 27 December he began a bombardment of the castle. Three days later, in the face of relentless and overwhelming firepower, Hamilton capitulated, asking only that the garrison be accorded the status of prisoners of war. Cumberland, however, demanded unconditional surrender. At a heated council of war Towneley vehemently opposed such ignominious terms and, though he at last yielded, he did not sign the surrender. He and the officers of his regiment were indicted for high treason at the court house, St Margaret's Hill, Southwark, on 15 July 1746. Towneley disputed the court's jurisdiction, maintaining that since he held the French king's commission, not that of Prince Charles, he should be treated as a prisoner of war, not a traitor. His argument was dismissed and he was found guilty. Towneley was hanged, drawn, and quartered on 30 July 1746 on Kennington Common. His body was buried in the churchyard of St Pancras; his head was displayed at Temple Bar but was recovered and interred in the family crypt at Towneley Hall. 


@@@@@


doc= 27604


Towneley, John (bap. 1697, d. 1782), translator, was baptized on 1 January 1697 at St Peter's Church, Burnley, Lancashire, the second son of Charles Towneley (1658-1712) of Towneley Hall, Lancashire, and his wife, Ursula, daughter of Richard Fermor of Tusmore, Oxfordshire. His brother was the Jacobite officer Francis Towneley, executed in London in 1746. John Towneley entered Gray's Inn on 14 March 1715 and studied law under William Salkeld, serjeant-at-law. At his father's death in 1711 he was left with an allowance of only $60 a year. About 1728 he moved to Paris where female members of his family had been pupils or nuns. There, according to his great-nephew Charles Towneley, he frequented literary society and joined the salon of Madame Doublet de Breuilpont. 
In 1731 Towneley entered Rothers's Franco-Irish infantry regiment as lieutenant; he distinguished himself at the siege of Phillipsburg in 1734, and became a captain in 1735. In 1745 his regiment, or a detachment of it, was sent to Scotland to assist Charles Edward Stuart, the Young Pretender, and Towneley took part in the battle of Falkirk. The French envoy, the marquis d'Eguilles, in a dispatch to Bachaumont, wrote on 20 February 1746: 'M. Townly, who will have the honour of delivering my despatches to you, is the man of most intelligence and prudence amongst those here with the prince: you may question him on any subject' (Cottin, 28). In the autumn of 1746 Towneley, with forty-two other Jacobite officers, received a grant of 1200 livres from Louis XV. In December he received the order of St Louis. 
According to Charles Towneley, on the publication of Samuel Butler's 'Hudibras' (1662-80) 'every real or pretended man of letters chattered on the subject' ('Palatine Note-Book', 1.27), no doubt thanks to Voltaire's discussion of the poem in two articles of the 'Dictionnaire philosophique'. Piqued by Voltaire's description of it as untranslatable except by reducing 'three quarters of the passage to be translated' ('Melanges', 174), Towneley began translating passages for the amusement of Madame Doublet's society. John Turberville Needham, his great-nephew's tutor, eventually persuaded him to complete the translation and to publish it. Towneley's 'Hudibras' was published anonymously in Paris in 1757, although the frontispiece indicated London as the place of publication, a stratagem to avoid censorship. The English original is given on parallel pages, and Hogarth's engravings are reproduced. The preface is by Towneley while the explanatory notes appended are by Pierre Larcher, the translator of Herodotus. A second edition, with the English text revised by Sir John Byerly and the French spelling modernized, was printed by Firmin-Didot in Paris in 1819. This also included a 'Notice sur J. Towneley', translated from an appendix to the 'Critical Review'. 
Although the editor of the 1815 edition calls Towneley's work 'rather an imitation than a translation', it aims at being very close to the original. It was extravagantly praised by Horace Walpole. The 'Nouvelle bibliotheque d'un homme de gout' (1777) taxed it with bad rhymes and faulty French (1.216-17), while Suard, in the 'Biographie universelle', though acknowledging its fidelity, pronounces the diction poor and the verses unpoetical, 'the work of a foreigner familiar with French but unable to write it with elegance'. It lacks the swing and burlesque rhymes of the original and Towneley himself declared the 'humour untranslatable'. 
Towneley died at Chiswick in 1782, at the residence of his nephew, also John Towneley (1731-1813), a noted book collector, and was buried in Chiswick churchyard. The first sale of the Towneley library took place after his nephew's death in 1813; there was a second sale in 1883. The elder Towneley possessed a considerable collection of Wenceslaus Hollar's prints, which were sold by auction in 1818. The sale also included some of his fragmentary manuscripts. 


@@@@@


doc= 27605


Townley, Sir Charles (1713-1774), herald, was born on Tower Hill, London, on 7 May 1713, the eldest son of Charles Townley of Clapham, Surrey, and descended from a younger branch of the ancient family of Towneley Hall, near Burnley, Lancashire. James Townley (1714-1778) was his younger brother. He was sent to Merchant Taylors' School, London, in 1727. He entered the College of Arms and was appointed York herald in July 1735, Norroy king-of-arms on 2 November 1751, Clarenceux king-of-arms on 11 January 1755, and Garter principal king-of-arms on 27 April 1773. He was knighted at George III's coronation in 1761. On 24 June 1748 he married Mary, daughter of George Eastwood of Thornhill, Yorkshire. They had three sons and a daughter. 
Townley died at his home in Camden Street, Islington, London, on 7 June 1774, and was buried, according to the terms of his will, in the family vault in the church of St Dunstan-in-the-East; his wife survived him. His eldest son, Charles Townley (1749-1800), became Bluemantle pursuivant on 31 December 1774 and Lancaster herald on 24 December 1781. 


@@@@@


doc= 27606


Townley, James (1714-1778), playwright and Church of England clergyman, was born in the parish of All Hallows Barking, Essex, on 6 May 1714, the second son of Charles Townley, a merchant of Tower Hill and Clapham, and the younger brother of Sir Charles Townley. He entered Merchant Taylors' School, London, in 1727 and matriculated as a commoner at St John's College, Oxford, on 15 May 1732; he graduated BA (1735) and MA (1738). Townley simultaneously pursued a vocation in the church; he took priest's orders in May 1738, having taken deacon's orders at Grosvenor Chapel, Westminster, from Bishop Hoadly of Winchester on 6 March 1736. 
Townley was chosen as lecturer of St Dunstan-in-the-East, London, on 12 October 1738 and only three years later he was appointed chaplain to Lord Mayor Daniel Lambert. He returned to Merchant Taylors' as third under-master, from 22 December 1748 until July 1753, when he was made grammar-master at Christ's Hospital. Townley again returned to Merchant Taylors', to serve as headmaster in 1760 after a brief stint as morning preacher at Lincoln's Inn (1759-60). While headmaster at Merchant Taylors' he attempted to reconfigure and to modernize the curriculum by introducing mathematics and emphasizing drama. Townley's efforts were greatly assisted by the public support of his friend David Garrick and by his ability to integrate his own playwriting skills. Indeed, Townley's curriculum reform provided him with a forum to commence his career, as Merchant Taylors' staged productions of his pieces 'Eunuchus of Terence' and 'Senecae Troades et ignoramus abbreviatus, in schola mercatorum scissorum'. 
Following these amateur stagings Townley wrote three original, professionally produced dramatic works: 'High Life below the Stairs' (1759), 'False Concord' (1764), and 'The Tutor' (1765). 'High Life below the Stairs', a two-act farce first staged at Drury Lane on 31 October 1759, garnered immediate public and critical acclaim, although some believed the play to be the work of Garrick. Further research and review unequivocally establishes that Townley wrote this piece and that Garrick probably contributed editorial assistance -- as Townley did in turn for Garrick, most notably on 'The Clandestine Marriage'. Regardless of the question of authorship, 'High Life' emerged as a smashing popular success; the standard plot of a master who dons the functional yet humorous disguise of a servant to witness and to assess the behaviour of his employees received a great deal of attention -- and protest -- from its audience, since it became a prominent attraction for all of London society. The play appeared in many editions, was translated into German and French, and was performed on a great many of the world's stages. 
Neither of Townley's final two plays, 'False Concord' and 'The Tutor', approached the commercial and artistic success of 'High Life'. Years after the production of 'False Concord', which had not been particularly well received on its appearance at Covent Garden on 20 March 1764 for the benefit of Woodward, Townley's son-in-law John Roberdeau alleged that Garrick plagiarized Townley's dialogue and characters in the 1767 staging of 'The Clandestine Marriage'. Specifically Roberdeau claimed, in an 1805 edition of the 'Gentleman's Magazine', that Garrick's characters Lord Ogleby, Mr Sterling, and Brush in 'The Clandestine Marriage' were exact copies of Townley's Lord Lavender, Mrs Sudley, and a pert valet in 'False Concord' (Roberdeau, 'GM', 110). Because no print version of 'False Concord' exists this claim can neither be refuted nor substantiated yet the allegation itself has emerged as more noteworthy than Townley and any of his plays. 
Attempts to determine the truth of Roberdeau's charge have, however, unearthed evidence that Townley received critical assistance from David Garrick and William Hogarth. Townley's professional relationship with both Garrick and Hogarth had always been assumed, yet remained speculative, but it is now clear that Townley was a constructive influence on various works of Garrick and Hogarth. 
As Townley pursued a dramatic career and became increasingly active in London literary circles he continued to advance in his clerical career. In addition to the early appointments he held in the church he received preferments at the rectory of St Benet Gracechurch (22 July 1749) and St Leonard Eastcheap (1749), as well as the vicarage of Hendon in Middlesex (from 2 November 1772 to 1777). Clearly he benefited in his professional advancements from his marriage in 1740, to Jane Bonnin of Windsor, a descendant of the Poyntz family and a relative of Lady Spencer. Townley had two children: a son, James, who upheld the traditional educational association with Merchant Taylors' and eventually became a proctor in Doctors' Commons, and a daughter, Elizabeth, whose marriage to John Roberdeau is noteworthy because of his aforementioned allegation of plagiarism levied against Garrick. Townley died on 15 July 1778; a tablet was erected in his honour in St Benet Gracechurch. 


@@@@@


doc= 27607


Townley, James (1774-1833), Wesleyan Methodist minister and religious writer, was born on 11 May 1774 in Manchester, the son of Thomas Townley, a local businessman. His mother, Mary, a devout churchwoman, was also an occasional attender at Methodist meetings. Townley was educated in Macclesfield by the evangelical incumbent, the Revd David Simpson (1745-1799), whose death and funeral deeply affected the young man. He joined the Wesleyan Methodists in 1790, giving up a promising career in the cotton industry in 1796 to become an itinerant preacher. According to his biographer, Townley was a sensitive and able minister, adept at resolving problems, clearing debts, and strengthening churches (Hoole, 323). Even the acerbic James Everett, no friend to the Wesleyan establishment, commented on Townley's 'steady piety; acceptable pulpit talents;... [and] deep sympathy' (Everett, 345). His name was canvassed unsuccessfully for the post of connexional editor in 1824 in succession to Jabez Bunting, but three years later he was appointed general secretary of the Wesleyan Missionary Society, retaining this position until his retirement. Elected president of the Wesleyan Methodist conference at Sheffield in 1829, his year of office took a heavy toll on his health, and he was compelled to retire as a minister in 1832. 
Townley steadily established a reputation within Methodism for biblical, historical, and linguistic scholarship. He was a member of the Manchester Philological Society founded by Adam Clarke, and his published works included the three-volume 'Illustrations of Biblical Literature' (1821) and a critical edition of Maimonides's 'Mose nevochim' (1827). A projected history of Christian missions was never completed, and bore fruit only in four articles published posthumously in the 'Wesleyan Methodist Magazine' in 1834. His academic and literary achievements were recognized in the award of a DD by Princeton in 1822. 
Townley was married twice. His first wife, Mary Marsden (1770-1827), to whom he was married in September 1798, came from a prominent Methodist family in London and was admitted to the Methodist society at the age of seven by John Wesley. Memoirs of her parents, John and Hannah Marsden, written by Townley, were published in the 'Methodist Magazine' in 1808. The eldest of the Townleys' eight children died in 1823, and Mary Townley herself died in 1827. His second wife was Dinah Ball, also of London. After an extended period of ill health, James Townley died in retirement at Ramsgate on 12 December 1833. 


@@@@@


doc= 27608


Townshend, Aurelian (fl. 1583-1649?), poet, was the son of John Townshend of Dereham Abbey, Norfolk, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Sir Robert Catlin (d. 1574), chief justice of the queen's bench. Aurelian and his sister Franceline (or Francelliana) were both born some time before 12 December 1583, when they are mentioned in the will of Thomas Townshend, yeoman of Crimplesham, Norfolk. Aurelian was third cousin of the Armada veteran Sir Roger Townshend (1543?-1590) of Raynham, and of the parliamentary historian Hayward Townshend ('c'.1577-1603x21). 
In 1600 Aurelian attracted the attention of the secretary of state, Sir Robert Cecil, who proposed to train him for the service of his young son William. A warrant by Cecil dated 1 April 1600 authorizes travelling expenses for 'Aurelianus Townesend' as the queen's messenger to Sir Henry Neville, English ambassador in France (Pipe Office, declared accounts, roll 543, m. 57'v'; 'Aurelian Townshend's Poems and Masks', xxxvii). In a letter to Neville at the same time Cecil described Townshend as 'a young gentleman' who 'hath bin well bredd, and by his owne industrie attayned to a good superficiall knowledge in the French and Italian tongues' and who also showed promise of being able to 'write faire hands'; he accordingly entrusted him to Neville's care, both linguistic and moral (R. Winwood, 'Memorials', ed. E. Sawyer, 1725, 1.167; 'Aurelian Townshend's Poems and Masks', xxxvii-xxxviii). After he had been a year in Paris, Cecil sent the young Townshend on to Venice, whence he continued, in a spirit of dutiful gratitude, to keep his patron informed of such local and diplomatic news as he might encounter. He does not seem, however, to have been very discreet in his choice of acquaintances. One man he recommended to Cecil, Dr John Thornil, canon of Vicenza, would soon turn out to be a Catholic emissary, harboured in London by the Venetian ambassador, while yet another, the adventurer and intriguer Sir Anthony Sherley, succeeded in tricking Townshend out of 200 'scudi' of Cecil's money. Townshend himself was obliged to borrow 100 'scudi' from the merchant John Brown in order to complete a journey through Tuscany and the Romagna and get back to Venice, but Cecil refused to pay this bill and summoned him home. Townshend's misfortunes were compounded when, on the way back through France, he sprained his ankle, fell ill, spent all his money, and could complete his journey only by imploring Cecil, on 7 February 1603, once again for funds. 
Townshend is next heard of in the company of the philosophical writer, poet, and diplomat Sir Edward Herbert on a mission to the king of France, Henri IV, in 1608-9. Herbert describes him in his autobiography as 'a Gentleman That spake the Languages of Frensh Italian and Spanish, in greate Perfection'; as the man who was entrusted to deliver a challenge to a Frenchman with whom Herbert had quarrelled, but also as one of those companions who failed to come to Herbert's assistance when he was cornered by a boar on a hunt ('The Life of Edward, First Lord Herbert of Cherbury, Written by Himself', ed. J. M. Shuttleworth, 1976, 41-2, 47). Passing references suggest that he may still have served Herbert in some connection as late as 8 April 1615, when, in a letter to Herbert, his stepfather Sir John Danvers refers to 'the hundred pounds imployed' by Herbert 'for Mr. Townsend' ('Old Herbert papers at Powis Castle and in the British Museum', 'Collections Historical & Archaeological Relating to Montgomeryshire and its Borders', 20, 1886, 84). He may also have continued to serve Cecil up to the time of his death in 1612 for, in his account of Cecil's last days, his chaplain John Bowles mentions an afternoon when Cecil 'had noe companie with him, but onely Master Townsend' (Francis Peck, 'Desiderata curiosa', new edn, 2 vols., 1779, 1.208). Nevertheless, positive evidence of Townshend's employment during most of his early years is lacking. 
An autograph letter signed by Townshend ('A Tounshend') to William Trumbull, English resident in Brussels, dated from Hampton Court on 13 March 1621 (BL, Add. MS 72360, fols. 136'r'-137'v'), indicates that he was then still connected with the court and very much 'au courant' with court news and gossip. Townshend refers in passing to his sister (Franceline, who would be reported by James Wadsworth in 'The English Spanish Pilgrime', 1629, 69, to be playing 'the shee Physitian in the Archdutches Court' in Flanders) and to 'my L[ord] of Westmerland' (her lover in exile, the bigamous Edmund Neville, conspirator and unsuccessful claimant to the earldom of Westmorland). Townshend excuses himself from coming over again to Brussels himself 'this somer' because his passport must be signed by 'too many handes' ('for I see a poore man that hath many frends, hath almost no tyme of his owne'). Parish registers reveal that between 1622 and 1634 'Aurelian Townsend gentleman' was living in the parish of St Giles Cripplegate, where his Norfolk kinsmen had once maintained town residences. Some time between 1619 and 1622 he married Anne ('c'.1597- 'c'.1667), daughter of Edward Wythies of Copgrave, Yorkshire. She was the widow of William Agborough (died 1619), with whom she had one son, Robert, who later adopted Townshend's surname and was knighted in 1660. She bore Townshend five recorded children: George ('bap'. 17 Dec 1622), Mary ('bap'. 8 April 1626), James ('bap'. 15 Dec 1627), Herbert ('bap'. 23 Sept 1631; 'bur'. 26 Feb 1634), and Frances ('bap'. 17 Nov 1632). On 3 June 1629 the king granted a petition by Townshend allowing him custody and administration of the estate of the deranged Philippa Ivatt, widow of Thomas Ivatt, searcher of London ('CSP dom.', '1628-9', 143/40, 144/34). 
Early in 1632 Townshend suddenly came to prominence as a writer of court masques, as temporary successor to Ben Jonson, who had fallen out of favour. On 8 January the king's twelfth night masque 'Albions Triumph' was presented, for which Townshend wrote the verses and description (modestly referring to himself in the printed edition as being 'as loath to be brought upon the Stage as an unhansom Man is to see himselfe in a great Glasse', but that he had obeyed the command of the king). The elaborate scenery, machinery, and costumes were devised by Jonson's old rival Inigo Jones, who was also chiefly responsible for the queen's shrovetide masque a month later, 'Tempe Restor'd', to which Townshend contributed the verses. Although some of Townshend's poems were undoubtedly written earlier, it is from the years immediately following these two masques that the bulk of his surviving works can probably be dated. He contributed to further court masques: one on 21 December 1635, when he supplied the antimasques after the French pastoral 'Florimene' performed by the queen's ladies; another when he contributed a 'Bacchanall' song to a 'maske before their Majestys', probably the court revival on 12 January 1637 of William Cartwright's 'The Royal Slave'. He also contributed some time in this period to an entertainment presented before the king by the Merchant Adventurers' Company. 
Townshend's attachment to the court and to the aristocratic, fashionable society of his day is evident in various of his poems, addressed or paying tribute not only to the king and queen themselves but also to the likes of Lady Judith May, wife of the vice-chamberlain of the household Sir Humphrey May, Sir Kenelm Digby, Henry Carey, earl of Monmouth, and the court musician Henry Lawes and his brother William. One of his neighbours in the Barbican was apparently John Egerton, first earl of Bridgewater, to whom he presented a copy of 'Albions Triumph' (now in the Huntington Library). Egerton's children took part in 'Tempe Restor'd', and his wife was mourned by Townshend in March 1636 in a funeral elegy. Like his daughter, Townshend may also have been on good terms with members of the Sackville family, one of whom, the fourth earl of Dorset's son Edward, he mourned in an elegy in 1645. Other friends included the court poet Thomas Carew, whose 'sweet' wit and manly spirit Townshend praised in his elegy on Gustavus Adolphus (killed 6 November 1632). Carew warmly responded in his elegy on the same subject by addressing Townshend as 'my dear Aurelian'; the poem notes that Townshend was living in the Barbican at this time. On 8 August 1633 'Aurelian Towneshend, Esq.' was also admitted to the fellowship of Gray's Inn, then a privileged society of gentlemen as much noted for its literary activities as its legal pursuits. 
By the time of the civil war Townshend's luck may have been waning. According to a reported but unverifiable inscription supposedly by Philip Herbert, earl of Pembroke, in a book apparently dated 1642, the 'poore & pocky Poett' Townshend, 'but a marryed man & an howsekeeper in Barbican', would have been 'glad to sell an 100 verses now at sixepence a piece, 50 shillinges an 100 verses' (cited in Alexander Dyce's edition of 'The Works of Beaumont and Fletcher', 1843-6, 1.xvii). It must have been financial straits which made Townshend petition the House of Lords for protection (granted 3 March 1643) against arrest by Isaak Tulley, silkman, on a claim of $600 for silk and fringes he bespoke for the use of Lewis Boyle, Viscount Kinalmeaky ('JHL', 5.632). Nevertheless, he described himself in that petition as 'the King's Ordinary Servant', and his association with the court persisted. This may, perhaps, be linked to the court successes in another sense of his daughter Mary, to whom he addressed the gently admonitory 'Let not thy beauties make thee proud'. Before she was twenty she was successively mistress of Charles Louis, elector palatine (1617-1680), and Edward Sackville, fourth earl of Dorset (1590-1652), and was even rumoured in 1647 to have dallied with the elector palatine's younger brother, Prince Maurice (1620-1652) ('Divers remarkable passages of the ladies at Spring-Garden, in parliament assembled', 'Scarce and Valuable Tracts... Lord Somers', 2nd edn, 5.472-3). On 26 February 1646 she married, as his second wife, George Kirke, a groom of the bedchamber and gentleman of the robes, at Christ Church, Oxford, where, according to William Dugdale, 'The King gave her; she being the admired beauty of the tymes' ('The Life, Diary, and Correspondence of Sir William Dugdale', ed. W. Hamper, 1827, 84). The king even settled upon her a jointure of $500 ('CSP dom.', '1676-7', 132). The couple remained loyal to Charles during the upheavals of the war -- as did Townshend's eldest son, George, and his stepson, Robert, who both fought and suffered imprisonment for the king. George and Mary Kirke received various royal favours and allowances after the Restoration before George Kirke's death in 1675; his widow, who was generously pensioned, lived on to 1702. 
Townshend himself, however, may not have stayed the course of the war in England, but was possibly the 'Mr. Townshend, Gent.' who was among the seventy 'servants and attendants' of princes Rupert and Maurice allowed by Sir Thomas Fairfax, on 19 June 1646, to leave for the continent after the fall of Oxford (E. Warburton, 'Memoirs of Prince Rupert, and the Cavaliers', 1849, 3.234). It is possible that in this period he supported himself by serving as a tutor to one or more younger exiles, including Sir Roger Townshend (1628-1648) and his brother Horatio, later Baron and Viscount Townshend ('bap'. 1630, died 1687), who, on 16 December 1646, had leave from parliament to travel abroad for three years. The grant of arms to Horatio by Sir Edward Walker in 1663 mentions Horatio's having received his education under Aurelian Townshend (BL, Add. MS 37675, fol. 49'r'). 
Townshend is next heard of in a poem by one C. R. 'To my Worthy Friend A:T:', inviting him to write an elegy on Lord Francis Villiers, who was killed by parliamentary forces at Kingston on 7 July 1648. Hailing Townshend as 'the last of all the Poets race' with 'the ablest Pen' the writer stresses how 'old' the poet is ('Your health a sicknesse, & your Muse growne cold'), his 'Long-spun Thread' almost 'become a shread' (University College, London, Ogden MS 42, 3-4). It is possible (from the attribution in a fragment of the poem formerly among the Sackville papers) that Townshend lived to write one more notable poem: a heroic elegy on Charles I's execution, on 30 January 1649, the complete text of which (Ogden MS 42, 1-3) is signed 'Philobasile' (lover of the king). Otherwise, unless he is the 'Tounshend' who contributed a slight, eight-line dialogue to the commendatory poems in Clement Barksdale's 'Nympha libethris' in 1651, no more is heard of him. 
Apart from the three main court masques in which he was involved in 1632 and 1635, and two or three sets of commendatory verses, Townshend's writings remained unpublished in his lifetime. They were written for, and confined to, coterie manuscript circulation, and various of the poems were also given musical settings by Henry Lawes and others. Judging by the number of copies surviving in seventeenth-century manuscript miscellanies, a few of his lyrics achieved considerable popularity, especially 'Victorious Beauty', addressed to Catherine Howard, wife (in 1608) of his first patron's son, William Cecil, second earl of Salisbury. 
Townshend's literary canon was first established by Chambers in his collected edition (1912). Additions and modifications to it were made, from both manuscript and printed sources, in Cedric C. Brown's edition (1983). Yet further additions (including the two elegies of 1648-9) can be made from a royalist anthology of the 1650s now at University College, London (Ogden MS 42), from manuscripts of verse tributes by him to Lord North and to the newly born Prince Charles (BL, Add. MSS 27407, fol. 5'r', and 27408, fols. 112'r'-113'r'), and from Sir Henry Herbert's copy of verses for a masque now in the National Library of Wales (NL Wales, MS 5308E, fols. 12'r'-13'v'). 
With the exception of a perfunctory reference in Sir John Suckling's 'Session of the Poets' (1637), which is heavily outweighed by C.R.'s eulogy in 1648, evidence of the poet's contemporary reputation is otherwise meagre. In his 1633 elegy on Gustavus Adolphus, Thomas Carew (author of the much more ambitious and successful court masque 'Coelum Britannicum', performed 18 February 1634) praised Townshend's ability, in his elegy on Gustavus Adolphus, to 'soar' to 'a loftier pitch' and make a 'noble flight', while at the same time implying that his customary level was to sing 'harmless pastimes' to 'rural tunes'. 
Townshend's verse is not generally comparable to the more richly textured poems of his more prolific friend Carew, let alone to the metaphysical complexities of John Donne, whose influence nevertheless extended to him as to so many of his contemporaries. But neither is it fair to dismiss him, as T. S. Eliot did, as merely a 'faint, pleasing tinkle' ('The metaphysical poets', 1921). Townshend's voice was distinctive enough, and somewhere in the rich canon of seventeenth-century English verse is a respectable niche for him where the virtues of accomplished lyricism, charm, sophisticated (if obsequious) gallantry, tact, and courtesy may receive due homage. 


@@@@@


doc= 27609


Townsend, George (1788-1857), writer and Church of England clergyman, was born at Ramsgate, Kent, the son of George Townsend, independent minister, and his wife. He was educated at Ramsgate and attracted the attention of the playwright Richard Cumberland (1732-1811), who encouraged and helped him to go to Trinity College, Cambridge. He matriculated at Trinity in the Lent term of 1808, and graduated BA (1812) and MA (1816). He was ordained deacon in 1813 and priest in 1814. He became curate of Littleport, Cambridgeshire, in 1813, before moving to Hackney as curate to John James Watson, archdeacon of Colchester. In 1816 he was appointed professor at Sandhurst and became curate at Farnborough, Hampshire. 
Townsend's first publication was 'Oedipus Romanus' (1811), a controversial tract which followed the logic of Sir William Drummond's 'Oedipus Judaicus' (which had argued that most of the 'Old Testament' was an astronomical allegory) in order to suggest that the twelve Caesars represented the signs of the zodiac. 'Oedipus Romanus' was reissued in 1819, and it also led Townsend to pursue with vigour the research which was to lead to his great work 'The Old Testament Arranged in Historical and Chronological Order', whose first part was published in London in 1821. This work obtained the notice of, among others, Shute Barrington, bishop of Durham, who appointed him his domestic chaplain in 1822. This position gave Townsend enough free time to bring out the second part of his work, entitled, 'The New Testament, Arranged in Chronological and Historical Order' (1825). 
During heated arguments over the pending issue of Catholic emancipation, and with Barrington's encouragement, Townsend published a reply to the Catholic Charles Butler's 'Historical Memoirs of the English, Scottish and Irish Catholics since the Reformation' (1822) with his own 'Accusations of History Against the Church of Rome' (1825; new edn, 1845). He was rewarded for his controversial work and received, on 25 August 1825, the tenth prebendal stall in the see of Durham, which he retained until his death. He also obtained, on 26 April 1826, the chapter living of Northallerton, which he left on 22 February 1839 to become perpetual curate of St Margaret, Durham. In 1836 he compiled a 'Life and vindication of John Foxe', the martyrologist, which was prefixed to the first volume of an edition of S. R. Cattley's 'Acts and Monuments of John Foxe' (8 vols., 1837-41). 
In 1850 Townsend undertook an unusual journey to Italy with the intention of converting Pope Pius IX to protestantism. He failed in his efforts, but on his return published an account of the mission, 'Journal of a tour in Italy in 1850, with an account of an interview with the pope in the Vatican' (1850). During his lifetime Townsend also published a variety of poems, sermons, theological studies, and historical works. He brought out 'Flowers from the Garden of the Church, or, The Collects of the Church of England Versified' in 1854. 
Townsend, who was twice married, died at The College, Durham, on 23 November 1857, and has been described by one historian as an 'old-style Durham High Churchman' (Wolffe, 112). A son from his first marriage, George Fyler Townsend, later became perpetual curate of St Michael's, Burleigh Street, Westminster, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 27610


Townsend, George Henry (d. 1869), compiler of reference works and journalist, was grandson of John Townsend (1757-1826), and nephew of George Townsend (1788-1857). Townsend was a prominent tory journalist. He edited 'The Herald' during the minority tory government of 1858-9, being dismissed, despite tory protests, about November 1859. As editor, he had close contacts with Lord Malmesbury, the foreign secretary (Earle to Disraeli, November 1859, MS Hughenden B/XX/E177). Townsend then recommended the foundation of a joint-stock company to develop the tory press in London, a proposal too adventurous even for Disraeli. He was editor and manager of 'The Press' from about 1865. He worked consistently for his party and understood that following the general election in 1868 he would receive some preferment -- perhaps a civil-list pension -- as his reward. However, Disraeli resigned without finding anything for him and Townsend, deeply disappointed, committed suicide at Kennington, London, on 23 February 1869 by stabbing himself. 
Townsend wrote 'Shakespeare not an Impostor' (1857), but his chief literary contribution was as a compiler and editor. He produced an epitome in 1857 of William Russell's 'History of Modern Europe', and edited several literary volumes. His 'Manual of Dates' was published in 1857 and, in its fifth edition, by Frederick Martin (1877), remains useful, though largely superseded by Haydn's 'Dictionary of Dates'. Townsend edited the seventh edition of 'Men of the time' in 1868. 
Besides these works, Townsend between 1860 and 1866 wrote several pamphlets containing selections of madrigals and glees for John Green, the proprietor of Evans's music and supper rooms, 43 Covent Garden. As these pamphlets purport to be compiled by John Green, confusion arose, and Green was sometimes regarded as a pseudonym of Townsend. The two were, however, entirely distinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 27611


Townsend, Isaac (1684/5-1765), naval officer and politician, was the nephew of Sir Isaac Townsend (died 1731), captain in the navy, and for many years resident commissioner at Portsmouth. He may have entered the navy in 1696, as servant to his uncle, captain of the 'Ipswich'. He was warranted as a volunteer on that ship in December of this year. Afterwards he was in the 'Severn', 'Lincoln', 'Royal William', 'Russell', and again the 'Ipswich' as a seaman or midshipman. Townsend passed his lieutenant's examination on 15 January 1706. It is possible that he was both at Vigo in 1702 and in the action off Malaga in August 1704. He received his first commission, as third lieutenant of the 'Resolution', on 29 July 1707. On 24 September 1707 he was appointed lieutenant of the 'Hastings' with Captain John Paul, employed on the Irish station, apparently until the peace. Townsend became second lieutenant of the 'Dorsetshire' on 3 March 1718. On 30 June 1719 he was appointed commander of the fireship 'Poole', and on 9 February 1720 he achieved post rank as captain of the 'Success' (20 guns), which he commanded on the Irish station for the next ten years. In February 1734 he was given command of the newly commissioned 'Plymouth' on the home station. In mid-1738 Townsend was ordered to join Nicholas Haddock's squadron in the Mediterranean. In June 1739 Haddock appointed Townsend to the 'Berwick'. In March 1740 Townsend was sent home with a convoy. Along with his ship's company, he was then turned over to the 'Shrewsbury' in April 1740, one of the fleet in the channel, with Sir John Norris, and for some time the flagship of Sir Chaloner Ogle, with whom, at the end of the year, she went out to the West Indies. In the operations against Cartagena in March-April 1741 the 'Shrewsbury', with the 'Norfolk' and 'Russell', all 80-gun ships, captured the small forts of St Iago and St Philip, at the entrance to the outer harbour. The 'Shrewsbury' suffered heavy damage with over 60 dead and wounded. After the failure of the operation against Cartagena the 'Shrewsbury' returned to England with a number of other ships under Commodore Richard Lestock. 
On 19 June 1744 Townsend was promoted rear-admiral of the red and in December he was elected MP for Portsmouth in the Admiralty interest. On 23 April 1745 he advanced to vice-admiral of the blue. Early that year he went out to the Mediterranean as third in command, with his flag in the 'Dorsetshire'. Shortly afterwards news arrived of the departure of a French squadron for the Americas and Townsend was detached with eight ships of the line to protect the British West Indian islands. He had further instructions to try to capture St Lucia or Puerto Rico. In the event the French were not threatening the British islands and the capture of enemy islands proved impracticable. However, Townsend intercepted a convoy of French merchant ships off Martinique on 31 October 1745, capturing or destroying over thirty of the vessels. 
Towards the end of 1745 rumours reached London of French preparations to retake Louisbourg, which had been captured by a force of New Englanders, supported by Commodore Peter Warren, in August 1745. Townsend was ordered to take over command of Louisbourg from Warren, who was anxious to return to England. Townsend sailed from Antigua on 31 January 1746 and arrived on 9 May. He remained at Louisbourg with the squadron while the French squadron approached, but failed to attack, the town. 
On 17 July 1747 Townsend was promoted admiral of the blue and in 1754 he became governor of Greenwich Hospital. In this position he had to undertake the custody of Admiral John Byng after his arrest in July 1756. He is said by Byng's friends to have performed this duty with needless, even brutal, severity. It is impossible to be certain of Townsend's attitude to Byng, but he had no reservations about succeeding to Byng's parliamentary seat at Rochester after the latter's execution in March 1757. 
In February 1757 Townsend was promoted admiral of the white, and following the death of Lord Anson in 1762 he became the senior admiral on the list. He married Elizabeth (1699/1700-1754), daughter of William Larcum, a surgeon of Richmond, and half-sister (on the mother's side) of Elizabeth, daughter of Anthony Storey, apothecary of London, and wife of Sir Isaac Townsend, Townsend's uncle. The fact that uncle and nephew shared the same name has caused frequent confusion, which this curious marriage with sisters of the same Christian name easily intensifies. Townsend has also been confused with George Townsend (1715-1769), a contemporary in rank, though a younger man. Townsend's wife died on 1 April 1754. His only son, Charles, died on 13 January 1764. Townsend himself died on 21 November 1765, aged eighty, and he was buried the next day with his wife and son in the chancel of St Mary, Thorpe, Surrey. A daughter, Elizabeth, survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 27612


Townsend, John (1757-1826), benefactor, was born in Whitechapel, London, on 24 March 1757, the son of Benjamin and Margaret Townsend. His father, a pewterer, was disinherited for his attachment to the Calvinistic Methodist leader George Whitefield and, as a result, the family lived a 'humble life' ('Congregational Magazine', 226). John was educated at Christ's Hospital, London, which he entered on 6 March 1766 and left on 8 April 1771 at the instruction of his father, who wished him to serve as his apprentice at Swallow Gardens, London. It was during the time of his apprenticeship that he began attending services at Tottenham Court Chapel and was drawn to preaching. After an eight-month position at Lewes, Sussex, he was ordained minister of the Independent church at Kingston, Surrey, in June 1781. He married in the same month Cordelia Carhusac; they had at least one child. Much to Townsend's disapproval members of his Kingston congregation came under the influence of William Huntington's antinomianism, forcing Townsend to resign his position. On 28 October 1784 he became minister of the newly founded Independent church in Jamaica Row, Bermondsey, and from March 1787 he also preached weekly at the Orange Street Chapel. 
In 1792 Townsend was responsible, along with Henry Cox Mason, rector of Bermondsey, and the MP Henry Thornton, for the establishment of an asylum for deaf mute children of the poor in Bermondsey. What began as a parish institution attracted a number of subscribers and grew to become a national charity. Plans were laid for the construction on Old Kent Road of a purpose-built asylum, which was begun in July 1807, and for which Townsend, by 'his own individual efforts and personal applications', was able to contribute $6000. In the period between the asylum's foundation and the erection of its new premises Townsend was also involved in the foundation of the 'Evangelical Magazine' (1793) and the creation of the London Missionary Society (1794) and the British and Foreign Bible Society (1804), for which he provided the name. In 1807 he also helped initiate the London Female Penitentiary, which housed and rehabilitated repentant prostitutes. 
In September 1810 Townsend published a 'Letter to the ministers, officers, and all other members and friends of the congregational churches in England', in which he drew attention to the poverty of his fellow ministers and the inadequacy of the education provided for their children. Townsend received a poor response to his appeal, raising just $200 in four months. As a result he limited his plans to the building of a free school for the sons of poor Independent ministers; this opened as the Congregational school in October 1811. In 1815 the school moved to a house in Lewisham, for which Townsend helped to pay by undertaking a lecture tour of Yorkshire and Lancashire intended 'to excite the churches there to assist it by their patronage'. As well as the 'Letter to the Ministers' he also published a collection of sermons on prayer, some 'Hints on Sunday-Schools and Itinerant Preaching' (1801), an abridgement of John Bunyan's 'Pilgrim's Progress' (1806), and a 'Defence of the Reformation' (1815). Townsend, a man of 'eminent philanthropy' ('Congregational Magazine', 229), was engaged in raising funds to build an almshouse when he died in Bermondsey on 7 February 1826. 


@@@@@


doc= 27613


Townsend, Joseph (1739-1816), geologist and writer, fourth son of Chauncy Townsend MP (died 1770), a linen merchant and mining speculator, and his wife, Bridget (died 1762), daughter of James Phipps, governor of Cape Coast Castle, was born in London on 4 April 1739. He matriculated from Clare College, Cambridge at Michaelmas 1758, and graduated BA in 1762 and MA in 1765. There is an unsubstantiated report that he was elected a fellow of the college. For a time Townsend studied medicine in Edinburgh under William Cullen. He was ordained deacon (London) on 21 December 1763, and showed some sympathy with Calvinistic Methodists, occasionally preaching in the countess of Huntingdon's chapel at Bath. As a preacher, Townsend appeared as 'a gaunt, upright, gigantic figure', having 'long arms with which he gesticulated wildly when he was seized with religious fervour' (Morris, 472). In 1767 he visited Scotland on a mission from Lady Huntingdon. There he was met by a number of 'pious and able ministers of the Established Church'. He preached at a small village, Coldstream, and soon thereafter went to Edinburgh, where he preached to multitudes, remaining there for two months ('Life and Times', 1.410-11). Either in late 1767 or early 1768 he went to Dublin at Lady Huntingdon's request, and on his representing to her 'the deplorable state of spiritual destitution prevailing in Dublin, she commissioned them [Townsend and a Mr Shirley] to purchase, build, or hire some sound commodious edifice, for the performance of divine worship, 'according to the forms of the Established Church'' ('Life and Times', 2.159-60). Townsend was appointed chaplain to the duke of Atholl in 1769, and in that year and 1770 he visited France, the Netherlands, and Flanders. His first publication, 'Every True Christian a New Creature' (1765) reflects his religious beliefs, but, as with some of his other works, attracted little notice. At one time it was thought, wrongly, that Townsend's Methodistical tendencies had made him the satiric butt of 'The Spiritual Quixote' by his neighbour Richard Graves. Townsend became rector of Pewsey, Wiltshire, a living he kept until he died. He also became one of the commissioners of the turnpike roads in Wiltshire, an appointment which earned him the nickname the Colossus of Roads. 
Townsend's 'Free Thoughts on Despotic and Free Government' and 'The Physician's Vade Mecum' both appeared in 1781, the latter running to ten editions by 1807. Townsend published two influential works on the poor laws. The first of these, 'A Dissertation on the Poor Laws' (1785), though largely forgotten for almost 200 years, was given new life in a 1971 edition. Townsend, who was a friend of Jeremy Bentham, argued in 'Observations on Various Plans for the Relief of the Poor' (1788) that the existing poor laws 'so beautiful in theory, promote the evils they were meant to relieve' (Morris, 474). Townsend advocated the abolition of outdoor relief for the able-bodied and went on to propose the compulsory establishment of friendly societies to cover the costs of medical treatment and burial of their members. Thomas Malthus acknowledged Townsend's influence on his own thinking, while the political economist J. R. McCulloch considered that 'Townsend's ideas were not so much a foreshadowing of Malthus's theory as the theory itself' (ibid.). 
The work for which Townsend seems to have been best known was his 'Journey through Spain in the Years 1786 and 1787' (1791, with a third edition in 1814). He dedicated the work to the earl of Wycombe. The reviewer for the 'Monthly Review' blew hot and cold: 'Not withstanding our warm approbation of Mr. Townsend's work, justice obliges us to say, that he indulgences himself too frequently in repetitions, and that there is a considerable degree of obscurity in many of his descriptions'; he also complained that there was too much emphasis on chemistry and not enough on natural history ('Monthly Review', 1791). J. R. McCulloch describes the 'Journey' as 'one of the best works of the kind that has ever appeared, throwing a great deal of light upon the political economy of Spain, and on the causes of her decline' (McCulloch, 215). The sight of beggars in Spain also served to strengthen Townsend's views about how best to tackle poverty. The 'Journey' was followed by 'A Guide to Health' (1795-6). Both the 'Guide' and the 'Vade mecum' enjoyed American editions. Townsend also published a volume of sermons in 1805, and concluded his writing career with 'The Character of Moses Established' (2 vols., 1812-15). He built up one of the largest fossil collections in Britain and devoted many years to trying to amass evidence to support the Mosaic story of creation. His geological researches led him to form a friendship with William Strata Smith (1769-1839), and he was made an honorary member of the Geological Society of London. 
Townsend was twice married, first to Joyce, daughter of Thomas Nankivell of Truro, on 27 September 1773; she died on 8 November 1785. On 26 March 1790 he married Lydia Hammond, the widow of Sir John Clerke; she died in 1812. Townsend died on 9 November 1816 and was buried within the precincts of St John's Church, Pewsey, where a tablet was erected to his memory. He left four sons, Thomas, Charles, James, and Henry, and two daughters, Charlotte and Sophia, from his first marriage. Townsend's obituarist in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' claimed pre-eminence for him as 'a mineralogist, a fossilist, and conchologist', and stated that 'As a preacher, he was sound in doctrine and consistent in practice'. He was also 'one of the principal projectors of, and a very considerable share-holder in, the Kennet and Avon Canal' ('GM'). Townsend's 'Etymological researches, wherein numerous languages apparently discordant have their affinity traced and their resemblance so manifest as to lead to the conclusion that all languages are radically one' was published posthumously in 1824. 


@@@@@


doc= 27614


Townsend, Richard (1618/19-1692), parliamentarian army officer, is of obscure origins and unknown parentage. According to tradition he was descended from the Townshends of Raynham, Norfolk, and he evidently laid claim to such kinship, adopting the arms of Sir Roger Townshend (1588-1637), the head of that family. It has been suggested, rather doubtfully and owing to no more than a rough similarity in age, that he was the Richard Townesend, son of John Townsend of Dichford, Warwickshire, who matriculated from Hart Hall on 16 May 1634, aged nineteen. However, he may have come from Dorset, where he served for much of the first civil war. His first wife, Hildegardis Hyde, may well have been a kinsman of Edward Hyde, earl of Clarendon -- again suggesting a west-country connection. Of his second wife nothing is known beyond her forename, Mary. 
In 1643 Townsend received the commission of captain in a regiment of ten companies raised to garrison Lyme Regis, which was threatened by the approach of Prince Maurice, then in the midst of his triumphant western campaign. On 3 March 1644 he surprised and routed 150 horse at Bridport. Townsend distinguished himself in the defence of Lyme, serving under Robert Blake, when it was besieged from 20 April until its relief on 13 June. Townsend was shot in the head, and promoted to the rank of major. The following year he accompanied his colonel, Thomas Ceeley, against the clubmen of Dorset, defeating them at Bridport on 3 July. When Ceeley was returned as MP for Bridport that year, Townsend succeeded him in command of the regiment with the rank of lieutenant-colonel. In 1646 he assisted at the siege of Pendennis Castle, near Falmouth, and in August in the negotiations for the surrender of the castle. 
The following month Townsend was made colonel of a regiment of 1000 foot to be raised for service in Ireland, with Robert Phayre as his lieutenant-colonel. In March the regiment was still in England, camped at Bath. It had reached Ireland by 15 June 1647, when parliament ordered Townsend and his regiment, which was in a state of some disorder, apparently owing to the presence of native Irish in the ranks, to the assistance of Murrough O'Brien, first earl of Inchiquin, the parliamentarian commander. He joined him in September, and on 13 November, when Inchiquin defeated Lord Taaffe, the royalist leader, near Mallow, Townsend commanded the English centre. Dissatisfied with the treatment accorded to the soldiers in Ireland by the predominant Independent party there, he joined early in 1648 in presenting a strong remonstrance to the English parliament against their neglect of the welfare of the troops. Failing to obtain redress, he soon afterwards joined Inchiquin, who disliked the Independents, in deserting the parliamentarian cause, and in coming to an understanding with Lord Taaffe. In a short time, however, his new associates became distasteful to him, and he entered into communications with parliament. 
In December 1648, in consequence of his endeavour to negotiate the surrender of Munster with parliamentary commissioners, Townsend was compelled to take refuge in England. On the execution of Charles I he returned to Ireland, professing that resentment at the king's death had finally determined him to loyalty. In reality, however, according to Thomas Carte, he was sent by Cromwell as a secret agent to corrupt the Munster army. In October 1649 he was arrested and thrown into prison for being concerned in a plot to seize the person of Inchiquin and take possession of Youghal. He was exchanged for an Irish officer, but was no sooner liberated than he engaged in a similar plot, was again taken prisoner, and conveyed to Cork. Inchiquin intended to shoot him as an example, and he was saved only by a timely mutiny of the garrison of Cork, who rose on the night of 16 October and drove the Irish out of the town. Townsend received special praise from Cromwell in a letter to the speaker, William Lenthall, as 'a very active instrument for the return both of Cork and Youghal to their obedience' (Abbott, 2.163). 
Townsend retired from service shortly afterwards, and before 1654 settled at Castletownshend, near West Carbery, co. Cork. At the Restoration he was pardoned and hence escaped the forfeitures which overtook many Cromwellian soldiers, having his lands confirmed to him by royal patents in 1666, 1668, and 1680. His good fortune was perhaps owing to the possible Clarendon connection through his first wife. Townsend sat in the Irish parliament of 1661 as member for Baltimore. In 1666 the apprehension of a French invasion caused the lord lieutenant, Roger Boyle, first earl of Orrery, to form the English in Ireland into companies of militia. Townsend was appointed a captain of foot, and in 1671 was appointed high sheriff of the county. 
The accession of James II ushered in a period of anxiety for the protestants of southern Ireland. Many took refuge in the north or crossed the sea to England. Townsend, however, stood his ground, and organized the protestant defence in co. Cork. On 18 October 1685 he was appointed 'sovereign', or mayor, of Clonakilty, in spite of the efforts of James to prevent the election of protestants. In November 1690 Townsend's mansion house of Castletownshend was unsuccessfully besieged by 500 Irish under Colonel Driscoll, but a little later it was compelled to surrender to MacFineen O'Driscoll. In compensation for his sacrifices and services Townsend received from government a grant of $40,000. 
Townsend died in the latter part of 1692, and was buried in the graveyard of Castlehaven. He had children with both his wives, leaving seven sons and four daughters. The eldest surviving son, Bryan, who served with the English army at the battle of the Boyne, was ancestor of the family of Townshend of Castletownshend. 


@@@@@


doc= 27615


Townsend, Richard (1821-1884), mathematician, was born on 3 April 1821 at Baltimore, co. Cork, Ireland, the eldest son of Thomas Townsend (died 1848) of Smithville, a commodore in the Royal Navy, and his wife, Helena, daughter of John Freke of Baltimore. After attending local schools in Castletownsend and Skibbereen, he entered Trinity College, Dublin, on 13 October 1837; he graduated BA in the spring of 1842 as first senior moderator (equivalent to Cambridge wrangler) in mathematics and physics. His entire career was spent as an academic at Dublin University where he gained gradual promotion. He prepared for the college fellowship under the professors of mathematics, James MacCullagh (until 1843) and Charles Graves (from 1843). Success in the highly competitive fellowship examination led to his election as a junior fellow in May 1845 and appointment as college tutor in October 1847. In the spring of 1852 he received the degree of MA and on 25 June 1870 he was appointed professor of natural philosophy, after he had acted as assistant from October 1862 and examiner in mathematics and mathematical physics. Having advanced through the ranks of the junior fellows, he finally became a senior fellow with a seat on the board of the college in the last year of his life. On 7 June 1866 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. He was married to his first cousin, Mary Jane Barrett (died 1881). They had no children. 
In the 'Cambridge and Dublin Mathematical Journal' (nine volumes, 1846-54) Townsend published a series of articles, mainly on geometrical topics reflecting the research interests of the Dublin mathematical school that flourished under James MacCullagh. His greatest success, however, was as a teacher and he enjoyed popularity as a tutor, having up to two hundred pupils at times. His most important publication was a textbook, 'Chapters on the Modern Geometry of the Point, Line and Circle' (2 vols., 1863-5), based on his lectures. This work achieved considerable, even international, recognition, providing, for example, the first elementary treatment of inversive geometry and giving an exposition of the theory of inverse points, figures, and methods of geometrical transformation. A further work entitled 'Lectures on attractions' was left unfinished at his death. 
Townsend (who was ordained deacon at Cork on 25 May 1860) was a benefactor of the protestant episcopal Church of Ireland. When Gladstone's 'Irish Church Act' of 1869 (effective 1 January 1871) disestablished and partly disendowed the church, Townsend's native parish in west Cork was perceived as a beleaguered outpost in a depressed region where more than 90 per cent of the population was Roman Catholic. He used his influence among college friends and former pupils to raise a considerable sum (perhaps $2500) as the nucleus of a permanent endowment of the parish. Having suffered from heart disease (cardiac dropsy) he died on 16 October 1884 at his house, 54 Upper Leeson Street, Dublin, and was buried at Mount Jerome cemetery. A mathematical exhibition was founded in his memory at the college. In an obituary a former pupil, J. P. Mahaffy, while praising the altruism of the deceased, hinted also at imperfections and psychological curiosities or idiosyncrasies in his character. 


@@@@@


doc= 27616


Townsend, William Charles (1804-1850), legal historian, born in Liverpool, was the second son of William Townsend of Walton, Lancashire. He matriculated from Queen's College, Oxford, in July 1820, graduating BA in 1824 and MA in 1827, and began his publications at an early age by contributing several poems to Fisher's 'Imperial Magazine' about 1820, and publishing 'The Paean of Orford: a Poem' in 1826. In November 1828 he was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn. He attached himself to the northern circuit, before practising at the Cheshire and Manchester assizes. Later he obtained a large practice on the north Wales circuit. In 1833 he was elected recorder of Macclesfield, and in 1834 he married Frances Wood (died in or after 1850), the second daughter of Richard Wood of Macclesfield. In March 1850 he was appointed a queen's counsel, and in the same year became a bencher of Lincoln's Inn. 
The publications of Townsend's mature years reflected his keen interest in legal history: 'The History and Memoirs of the House of Commons' appeared in 1843-4, followed by 'The Lives of Twelve Eminent Judges of the Last and of the Present Century' (1846), and 'Modern State Trials' (1850). He died of heart disease on 8 May 1850, at Burntwood Lodge, Wandsworth Common, Surrey, the house of his elder brother, Richard Lateward Townsend, vicar of All Saints', Wandsworth. He was buried on 13 May 1850, in the vaults of Lincoln's Inn, London. He was survived by his wife; they had no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 27617


Townshend, Charles, second Viscount Townshend (1674-1738), politician, diplomatist, and agricultural innovator, was born on 18 April 1674 at Raynham, Norfolk, and baptized on 2 May at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London. He was the eldest of the three sons and heir of Horatio Townshend, first Viscount Townshend (bap. 1630, d. 1687), politician, and his second wife, Mary (died 1685), the daughter of Sir Joseph Ashe, of Twickenham, Middlesex. His two brothers were Roger (died 1709), a colonel of a foot regiment and MP for Norfolk and later Great Yarmouth; and Horatio ('c'.1683-1751), who was MP for Great Yarmouth and later Heytesbury, a director of the South Sea Company, a governor and director of the Bank of England, and a commissioner of the excise. Townshend took his seat in the House of Lords in December 1687 following the death of their father. 
Townshend was educated at Eton College and matriculated at King's College, Cambridge, at Easter 1691. After travelling abroad for three years from August 1694 to October 1697 he married, on 3 July 1698, Elizabeth (died 1711), the second daughter of Thomas Pelham, first Baron Pelham. During their thirteen-year marriage they remained devoted to one another and were rarely separated. The couple had nine children; the first, Horatio, was born in August 1699 and was followed by two girls and six boys. Only five of the children, four sons and one daughter, survived to adulthood. 
Although his father had been a staunch tory, Townshend favoured the whigs and quickly became active in politics. In 1701 he was appointed high steward of King's Lynn (21 April) and of Norwich Cathedral (21 or 30 April), offices he held until his death. In addition he served as lord lieutenant of Norfolk, a position he held twice (1701-13 and 1714-30), and as 'custos rotulorum', to which he was appointed on 31 May 1701. These offices and his stature in the community gave Townshend considerable political influence. In May 1701 he also delivered his maiden speech in the House of Lords. Unfortunately he was not a skilled orator. Even one of his friends, the fourth earl of Chesterfield, noted that, although Townshend always 'spoke materially, with argument and knowledge... [he] never pleased... [because] his diction was not only inelegant, but frequently ungrammatical, always vulgar: his cadences false; his voice unharmonious, and his actions ungraceful' ('Letters of... Chesterfield', 4.1454). He went on to observe that 'Nobody heard him with patience' and that some individuals 'used to joke upon him and repeat his inaccuracies' (ibid., 4.1455). In spite of this failing, Townshend played an important political role, in part because of his and Robert Walpole's control of the Norfolk whigs, who usually acted with the junto leadership. 
During the early years of Queen Anne's reign Townshend protested against the 'Occasional Conformity Bill', defended the rights of the electorate in the Aylesbury election, and helped to defeat the proposal to invite Princess Sophie of Hanover to England. In 1706 he became a member of the Royal Society and was nominated to serve as one of the commissioners to negotiate the treaty of union between England and Scotland. The following year he was appointed captain of the yeomen of the guard (25 November) and was sworn of the privy council (1 December), and in 1708 he was elected to serve on a committee of seven peers investigating charges of treason against William Gregg, Robert Harley's secretary. 
In 1709 the queen appointed Townshend to his most important diplomatic post, at The Hague, the main artery of British diplomacy. This post was crucial not only because of the importance of maintaining good relations with Britain's closest ally but also because it was the 'whispering gallery' of Europe (Horn, 'British Diplomatic Representatives', 19-20), where the most extensive information on European politics was available. At that time the British, embroiled in the War of the Spanish Succession (1702-13), feared that the Dutch might conclude a separate peace with France. Many whigs were delighted with the selection of Townshend. Bishop Burnet for one thought him 'a man of great integrity, and of great principles in all respects; free from all vice and of an engaging conversation' ('Burnet's History', 6.18-19). 
The impetus for the appointment had come from John Churchill, duke of Marlborough, who had pressed the government to appoint a colleague to aid him in concluding a treaty with the Dutch. The ministry had first chosen Charles Montagu, earl of Halifax. Justifiably suspicious of the duke's motives, Halifax had refused, whereupon the ministry turned to Townshend, one of the proteges of John, Lord Somers, who as early as 1707 had been promised the post at The Hague. Negotiations with the Dutch had been ongoing for several years at the time of Townshend's appointment. Plans for a barrier treaty, to construct a string of fortresses in the Southern Netherlands, had been discussed in 1706 but came to nothing. Only when the British learned that France had begun talks with the continental allies did they, fearing that the Dutch might conclude a separate peace, authorize Marlborough to reopen discussions for a barrier. Marlborough, realizing that the other allies, notably Prussia and Austria, would oppose this barrier, and that a barrier treaty was too high a price for the British to pay for Dutch adherence to the war effort, distanced himself at the outset from the negotiations. Such was the situation that Townshend confronted when he arrived at The Hague on 17 May 1709. 
Fortunately, many of the Dutch leaders, including Anthonie Heinsius, the grand pensionary, befriended the popular young diplomatist. As ambassador-extraordinary and plenipotentiary to the United Provinces (13 May 1709 to 21 March 1711) Townshend helped to draw up the harsh peace terms that Louis XIV rejected. In 1709 he also concluded a treaty with the Dutch guaranteeing the Hanoverian succession and allocating the Dutch a barrier of fortifications in the Spanish (later the Austrian) Netherlands. His conviction that Dutch security depended on the acquisition of a good barrier and that a more generous treaty would secure Dutch allegiance to Britain and the ongoing war led him to exceed his instructions and make strategic, financial, and commercial concessions not outlined in the British project. Among the proposals offered to the Dutch by Townshend were the cession of Upper Gueldres, territory which the king of Prussia claimed as part of his inheritance from his mother, and the inclusion of other fortresses in the barrier, such as Dendermonde, which were of economic but not strategic importance. 
The reaction of Britain's allies was explosive: Frederick I of Prussia was furious because the treaty ignored his claims to Gueldres, and Joseph I of Austria because the treaty implied Dutch military and economic domination of the Netherlands. In Great Britain the treaty provoked an uproar because many believed that it constituted more of a barrier against British trade than a military barrier against France. Merchants objected in particular to the clauses which gave the Dutch an equal share in the concessions of the Spanish empire and greater trade advantages in the Netherlands. The infamous double duty which the British had to pay on goods imported into the Netherlands amounted to a potent trade weapon. A lively pamphlet war soon erupted. On one side Francis Hare, in 'The Barrier Treaty Vindicated', attempted to justify the treaty by arguing that it had fulfilled its main purpose, the securing of a sufficient barrier for the Dutch and the safeguarding of the protestant succession. On the other, Jonathan Swift attacked the treaty for ignoring the rights of the allies and for endangering British trade, making Britain 'a Province to Holland, and a Jest to the whole world'. Henry St John reflected the tory attitude when he remarked that it was the 'last and great sale of British interests' (Feiling, 404). The conclusion of the treaty, which Marlborough cannily refused to sign, marked a far from edifying chapter in the diplomatic history of the United Provinces. The Dutch, ignoring the larger issue of peace or war, crudely squeezed concessions out of their unwilling ally. 
None the less, Townshend's mission marked the high point of Anglo-Dutch relations during the war. Although the Dutch had forced the British to consent to Townshend's treaty, they had in the process tied themselves to Britain and had given up their last chance of a separate peace with France. Townshend's mission and the conclusion of the barrier negotiations exemplify the British policy of 'appeasing' the Dutch to prevent their defection to France. However, Dutch gains were largely illusory. With its extensive military and economic advantages, the barrier did not necessarily form a strong defence, since it later alienated both France and the inhabitants of the Southern Netherlands. Equally, it was highly improbable that either the king of Prussia or the Habsburgs would accept a treaty so detrimental to their own interests. Lastly, the extensive commercial concessions which the Dutch obtained would invariably lead to conflict with Great Britain, the treaty's guarantor. 
In 1709 Townshend, along with Marlborough, negotiated the peace preliminaries with Anthonie Heinsius and the French representatives, Jean Baptiste Colbert, marquis de Torcy, and Pierre Rouille de Marbeuf. The basis of the preliminaries was the cession of the whole Spanish monarchy to the Habsburgs and the acknowledgement of Archduke Charles as king of Spain. Louis XIV was to restore all the towns and forts conquered in the Spanish Netherlands. He was also required not only to withdraw all French troops from Spain but also to help the allies to remove Philip V. If the whole Spanish monarchy were not ceded within two months of the treaty's conclusion, the armistice would expire. It was these demands, presented in the infamous articles 4 and 37, that doomed the talks. Subsequent meetings in Gertruydenberg underscored Louis XIV's refusal to make all the sacrifices without receiving anything more than a promise of peace negotiations in return. Louis continued to maintain that he would rather wage war against his enemies than his children. These negotiations, though ultimately futile, proved that the barrier treaty had indeed secured Dutch allegiance to Britain and the war. In the spring and summer of 1710 the British government, fearing that the Great Northern War might spill over and merge into the War of the Spanish Succession, authorized Townshend to sign the conventions of 31 March and 4 August which guaranteed the peace in the Holy Roman empire, Poland, and the duchies of Schleswig and Jutland. 
By 1710 Britain, as well as France, was weary of the war. The ministerial revolution which ushered the tories back into power ultimately meant the recall of Townshend on 21 March 1711 and a repudiation of the barrier treaty in 1712. Although the tories at this time paraded their co-operation with the Dutch and simulated a desire to continue the war to ensure stability at home and to obtain the best possible terms from France, St John in particular bombarded Townshend with complaints about the failure of the Dutch to fulfil their treaty obligations. These demands were a hint of Britain's coming withdrawal from the conflict, and marked the beginning of British abandonment and eventual renunciation of their Dutch allies. 
Townshend was not only recalled from his post but also dismissed as captain of the yeomen of the guard (13 June 1711). In addition to these political trials he was grief-stricken by the loss, between April and June 1711, of his newborn daughter Elizabeth, his wife -- in his 'first irreparable misfortune' (7 July 1711, BL, Stowe MS 224) -- and his eldest son, Horatio. On 14 February 1712 he was censured by the tory-dominated House of Commons for exceeding his instructions and condemned as a public enemy. Gilbert Burnet, an admirer of Townshend, in commenting on this incident, sardonically noted that 'reason is a feeble thing to bear down resolutions already taken' ('Burnet's History', 6.123). In 1713 the tories forced the Dutch to renegotiate the treaty and drastically reduced the number of fortresses. Locally Townshend retained his position as lord lieutenant of Norfolk until April 1713, when James Butler, duke of Ormond, replaced him. By that time Townshend had lost his ability to influence local appointments or to protect his appointees. 
While in opposition Townshend spent his time harassing the government. In particular he worked with other whigs on the bill which declared enlisting and recruiting individuals for the Pretender to be high treason, and he protested against the now infamous restraining orders (10 May 1712) in which Bolingbroke ordered Ormond not to engage in any further continental military action. These orders meant in effect an abandonment of Britain's allies. In the midst of this political manoeuvring Townshend married, on 6 July 1713, Dorothy (died 1726), known as Dolly, the charming and beautiful sister of his boyhood friend and whig colleague Robert Walpole. The marriage, which produced eleven children, the eldest of them being George Townshend, was a happy one for Townshend and helped to cement the friendship of this unlikely political duo. At the same time Townshend strengthened his ties with Hanoverian agents, especially Johann Kaspar von Bothmer, in preparation for the accession of George I. Townshend was able to win over George I because of his reputation for integrity and hard work and his staunch adherence to the cause of the Hanoverian succession. His friendship with influential Dutch officials, such as Heinsius and Slingelandt, also helped him. After the death of Queen Anne in August 1714 George chose Townshend as one of the eighteen regents to prepare for his accession. 
Once in power George I appointed Townshend secretary of state for the northern department, a post he held from 17 September 1714 to 12 December 1716. On 1 October he was again sworn of the privy council and began his second term as lord lieutenant of Norfolk. George's accession also saw Townshend's brother-in-law Robert Walpole appointed first lord of the Treasury and chancellor of the exchequer. Although he advised against the prosecution of Robert Harley (now earl of Oxford) for treason and later favoured pardoning Henry St John (now Viscount Bolingbroke), Townshend generally supported the proceedings against those who concluded the treaties of Utrecht and urged the seizure of the papers of Lord Strafford, one of the British envoys. He energetically helped to suppress the Jacobite rising in 1715, supported the 'Septennial Act' of May 1716 which extended the legal life of the existing and subsequent parliaments from three to seven years, and tried to restrict British involvement in the naval war between Sweden and Denmark. 
In his capacity as secretary of state Townshend promoted defensive alliances with both the Holy Roman emperor and the king of France and, with James Stanhope's assistance, concluded a definitive barrier treaty with the Dutch on 14 November 1715. His delay in signing a treaty with France because of difficulties over the Pretender and over the destruction of the fortifications at Mardyke, a pirate haven, irritated George I, who, deeply involved in the Great Northern War, wanted the French treaty speedily concluded. Townshend's belief that an aggressive policy in northern Europe would be expensive and contrary to Britain's interests caused him to lose influence with both the king and his minions, including Stanhope, who wanted Britain to take an active role in the Baltic. George I also opposed Townshend's plan to re-establish the balance of power between Russia and Sweden. 
Although the main cause of Townshend's fall was a difference over foreign policy, personal rivalries also played a role. The fissure present at the outset in the government progressively widened. George's increasing favouritism towards both Stanhope and the earl of Sunderland worsened relations among the whigs. Sunderland, who had been lord lieutenant of Ireland and then lord privy seal, envied Townshend, who, though less experienced, held the more influential office. Sunderland convinced George I and Stanhope that Townshend and Walpole were plotting with the prince of Wales. Townshend's procurement of an Irish rather than a British title for the king's mistress, Melusine von der Schulenberg, angered her and worsened his position. 
The rift in the government over foreign policy led Townshend on 26 December 1716 to exchange the office of secretary of state for that of the lucrative but politically powerless office of lord lieutenant of Ireland, to which he was appointed on 24 February 1717, although he never visited the country. While Townshend was reluctant to accept this position, widely regarded as a form of political exile, he did so in order to avoid further splits within whig ranks. However, the attempt to appease Townshend and to prevent additional divisions ultimately failed, as Walpole joined the opposition to Stanhope and Sunderland. Walpole presciently told Stanhope that he was quite mistaken in believing that removing his brother-in-law would 'meet with no objection from the Whigs' (Plumb, 1.237). Walpole, who whatever his faults proved loyal on this occasion, pointed out that 'Such sudden changes to old sworn friends are seldom look'd upon in the world with a favourable eye' (Coxe, 'Walpole', 2.143). Townshend himself opposed the king's favoured ministers and continued to criticize the ministry's policies, for example the crucial 'Mutiny Bill'. This stand led to his dismissal on 20 April 1717. Walpole resigned shortly after, as did William Pulteney, Paul Methuen, and the duke of Devonshire. After Townshend's other supporters, including Sir Charles Turner, were dismissed, the king reconstructed the cabinet under Stanhope's leadership. 
Townshend did not, however, remain out of power for long. In concert with Walpole and other opposition whigs he adopted the effective tactic of showing the ministry his political importance while at the same time making himself so troublesome that the king would be forced to bring him back into the government. Such measures included the support offered by the Townshend-Walpole whigs to Lord Oxford in May 1717 and opposition to the 'Peerage Bill' in 1719. More positively, Townshend, along with Walpole, also reconciled the prince of Wales to his father. This and the successful piloting of the civil list through the House of Commons ensured Townshend's and Walpole's return to power. 
Early in 1720 Townshend was partially reconciled to Stanhope, and on 22 June George I appointed Townshend president of the council and Walpole paymaster-general of the forces. Following Stanhope's death from a stroke on 5 February 1721, Townshend was reappointed secretary of state for the northern department on 21 February. The forced retirement of Sunderland, who still held a court appointment as groom of the stole, and the latter's death on 19 April 1722, left Townshend and Walpole only one powerful enemy at court: John Carteret, then secretary of state for the southern department. Carteret, who spoke fluent French and German and was very knowledgeable about European affairs, in part because of his earlier position as ambassador to Sweden, wanted to protect Hanoverian interests by blocking Russian ambitions in the Baltic and securing the friendship of the emperor. Carteret's enforced move in April 1724 to become lord lieutenant of Ireland nullified this threat but also rid the ministry of its last common enemy. Walpole's skilful handling of the South Sea Bubble crisis marked a change in the equilibrium between Walpole and Townshend, although George I still favoured Townshend over his brother-in-law. The king granted his eldest son, Horatio, a peerage in May 1723 and made Townshend a knight of the Garter in July the following year. 
The first major clash between Townshend and Walpole occurred over the treaty of Hanover, which Townshend concluded with France and Russia in order to counteract the Austro-Spanish treaty of Vienna (1725). Townshend insisted on retaining Gibraltar, which the Spanish had hoped to recover. Walpole, however, thought that Townshend was overstating the threat from the Austrians and attempting to overturn Britain's traditional alliance. As the political relationship between the two men unravelled, the death of Townshend's second wife on 29 March 1726 also weakened the ties that had bound them. Dolly, who died of smallpox, had been devoted to both her husband and her brother. Thereafter the rift between the two widened, with Townshend and Walpole now vying for power not only at court but also in Norfolk. 
By the time George II ascended the throne in June 1727 the political pendulum had swung in favour of Walpole, who had assiduously courted the queen and spent a great deal of time with the king. Townshend's position at court had been further weakened during the years 1727-8 because of his severe ill health. A struggle for power between the two men ensued. Chesterfield, who knew Townshend well, observed that the latter was 'not of a temper to act a second part, after having acted a first' (BL, Stowe MSS, Chesterfield characters). The same was even truer of Walpole, who wanted more influence in foreign policy and differed with Townshend over its direction. Townshend, for example, remained suspicious of Prussia, while both Walpole and the queen sought a closer alliance with that power. Townshend remained loyal to the Dutch. Although he believed that the territorial integrity of Austria was essential for Britain's long-term interests, he distrusted the Austrians, whom he regarded as ungrateful, obstinate, and likely to threaten the European system. He was fully aware too of the fragility of Britain's alliance with France. Walpole, in contrast, did not appreciate how divergent Britain's and France's long-term interests and aims were. 
The relations between Townshend and his fellow secretary for foreign affairs, the duke of Newcastle, also worsened over time. In the early years of his ministry Newcastle, who had no diplomatic experience, was dependent on his colleague. After Townshend's illness Newcastle became increasingly confident and ambitious. It was Newcastle who helped to ignite the crisis that led to Townshend's resignation. The conclusion of the treaty of Seville in 1729 was undoubtedly the 'coup de grace'. While Townshend was in Hanover with the king, Walpole and Newcastle outmanoeuvred him. They dispatched William Stanhope to Spain to conclude a peace which provided that, in return for recognizing their claims to Parma and Piacenza, the Spanish would restore the privileges of the 'asiento' and allow commissioners to adjudicate difficulties over trade in the Caribbean. Stanhope's reward was elevation to the peerage and later appointment to Townshend's position. This treaty solved nothing. Walpole never really appreciated the long-term consequences of his actions, nor did he comprehend the clash between British, French, and Spanish long-term interests or understand that not all problems could be resolved diplomatically. 
When Townshend failed to obtain an appointment for either Chesterfield or Paul Methuen, he realized how little influence he retained. None the less, Walpole could not force him out and had to wait for him to resign. By 1730 it was clear that Townshend and Walpole could no longer work together; Walpole baited Townshend and quarrelled openly with him. Walpole's gratitude to Townshend for his past aid and support now counted for little. Although both were ambitious and hard-working, they shared little else. Townshend, a nobleman of a second generation, was scrupulously honest and frugal, while Walpole, a squire's son, was venal, lecherous, vulgar, and prodigal. Townshend was often forceful and blunt while Walpole was devious and frequently ingratiating. Walpole's allegation that Townshend did not pay enough attention to parliamentary opinion was unfounded. Nor is it true that fundamental policy clashes triggered Townshend's resignation, for policy changed little after his retirement. 
Townshend had considered resigning as early as autumn 1729 but eventually took the decision on 15 May 1730, when he 'retired in disgust' (Coxe, 'Walpole', 1.332). Although he had enjoyed the work entailed in his position, he hated the continual intrigues. He never wavered from his resolution not to return to the capital or to become involved once more in political disputes. He never wrote to or saw Robert Walpole again, though he did maintain a tenuous relationship with the latter's brother Horatio. His resignation was tragic in that it marked the end not only of a successful political alliance and a dedicated public career but also the termination of a long friendship. 
Townshend retired to his Norfolk estate, where he devoted the remainder of his life to his friends, family, and farm, only occasionally serving as justice of the peace. This retirement rejuvenated him. He told a friend that he passed his time 'with great happyness and content' which ought to 'be our chief care whilst we are in this world' (BL, Add. MS 28052, fol. 153). His improvements in agriculture, especially his championing of the value of turnips, a crop whose use he promoted as an integral part of a successful rotation plan, earned him the nickname Turnip Townshend. He also experimented with some of the new methods he had seen in the United Provinces and in Hanover, where the soil resembled that of Norfolk. Instead, for example, of sowing his turnips with the broadcast method, he drilled and hoed them. On his lands he used the four-crop 'Norfolk rotation': turnips, barley or oats, clover or rye, and wheat. This method was especially valuable because farmers did not have to let the land lie fallow and could maintain stock over the winter. In addition, Townshend enclosed, reclaimed, and improved his land through his use of quantities of manure and marl, and fed his cattle and sheep turnips over the winter. His goal was to transform previously unusable acreage into permanent arable through the use of restorative crops. Long-term leases were offered as incentives to his tenants to improve the land. Specific clauses in contracts often required tenants to participate in the cultivation of turnips. He was also interested in the scientific elements of farming and experimented with the breeding of livestock. Townshend's innovations were immortalized by Alexander Pope, who described an individual who 'Ploughs, burns, manures, and toils from Sun to Sun' (A. Pope, 'Imitations of Horace', epistle II, ii). 
Contemporaries differed in their assessment. While some regarded Townshend as tall and handsome, others saw him as rough and bucolic. Godfrey Kneller's portrait of about 1704 depicts him as tall, with an oval face, thick eyebrows, and a long nose. John Macky praised him as a 'Gentleman of Great Learning, attended with a sweet Disposition; a Lover of the Constitution of his Country; is beloved by every Body that knows him' ('Memoirs of the Secret Services', 89). Lord Hervey, a partisan of Walpole known for his malicious pen, detested Townshend whom he called 'rash in his undertakings, violent in his proceedings, haughty in his carriage, brutal in his expressions, and cruel in his disposition; impatient of the least contradiction, and as slow to pardon as he was quick to resent' (Hervey, 1.108). This view was predictably echoed by Matthew Prior, who was indicted for his role in the Utrecht peace, and who described Townshend as 'brusque, arrogant, stubborn' (Eves, 330). William Coxe favoured the middle ground in his description of a man who, 'though impetuous and overbearing, was generous, highly disinterested, of unblemished integrity and unsullied honour' (Coxe, 'Walpole', 1.64). Townshend's 'sweetness of disposition' ('Private Correspondence of Sarah, Duchess of Marlborough', 2.581) in fact glossed over his other faults and often endeared him to others. 
Townshend was undoubtedly capable, determined, and hard-working, but in achieving his goals he sometimes appeared blunt, abrasive, stubborn, impatient, and overbearing. In contrast to many of his contemporaries whose venality was legendary he was scrupulously honest. He was generous to both friend and foe. He was also a passionate man who loved and hated quickly and rarely changed his mind once an opinion had been formed. The astute Lord Chesterfield pointed out that, though in appearance he was often rough and coarse, 'his nature was by no means so; for he was a kind husband to both his wives, a most indulgent father to all his children, and a benevolent master to his servants' (BL, Stowe MSS, Chesterfield characters, fol. 14). 
Historians have often underrated Townshend's accomplishments in part because his rival Walpole outmanoeuvred and outlasted him. Townshend died at Raynham on 21 June 1738 and was buried there on 27 June. 
Townshend's eldest surviving son, 
The second viscount had three more sons from his first marriage who reached maturity. The Hon. 
Thomas's younger brother the Hon. 


@@@@@


doc= 27618


Charles Townshend, third Viscount Townshend (1700-1764), politician and benefactor, was born on 11 July 1700 and baptized at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 15 July. After attending Eton College and King's College, Cambridge, where he was admitted in 1718, he was MP for Great Yarmouth between 1722 and 1723. In addition he held various offices, including lord of the bedchamber (1723-7), master of the jewel house (1730-39), lord lieutenant of Norfolk (1730-38), succeeding his father, and high steward of Norwich Cathedral (from 1738 until his death). On 24 May 1723 he took his seat in the House of Lords as Baron Townshend of Lynn, and on 29 May he married Etheldreda ('c'.1708-1788) ['see 'Townshend, Etheldreda], the daughter of Edward Harrison, of Balls Park, Hertfordshire, a woman notorious for her wit and malice as much as for her promiscuity. They had five children, among them George Townshend (1724-1807), an army officer and later fourth viscount, and Charles Townshend (1725-1767), a politician. Although Charles and his wife were both somewhat eccentric, they differed in many ways; the marriage was not happy and the couple formally separated in 1741. He had an affair with his maid and fathered three more children, for whom he provided. Contemporaries praised his wit and imagination as well as his intelligence. In 1751 he published his thoughts on trade in a pamphlet, 'National Thoughts, Recommended to the Serious Attention of the Public'. In Townshend's view industry created trade, and trade wealth; drunkenness and idleness were responsible for the miseries of the poor. A decline in trade caused a decline in national greatness. Townshend opposed the export of cheap corn because he believed that it would undercut Britain's trading position. He corresponded extensively with the economist Josiah Tucker and established a prize for the best paper written on trade theory at the University of Cambridge. The prize, intended to stimulate debate on commercial matters, ultimately proved a fiasco and was withdrawn. His endowment of a charity school at Raynham to educate both boys and girls also illustrated his social concern. He died on 12 March 1764 at Raynham and was buried there on 20 March. The bulk of his estate went either by entail or settlement to his eldest son, Charles, or to his estranged wife, who died on 9 March 1788. 


@@@@@


doc= 27619


Townshend, Charles (1725-1767), politician, was born on 27 August 1725, the second of the four sons and one daughter of Charles Townshend, third Viscount Townshend (1700-1764) ['see under 'Townshend, Charles, second Viscount Townshend], politician, and his wife, Etheldreda Townshend (c.1708-1788), the daughter of Edward Harrison of Balls Park, Hertfordshire, and his wife, Frances Bray. It was not a stable family background, for his parents were as promiscuous sexually as he was to be politically, and they separated in 1741. Charles, then aged fifteen, sided with his father and saw little of his mother for the next decade. As if this were not trauma enough, he was perpetually dogged by ill health -- 'my crazy constitution'; modern diagnosis has identified epilepsy as his chief ailment. He was intended by his father for the bar, whereas his elder brother, George Townshend, later fourth Viscount and first Marquess Townshend, was set on a military career. In 1742 Charles both entered at Lincoln's Inn and went to Clare College, Cambridge. After three years in Cambridge he spent a year at Leiden University, the leading centre for the study of Roman law, and then returned for a year in residence at Lincoln's Inn; he was called to the bar in 1747. His relationship with his bullying and parsimonious father was an unhappy one. A letter written when he was twenty shows Charles being driven to defend his weekly game of real tennis as 'more an exercise necessary for my health than as a diversion' (Namier and Brooke, 6), having given up cricket because his father deemed it a waste of time and money. His father was constantly complaining of what Charles cost him, and Charles early acquired the habit of making assurances he would not fulfil. 
At the general election of 1747 Townshend was returned to parliament for Great Yarmouth, a borough where his family had considerable influence. He first had to assure his father that he would not be diverted from a legal career, a promise from which he was released within a year on grounds of ill health. The political stage beckoned. The Townshend family was at the heart of the whig aristocratic oligarchy, and his paternal grandmother a half-sister of the then prime minister, Henry Pelham, and his brother the duke of Newcastle, who was wont to refer to Charles Townshend as his nephew. In 1748 Lord Townshend asked Newcastle to give Townshend a seat on the Board of Admiralty. That was aiming too high for a first ministerial post, and he had to settle for a seat at the Board of Trade and Plantations in 1749. Here he soon won the favour of Lord Halifax, president of the board, and industriously acquired a knowledge of commercial and colonial matters. His spell at the Board of Trade was the time when he formulated the opinions on America he sought to enact as chancellor of the exchequer. It was Townshend who in 1753 drafted instructions to the governor of New York directing that colony's assembly to make permanent financial provision for official salaries. Here was the germ of the idea behind his revenue duties of 1767, the financial independence from assemblies of colonial administrators and judges, as the key to the maintenance of British control. That was not an idea unique to Townshend, but one he always kept in mind. 
As yet Townshend made no mark in parliament. The diarist Horace Walpole later recalled that 'Townshend's speeches for four or five years gave little indication of his amazing parts. They were studied, pedantic' ('Last Journals of Horace Walpole', 1.82), usually on departmental business. Not until 1753 did Townshend shine in debate, opposing the 'Marriage Act' by championing from his own experience the cause of children against parents. His long and witty speech led Walpole to take note of the: 'young man of unbounded ambition, of exceeding application, and, as it now appeared, of abilities capable of satisfying that ambition, and of not wanting that application... His figure was tall and advantageous, his action vehement, his voice loud, his laugh louder. (Walpole, 'Memoirs of... George II', 1.340-41)' At the ministerial reshuffle of 1754, when Newcastle succeeded his deceased brother as prime minister, Townshend sought a seat on the Treasury board, again aiming a rung too high, and had to settle for one at the Admiralty board. Then came the turning point of his life in a political as well as personal sense -- his marriage on 18 September 1755 to Lady Caroline Scott, styled Lady Dalkeith (1717-1794) ['see 'Townshend, Caroline, suo jure Baroness Greenwich], the eldest daughter of the late John Campbell, second duke of Argyll and first duke of Greenwich (1680-1743), and his wife, Jane Warburton. She was the widow of Francis Scott, styled earl of Dalkeith (1721-1750), politician, and the mother of Henry Scott, third duke of Buccleuch. Apart from considerable expectations, she was already a wealthy woman, possessing a net income of $3000 besides a personal estate of $46,000, out of which she proposed to settle $30,000 on Townshend. The couple had three children: two sons, Charles and William, who both died as unmarried army officers, and a daughter, Anne, twice married. It was the political import of the marriage that caught Horace Walpole's attention: 'Charles Townshend marries the great Dowager Dalkeith. His parts and presumption are prodigious. He wanted nothing but independence to let him loose' ('Letters of Horace Walpole', 3.321). For Townshend financial security now begat political volatility. 
Within a month of his marriage Townshend, hitherto an undoubted ministerial supporter, was rated as 'doubtful' by Newcastle. His new independence coincided with unease over recent cabinet decisions, and not even an offer by the duke of a place on the Treasury board could cement his allegiance. Townshend shared the concern of Pitt about Newcastle's European-orientated policy, contrasting it with the apparent neglect of America. Pitt's dismissal from office was soon followed by his own in the Christmas recess. When parliament reassembled in early 1756 Townshend adopted the American viewpoint, denouncing the defenceless state of the colonies. His displays of verbal pyrotechnics, replete with epigrams and satire, were much admired, and that, according to Walpole's reflections on the session, was their sole purpose: 'Neither caring whether himself or others were in the right, [he] only spoke to show how well he could adorn a bad cause, or demolish a good one' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of... George II', 2.147). 
That Townshend, despite his evident talents, was not taken seriously meant that he could be left out of the political reckoning. When Pitt formed a new ministry after the fall of Newcastle in the autumn of 1756, he was the conspicuous exception in not being given active political employment, and was fobbed off with the court post of treasurer of the chamber. Lord Waldegrave, a royal confidant, noted that 'Pitt did not choose to advance a young man to a ministerial office, whose abilities were of the same kind, and so nearly equal to his own' ('Memoirs and Speeches', 186). Since the Townshend family's hold on Yarmouth had become uncertain, Townshend's re-election on receiving office was for the Admiralty-controlled borough of Saltash. Antipathy to Pitt naturally ensued, as Waldegrave noted: 'Charles Townshend hated Pitt, and disliked his employment which was merely a sinecure' (ibid., 195). During the political manoeuvres of 1757 that were designed to exclude Pitt from office, Townshend was talked of as a possible secretary at war, but he deemed it unwise to join in such an unpopular scheme, and so retained his court office throughout the Pitt-Newcastle coalition ministry that won the Seven Years' War. He became reconciled to Newcastle by 1758, when the duke became godfather to his first son. The next year a possible appointment arose for Townshend as chancellor of the exchequer in a ministerial reshuffle. Newcastle commented to his crony Lord Hardwicke on 31 August 1759: 'if Charles Townshend had not such a character, I would make him Chancellor of the Exchequer at once, but there is no depending upon him, and his character will not go down in the City nor anywhere else' (Namier and Brooke, 59). The former lord chancellor agreed: 'That office should be filled by somebody who may in a particular manner be depended upon, of some gravity, known veracity, whose word may be taken and relied on' (ibid.). No changes of office took place in 1759, and Townshend remained becalmed in the political doldrums until the death of George II in 1760. 
Townshend meanwhile had acquired some degree of favour at the court of the prince of Wales, and, following the latter's accession as George III, the new king's favourite, Lord Bute, included him as one of three stipulated nominations for office. Townshend 'had sworn allegiance to him, 'for a time'', so he said ('Political Journal of... Dodington', 414). He accordingly became secretary at war in March 1761, and at the king's behest was given the safe Treasury borough of Harwich. But, before the new parliament met in November, Townshend had taken umbrage at George Grenville's being appointed leader of the House of Commons instead of himself, after the resignation of Pitt in the previous month. He annoyed Bute and the king by implicit criticisms of ministerial policy, notably by warm support for continuing British participation in the German campaign, a strategy favoured by Pitt rather than Bute. Townshend, when introducing the army estimates on 9 December, even commended 'Mr Pitt's divine plan' (Walpole, 'Memoirs of... George III', 1.79). He then fell into line, and during the first half of 1762 maintained a low political profile, devoting himself to the work of the war office, a busy department. But by midsummer he was quarrelling with Bute over army appointments, and threatening resignation, a step the king would have welcomed, as he wrote to Bute on 15 July: 'I fancy though that he will think bullying not the way to get anything but the loss of his employment. Besides his character is so very bad that I believe nothing would strengthen the opinion of the present government in the eyes of the public so much as that vermin being against it. ('Letters... to Lord Bute', 120)' Townshend did not resign, and by October, when Grenville had been replaced by Henry Fox to carry the peace terms through parliament, George III was coupling Townshend and Fox as the two men to accomplish that task, but at the same time he denounced as absurd an idea of rewarding him with Grenville's post as secretary of state. Townshend himself for a while aspired to become president of the Board of Trade, but in the end he chose to retain the war office. He was included in ministerial consultations on the peace terms, but simultaneously was assuring Newcastle, now in opposition, that he would not support Fox in parliament, and he certainly thought that Britain had not obtained enough concessions. Townshend at this time justified his behaviour as that of an independent man, without political connections, judging policies on their merits: 'It is my firm resolution to act the part of a man of business and a man of honour; to be decided by things and not men; to have no party; to follow no leader; and to be governed absolutely by my own judgement. (Namier and Brooke, 77)' That he could, as he did in this reflection on 10 November, regard his behaviour as consistent was remarkable self-deception. A less complimentary opinion was penned on 19 October by Richard Rigby, reporting events to the peace envoy in Paris, the duke of Bedford: 'Charles Townshend, that splendid shuttlecock, veers about with all these different gales. He laughs at the ministry at night and assures them in the morning that he is entirely theirs' (ibid., 75). 
The next twist in Townshend's career was his sudden resignation from the war office on 8 December 1762, the day before the great House of Commons debate on the peace. He then confounded expectations by defending the terms of the peace in a speech highly rated by friend and foe. The explanation of this double somersault was that he had been afraid of a direct confrontation with Pitt. That fear vanished when Pitt left the house immediately after his own speech, when Townshend made what cynics thought was the second of two alternative speeches he had prepared. Townshend, being out of office, was now courted by Newcastle, but in vain, for the ministry perceived he was the opposition's last parliamentary hope -- Pitt having disavowed any alliance with the duke. Early in 1763 Townshend accepted Bute's offer to be president of the Board of Trade, a post he desired through his concern over growing colonial disregard of British authority. His brief tenure of the post, from mid-February to early April, was notable for the first specific proposal of a colonial tax, to meet the promises made on 4 March by the new secretary at war, that America would in future pay its own army costs. On 18 March Townshend moved that this money should be raised by converting into a revenue duty of 2died the existing 1733 prohibitory duty of 6died a gallon on foreign molasses, a sugar product used to make rum. That would allow, he said, legal importation into North America of a commodity notoriously being smuggled. The ensuing legislation, regarded with dismay as premature by George III and Bute, was killed by a procedural device on 30 March. 
Townshend's spell as president of the Board of Trade was cut short by a change of ministry consequent on Bute's decision to resign. The king's intention was that Townshend would be promoted to the Admiralty, a cabinet post vacated by Grenville's elevation to the Treasury. The motives for this change were twofold: the danger of leaving the uncontrollable Townshend in such a sensitive post when American issues would be in the forefront of attention; and a desire to provide for Lord Shelburne, a protege of Bute but too young for a cabinet post. Townshend, ignorant of the overall plan, was offered the Admiralty on 7 April, and stated his wish to remain at the Board of Trade. On 14 April the king personally persuaded him into accepting the Admiralty: as part of the bargain George III agreed to fulfil a promise of Lord Bute that Lady Dalkeith would be given her father's lapsed British peerage title of Greenwich, with reversion to her male heirs by Townshend. The next day, however, Townshend demanded of the king a seat at the Admiralty board for a friend, Peter Burrell, only to be told that he was too late and to be reminded that he had previously accepted the Admiralty without any such condition. Townshend obstinately refused to give way, and found himself out of the ministry, for Shelburne had already been appointed to the Board of Trade. 
For two years Townshend was out of office, but never out of consideration for it. Pitt put him down for secretary of state in his ministerial plan of August 1763, a gesture for which Townshend was long grateful. He was thought of for, but not offered, the Admiralty in September, when his brother George reported to Prime Minister Grenville that Charles seemed determined to continue in opposition. George Townshend, after an active military career, had now entered politics himself, as a courtier supporting the successive ministries of Grenville, Rockingham, and Chatham in the post of lieutenant-general of the ordnance. His political estrangement from Charles continued until 1765. By the autumn of 1763 Charles Townshend was involved in opposition consultations, and spoke frequently against government in debates on the first Wilkes case of general warrants. He was regarded by Newcastle as his colonial expert, but missed the American debates of 1764 for a variety of reasons, including his father's death on 12 March. By the end of the session, dismayed by Pitt's absence from parliament, Townshend was preparing to desert Newcastle. During the recess of 1764 he both wrote opposition propaganda and sounded out Grenville about joining his ministry. After parliament reassembled in 1765 Townshend began to speak for the government, most famously in support of Grenville's 'American Stamp Bill' on 6 February, when the Connecticut agent Jasper Mauduit ascribed to him this peroration: 'And now will these Americans, children planted by our care, nourished up by our indulgence until they are grown to a degree of strength and opulence, and protected by our arms, will they grudge to contribute their mite to relieve us from the heavy weight of that burden which we lie under? (Namier and Brooke, 129)' On 3 March Townshend had a private interview with Grenville at the house of his brother George, now Lord Townshend, and his public transfer of allegiance was demonstrated by a speech on the 'Regency Bill' on 12 May. Townshend became paymaster-general on 24 May, at a time when George III was already seeking to rid himself of the Grenville ministry. Simultaneously he was being listed for ministerial office in an incoming administration to be formed by Newcastle's friends under Lord Rockingham. In early July he was pressed to become chancellor of the exchequer in that ministry, even by George III himself, but chose to retain the pay office and declined to attend cabinet. He failed to support the ministerial repeal of the 'Stamp Act' in debate. 
Townshend's hour came when Pitt was called upon to form a ministry in July 1766. He named the duke of Grafton to the Treasury, and insisted that Townshend should be his chancellor of the exchequer. Townshend was reluctant to exchange his lucrative post at the pay office, worth $7000, for one involving much drudgery and with a salary of only $2500, but was bullied into acceptance by Pitt. Although he did succeed in raising his office to cabinet rank, Pitt, now to become earl of Chatham, retained Henry Conway as leader of the Commons, as he had been under Rockingham, since he was a much more respected figure than Townshend. But as debaters there was no comparison between them. The great Irish parliamentarian Henry Flood opined after hearing a debate on 25 November 1766 that there was 'no one person near Townshend. He is the orator; the rest are speakers' ('Correspondence of William Pitt', 3.144n). 
Illness prevented Chatham giving a lead to his administration, a situation of which the irrepressible, irresponsible Townshend took full advantage, when the ministry faced problems in India and America. The recent acquisition of Bengal by the East India Company raised the linked questions of ownership of that territory and allocation of the anticipated revenue of $2 million. The view of Chatham was that the crown possessed the sovereign authority, and should therefore claim the lion's share of the revenue. But Townshend and Conway, his chief Commons spokesmen, both championed the rights of the company, and Chatham's prolonged ill health early in 1767 allowed them to thwart his policy in a divided cabinet. On 4 March Chatham was driven to offer Townshend's post to Lord North, whose refusal only strengthened Townshend's hand. Even the revelation that Townshend had a pecuniary motive did not destroy his position. By the spring it was known that the chancellor of the exchequer had been successfully speculating in East India stock, and with government money too, left temporarily in his hands from the pay office. Walpole wrote on 19 March that the secret was out: 'Charles Townshend's tergivisations appear to have been the result of private jobbing. He had dealt largely in India stock, cried up the Company's right to raise that stock, has sold out most advantageously, and now cries it down. What! and can a Chancellor of the Exchequer stand such an aspersion? Oh, my dear Sir, his character cannot be lowered. ('Letters of Horace Walpole', 7.97)' Having made over $7000 for himself Townshend was now concerned to obtain good terms for the state. This he achieved by avoiding controversy over legal rights and instead pragmatically negotiating with the company an annual payment of $400,000. The ministry coerced the company by legislation to limit its dividend, and a debate over the measure on 8 May was the occasion for Townshend's famous 'champagne speech'. Contemporaries differed on how far he was drunk and his speech unpremeditated. 'It lasted an hour', Walpole wrote, 'with torrents of wit, ridicule, vanity, lies, and beautiful language'. Townshend hit targets all round the political spectrum, including the crown: 'Government, he said, must not continue to be what he himself was always called, a weathercock. Nobody but he could have made that speech, and nobody but he would have made [it], if they could. It was at once a proof that his abilities were superior to those of all men, and his judgement below that of any man. It showed him capable of being, and unfit to be, First Minister. (ibid., 7.105-6)' America was simultaneously under consideration together with India, and it is for his taxation of the colonies that Townshend is above all remembered by posterity. At the time much ministerial attention was also paid to coercion of New York for its defiance of the 1765 'Mutiny Act', and it was Townshend's suggestion of preventing that colony's assembly from enacting any legislation until it was willing to pay army costs that was adopted by the cabinet. That was the most moderate of three measures under consideration, adopted in preference to coercive billeting and direct taxation, and it strengthened Townshend's repeated claim to be a friend of America. His taxation plan might seem to invalidate that contention, but long-standing historical myths have clouded the picture. The principle of colonial taxation was always accepted by the Chatham ministry. That Townshend was premature in his announcement, and personally involved in the detailed enactment, has led to his being given full responsibility for the 'Townshend duties'. His personal contribution was not the imposition of American taxation as such, but alteration of the aim from the initial purpose of paying for the army there to the scheme he had suggested in 1753, and again in 1754, of freeing colonial government from financial dependence on the assemblies. The mode of taxation he adopted was the imposition of colonial import duties, thereby exploiting the supposed American distinction of internal and external taxes. After Chatham's failure to replace him on 4 March, Townshend was able to impose his views on the cabinet. It would seem that no contemporary perceived that, since government in America was already financed by the colonial assemblies, Townshend's plan would not save the British taxpayer any money. The eventual targets for his duties were British china, glass, and paper, and, more famously, tea, a duty of 3died a pound calculated to bring in half the estimated $40,000 revenue. That amount was small, derided by Grenville in opposition, but intended by Townshend to be only a beginning. There was no connection, as was once thought then and later, with a ministerial defeat of 27 February on the land tax that cost the administration $500,000 in revenue. That deficit was made up, not by the levy on the East India Company, but by an assiduous scrutiny by Townshend of government departments that uncovered numerous odd sums of money. 
The middle of 1767 saw Townshend in the ascendant, carrying his measures concerning America and India, and being a success as chancellor of the exchequer. Personal matters also went well for him. The inheritance by his wife in April of a further income of $4000 per annum from her mother enabled him to boast to Grafton of his complete financial independence. He capitalized, too, on his political success and seeming indispensability by obtaining at last for his wife on 19 August the long-coveted British peerage title of Greenwich held by her father, albeit as baroness not duchess: since her two sons predeceased her, the title expired on her death. And it was largely through his influence that, in the same month, his brother Lord Townshend was appointed lord lieutenant of Ireland. And then suddenly he died, on 4 September 1767, at Sudbrook, Surrey, of a 'putrid fever', aged forty-two. 'That first eloquence of the world is dumb', wrote Walpole, conveying the sense of shock and loss to the political scene ('Letters of Horace Walpole', 7.133). 
Walpole was well aware that Townshend had dazzled to deceive, and wrote a considered judgement to Conway: 'As a man of incomparable parts, and most entertaining to a spectator, I regret his death. His good humour prevented one from hating him, and his levity from loving him; but in a political light I own I cannot look upon it as a misfortune. ('Letters of Horace Walpole', 7.129)' Throughout his life men saw through Townshend for what he was, brilliant but unreliable. If posterity remembers him for the taxation that set in train the sequence of events that culminated in the American War of Independence, contemporaries were both fascinated and appalled by his behaviour. While perhaps matching Pitt in oratory, he lacked the other's political courage, for all his boasts of independence. To his parliamentary talent he added administrative ability, when he put his mind to it. Yet his capricious character made him his own worst enemy, a phrase used of him by Henry Fox in 1763. To be talked about was his chief aim in life, and Edmund Burke gave him a belated obituary notice which he would have liked, in his famous speech of 19 April 1774 on American taxation, when he declared that Townshend had been 'the delight and ornament of this House, and the charm of every private society which he honoured with his presence' (Simmons and Thomas, 4.222). 


@@@@@


doc= 27620


Townshend, Charles, first Baron Bayning (1728-1810), politician, born on 27 August 1728 in Twickenham, Middlesex, was the only son of the Hon. William Townshend (1702-1738) ['see under 'Townshend, Charles, second Viscount Townshend], politician, and his wife, Henrietta (died 1755), the daughter of Lord William Paulet and his second wife, Anne Egerton. Both his parents came from powerful whig families, for his father was the third surviving son of Charles Townshend, second Viscount Townshend (1674-1738), and his mother was the granddaughter of Charles Paulet, first duke of Bolton (1630/31-1699). He was educated at Eton College (1742-5) and Clare College, Cambridge, and graduated MA in 1749. He was appointed secretary to the British embassy at Madrid on 17 September 1751, and remained in Spain for four years. Henceforth he became known as 'Spanish Charles', in contradistinction to his brilliant namesake and cousin, the politician Charles Townshend (1725-1767). 
Townshend left Madrid in January 1755 following his mother's death and returned to England. At the general election of 1756 he succeeded his cousin Charles as member for Great Yarmouth, which his father had previously represented from 1723 to 1738. He remained the city's MP until 1784. He acted generally with the Rockingham whigs, but was not prominent as a speaker, and is reported to have spoken on only three occasions in the 1768-74 parliament. He was present at the great gathering of whigs held at Claremont, Newcastle's house at Esher, on 30 June 1765, and was one of the minority there who advised against taking office without Pitt. When, however, Rockingham became premier, Townshend was made a lord of the Admiralty, on 16 July 1765. In February 1770 he exchanged this office for a commissionership of the Treasury under North, with whom he became closely associated. He was sworn of the privy council on 20 June 1777 and on 17 September was appointed joint vice-treasurer of Ireland. On 21 August 1777 he married his cousin Annabella Smith (died 1825), the daughter of the Revd Richard Smith and his wife, Annabella, who was a granddaughter of Lord William Paulet. They had three sons and five daughters. 
In the Fox-North coalition ministry of 1783 Townshend held the office of treasurer of the navy. Faced with an opposition of independents and dissenters who were united against the coalition, he declined to stand for re-election at Great Yarmouth at the 1784 general election. He was returned on the family interest in 1790 and finally retired from parliament in 1796. As one of the Portland whigs, he gave his support to Pitt in 1794, and was created a peer on 20 October 1797, with the title of Baron Bayning of Foxley. In 1807 he was elected high steward of Yarmouth in succession to his uncle George Townshend, first Marquess Townshend. 
Townshend died after a few hours' illness on 19 May 1810, aged eighty-one. His widow, who became heir of her brother Powlett Smith-Powlett of Sombourne, Hampshire, died at Chislehurst on 3 January 1825. Of their eight children, the two surviving sons, Charles Frederick Powlett Townshend (1785-1823) and Henry Powlett (1797-1866), who assumed by royal licence the name of his maternal great-grandfather, William Powlett, both died without heirs, and on the death of the younger in 1866 the peerage became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 27621


Townshend, Charles Fox (1795-1817), founder of the Eton Society, born at Balls Park, Hertfordshire, on 28 June 1795, was the eldest son of John Townshend (1757-1833), member of parliament successively for Cambridge University, Westminster, and Knaresborough, and his wife, Georgiana Anne, daughter of William Poyntz of Midgham, Berkshire. George Townshend, second marquess, was his uncle, and John, the fourth marquess, was his younger brother. Charles James Fox was his godfather. Townshend was educated at Eton College (1807-12) under John Keate. 
In 1811 Townshend founded the Eton Society, which was both a debating society and a social club. Its members were originally known as the Literati, but afterwards the society was called 'Pop', from 'popina', 'eating-house', because its meetings were held in a room over the shop of Mrs Hatton, a confectioner. In 1846 this house was pulled down and the club removed to the Christopher, one of the inns of court. Keate approved the objects of the society, and the translation of 'docti sumus', 'I belong to the Literati', became one of his stock jokes (Lyte, 403). The original number of members was twenty; it increased to thirty, but by 1816 had sunk to fourteen, and had it not been for the protest of the founder the society would probably have become extinct. Townshend's remonstrations had their effect, however, and the membership immediately recovered. He saw the society as more than merely a school club and in its early years Pop included many distinguished orators; some who had left the school continued to belong -- when W. E. Gladstone was a member in the 1820s a number of MPs were among the membership. Remarkable for having been run successfully by boys for more than a century, the Eton Society later assumed the character of a social oligarchy within the school rather than a debating society. Its founder proceeded to St John's College, Cambridge, and graduated MA in 1816. He died unmarried in Grosvenor Place, London, on 2 April 1817, while a candidate for the representation in parliament of Cambridge University. Townshend's early death, caused by consumption, was a severe blow to his father, who, encouraged by his son's achievements at Eton, had grandiose ambitions for his becoming leader of the whig party. 


@@@@@


doc= 27622


Townshend, Chauncy Hare (1798-1868), poet and collector, was born on 20 April 1798, the only son (he had a younger sister) of Henry Hare Townsend (1765?-1827) of Busbridge Hall, Godalming, and Walpole, Norfolk, and his wife, Charlotte Winter Lake ('c'.1770-1831), daughter of Sir James Winter Lake of Edmonton ('b'. 1745). He was educated at Eton College (1811-15) and Trinity Hall, Cambridge (BA, 1821; MA, 1824). He won the chancellor's English medal for his poem 'Jerusalem' (1817). Although ordained, he never took a living, perhaps because of poor health, but he was a self-confessed hypochondriac. Townshend (he changed the spelling of his name in 1828) was determined to be a poet; he approached Robert Southey, the poet laureate, with his work in 1815. Southey offered encouragement and they corresponded for several years, Townshend visiting Southey in Keswick. Townshend's first volume, 'Poems' (1821), followed, dedicated to Southey. This was revised and reprinted in 1825 as 'The Weaver's Boy'. On 2 May 1826 Townshend married Eliza Frances, eldest daughter of Sir Amos Godsill Robert Norcott, of Hornsey. The marriage ended on 30 August 1843, confirmed by deed of separation on 6 September 1845, with 'unhappy differences' cited as the cause. There were no children. 
In 1827 Townshend published anonymously 'The Reigning Vice: a Satirical Essay in Four Books'. He also contributed to annuals and other periodicals. Through Southey, Townshend met Wordsworth, but upset their cordial relationship with critical articles on Wordsworth in 'Blackwood's' during 1829. Townshend continued to contribute to 'Blackwood's', and, thanks to his friendship with Dickens, to 'Household Words', and later to 'All the Year Round'. Dickens came to regard Townshend as a close friend, and was made his literary executor (thereby being required to publish Townshend's 'Religious Opinions', 1869). The two first met in 1840 at the home of Dr John Elliotson, a mesmerist. Mesmerism intrigued both Dickens and Townshend, who published 'Facts in Mesmerism' (1840), dedicated to Elliotson, and 'Mesmerism Proved True, and the Quarterly Reviewer Reviewed' (1854). In 1851 Townshend published two volumes of verse: 'Sermons in Sonnets' and, under the pseudonym T. Greatley, 'Philosophy of the Fens', a lively satirical work drawing on contemporary life. A ballad, 'The Burning of the Amazon', was published in 1852, the profits going to those who suffered by the calamity. A further volume of verse, 'The Three Gates', followed in 1859, reprinted in 1861, dedicated to Dickens. 
For long periods Townshend lived abroad for health reasons. When in London (about two months each summer), he dined regularly with Dickens, who also visited Townshend in his Lausanne villa. Dickens skilfully reflects Townshend's character when describing him aboard the Folkestone ferry, in his carriage, which he found 'perforated in every direction with cupboards, containing every description of physic, old brandy, East India sherry, sandwiches, oranges, cordial waters, newspapers, pocket handkerchiefs, shawls, flannels, telescopes, compasses, repeaters... and finger-rings of great value' ('Letters of Charles Dickens', 8.177). 
The latter were part of Townshend's collection of precious stones, which in his will he left to the South Kensington Museum, with collections of Swiss coins, cameos, photographs, drawings, and engravings. His remaining collections were left to the Wisbech and Fenland Museum, including his library, with the manuscript of 'Great Expectations', the novel which Dickens 'affectionately inscribed' to Townshend. Townshend's death in his London home, 21 Norfolk Street, Park Lane, on 25 February 1868, upset Dickens, then in America: 'It is not a light thing to lose such a friend, and I truly loved him' ('Letters of Charles Dickens', 1880, 372). Townshend was buried in the new cemetery, Godalming. 
Bulwer Lytton described Townshend's 'beauty of countenance' as a young man, but noted that he became 'plain in later life -- an accomplished man -- but effeminate and mildly selfish' ('Letters of Charles Dickens', 2.110n). Townshend's will hardly supports the latter charge. The bulk of his estate went to found the Burdett-Coutts and Townshend Foundation School in Rochester Street, Westminster, a charity school offering free evening education to 400 children over thirteen. Townshend remained a minor literary figure, with a wide acquaintance in the arts world and a considerable knowledge of the artefacts he collected. His lasting memorial is perhaps Wisbech Museum itself, rather than his writing. 


@@@@@


doc= 27623


Townshend, George (1715/16-1769), naval officer, was the eldest son of the politician and agricultural improver Charles Townshend, second Viscount Townshend (1674-1738), and his second wife, Dorothy (died 1726), sister of Robert Walpole, first earl of Orford. He entered the navy in 1729 in the 'Rose' (20 guns), with Captain Weller, apparently on the Carolina station. After two and a half years in her he served for four and a half in the West Indies, in the 'Scarborough' -- also a 20-gun frigate -- with Captain Thomas Durell, and for the first part of the time with Lieutenant Edward Hawke. Townshend passed his examination on 23 October 1736, being then, according to his certificate, nearly twenty-one (TNA: PRO, ADM 107/3, p. 304). On 30 January 1739 he was promoted captain of the frigate 'Tartar', which he commanded on the Carolina station until November 1741. In December he was appointed to the 'Chatham', and two years later to the 'Bedford' (70 guns), in which he went out to the Mediterranean and took part in the action off Toulon on 11 February 1744; he continued there under Vice-Admiral William Rowley, and in the summer of 1745 Rowley appointed him to command a detached squadron on the coast of Italy, with the rank of commodore. 
Townshend's first duty was to co-operate with the insurgent Corsican patriots against the Genoese. Hearing from them that they had 3000 men under arms he posted his ships and bombs before Bastia, and on the night of 6-7 November destroyed the batteries and reduced the town to ruins. It then appeared that the 3000 men had yet to be raised, and it was not until 18 November that the insurgents were able to take possession of the town. Towards the end of the month he reduced the forts of Mortella and San Fiorenzo; but the Corsican patriots were so busy fighting among themselves -- 'alternately dining together and squabbling' as Townshend told the Admiralty -- that nothing could be effectively done. This unsatisfactory situation continued for some months. On 7 April Townshend wrote to the Admiralty that the dissensions were so violent that nothing could be done without a number of regular troops. On 8 May he made clear that, as his whole force was needed to maintain the blockade of the Genoese coast, the revolt in Corsica should be left to itself. To the difficulty of disunion among the patriots was added that of the presence in the neighbourhood of a French squadron reportedly fully equal in force to that with Townshend. In March he had stretched across to Cartagena, and, having watered at Mahon, was on his way to Cagliari to consult with the Sardinian viceroy, when he saw four large ships and two French men-of-war. Having with him only one ship, the 'Essex', besides the 'Bedford', and two bombs, Townshend judged against engagement until he could secure the rest of his squadron. With this French squadron on the coast, he concluded that 'nothing can be attempted against Corsica'. 
Having received several such communications the Admiralty sent out an order for a court martial to inquire into Townshend's conduct and behaviour. This was carried out on 9 February 1747, with the result that the court was convinced that Townshend 'did not meet with a squadron of the enemy's ships, nor see or chase any ships so as to discover them to be enemies'. They concluded moreover that Townshend's report upon the vicinity of the French squadron was based upon purely hearsay evidence. The court was therefore of the opinion that Townshend's letters were written 'with great carelessness and negligence' and 'contained very false and erroneous accounts of Captain Townshend's proceedings'. He was required by the court to write letters to the Admiralty and to Vice-Admiral Henry Medley, the commander-in-chief, begging pardon for his fault; it was also recommended that he be severely reprimanded by the president. Horace Mann, British representative in Florence, who had formed a very poor opinion of Townshend's capacity and education, wrote to Horace Walpole that if Townshend had been capable of writing an intelligible letter in his own language he would not have found himself suspected of cowardice; and that he had omitted to state that he had only one ship besides his own (J. Doran, 'Mann and Manners at the Court of Florence, 1740-1786', 2 vols., 1876, 1.56). For his part Walpole attributed the court martial entirely to political motives: 'The persecution is on account of the poor boy's relation to my father' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 19.332). Moreover Townshend's letters are perfectly intelligible, and the fact of his having with him only one ship besides his own is clearly stated, and the ship named. None the less Townshend's surprisingly uncouth manner is well attested by Edward Brenton. 
After this, Townshend continued in the Mediterranean until towards the end of the year, when he returned to England, and paid the 'Bedford' off in December. Because Townshend enjoyed Henry Pelham's 'very powerfull support' (BL, Add. MS 15957, fol. 87), and had been a commodore, Lord Sandwich appointed him to command off the Scheldt in the spring of 1748 with a broad pennant in the 'Folkestone'. From November 1748 to November 1752 he was commodore and commander-in-chief at Jamaica, with his broad pennant in the 'Gloucester'. On 4 February 1755 he was promoted rear-admiral of the white, and again sent out to Jamaica, as commander-in-chief, with his flag in the 'Dreadnought'. Townshend returned to England in 1757 and had no further service, but he became vice-admiral in 1758 and admiral in 1765; and he died, apparently unmarried, in August 1769. 


@@@@@


doc= 27624


Townshend, George, first Marquess Townshend (1724-1807), politician and caricaturist, was born on 28 February 1724 in London, the eldest son of Charles Townshend, third Viscount Townshend (1700-1764) ['see under 'Townshend, Charles, second Viscount Townshend], politician, and his wife, Etheldreda Townshend (c.1708-1788), the daughter and sole heir of Edward Harrison of Balls Park, Hertfordshire. George I was one of the sponsors at his baptism, at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, 25 March 1725. The future chancellor of the exchequer Charles Townshend was his younger brother. He was educated at Eton College and St John's College, Cambridge, whence he graduated MA on 3 July 1749. Regarded by contemporaries as a very handsome man, Townshend is described by Sir Lewis Namier as 'warm hearted, sensitive and capable of enthusiasms, but unsteady and odd, intermittently ambitious, often disgruntled, quarrelsome, lacking in judgment, and burdened with an insuperable urge to ridicule, the resort of the intelligent under oppression' (Namier 549). 
In summer 1743, while on the grand tour of Europe, Townshend joined the army in Flanders as a volunteer. Two years later he was offered the command of a regiment and in April was appointed captain in the 7th regiment of dragoons. He was serving under the duke of Cumberland, and his Pelhamite relations (his paternal grandmother was a half-sister of the duke of Newcastle) took the opportunity to foster this connection. His parents had separated in March 1741, and, unlike his brother Charles, he had remained close to his mother, a woman known for her wit and promiscuity, her dislike of Cumberland, and her sympathy for the Jacobite cause. To counter her influence, George Townshend was placed in the care of the Cumberland family, a move that was to benefit his military career. He served under Cumberland at Culloden on 16 April 1746, and in the following February he became aide-de-camp to the duke. At the same time he transferred to the 20th foot, and after fighting in the battle of Laufeld on 2 July he moved to the 1st foot; on 8 March 1748 he assumed the office of lieutenant-colonel. However, this stage of his military career was brought to an end by a disagreement with Cumberland, possibly over the treatment of another junior officer. 
In 1747, while in Flanders, Townshend was elected unopposed as MP for Norfolk, and it was politics that occupied his attention on his return to England. His first recorded parliamentary speech, in February 1749, was in the debate on the 'Mutiny Bill' when he supported an attack made on Cumberland by Richard Lyttelton, a fellow officer. In the following year Townshend moved that courts martial should replace the commanding officer as the authority empowered to punish non-commissioned and private officers. This was another thinly disguised attack on Cumberland, and, though it was backed by the prince of Wales's party, it was defeated. This year also saw Townshend leave the army, reputedly over the refusal to allow him to stay and cultivate the whig interest in Norfolk. However, his dispute with Cumberland continued and was compounded in 1751 after the publication of a pamphlet titled 'A Brief Narrative of the Late Campaigns in Germany and Flanders'; this criticized Cumberland's military capability, and was thought to have been written, or at least inspired, by Townshend. 
For a short period Townshend became allied with the following of the prince of Wales. But after the prince's death in March 1751 he made peace with the Pelhams, and Newcastle counted him among his supporters. His animosity to Cumberland continued though, and when Henry Fox, his political agent, was appointed secretary of state and leader of the house, Townshend and his brother moved into opposition; they joined William Pitt and the Grenvilles in opposing the address on 13 November 1755. In autumn 1756 Townshend gained political prominence as the foremost supporter of an extension of the militia. He was motivated by his dislike of standing armies and by his determination to strike back at Cumberland. As champion of this populist issue and a respected member of the country gentlemen, he was a valuable asset to Pitt. 
After the defeat of his 'Militia Bill' in the Lords Townshend was responsible for an important innovation in the way the opinions of the voting public were utilized. He sent a circulating letter to the boroughs and corporations instructing them to advise their members to campaign for another militia bill. He was therefore responsible for popularizing a propaganda weapon that would prove invaluable to the parliamentary reform campaign of the 1780s. 
During the early months of 1757 Townshend divided his time between resuscitating the 'Militia Bill' and promoting a parliamentary inquiry into the loss of Minorca. Along with his brother he attempted to encourage opposition 'out-of-doors' to the government, focusing on these two issues. His involvement in the ill-fated inquiry enabled him to score points against Henry Fox, particularly after Pitt's dismissal from the ministry. 
On 28 June 1757 Townshend's 'Militia Bill' received royal assent, and he deserved much of the credit for steering it through parliament and for ensuring that it was implemented effectively in the face of strenuous opposition from his father. However, although Townshend remained on good terms with Pitt and had formed a new connection with Bute, his political influence was short-lived, curtailed as it was by the Pitt-Newcastle coalition. Townshend regarded the new administration as a union of competing interests, which had been formed without any declaration of a public system of measures. He was also incensed by the nominal position in the new ministry offered to his enemy Henry Fox. Townshend felt betrayed by his former ally, and he and his brother retired to the country. By now Townshend was married and the father of a growing family. On 19 December 1751 he had married, with a marriage portion of $12,000, Lady Charlotte Compton (died 1770), the second daughter of James Compton, fifth earl of Northampton, and his wife, Elizabeth Shirley, Baroness Ferrers in her own right. His wife, who had succeeded to her mother's title in 1747, inherited her father's title and his fortune on his death in 1754, since she was by then his sole heir. 
Townshend was acutely aware of the importance of propaganda and public opinion, and he used pictorial satire against his enemies to reinforce his political views. During the campaign for the 'Militia Bill' he had adorned 'the shutters, walls, and napkins of every tavern in Pall Mall with caricatures of the Duke [of Cumberland] and Sir George Lyttelton, the Duke of Newcastle and Mr. Fox' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 37.444). Walpole was moved to observe that 'his genius for likenesses in caricature is astonishing' (ibid.). Inspired by the works of Hogarth and Italian 'caricatura', Townshend was said to have invented a new form of political caricature, depicted on cards. More importantly, according to Walpole, he was the first to introduce personal caricature into political prints. However, it is questionable whether this marked a watershed in visual satire. Diana Donald has argued that it is too simplistic to suggest that he initiated a shift which saw the old emblematic tradition being replaced by more sophisticated personal caricature. Yet Townshend does have a legitimate claim to significance in the development of satirical art. Donald states that his 'savage personal lampoons, once engraved and published, transformed 'caricatura' from an innocuous amusement into an offensive weapon in the political feuds of the day' (Donald, 'Age of Caricature', 14). Even so, the full extent of his influence would not be seen until the 1780s -- when Gillray and Rowlandson reintroduced parody and the mock-heroic into visual satire. 
It is doubtful whether Townshend's ability as a caricaturist advanced his career: George II was displeased by his foray into this world of 'low' art, and his pointed satire quickly brought him a number of other enemies. In 1757 a pamphlet titled 'An Essay on Political Lying' was published in reaction to a print by Townshend, probably by a hireling of Henry Fox. Moreover, the offence caused by his drawings was compounded by what his enemies regarded as his close association with Grub Street, demonstrated by the sponsorship of caricaturists and printsellers such as Mary and Matthew Darly. It was felt that by ridiculing members of his own class he was inciting the mob, and his support of petitioning as a political weapon gave further ammunition to his opponents. 
Townshend was compensated for his failure to advance in political circles by the retirement of Cumberland. As Townshend's political estrangement from Pitt had been brief, this meant that a resumption of his military career was both a viable and an attractive option. When he applied to be reinstated in the army he was assisted by Pitt; on 6 May 1758 he was promoted to the rank of colonel and became aide-de-camp to George II. Pitt was also instrumental in securing his appointment in February 1759 as brigadier under Major-General James Wolfe, who was responsible for leading an expedition against French-held Quebec. Townshend sailed with Wolfe, reaching Louisburg harbour in May. The expedition then headed for Quebec and Townshend took part in the attack on Montcalm's camp at Montmorenci in late July. After this point, however, the relationship between Townshend and Wolfe deteriorated. Frustrated by their failure to make any real progress in Quebec, Townshend complained to his wife on 6 September from Camp Levi: 'General Wolfs health is but very bad. His generalship, in my poor opinion, is not a bit better: this only between us. He never consulted any of us till the latter end of August, so that we have nothing to answer for, I hope, as to the success of this campaign' ('Townshend MSS', 309). When Wolfe did consult his officers an attack on the north side of the St Lawrence above Quebec was agreed upon. Some sources credit Townshend as the originator of this plan, but it has also been suggested that he advised against it as too hazardous. Townshend led the left wing at the battle on the heights of Abraham, and when Wolfe was killed and Monckton disabled, overall command devolved upon his shoulders. He abandoned the pursuit of the French army, preferring to focus on bringing Quebec to a speedy surrender, which it did on 17 September 1759. 
Although Townshend returned as a hero, his victory was tainted by accusations that he had endeavoured to embellish his own part in the battle at the expense of Wolfe. Wolfe, killed heroically on the verge of victory, was a more easily accepted saviour of British Canada. Townshend, as a noted satirist, and a subordinate known to have been on bad terms with Wolfe, came out of the affair badly. Henry Fox and Cumberland were both implicated in the minor pamphlet war that ensued. Indeed Townshend was ready to challenge Lord Albemarle, Cumberland's protege, to a duel, subsequently called off, for his part in the business. 
Ultimately, Townshend's friendship with Bute prevented the Quebec affair from damaging his political career, and in December 1760 he was sworn of the privy council. He also continued to see military service. Between February and December 1761 he was with the British army in Germany, and he spent much of the second half of 1762 on active service in Portugal. While abroad he corresponded with Bute, and on his return he made it clear that he supported the controversial peace treaty ending the Seven Years' War. However, though he was prepared to speak out on the main issues of the day, when in parliament his primary concern remained the militia. 
On 14 March 1763 Townshend became lieutenant-general of the ordnance in the Grenville ministry. He was reasonably firm in his support for Grenville, and in the early days of the administration he did all that he could to persuade his brother to join him in government. However his encouragements succeeded only in alienating Charles. For his own part Townshend avoided becoming involved in the Wilkes affair and general warrants, but as a landowner in a 'malt county' he staunchly supported the 'Cider Act'. This, though, was the end of his career in the Commons as he succeeded his father as fourth Viscount Townshend on 12 March 1764. The death of his father seemed to initiate a process of reconciliation between Townshend and his brother. This was assisted by the fact that Charles was becoming disillusioned with life in opposition and was looking for a place in government. Townshend's own importance was now derived largely from the precocious talents of his brother. Their restored amity allowed him to exert a good deal of influence over his brother's actions. In May 1765 Townshend prepared the way for Charles's inclusion in the Grenville ministry, and on Grenville's fall Townshend was able to persuade Charles to refuse office with the Rockinghams. Charles James Fox claimed that Townshend was motivated by his continued bitterness towards Cumberland and pique at the failure of the Rockinghams to court him. 
On the formation of the Chatham ministry, in which Charles was chancellor of the exchequer, Townshend offered his services to the government. After the abortive appointment of Lord Bristol, he became lord lieutenant of Ireland on 19 August 1767, a post to which he had long aspired. He owed his position to the influence of his brother Charles, but contemporaries also cited his connection with Lord Bute. 
During the short-lived Bristol administration in Ireland the Chatham ministry had indicated its determination to make inroads into the power of the Irish undertakers, namely the leading parliamentarians and landowners who undertook to manage government business in return for a share of patronage. But research by Thomas Bartlett has demonstrated that Townshend himself was responsible for the radical policies followed during his administration, though it is clear that the British ministry had been preparing for a change in the Irish system of government for some years. Some doubt remains as to whether Townshend was appointed as a resident lord lieutenant -- a measure that would make inroads into undertaker influence. 
A failure to clarify the government's Irish policy at a succession of cabinet meetings meant that Townshend's administration began in a state of confusion. This situation was made all the more problematic by the death of Townshend's brother Charles on 4 September, thus removing his only genuinely sympathetic ear in the cabinet. As a result, at a time when sensitive handling of Ireland was vital, the British ministry did all it could to inflame the Irish parliament and damage Townshend's credibility. 
The popularity of Townshend's administration was immediately dented by the British ministry's delay in appointing a new Irish lord chancellor, and then by its decision to recommend an Englishman for the post, thus alienating senior Irish legal officers. A simultaneous dispute occurred over the 'Judges' Tenure Bill', giving security of tenure to Irish judges during good behaviour, which Townshend, in his speech to the Commons, had announced would be approved by the British ministry. The secretary of state, Lord Shelburne, denied that Townshend had been given this authority, and when the British privy council altered the bill it was rejected. 
Townshend's principal task on appointment was to secure an augmentation of the British army in Ireland, in order to bring Irish regiments up to the same size as their British counterparts. This process of standardization was made necessary by gains in the American mid-west and by the adoption of the fixed rotation of regiments in 1765, whereby regiments would rotate throughout the empire and therefore would have to be the same size. However, in Ireland the augmentation was unpopular, as Irish politicians feared that the army was being increased only in order for regiments to be sent abroad, thus denuding Ireland's defence against the Catholic threat. As a palliative Townshend was allowed to accept a bill to limit the term of the Irish parliament to eight years. But his failure to secure undertaker support -- as the British ministry refused to accept their patronage demands -- and the approaching general election made necessary by the new 'Octennial Bill', which made MPs more responsive to public opinion, ensured the defeat of the augmentation on 19 April 1768. Townshend eventually secured its passage on 21 December 1769, after introducing measures to quiet fears of Irish troop losses. But his disagreements with the leading Irish politicians had persuaded him that the reform of the Irish system of government was essential if British influence over its oldest colony was to continue. 
Townshend's new system comprised several measures: the viceroy's constant residency; reform of the Irish revenue board; dismissal of recalcitrant office-holders; encouragement of the hereditary revenue; and the creation of a Dublin Castle party loyal to the viceroy. Yet, though parts of this programme were approved by the duke of Grafton, it was not until Lord North was appointed prime minister that Townshend had the full support of the British government. Indeed for a time it seemed likely that Townshend would be replaced by Lord Sandwich, a member of the Bedford group. However, in this case it seems that Townshend received direct support from the king, who had no liking for Sandwich because he was not a man of 'blameless character'. It is probable that Townshend had endeared himself to the king through his determination to cut through factional politics in Ireland, putting himself and the Irish government at the king's service. 
On 21 November 1769 the British government was given a clear indication of the need to reassert a measure of control over Ireland when the Irish Commons rejected a money bill, explicitly stating that this was because it had not originated in the Commons. Townshend, with the backing of an incensed British ministry, retaliated by proroguing the Irish parliament. The extended parliamentary interval allowed Townshend the opportunity to begin his reforms, but he was not helped by the unpopularity of the prorogation. The suspension of parliament was a political blow to Irish patriotic sentiment and an economic blow to Dublin's business community. The 'Freeman's Journal' printed regular attacks on Townshend and his administration, and Dublin also witnessed a pamphlet war. The anti-Townshend pamphlets written by opposition MPs were published together in 'Baratariana', a collection that included references to his caricatures. He was described as a 'Tyro of the graphic art', a man who mixed 'malevolence with levity... dedicating even his 'smiles' to the injury of his companions' ('Baratariana', 308, 351). 
Townshend tried to repair some of this damage by holding balls in aid of Irish manufacture and by promoting Irish trade concessions. But his personal popularity remained low. He had alienated many Irish politicians through his wit and temper. His habit of carousing into the early hours of the morning in Dublin Castle with those not of the first rank was also frowned upon by the Irish elite. 
Nevertheless Townshend used the interval to his advantage, particularly after the North ministry, in cabinet meetings on 21 February and 24 December, approved his reform programme and thereby created a new board of accounts, dismissed John Ponsonby from the revenue board, and approved the revenue board's division. In order to test the paper majority of Townshend's newly formed Castle party, a short parliamentary session was called in February 1771. Townshend's reforms were vindicated, as the opposition was comprehensively defeated in a series of votes, and John Ponsonby resigned as speaker in frustration. However, public dissatisfaction was demonstrated in a riot outside the Commons. Townshend claimed 'that the cry amongst the mob was that the lord lieutenant had got a great majority, and was going to carry away their parliament' ('Calendar of Home Office Papers', 3.211). 
Townshend, having turned away from the undertakers' assistance, was now reliant on an ambitious group of men -- many of them with patriotic inclinations -- eager for reward. There was insufficient patronage to keep the new Castle party content, and as the next session approached it became clear that his majority was no longer solid. To counteract this problem Townshend began to turn to Lord Shannon, an old-style undertaker, who had never really been reconciled to life in opposition. However, though Townshend laid the groundwork for Shannon's return, he was not able to count on his support, and his government was defeated on several issues, most notably the division of the revenue boards. Shannon refused to return to government under Townshend, partly because of the viceroy's support for bills designed to bring relief to Ireland's Catholics. 
Although the session ended quietly it was clear to the North ministry that Townshend's personal standing was preventing the completion of government dominance, and that his removal would restore a measure of calm to Irish politics. Henry Seymour Conway claimed that Townshend 'disdains too much to be a politician and will not take the trouble of managing, or let others do it' (PRONI, Annaghmore MSS, T 2812/12/25). Indeed his personal relations with some Irish politicians were at their lowest ebb during his last months in Ireland, and an argument with Lord Bellamont resulted in a duel in which Bellamont was shot and injured. Francis Andrews, provost of Trinity College and a government supporter, observed: 'It is rather odd that a man who had so many great things to give away, and gave them all to the people of the country, should not leave a friend behind him' ('Eighth Report', HMC, 1.193). In reality, however, his departure was lamented by many Irish politicians, and he was attended by a sizeable crowd when he came to board his ship. Indeed Townshend's Irish friends continued to hold a dinner on the day of his birthday for years after he had left Ireland. 
Townshend left behind a much-altered system of government. The lord lieutenant, being now resident, possessed a greater degree of control over his managers; individuals no longer held more than one principal office of the crown, and the lords justices had disappeared. Townshend had also increased the hereditary revenue, although this did not lessen the reliance of the Castle government on the Irish parliament. His reforms were a direct result of his own persistence, but at the same time he had been reliant on the support provided by the North ministry. In essence the British ministry had adopted a policy of direct rule over Ireland, with Townshend responsible for the implementation of this policy and its fine-tuning. 
On his return from Ireland Townshend was restored to his old office at the Ordnance. He remained a firm supporter of North and went into opposition on the formation of the Rockingham ministry. When the Fox-North coalition was formed he returned again to the Ordnance. Throughout the remainder of his political life he remained exercised by a limited number of issues. The militia still concerned him, and added to this was now Ireland. He spoke on several occasions in the Lords on behalf of Irish trade concessions. This was a service that many Irish politicians recognized as their dislike of him was tempered in the years before his death. 
Townshend's wife had died in Ireland, at Leixlip Castle, on 14 September 1770, and he married, on 19 May 1773, Anne (died 1819), the daughter of Sir William Montgomery, first baronet, MP for Ballynekill, and his first wife, Hannah Tomkyns. They had six children. Townshend continued to climb the ranks of the army, becoming colonel of the 2nd regiment of dragoons on 15 July 1773, general on 20 November 1782, and field marshal in 1796. One of his most cherished ambitions was achieved on 31 October 1786, when he was created Marquess Townshend of Raynham. He held a number of other offices during the latter years of his life, including lord lieutenant and vice-admiral of the county of Norfolk, governor of Hull, governor of Jersey, and high steward of Tamworth. His wife was appointed mistress of the robes to the princess of Wales in 1795. But these honours could not disguise a rather lacklustre end to a tumultuous political and military life. He spent much of his time as a county squire, an advocate of the new farming techniques popularized by his grandfather. He died on 14 September 1807 at Raynham, Norfolk, where he was buried on 28 September. His wife survived him and died on 29 March 1819; he was succeeded as second marquess by his eldest son by his first marriage, George Townshend (1753-1811). 
Excepting his Irish post, which in the eighteenth century was regarded as a curse as much as a blessing, Townshend never held high political office; indeed it could be said that he never aspired to it. Yet his achievements were to have a resounding impact. His involvement in introducing a more direct form of government in Ireland in 1767 marked a major step towards union. His sensitivity to propaganda and public opinion is also noteworthy. He was a significant political caricaturist, and his advocacy of the petitioning of MPs challenged the eighteenth-century notion of the relationship between MPs and their electors. 


@@@@@


doc= 27625


Townshend, George, second Marquess Townshend (1753-1811), antiquary and politician, the eldest son of George Townshend, first marquess (1724-1807), and his first wife, Charlotte Compton, Baroness Ferrers and Compton (died 1770), was born on 18 April 1753. He was educated at Eton College from 1 April 1761 to 1770 and at St John's College, Cambridge, which he entered on 20 November 1770, and was created MA on 6 July 1773. As a young man he served in the army; he was gazetted cornet in the 9th dragoons on 29 September 1770, lieutenant in the 4th regiment of horse on 1 October 1771, and captain in the King's light dragoons on 31 December 1771. On his mother's death, on 14 September 1770, he succeeded to the baronies of Ferrers (or, as he preferred it, de Ferrars) and Compton. Relations with his father broke down in 1774 as Lord Townshend, heavily encumbered by debt, attempted to secure the agreement of his son to the breakup of the entail on the family estates. Ferrars agreed, but only on terms which his father found objectionable. On 24 December 1777, at Lambeth Palace chapel, he married Charlotte ('bap'. 1754, died 1802), the second daughter and coheir of Eaton Mainwaring Ellerker of Risby Park, Yorkshire. They had two sons, George Ferrars Townshend (who succeeded his father in his titles but was disinherited from the Raynham estate in Norfolk) and Charles Vere Ferrars. Their marriage lasted until Charlotte's death, at Bristol Hotwells, on 2 February 1802. 
Ferrars did not play a major political role in the House of Lords, although he did speak in a number of debates; in 1775 he spoke on 26 October, when he declared that he should oppose all the measures of the court, although out of respect to his father he forbore to begin doing so that day. When the whigs returned to office in the spring of 1782 he was made a privy councillor and was nominated captain of the band of gentlemen pensioners. The younger Pitt reappointed him to that post in December 1783, and on 5 March 1784 he was named a member of the committee of the privy council which managed colonial commerce until the Board of Trade was constituted. On 18 May that year Ferrars was created earl of Leicester. His father, from whom he had sought permission to assume the title, had told him that he might take any title but that of Viscount Townshend. The earldom of Leicester had in fact been extinct since 1759. Charles James Fox had wished to give it to his friend Thomas Coke, whose family had possessed it after the Sidneys, and a new earldom of Leicester of Holkham was created for Coke in 1837. 
In February 1788 Leicester signed a protest against Lord Thurlow's proposal that the Commons should produce evidence in support of Warren Hastings's impeachment before calling on the defendant. He was master of the Royal Mint from 20 January 1790 to July 1794 and held the office of joint postmaster-general from January 1790 to February 1799. On 20 February 1799 he was named lord steward of the household, an office which he held until August 1802. In January 1806 he wrote to Grenville in anticipation of a new ministry, requesting that he should be reinstated as superintendent of the Post Office -- an ambition which fell foul of the need for inclusiveness in the ministry of all the talents. On the death of his father in 1807 he succeeded as second Marquess Townshend. 
Leicester was a keen amateur antiquary from his youth, being particularly interested in heraldry and archaeology. Walpole referred to his 'violent passion for ancestry' -- which Walpole alleged he preferred to gambling ('Letters', 7.159). He devoted considerable effort to establishing his own genealogical claim to the earldom of Derby, held in the middle ages by the Ferrers family. After the death in 1784 of the president of the Society of Antiquaries, Jeremiah Milles, he was swiftly elected to the council of the society and made a vice-president, preparatory to his planned election as president. Meanwhile, Edward King was elected temporary president, on the understanding that he would cede his position to Leicester in the official elections to be held in April. King claimed later to have had a completely different understanding of the arrangements, and challenged Leicester for president in the first contested election in the society's history. Leicester won by a majority of two to one, and magnanimously included the defeated King at the top of his house lists. King was less gracious in defeat; he had been accused of underhand dealings in the campaign, and after 1784 rarely attended the meetings of the society. 
Leicester provided a good figurehead for the society, offering social and fashionable cachet, as well as having some credibility as an antiquary. The society had recently moved to accommodation in Somerset House, and its membership was rapidly expanding and included increasing numbers of gentlemen from 'polite society'. Although he neither followed up the administrative reforms which King had swiftly implemented nor acted as a dynamic intellectual force, he was conscientious in attending council meetings and was willing to allow his fellow antiquaries to exploit the aristocratic connection. It was through his intervention that Richard Gough gained permission to dedicate his new edition of Camden's 'Britannia' to George III in 1789. He particularly associated himself with the antiquities of Leicestershire: John Throsby, the historian of Leicester, dedicated his history to him, and John Nichols acknowledged his assistance in the preface to his history of Leicestershire, the first volume of which was dedicated to the earl. Leicester was also admitted to the Royal Society in 1781 and was made a trustee of the British Museum in 1787. He continued as president of the Society of Antiquaries until his sudden death, at Richmond, Surrey, on 27 July 1811. He was buried at Raynham, Norfolk. 


@@@@@


doc= 27626


Townshend, George Ferrars, third Marquess Townshend (1778-1855), disinherited aristocrat, was the elder son of George Townshend, second Marquess Townshend (1753-1811), and his wife, Charlotte Ellerker (died 1802), of Risby Park, Yorkshire. He was born on 13 December 1778 in Wimpole Street, London, and was educated at Eton College and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in 1798. He was known as Lord Chartley and Lord Leicester before succeeding as marquess in 1811. He had a serious dispute with his father over the use of the title of earl of Leicester, and was subsequently disinherited by him in favour of his younger brother, Charles. Reasons for the rupture are not made explicit. Farington described him as 'a very effeminate young man -- sometimes he wore pink ribbons on his shoes' ('Farington Diary', ed. Greig, 4.223), and his marriage, to Sarah ('c'.1786-1858), daughter of John Dunn-Gardner of Chatteris, was an unmitigated disaster. They married on 12 May 1807, and by November of the same year were reported to be on the point of separation. They separated in the following year, Lady Chartley accusing him of impotence and 'not being formed as a man should be' ('Farington Diary', ed. Greig, 5.75). Townshend lived chiefly at Genoa, where he was known as Mr Compton. He died under that name on 31 December 1855 at his home, the Villa Rostan, Pegli, near Genoa, and was buried in the protestant cemetery of San Benigno. His wife went through a ceremony of marriage at Gretna Green on 24 October 1809 with John Margetts (died 1842) and was known as Mrs Margetts until 1823; they had at least three sons and two daughters. From 1823 she styled herself Marchioness Townshend, a form of address to which she was perfectly entitled, no divorce having taken place. It was under that name that she died, on 11 September 1858, at Brighton, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. She had married, on 10 January 1856, James Laidler of Fenton, Northumberland. Her eldest surviving son from her liaison with Margetts, John, called himself Lord John Townshend from 1823 until 1828, when he adopted the title of earl of Leicester. An act of parliament of 1842-3 ruled that these were not legitimate children of the Townshend marriage, overturning the legal doctrine that where a marriage existed, the husband was presumed to be the father of all the children. Thereafter, the son, who was Conservative MP for Bodmin in 1841-6, took his grandmother's name, Dunn-Gardner, by royal licence. 


