@@@@@


doc= 27727


Trevor, Sir John (bap. 1624, d. 1672), politician and government official, was baptized on 23 August 1624 at St Margaret's, Westminster, the second but eldest surviving son of 
Trevor senior was knighted at Windsor on 7 June 1619 and sat as a member of parliament for Denbighshire in 1621 and Flintshire in the following parliaments. He then moved to Great Bedwyn in 1628 and Grampound in the Long Parliament. He initially made little mark in the parliaments, and was later named as one of those who had offered bribes to the lord chancellor in the parliament of 1621. A moderate presbyterian, he managed to gain the favour of the court and acquired the keepership of several royal forests and his father's farm of the coal tax, as well as the inheritance of Trefalun in 1638 from his uncle Sir Richard Trevor. He was involved in a number of royal commissions during the 1630s and was a member of the Long Parliament, being noted there as a spokesman for north Welsh affairs. He sat on the committee of both kingdoms from 2 June 1648 and the commission for the propagation of the gospel in Wales in 1650, as well as the republican council of state in 1651 and 1652-3. In addition he sat on local committees for militia and taxation in Middlesex, Westminster, Denbighshire, and Flint. Trevor sat in Cromwell's second parliament of 1656 and supported the offer of the crown to the lord protector. Trevor was a rising man in the 1650s, sensible enough not to be a regicide, and making the most of the financial opportunities of the period, including the purchase of royalists' and recusants' estates. He took no part in the Restoration, but was given a royal pardon on 24 July 1660 and subsequently lived in London, his estate at Plas Teg in Wales being given as a refuge to William Jones, a deprived churchman, as his pensioner. He may have married Margaret Griffith in 1672. He died in 1673 bequeathing some of his property to the establishment of two houses for poor men in Wales. 
Sir John Trevor the younger was educated at Leiden in 1643 and entered parliament as a recruiter member for Flintshire on 2 December 1646. He faltered at the possibility of regicide however and was excluded, or retired, in 1648. About 1649 he married his cousin Ruth (1628-1687), fourth daughter of John Hampden, the puritan politician, and the couple had five sons and one daughter. Ruth remained a presbyterian following the Restoration and attended Thomas Manton's church in London. Trevor returned to public life in the Cromwellian parliaments of the 1650s. He also sat on several county committees from 1657. His politics in the 1650s were clearly moderate, based on ideas of legality and a dislike of innovations. He supported the offer of the crown to Cromwell, and welcomed the constitution of 1656, hoping for the peace of the people as the main basis for the legal settling of the nation. He was a supporter of Richard Cromwell, and on the latter's removal backed George Monck, sitting on the council of state in February 1660. He was rejected by Flintshire in the Convention of 1660 and instead sat for Arundel. In a pamphlet of 1660 Trevor further outlined his political views in that he was against the Rump and called for a broader based settlement than the Rump could ever provide. Significantly he also claimed that absolute uniformity of religion was not essential to any monarchy. With this Trevor made a successful transition into the Restoration. 
Trevor was MP for Great Bedwyn from 18 February 1663 to his death in 1672 and was an advocate of leniency in the indemnity debates. He was named to the committee for restoring the dukedom of Norfolk to the Howard family and was concerned to make good relations with the royal regime. Chosen for a diplomatic mission to France in 1663, he had already become attached to the party of Sir Henry Bennet, the future earl of Arlington. The fall of Lord Chancellor Clarendon in 1667 opened up new opportunities to Trevor. With a continued credit among the dissenters and at court because of his attacks on Clarendon he was thought to be useful for a regime planning religious indulgence as part of its policy. Trevor was knighted in 1668 and sent on another mission to France. There he did not behave himself altogether well according to Charles II, who was 'troubled that Trevor carried himself so like an ass' to Henriette-Anne, the king's sister. Charles claimed that he had 'sent him a chiding for it' and put it down to his 'want of good breeding' (Bryant, 1963, 216). None the less with the retirement of William Morice on 29 September 1668 Trevor was allowed to purchase the junior secretary of state's place for the sum of $8000. Although initially the patent included the usual clause of giving the recipient $100 for life, this was changed -- either because of jealousy from other courtiers or through retrenchment -- to $100 during pleasure only and such was the limitation on Trevor's power that he did not challenge it. 
Indeed, despite his post, Trevor was without any real influence or authority in the regime; it was Arlington, the senior secretary of state, who held the reins of power at this time. Trevor wavered between the clashing forces of Arlington and the duke of Buckingham in this period and some considered him as Buckingham's man as he secured the election of Buckingham as chancellor of the University of Cambridge in May 1671. He continued to support the relief of dissenters, speaking against the continuation of the 'Conventicles Act' in November 1669, was unhappy at having to enforce it, and according to Joseph Williamson in 1671 'Secretary Trevor [was] theirs', that is, wholly in with the dissenters ('CSP dom.', '1671', 569). He naturally supported the declaration of indulgence of 15 March 1672 and had some share in its administration. Trevor died suddenly of apoplexy and fever on 28 May 1672, allegedly brought on by drinking cold wine with ice when he was very hot. He was buried on 31 May at St Bartholomew-the-Less, Smithfield, in London. His wife died on 1 December 1687, and his second son, Thomas Trevor, was created Baron Trevor of Bromham. 


@@@@@


doc= 27728


Sir John Trevor (1596-1673), politician, and Anne, the daughter of Sir Edmund Hampden. Sir John Trevor senior was the eldest son of John Trevor of Trefalun (1563-1630), navy official and politician, and Margaret, the daughter of Hugh Trevanion of Trevannion, Cornwall, and from his father inherited Plas Teg, Flintshire. He married Anne Hampden in 1619. 


@@@@@


doc= 27729


Trevor, Sir John (c.1637-1717), judge and speaker of the House of Commons, was the second son of John Trevor (1602- 'c'.1643) of Bryncunallt, Denbighshire, judge on the north Wales circuit, and his wife, Margaret, the daughter of John Jeffreys of Acton, Denbighshire. He married Jane (1643-1704), daughter of Sir Roger Mostyn, first baronet, of Mostyn in Flintshire and widow of Sir Roger Puleston of Emral, Worthenbury in the same county. They had four sons and two daughters. The Trevor family had long held the Bryncunallt estate but with significant interests in Ireland they were never as influential in Wales as the cadet branch of the family based at Trefalun. 
Trevor's education was given direction by his father's brother, Arthur Trevor. He attended Ruthin School as a young boy and proceeded to St Paul's School, London, in 1647. He worked as a clerk in his uncle's legal chambers until he was admitted to the Inner Temple in November 1654. By May 1661 he had been called to the bar. Having acquired a basic knowledge of the 'knavish part of the law' he became a recognized expert at handling gambling transactions (North, 1.286). He ingratiated himself at the Stuart court and was rewarded with a knighthood on 29 January 1671. Two years later he was promoted to become one of the king's counsel. Called to the bench of the Inner Temple in May 1673, he became its treasurer later that year and was a reader by 1675. Promotion in the legal world coincided with political progress. On 10 February 1673 he became MP for Castle Rising in Norfolk. This was a pocket borough of the Howard family and Trevor purchased the seat for $60. 
Bishop Gilbert Burnet, a contemporary commentator, described Trevor as 'a bold and dexterous man [who]... knew the most effectual ways of recommending himself to every government' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 4.76). During the closing years of the Cavalier Parliament (1661-79) Trevor's career justified these words. He was an active debater and a clear government supporter. By the autumn of 1675 his eminence was such that he was chairing both the committee of ways and means and that on the state of the nation. He was an ardent defender of the established church and played a significant part in debates relating to the threat of Catholicism. He was elected chairman of the committee on the growth of popery in the spring of 1678 and took the lead in these inquiries. He was also a member of the committee which investigated the Popish Plot later that year, and presented the draft address to the House of Commons for the removal of all Catholics from London. 
Committed to the hereditary succession, Trevor was a vehement opponent of exclusion. He was returned for Bere Alston in Devon in the parliaments of March and October 1679, but he gained a Welsh seat in the third Exclusion Parliament (1681) by securing Denbigh County. Trevor spent most of his time at his London residence in Clement's Lane but by this time he had inherited the Bryncunallt estate on the death of his brother and certainly made an effort to consolidate his presence in north Wales. He was deputy lieutenant for Denbighshire and Flintshire in 1679-89, and served as mayor of Holt in 1682-3. He was a member of the commission into encroached lands in Denbighshire in 1684 and was made a freeman of Denbigh the following year. Among his charitable bequests was a $100 subscription to Denbigh grammar school. 
Trevor was returned for Denbigh boroughs in 1685. At the opening of parliament on 19 May he was proposed for the speakership by the secretary of state, Charles Middleton, and deemed suitable 'by reason of his great integrity, knowledge of the laws of the land and of the rules and orders of this House' (BL, Lansdowne MS, 507, fol. 40). With the support of his cousin Sir George Jeffreys and the king he was accepted without opposition. As a staunch tory he must have been comfortable presiding over this tory-dominated assembly. On 12 October 1685 he was rewarded for political service with the mastership of the rolls -- it is no coincidence that the appointment followed Jeffreys' elevation to the position of lord chancellor. For the last few weeks of the parliamentary session Trevor held both offices simultaneously. 
On 6 July 1688 Trevor was appointed to the privy council and he was one of the few who attended James II's last privy council meeting on 16 December. This loyalty led to a temporary loss of favour at the start of the reign of William and Mary. He was elected MP for Bere Alston in 1689 but was deprived of his other influential positions. Still, his legal expertise meant that he was appointed solicitor-general to the queen in 1689 and he became the self-appointed leader of the tories during this parliament. He was elected MP for Yarmouth in the Isle of Wight in 1690. The previous summer William III had commented to the marquess of Halifax that he considered Trevor to be 'such a knave that it would be objected if he was employed' (Foxcroft, 2.228). Despite such concerns Trevor's usefulness could not be ignored and when parliament convened on 20 March 1690 he was proposed for the speaker's chair by Sir John Lowther, the vice-chamberlain, and once again was accepted without opposition. Trevor's career now went from strength to strength. He was appointed first commissioner of the great seal in June 1690 in the place of Sir John Maynard, and on 1 January 1691 he was restored to the privy council. Two years later, on 13 January 1693, he was reinstated as master of the rolls. 
As speaker it was Trevor's responsibility to decide who should speak in debate, even though his choice could be overruled by a majority of MPs. Anecdotes about his behaviour exist in plenty. He was very obviously cross-eyed and tales developed about how this meant that during debate more than one member could think that they had 'caught the Speaker's eye'. There is nothing to substantiate these tales in recorded debate; it is more likely that Trevor conformed with the tradition of allowing government spokesmen to take the floor at the most tactically advantageous time, and otherwise ensured that he chose speakers in a way which protected him against any accusations of blatant bias. 
The speaker's office was an openly partisan one so in addition to managing debates Trevor was expected to promote the king's business. In the main he seems to have coped successfully with these demands until his speakership came to an abrupt end in 1695 when he found himself at the centre of a House of Commons inquiry into corruption. On 12 March 1695 Paul Foley, reporting from the select committee, informed the house that on 12 February 1693 the common council of London had ordered that 1000 guineas should be given to Sir John Trevor in return for his support in relation to the 'London Orphans Bill'. The order was endorsed with the information that the payment had indeed been made on 22 June in the presence of witnesses. This report led to a four-hour debate on Trevor's behaviour chaired by Trevor himself. At nine o'clock Trevor was placed in the uncomfortable position of stating the question on a motion condemning his own behaviour. The house decided that he was guilty 'of a high crime and misdemeanour' ('JHC', 11.271). 
The following day Trevor was absent from the house, having been 'taken with a violent fit of the colic' and the house was forced to adjourn ('JHC', 11.271). On 14 March the house received a second letter of apology from the speaker whereupon Thomas Wharton, comptroller of the household, announced that the king gave leave for the election of a new speaker. On 16 March the house passed an order that Trevor should be expelled. As investigations continued it was discovered that Trevor was also one of the members who had accepted gratuities from the East India Company. On 3 May it was decided that the ex-speaker should be impeached for his behaviour but the prorogation of parliament protected Trevor from this fate. 
Corruption charges ended his time in the chair but Trevor's career in public office continued. He retained the mastership of the rolls until his death. There is no evidence to suggest that he was anything other than impartial in legal affairs and his decisions were cited by later judges. During the reign of Queen Anne he was sworn of the privy council in June 1702 and was also returned to his Welsh offices. He was constable of Flint Castle from 1705 until his death and 'custos rotulorum' for Flintshire (1705-14). He died intestate in London on 20 May 1717 and was buried in the Rolls Chapel in Chancery Lane ten days later. He was reputed to have left a fortune of $60,000 which was divided among his children. Trevor's sons died without heirs and the Bryncunallt estate eventually passed to his daughter Anne. 


@@@@@


doc= 27730


Trevor, John Hampden-, third Viscount Hampden (1748-1824), diplomatist, was born in London on 24 February 1748 and baptized John Trevor at St George's, Hanover Square, on 26 March, the second son of Robert Trevor, later fourth Baron Trevor and first Viscount Hampden (1706-1783), a diplomatist, and his wife, Constantia de Huybert (1726/7-1761). In February 1754 his father added Hampden to the family name on succeeding to John Hampden's Buckinghamshire estates. 
Hampden-Trevor was educated at Westminster School, and matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 28 January 1767. He graduated BA on 20 October 1770 and proceeded MA on 9 July 1773. On 5 August 1773 he married at Slapton, Buckinghamshire, Harriet (1750/51-1829), only child of Daniel Burton, a canon of Christ Church and rector of Slapton; they had no children. Following his father's career, he was appointed on 8 April 1780 minister-plenipotentiary at Munich to the elector palatine and minister to the diet at Regensburg. His principal duty was to watch for attempts by France to negotiate a subsidy treaty, which would secure troops, with any part of the empire. He was also charged with investigating the grievances of protestants in the empire. Having performed his duties satisfactorily, he succeeded Lord Mountstuart as envoy to the Sardinian court in March 1783. He arrived at Turin on 15 October 1783 with instructions to assist the Vaudois and other protestant subjects of the Sardinian king, and to this end he received a Vaudois deputation on 27 December. In January 1785 he was ordered to maintain strict neutrality in the struggle between France and Austria, and his numerous dispatches demonstrate the difficulties of the Sardinian kingdom sandwiched between the two great powers. He tried unsuccessfully to be promoted to Florence in December 1786 but later refused missions to both Russia and Vienna. The title of minister-plenipotentiary was conferred on him on 16 June 1789, with additional pay he had requested six years earlier when he declared that he had spent $4000 more than he received from the government. From 1793 to 1796 the critical state of affairs kept him constantly at his post but in May 1797 he took leave; he was never able to return to Turin because the French occupied the city in July 1798. His official recall was delivered to him in Florence in November 1799 and, having failed to be nominated as an intermediary between the Austrian army and the Piedmont government in May 1800 on the grounds of his too strong attachment to the Sardinian court, he went into retirement. 
During his time in Turin, or on leave in Switzerland, Hampden-Trevor counted among his friends Horace Walpole, the Berry sisters, Edmund Burke, Lord Sheffield, and Edward Gibbon; the latter wrote of him in 1792 that he was 'par lui-meme un des hommes les plus essentiels et les plus essentiels que j'aye jamais connus' ('Letters of Edward Gibbon', 3.245). In the same year Hampden-Trevor published at Parma 'Poemata Hampdeniana', a folio edition of his father's Latin poems, dedicated to George III. Gibbon was also charmed with his wife, as was Benjamin Constant who fell briefly but dramatically in love with her in Lausanne. In retirement, such lustre as accompanied their life in Italy and Switzerland soon faded. When Lord Glenbervie dined with them at Richmond in 1804 he noted: 'He has a great deal of that stiff politeness which a long diplomatic career is so apt to give. His parts are above par, and he is civil but not agreeable. She has still the remains of a most engaging countenance and manner, but too coaxing and adulatory, which by being perpetual and undiscriminating does not flatter. ('Diaries', 1.362)' Hampden-Trevor succeeded his brother Thomas in the peerage as third Viscount Hampden on 20 August 1824 and died a few weeks later on 9 September 1824 in Berkeley Square, London. He was buried at Glynde in Sussex. The Hampden estates passed to the Hobart family. He was survived by his wife, who died on 26 June 1829 and was also buried at Glynde. 


@@@@@


doc= 27731


Trevor, Marcus, first Viscount Dungannon (1618-1670), royalist army officer and politician, was born at Rostrevor, co. Down, on 15 April 1618, the son of Sir Edward Trevor (died 'c'.1649) of Rostrevor and of Bryneunallt, Denbighshire, and his second wife, Rose (died 1623), the daughter of Henry Ussher, archbishop of Armagh. His father had left his property in Wales for estates in Ireland worth $800 per annum. 
Trevor was admitted to the Inner Temple in November 1634. However, his connections to the planter community in Ireland were strong. On 29 September 1633 he was engaged to marry Frances ('c'.1618-1656), the daughter and coheir of Marmaduke Whitechurch of Loughbrickland, co. Down. They married in August 1636 after her parents' deaths; they had two children. His sister married Sir Hans Hamilton of Monella and Hamilton's Bawn. In September 1636 Trevor walked in Lord Montgomery of Ards's funeral procession. In the 1640 Down election he and his father aligned themselves with the planter Hills and the Irish Bagnalls, McGuinesses, and O'Neills against the Montgomery-Hamilton (planter) faction and their Irish allies. He served as MP for Downpatrick (1639-49), while his father was elected for Newtownards in 1640. Following the Irish rising of October 1641 the insurgents imprisoned his father in Narrowater Castle, Newry, until April 1642. Marcus Trevor became a commander in Down, and received a letter threatening reprisals from the rebel Con Magennis (perhaps a former political ally). He later joined one of the earl of Ormond's regiments. In October 1643 he departed for England to serve the king against the parliamentarians. Following parliamentarian advances in north-east Wales he found himself a major of horse defending Holt Bridge with Ellice's foot. He acquired command of the horse regiment of Arthur, Lord Capel (originally raised in November 1642). On 12 January 1644 he just escaped capture by the parliamentarians when they made a night attack on Ellesmere, Shropshire. By February his regiment mustered just 30 men, but by 5 May its strength had risen to 400. He joined Prince Rupert's army on 16 May. 
At the battle of Marston Moor his regiment served with the right wing of the royalist cavalry at the extreme left of the front line. Once the battle started Marcus countercharged Cromwell's horse regiment, hitting it in the right flank. He personally fought Cromwell and wounded him, forcing the future lord protector to leave the action to have his wound dressed. Trevor's horse survived the battle and retreated to north Wales. He became the governor of Ruthin Castle on the River Clywd. His regiment was badly weakened in the action at Montgomery Castle on 18 September. On 19 October Sir Thomas Myddleton's parliamentarian force attacked Ruthin. Trevor and his 120 cavalry fled, but his deputy successfully held the town. In December the inhabitants of the vale of Clywd petitioned Lord Byron against the regiment's excessive requisitions. Before the war's end Trevor's horse was cast into Prince Charles's horse as reinforcements, and it disbanded following the royalist defeat in Cornwall. On 12 April 1646 Trevor surrendered Ruthin Castle to the parliamentarians. He submitted to Fairfax in Oxford in May. 
In July 1647 Trevor and his wife, Frances, were in Holywell, Flintshire, on the way to Ireland. Once there he joined Michael Jones's parliamentarian force for service against the Irish confederates. He received the governorship of Carlingford on 13 April 1648. On 3 November while scouting for Jones he prevented the parliamentarians from being surprised when he spotted Owen Roe O'Neill's army crossing a bridge near Clonee, 5 miles from Dublin. He served under Colonel George Monck, perhaps as late as April 1649. On hearing of Charles I's execution he deserted the parliamentarian army and joined Ormond's Irish royalist army. In May he helped Lord Inchiquin, who commanded 2000 foot and 1500 horse, to blockade and capture Drogheda. On 23 July with six horse troops he attacked the Irish confederate Lieutenant-General Richard O'Farrell who was convoying a supply of ammunition received from the parliamentarians. Trevor's cavalry dispersed all but 70 of the 800 largely drunken Irish foot and horse, forcing O'Neill's army to retreat into Monaghan. Subsequently he commanded a food and ammunition magazine at Ardee, but he could not aid Drogheda during Cromwell's siege. On 26 September with 500 horse he attacked Colonel Robert Venables at Dromore. Trevor's initial success turned to failure when the English rallied. Following a skirmish Trevor retreated west across the River Bann. After Ormond and O'Neill formed an alliance on 12 October Trevor was so excited at the prospects it offered that he travelled to his former enemy's camp to pay his respects. In November, while serving with Inchiquin during the attack on Cromwell at Glascarig near Wexford he was shot in the belly and carried to Kilkenny. On 16 December Monck ordered Major George Rawdon to prohibit Trevor from returning to his estates. In March 1650 Ormond promoted him lieutenant-general of horse, but in April with Viscount Montgomery of Ards and Lord Moore he submitted to Cromwell at Clonmell. 
The regicide Colonel John Jones (who hailed from north Wales, as had Trevor's father) had succeeded Trevor as governor of Carlingford, and despite their political differences the two men became friends. As Jones married a sister of Cromwell's in 1655 the connection had potential patronage benefits for Trevor. Meanwhile in October 1651, perhaps in connection with the terms of his submission, he claimed exemption from the common burdens. The Commonwealth government trusted him sufficiently in October 1652 to order him to gather 500 Roman Catholic Irish in Ulster and march them to Carlingford for transportation from the province. Subsequently he supported Henry Cromwell major-general of the forces in Ireland, and from 1657 lord deputy, spent time in Dublin, and even received a hawk from his former oppressor Major Rawdon. As late as November 1654 the lord protector suggested that he be imprisoned, but he changed his policy on 25 April 1655 when he ordered that his former adversary be placed under his protection and permitted to use his Irish estates. Trevor later claimed that as the republic fell apart he had tried to suborn Henry Cromwell to declare for Charles II, promising him 5000 troops from Ulster. Whatever the truth of that story, he certainly maintained close relations with the protectorate regime in Ireland as it entered its final days. Jones arranged for him to receive the lease of the corporation of Carlingford and its lands (600 acres), while in June 1659 the lord lieutenant presented him with a similar grant of Dundalk (1200 acres) as well as further lands in co. Louth, and in co. Kildare, as one of his last acts. In November 1659 with Viscount Montgomery of Ards and Colonel Vere Essex Cromwell he began plotting the restoration of the monarchy in Ireland. In the next month he was involved in the royalist plot against Dublin Castle. In 1660 he kept Ormond, then living in Brussels, apprised of Irish affairs. 
After the Restoration Trevor gained a degree of public prominence as a government official. He became ranger of Ulster on 6 December and was appointed to the Irish privy council on 19 December. In 1661 the shire electors of Down returned him to the Dublin parliament. His friendship with Ormond brought him material benefits when on 20 March 1661 the Irish land commissioners confirmed his rights (against those of pre-October 1641 landholders and grantees who had served against the Irish rebels) to the protectorate land grants, a decision confirmed by the privy council on 24 October. He received the office of master of the game and ranger-general of his majesty's woods (including Phoenix Park, where the post had a lodge) on 28 August, the licence for gunpowder manufacture in Down on 16 October, and command of a troop of Irish horse. He was elevated to the Irish peerage on 28 August 1662 as Baron Trevor of Rostrevor and Viscount Dungannon and entered the Irish House of Lords on 12 September. The citation in his grant of supporters stated the elevation to peerage arose from his wounding Cromwell, but given his subsequent career the patronage of Ormond was most likely the cause of the honour. During the Restoration he alternated his time between Ulster and Dublin. As lord lieutenant of co. Down from 1664 he dealt with tory bands by setting them against each other, as opposed to the more usual policy of allowing them to go into voluntary exile with the profits of their crimes. In June 1666 he helped to suppress a mutiny by the Carrickfergus Castle garrison. That August he travelled to co. Kilkenny, co. Wicklow, and co. Wexford in the company of Ormond. On 14 August 1667 he received the appointment as marshal of Ireland, which brought him an annual salary of $687. In April 1668 he and his wife travelled to Holyhead, Chester, and Coventry with Ormond. In October 1669, along with Viscount Conway, he dealt with the pay stoppage of the Royal regiment in Dublin. He died on 3 January 1670 at Dundalk and was buried in Clanallin church, near Rostrevor, on 10 January. His first wife had died on 9 February 1656. He was survived by his second wife, Anne (died 1692), daughter and heir of John Lewis of Anglesey and widow of John Owen of Orieltown, Pembrokeshire. 
With his first wife, Frances, Trevor had two sons. Arthur was born in 1644 and died on 1 June 1661. Marcus (1645-3 June 1669), matriculated at Trinity College, Dublin, on 10 June 1661, and served as the MP for Down from November 1665 to August 1666. With his second wife Trevor had four sons. Edward died in March 1666. Lewis succeeded as second viscount. He subscribed for the publication of the fourth edition of Milton's 'Paradise Lost'. He died in Spring Gardens, Middlesex, and was buried on 3 January 1692 in Kensington. John, born in Dublin in 1668, matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 27 March 1686 with his brother Marcus 
(Mark; 'b'. 1669)
. On 31 December 1687 the younger brother accidentally shot and killed his sibling and fellow student. Mark succeeded as third viscount in 1692. After Oxford he attended the Inner Temple in 1688; he had a reputation for drunkenness. Mark became a soldier as his father had and served as colonel of the foot in Spain from 1704 until his death at Alicante on 8 November 1706 from spotted fever. He had married Arabella Susanna, widow of Sir John Magill, and daughter of Hugh Hamilton of Glenawly. Their daughter Arabella, baptized on 7 February 1667, married the Hon. Henry Bertie on 17 July 1708, and died on 10 December 1708. As the peerage was limited to the male heirs she did not succeed to the title. Eventually the property passed to Arthur Hill-Trevor, Viscount Dungannon. 


@@@@@


doc= 27732


Trevor, Richard (1707-1771), bishop of Durham, was born on 30 September 1707 at Peckham, Surrey, the youngest son of Thomas Trevor, first Baron Trevor (bap. 1658, d. 1730), judge, and his second wife, Anne (died 1746), the daughter of Colonel Robert Weldon and widow of Sir Robert Bernard. Trevor was educated first at Bishop's Stortford in Hertfordshire, and then at Westminster School. On 6 July 1724 he entered Queen's College, Oxford, as a gentleman commoner; he graduated BA in 1727. In November 1727 he was elected fellow of All Souls, and in 1731 received his MA; he took holy orders in the same year. In 1732 his half-brother Sir John Bernard presented him to the valuable living of Houghton-with-Wilton in Huntingdonshire. He was appointed canon of Christ Church on 8 November 1735, and proceeded DCL in 1736. 
Trevor was consecrated bishop of St David's on 1 April 1744, and translated to the see of Durham on 9 November 1752. He owed the former episcopal office to the patronage of the duke of Newcastle, and the latter to Henry Pelham. However, he failed to gain promotion to the primacy when the archbishopric of Canterbury became vacant in 1758; and he was unsuccessful in his attempt to be elected chancellor of Oxford University in 1759, when his two competitors, the earls of Lichfield and Westmorland, combined their votes against him. 
Trevor was actively involved in the 'improvement' of his two major places of residence: the palace of the bishops of Durham, in which he lived in summer, and the Sussex family estate where, after 1744, he spent the winter months. Thus he is said to have spent $8000 at Bishop Auckland, in order to begin the south front and build a Gothic gateway to the park. As for his other residence, Glynde Place, near Lewes, he not only improved the mansion, but also had the church rebuilt in Georgian style. 
Horace Walpole and his correspondents jokingly referred to Trevor as St Durham -- a jest aimed at his reputation for saintliness. His record of ecclesiastical patronage in the long Durham episcopate provides evidence of his consistent concern for the high standard expected of clerics to whom he offered preferments. A very benevolent man, Trevor bequeathed $3450 to several public charities and to the poor of the places he had lived in (TNA: PRO). The full-length portrait in oils that is preserved at Glynde Place conveys the confident image of a prelate of great human stature, though not as 'fat-bellied' (Walpole, 10.257) as Horace Walpole's correspondence suggests. Two of Trevor's five published sermons were in support of the Hanoverian establishment in times of crisis. 
Bishop Trevor, who was unmarried, died of gangrene in London on 9 June 1771, and was buried 'very privately (according to his own directions)' (Allan, 24) at Glynde in Sussex on 19 June. A monument by J. Nollekens was erected to him in the chapel at Bishop Auckland in 1775. 


@@@@@


doc= 27746


John de Trokelowe (fl. c.1330), composed about 1330 or later. This text (covering the years 1307-23 and ending with the execution of Andrew Harclay, earl of Carlisle) continues to folio 212'r' of Claudius D.vi and is terminated by the colophon 'Hucusque scripsit frater Iohannes de Trokelowe'. Trokelowe may possibly be identified with a monk at Tynemouth, who was part of a conspiracy in 1294 to make the priory independent of St Albans. There are complications in the attribution of these 'Annales' to Trokelowe, however, since Thomas Walsingham, writing about 1400, gave Rishanger as the source for his account of the executions that followed the battle of Boroughbridge in 1322, and this episode is in fact contained in Trokelowe's annals. Nor did Walsingham mention Trokelowe in his list of St Albans historians: 'Post Matthaeum, Willelmus Risangre, Henricus Blankfrount, Symon Bynham, et Ricardus Savage, Chronica successive scripserunt' (Walsingham, 'Annales', 2.303). It is possible, then, that Trokelowe was only the scribe rather than the author as such, and that this text is substantially the work of Rishanger. Trokelowe's chronicle is pro-baronial and is relatively sympathetic to Edward II. The importance of St Albans as a centre for information and locus of public events, moreover, gives Trokelowe access to significant amounts of firsthand information not otherwise available. 


@@@@@


doc= 27987


Ultan moccu Chonchobair (d. 657), bishop of Dal Conchobair (Conchuburnenses) and abbot of Ardbraccan, whose feast day was 4 September. An addition to his pedigree in the genealogies of the saints says that his mother, Collo (Colla) ingen Dimmai, was of the Gailenga (a neighbouring client kingdom), and thus Ultan (that is, Ardbraccan) was entitled to a share of dues from them. In the Rheims prologue of the ninth century, Ultan was the first named hagiographer of Brigit, preceding Aileran and Cogitosus. A hymn to Brigit, 'Brigit be bithmaith', was ascribed to him (the ascription is probably of the eleventh century, and, although almost certainly false, it attests his continuing reputation as a supporter of the cult). He also, however, possessed a book from which Tirechan, in the late seventh century, took his information about the four names of Patrick. The Latin phrase used by Tirechan may imply that Ultan was the author of the book. In any case, Ultan was certainly an oral source for Tirechan and was also his teacher. Ultan is thus important in that he demonstrates that a bishop of a client people within the lands of the southern Ui Neill could be concerned with the hagiography of both Patrick and Brigit. 


@@@@@


doc= 28038


Uther Pendragon (supp. fl. late 5th cent.?), king of Britain and a Breton by descent, and Igerna, wife of Gorlois, duke of Cornwall. Uther had himself changed by Merlin into the duke's likeness, entered Tintagel Castle (vividly described) on the Cornish coast, and begat Arthur; while he was so occupied, his men killed Gorlois at a siege elsewhere in Cornwall, freeing Igerna for marriage to Uther and thus legitimizing Arthur's birth. Arthur became ruler of Britain after his father's death, and was a paragon of generosity, affluence, courage, military success, and courtliness. He brought the Saxons under control in four battles recalling some of the twelve named in the 'Historia Brittonum'; he then conquered a rebellious Scotland, and married Guinevere (Guenhuvera), a woman of noble Roman descent reared in Cornwall. He went on to conquer Ireland, Iceland, and other north Atlantic islands. After twelve years' rule, with knights coming from afar to join his court, Arthur went on to conquer Norway, Denmark, and Gaul. After a further nine years he was crowned in a splendid ceremony at Caerleon. 


@@@@@


doc= 28064


Charlotte Elizabeth Vandenhoff (1818-1860), who was born in Liverpool and made her first appearance at Drury Lane as Juliet on 11 April 1836. She went from there to Covent Garden and the Haymarket, and succeeded in establishing herself as a capable actress in parts in which delicacy and feeling rather than strength or passion were required. She won acceptance as Imogen, Cordelia, and Pauline in 'The Lady of Lyons', and in 1837, at the Haymarket, was the first Lydia in Sheridan Knowles's 'The Love Chase'. In October 1839 she made her American debut at the National Theatre, New York, as Julia in 'The Hunchback', a role she repeated in November at the Chesnut Street Theatre, Philadelphia. Her chief triumph was as Antigone in a translation from Sophocles at Covent Garden on 2 January 1845, in which her father played Creon. In January 1855, at the St James's, she was Alcestis in a translation by Spicer from Euripides. She was fair in hair and complexion, symmetrical, with gentle mobile features, and was taxed, perhaps unjustly, with imitating Helen Faucit. Charlotte Vandenhoff retained her maiden name to the last, though she married, on 7 July 1856 by licence at St Mary's Church, Hull, Thomas Swinbourne, an actor well known in the provinces and not unknown in London. This marriage she sought within a month to repudiate. She revisited America in 1858. She was taken ill in Birmingham, and died in Handsworth on 31 July 1860. She was the author of 'Woman's Heart', produced in 1852 at the Haymarket, a comedy in which she herself played the heroine. 


@@@@@


doc= 28087


Vane, Thomas (b. 1599/1600), Church of England clergyman and Roman Catholic convert, was born in Kent, matriculated from Jesus College, Oxford, on 26 April 1616 aged sixteen, and transferred in 1618 to Christ's College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1620 and MA in 1623. He was ordained deacon and priest at Peterborough in April 1621 and was appointed chaplain-extraordinary to Charles I and rector of the rich west Kent living of Crayford, possibly by means of family patronage, in 1626. Edward Hasted, in his history of Kent, omits him from his list of rectors of Crayford, perhaps influenced by the rector's subsequent abandonment of the Church of England, leaving a gap from the year of Vane's appointment to the point at which his successor was eventually appointed, in 1648. 
It seems likely that at least as early as the 1630s Vane was exhibiting Arminian sacramental preferences which presaged his conversion to Catholicism and which seem to have divided his parish: in July 1633 the last significant step taken by the archbishop of Canterbury, George Abbot, was in the form of an arbitration to impose on Crayford church a distinctly high-church manner of reverently receiving 'the body and blood of Our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ' ('VCH Kent', 2.91). The rector took his Cambridge DD in 1640 but was soon to leave the Church of England and, becoming a Catholic, gave up his benefice and, apparently with his wife, travelled to France and Italy. He was awarded a medical degree in a continental university and changed his career to the practice of medicine. 
Educated in theology to an advanced degree Vane also took up authorship on behalf of the Catholic faith. His 'A Lost Sheep Returned Home', published in Paris in 1643, around the time of his departure for the continent, was dedicated to Charles I's Catholic queen, Henrietta Maria, and explained the motives for his change of faith. It drew a defence of the historical authenticity of the Church of England from the historian Edward Chisenhall and went through five editions between 1643 and 1666. His historical work, 'An Answer to a Libell' (Paris, 1646), was a defence of the Catholic Church's Fourth Lateran Council, which in 1215 established the doctrine of transubstantiation in the Eucharist. Dedicated to Sir Kenelm Digby, it had earlier been issued attached to Miles Pinckney's 'Occasional Discourses' (1646). A third book, 'Wisdom and innocence, or, Prudence and simplicity in the examples of the shepherd and the dove, propounded by Our Lord', was published in 1652 with a dedication to the earl of Westmorland. 
Vane was a remarkable but shadowy character, difficult to trace. He may or may not have been the Thomas Fane who died in Kent in 1692 at the age of ninety. 


@@@@@


doc= 28088


Vane, William Harry, first duke of Cleveland (1766-1842), aristocrat, was the son of Henry Vane, second earl of Darlington (1726/7-1792) ['see under 'Vane, Henry, first earl of Darlington], and Margaret ('bap'. 1733, died 1800), daughter of Robert Lowther and sister of James Lowther, first earl of Lonsdale. He was born on 27 July 1766 in St James's Square, London, and was educated by a private tutor, William Lipscomb, and at Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated in 1783. He married, first, on 17 September 1787, Lady Katherine Margaret (1766-1807), second daughter and coheir of Harry Powlett or Paulet, sixth duke of Bolton; they had three sons and five daughters. He married, second, on 27 July 1813, Elizabeth (1777-1861), daughter of Robert Russell, market gardener, of Newton, Yorkshire. His second wife had been his mistress for some years, and previously that of Thomas Coutts, the banker. She inherited substantially under her husband's will. 
As Viscount Barnard he was MP for Totnes in 1788-90, and for Winchelsea (which his father had recently purchased) in 1790-92. His political allegiances fluctuated; he started as a whig, but generally supported Pitt, until succeeding as earl of Darlington on 8 September 1792. Thereafter he became increasingly alienated from Pitt, who was unwilling to elevate Darlington in the peerage. He supported the ministries of Canning and Wellington as an independent. Although he seldom spoke in the House of Lords, he was an advocate of political reform, and presented there a petition from South Shields on the subject on 3 March 1829. He proved himself throughout an influential supporter of the bill, and willing enough to abandon his six borough seats. Indeed, he was said to have purchased the seats to ensure his marquessate, and given them up to gain a dukedom: he was created marquess of Cleveland in 1827 and duke of Cleveland in 1833. However, his support for reform was such that he disinherited his elder sons (who had become tories) in favour of his youngest son, Lord Harry Vane, who remained a whig. 
The duke was more notable as a sportsman than as a politician. Living at Raby Castle, co. Durham, for a considerable portion of every year, he proved himself an enthusiastic upholder of every form of sport. He began to hunt his father's hounds in 1787, and spared no expense on his kennel. His hounds were renowned for their speed, and were divided into two packs, one of large breed and one of small; with these he hunted on alternate days. After each day's hunting it was his habit to enter an account of the day's sport in a diary, portions of which were privately published at the close of every season. He paid considerable sums of money to his tenants for the preservation of foxes, and on their behalf he successfully opposed the first Stockton and Darlington Railway in 1820, because in its course it encroached on a favourite cover. In 1835 he divided his celebrated pack between his son-in-law, Mark Milbanke, and himself, and the old district of the hunt was at the same time apportioned. Almost equally enthusiastic in his patronage of the turf, he maintained a magnificent stud, and was rewarded by winning the St Leger with his horse Chorister in 1831. 
The duke of Cleveland died in Cleveland House, St James's Square, on 29 January 1842, and was buried in Staindrop church, co. Durham, where a monument was erected to his memory. He was succeeded in the title by each of his three sons in turn, none of whom had any legitimate heirs. Lord Brougham, whom Cleveland had introduced to the House of Commons as member for Winchelsea and who was a lifelong friend, was one of the executors of a will that left almost $1 million in addition to huge estates, around $1,250,000 in consols, and plate and jewels to the value of a further $1 million. 


@@@@@


doc= 28089


Aken, Joseph van (c.1699-1749), drapery painter and painter of genre and conversation pieces, was born probably in Antwerp, where he first practised as a painter. The title to a mezzotint of him by John Faber after Thomas Hudson gives his name as Vanhaeken, under which spelling of his name, rendered 'Van Haeken', he appeared in the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. He moved to London about 1720 with his artist brothers Arnold and Alexander. His Flemish-style conversation pieces, such as 'An English Family at Tea' (Tate Gallery, London) and 'Schoolmaster with a Class of Boys' (City Museum and Art Gallery, Hereford), painted on arrival in England, are of considerable interest to the social historian, as are his crowded city scenes, 'The Stocks Market' (Bank of England, London) and 'Covent Garden Market' (Museum of London). His powers of observation were most profitably employed when he turned his hand to the depiction of 'silks satins Velvets, gold & embroideryes' for a number of London's leading portrait painters, including Thomas Hudson and Allan Ramsay (Vertue, 3.117). His particular skill in differentiating between fabrics and in delineating jewels, so accurately as to enable identification of, for example, a Spitalfields silk or a paste necklace, make the portraits on which he worked a rich resource for the study of costume. 
Hogarth bitterly remarked that an industrious drapery painter could not 'fail of getting a fortune' and often painted nine-tenths of a portrait, though 'all the reputation is engrossed by the fizmonger' (Kitson, 100-01). Van Aken's services were jealously guarded by those fortunate enough to secure them. Many portraitists sent their canvases out to his studio (Reynolds is said to have left his apprenticeship to Hudson after refusing to carry a canvas to van Aken's house in the rain), but a few provincial painters such as Henry Winstanley and the amateur Rhoda Delaval sent painted heads on small pieces of cloth to be let in to full-size canvases on arrival in London. 
Neither Hogarth nor Stephen Slaughter employed a drapery painter, but the majority of portraitists were willing to pay approximately 4 to 5's'. a day to a run-of-the-mill practitioner and much more to someone of van Aken's ability. It appears that Jeremiah Davison, Henry Pickering, and Isaac Whood, as well as Hudson and Ramsay, all used van Aken's services, some giving guidelines as to hands, pose, and background, and others not. His earnings enabled him to form his own collection of works of art, which included Rembrandt's 'The Entombment' (Hunterian Art Gallery, University of Glasgow) and three 'models in clay' by Michael Rysbrack (Vertue, 3.90). He won the respect and friendship of fellow artists and joined Hogarth, Hudson, Francis Hayman, and the sculptor Henry Cheere on a trip to Paris in 1748, going on to Flanders and the northern Netherlands with Hudson and Cheere to visit some of the leading continental painters of the day. Van Aken died in London on 4 July 1749, leaving a widow but no children. He was buried in St Pancras Church in London. At his death Hudson and Ramsay were joint executors of his will. 


@@@@@


doc= 28090


Homrigh, Esther Van (1688-1723), correspondent and lover of Jonathan Swift, was the elder daughter of a leading Dublin citizen, Bartholomew Van Homrigh (died 1703), and Esther, 'nee' Stone (died 1714). At their majority or marriage each daughter was entitled to $250 annually, and after Bartholomew's decease possibly as much as $5000 apiece. Vanessa's sister was Mary ('c'.1696-1721), her brothers Ginkell (1694-1710) and Bartholomew jun. (1693-1715). In 1707 the family moved from Dublin to London, where their circle included Sir Andrew Fountaine, diplomat and friend of Leibniz, and Erasmus Lewis, friend of Pope, Prior, Arbuthnot, and Gay. Jonathan Swift met up with them 'en route' for London at Dunstable in December that year. In 1713 (6 June) and 1720 (12 August) he recalled the precise occasion when Vanessa spilled coffee in the fireplace of the inn at Dunstable. Although he may have known the family before 1707, it was here that their serious, seventeen-year relationship began. 
Esther Johnson dismissed the Van Homrighs as 'of no consequence' in a letter to Swift ('c'.24 Feb 1711, Swift, 'Journal to Stella', 202), but she had been seriously misled. By May 1711 the Van Homrighs set aside a room for Swift's use in their London house in Bury Street, St James's. At this period in 1711-12 he sometimes visited twice daily. Described as 'a closet' when writing to Stella, with Vanessa their private space was called the 'Sluttery, which I have so often found to be the most agreeable Chamber in the World' (18 Dec 1711, 'Correspondence of Jonathan Swift', 1, no. 149). Here they enjoyed privacy, sugared oranges, and coffee. Each referred to drinking coffee as a symbol of social intimacy, and in 1766 Horace Walpole suggested that this was a coded reference to sexual intercourse. The family moved to Park Place, off St James's Street, in August and September 1712. 
Twenty-eight of Swift's letters to Vanessa (the first dated 18 December 1711) and seventeen drafts of Vanessa's to Swift survive. Mere friendship was insufficient, and Vanessa demanded a passionate, even a sexual involvement, which Swift was psychologically and perhaps also physically incapable of managing, least of all of reciprocating. Their clandestine communication was aided by Erasmus Lewis and Charles Ford. In November 1714, after his installation as dean of St Patrick's and in spite of Swift's warning (12 August 1714) that he could seldom see her because of risks to their reputations, Vanessa followed him to Dublin, where she was acutely miserable. Gossip about his visit to Vanessa with 'little master' (20 Dec 1714, 'Correspondence of Jonathan Swift', 2, nos. 371-2), has been interpreted by those wishing to normalize Swift's sexual psyche as an allusion to a natural son of Swift and Stella (possibly Bryan M'Loghlin), or to an unnamed natural son by Vanessa. 
Of independent means, but burdened by debts accumulated by her mother and spendthrift brother Bartholomew (for his will, see Le Brocquy, 'Cadenus', 143-9), Vanessa lived at Celbridge (later Marlay Abbey), 11 miles from Dublin and on the way to Charles Ford's estate at Wood Park, and, more dangerously if more conveniently for Swift, at the family's town house, Turnstile Alley, near College Green. 'You have taught me to distinguish and then you leave me miserable', she wrote (18 Dec 1714?, 'Correspondence of Jonathan Swift', 2, no. 370), and it may have been six years before Swift visited her at Celbridge. 'Cadenus and Vanessa' had been written for Vanessa perhaps at Windsor between August and September 1712, and not intended for publication. Manuscript copies circulated before publication first in Dublin in 1726 and then in London on 19 May 1726, and eventually an authoritative text appeared in the 1727 'Miscellanies'. A passage cancelled by Swift reveals the essential and problematic dynamic in their relationship, from Swift's viewpoint: '
She wish'd her Tutor were her Lover; 

Resolv'd she would her Flame discover. 
(Swift, 'Journal', xliii)' Her name is Swift's invention, a compound of 'Van' and 'Hessy'. 
Swift's last letter, of 7/8 August 1722, was written nine months before Vanessa made her will. His liaison with Stella perhaps caused Vanessa to confront him with the necessity of choosing between or acknowledging the status of one or the other. Vanessa died on 2 June 1723, probably from tuberculosis contracted from nursing her sister Mary (her will, signed 1 May 1723, is in Le Brocquy, 'Cadenus', 152-4). After her death Swift disappeared from Dublin on a two-month visit to southern Ireland, and in June at the parish of Skull he composed a Latin poem, 'Carberiae rupes', full of apocalyptic imagery. Poems attributed to Vanessa are: 'To Love', 'Ode to Spring', 'Ode to Wisdom', and a 'Rebus' on Swift's name. Shortly after Stella's death, a scandal novel based transparently on the Swift-Stella-Vanessa story appeared ('Some Memoirs'), giving some insight into public speculation of the time. 
Vanessa was determined to be remembered. Erasmus Lewis, Francis Annesley, Archbishop William King, Archbishop Theophilus Bolton, Dr Bryan Robinson (probably her Dublin physician), and five others received $25 each for a mourning ring. Most of her estate went to two heirs and sole executors whom she hardly knew, Robert Marshall, law student of Clonmel, and the Revd Dr George Berkeley, fellow of Trinity College, Dublin. Swift is not mentioned, perhaps a final retaliation against a man whose neglect made her 'live a life like a languishing Death' (November/December 1720, 'Correspondence of Jonathan Swift', 2.524). The story of deathbed instructions for publication of her letters is apocryphal, but Marshall and Berkeley nevertheless began the publication process until Sheridan intervened. 


@@@@@


doc= 28091


Huysum, Jacobus van (1687x9-1740), flower painter, was born at Amsterdam. He was one of four sons, all painters, of the painter Justus van Huysum the elder (1659-1716), the other three being Justus van Huysum (1685-1707), Michiel van Huysum (1704-1760), and Jan van Huysum (1682-1749), the celebrated flower painter. Van Huysum came to England in 1721, in which year he was living in the house of a patron, Mr Lockyear, of the South Sea House, London. He drew many of the plates in J. Martyn's 'Historia plantarum rariorum' (1728-37) and in the Society of Gardeners' 'Catalogus plantarum' (1730). Subsequently he was patronized by Sir Robert Walpole, in whose house at Chelsea he lived; there he was employed to paint flower pieces and copies from the old masters in Walpole's collection, including paintings by Caravaggio and Claude, for the decoration of Walpole's great house, Houghton Hall, in Norfolk. The 1736 catalogue of Walpole's collection records that all the pictures hung over the doors and the chimneys in the attic storey of Houghton were by 'a brother of van Huysum' (MS, PML 7586, Pierpont Morgan Library, New York). However, because of his drunk and disorderly habits Walpole dismissed him after two years. He subsequently died in obscurity in London in 1740. 
Although van Huysum did sometimes copy his brother Jan's paintings he did not necessarily seek to emulate his style, and in his most famous work, the series of flower pieces representing the twelve months of the year (priv. coll.), the flowers are rendered in a more naturalistic manner than those in the work of his brother. Examples of his drawings are in the British Museum, the Royal Society of Arts, and the Natural History Museum, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 28092


VanKoughnet, Philip Michael Matthew Scott (1822-1869), politician and judge in Canada, was born on 21 January 1822 at Cornwall, Stormont county, Ontario, the eldest son of Lieutenant-Colonel Philip VanKoughnet and his wife, Harriet Sophia, the daughter of Matthew Scott of Carrick-on-Suir, co. Tipperary. The family, which was originally named von Gochnat, emigrated from Colmar in Alsace in 1750, and settled in what later became the town of Springfield, Massachusetts. Michael VanKoughnet (1751-1832), grandfather of Philip, was a loyalist and took refuge in 1783 in Cornwall, old province of Quebec, where he died in October 1832, leaving three sons and a daughter from his marriage with Eve, the daughter of John Bolton Empey. The eldest son, Philip VanKoughnet (1790-1873), born on 2 April 1790, served at the battle of Crysler's Farm on 11 November 1813 and commanded the fifth battalion of the Canadian incorporated militia at the battle of the Windmill, Prescott, on 13 November 1837. He was also for thirty years a member of the legislature of Upper Canada, and, on its union with Lower Canada in 1841, the legislative council. At his death he was chairman of the board of arbitrators for the dominion. He died at Cornwall on 17 May 1873, leaving eight sons and five daughters. 
The younger Philip VanKoughnet was educated at the Eastern District grammar school before serving under his father in the militia in 1837. The experience led him to give up thoughts of entering the church and he turned instead to law. He began his studies in Cornwall in 1838, then moved to Toronto, and was admitted to the bar in 1843. He specialized in equity law and rapidly established his reputation and a successful practice, enabling him to marry in November 1845 Elizabeth, the daughter of Colonel Barker Turner. He was appointed queen's counsel in 1850, served on the council of the University of Trinity College, and lectured there on equity jurisprudence. 
In 1856 VanKoughnet was persuaded by his long-standing friend John A. Macdonald to become president of the executive council and minister of agriculture. In the latter post he was active and efficient, paying particular attention to combating crop damage by pests. Also in 1856 he was elected to the legislative council as member for the Rideau district. In 1858 he became commissioner of crown lands and in 1860 chief superintendent of Indian affairs, in which post he had some success in settling long-running land claims. He initiated the system of selling townships 'en bloc', which led to a rapid opening up of new areas for colonization. He also encouraged and organized western exploring expeditions and promoted improvements in transport infrastructure, particularly railways. 
In 1862 VanKoughnet was appointed chancellor of the court of chancery of Upper Canada. He held this office with distinction until his death, having declined Macdonald's offer in 1868 of the office of chief justice. He died at Toronto on 7 November 1869 after a short illness and was survived by his wife and their two sons. Although he was helped by his close friendship with Macdonald, his achievements were due in large measure to his industry, keen mind, and legal acumen. 


@@@@@


doc= 28093


Laun, Henri van (1820-1896), author and French scholar, was born in the Netherlands. He was educated in France, and settled permanently in England in 1848. At first he sought to make his fortune as a journalist, but soon came to prefer the less precarious business of teaching. He was successively French master at King William's College, Isle of Man, at Cheltenham College, and at the Edinburgh Academy, where he became friends with Professor Blackie, Lord Neaves, Sir Alexander Grant, and many other noted intellectuals. Settling afterwards in London, he acted for twenty consecutive years as French examiner for the civil service commission and for the War Office. He was also at this time involved in literary and artistic circles in London, and his first publication, 'A Grammar of the French Language', in three volumes (1863-4), was followed by 'The Adventures of Gil Blas' (1866), a translation of Alain-Rene Lesage's 'Histoire de Gil Blas de Santillane', and 'Selections from Modern French Authors' (1869-88). In 1871 a 'History of English Literature', a translation of the work by his friend Hippolyte-Adolphe Taine, was first published in Edinburgh in two volumes. It ran through four or five editions, and was then published in four volumes in London in 1886. The 'Dramatic Works of Moliere', translated by van Laun in six volumes, was published in Edinburgh in 1875-6, with illustrations by Lalauze. It included much out-of-the-way information, derived from Langbaine and other sources, concerning seventeenth- and eighteenth-century translations and plagiarisms, both acknowledged and unacknowledged, of separate plays. 
In 1876-7 van Laun produced his own 'History of French Literature'. The first volume covered the period 'from its origin to the Renaissance'; the second covered the period to 'the end of the Reign of Louis Phillipe ['sic']'. It was reprinted in 1883. He next published his 'French Revolutionary Epoch' (1878), a history of France in two volumes from the beginning of the first revolution to the end of the Second Empire. This was followed in 1885 by 'The Characters of J. de La Bruyere, Newly Rendered into English'. 
Van Laun was for some years confidential adviser to John C. Nimmo, a London publisher. He also occasionally wrote critical pieces for the press, and contributed to such journals as 'Notes and Queries'. He was widely read in English dramatic literature, and possessed a great knowledge of French and English idioms as well as a large amount of scholarly erudition. He was described in his obituary in 'The Times' as a 'bibliophile of exacting taste, [whose] acquaintance with 'editions de luxe' and book illustrations could scarcely be rivalled' ('The Times', 22 Jan 1896, 10). He died of cirrhosis of the liver at 174 Lancaster Road, London, on 19 January 1896, and was buried in Brookwood cemetery, Woking, on the 23rd. 


@@@@@


doc= 28094


Leemput, Remigius van (1607-1675), painter and art collector, was of Flemish or possibly French origin and was baptized at Antwerp in December 1607. He was received into the guild of St Luke in Antwerp in 1628-9. By October 1635 he had settled in England and was living in Covent Garden, London. Van Leemput is listed in various contemporary inventories as Remee, Remy, and Old Remy. He was associated with the studio of Sir Anthony Van Dyck and established a reputation as a copyist. Series of small copies of Van Dyck's portraits, known as 'closet' pictures, were much in demand in the seventeenth century. They exist at Weston Park, Hampshire; Woburn Abbey, Bedfordshire (of the children of the fourth earl of Bedford); and in the Royal Collection. The latter two groups were both previously attributed to Theodore Russell (bap. 1614, d. 1689), with whose works van Leemput's have been confused, but have subsequently been convincingly re-attributed to van Leemput (although several hands may have been at work in the Woburn series). A particularly fine example from the Woburn series, attributed to van Leemput, is the small portrait of Anne, Lady Digby, painted 'c'.1641. The Royal Collection series, which includes copies after Sir Peter Lely and Samuel Cooper, as well as Van Dyck, was recorded in the reign of Queen Anne as by van Leemput and located in her bathing room. By the reign of George III they were associated with Russell but the traditional attribution to van Leemput is more convincing. Van Leemput was also paid $150 by Charles II for a life-size copy after Holbein's mural 'Henry VII, Elizabeth of York, Henry VIII and Jane Seymour' (1537), originally commissioned by Henry VIII for Whitehall Palace. The Holbein wall painting was destroyed by the Whitehall fire of 1698 and van Leemput's copy of it and another one he executed (the latter now at Petworth House, Sussex) are the only records of the original full composition. Van Leemput also painted individual independent works such as the 'Portrait of an Unknown Officer and Servants' at Lennoxlove, East Lothian. 
As well as painting van Leemput was a collector and dealer, a leading figure in the London art world and he purchased a number of important works at the sale of Charles I's collections, including Van Dyck's famous 'Charles I with M. de S Antoine' of 1633 (Royal Collection). Van Leemput attempted to sell the portrait in Antwerp but failed to find a buyer and the work was eventually reclaimed from him by the crown at the Restoration. The painting was widely copied and some of the smaller versions, such as that in the Museo del Prado, Madrid, have been attributed to van Leemput. A copy of one of Van Dyck's portraits of Queen Henrietta Maria, attributed to van Leemput, is in Dulwich Picture Gallery, London, described in the actor William Cartwright's original inventory as 'coped by oul Reme' ('Mr Cartwright's Pictures', 34). His quirky, distinctive style is unmistakable in such works. 
Van Leemput died in 1675 and was buried in St Paul's, Covent Garden, London, on 9 November, where his son Charles had been laid to rest on 19 September 1651. Another son, Giovanni Remigio, made a reputation for himself as a copyist in Italy and his daughter Mary also showed a talent for painting. She married Thomas Streeter, nephew of the serjeant-painter Robert Streeter. To his wife Anna Maria, van Leemput left all his estate including 'my house at Antwerpe upon the Meere and two small parcells of Land being near the said city of Antwerpe' (will). Van Leemput's considerable collection of works of art was sold at Somerset House on 14 May 1677. 


@@@@@


doc= 28095


Lemens, Balthasar van (1637-1704), painter, was born in Antwerp. His 'early genius [having] soon distinguishd it self', he went to England not long after the restoration of Charles II in 1660. Vertue records that 'Mr. Le Mense learnt under Decretz' (Vertue, 'Note books', 1.127); presumably this was Emanuel de Critz. Vertue also noted that van Lemens was 'expecting to meet with suitable encouragement' (ibid., 2.136). This does not appear to have been forthcoming, however. Early commentators hint at misfortunes 'in the latter part of his life, wherein he was often in trouble' (Buckeridge, 405), which made it necessary for him to undertake work for other people, drawing and making sketches to assist both painters and engravers; chief among these was Paul van Somer, the mezzotint engraver. Bainbrigg Buckeridge, writing 'c'.1706, thought van Lemens's drawings and sketches 'excellent, and by some thought much better than many of his finished pieces' (ibid.), while Vertue judged 'his Invention' as 'very fruitfull being as serviceable in his drawings for others as to himself' and his sketches 'free & masterly' and 'of a good manner of Design' (Vertue, 'Note books', 2.136-7). 
Van Lemens had some success in painting small history pieces, allegories, and landscapes. Buckeridge describes these as 'very pleasing and well coloured. His manner was free, and often very graceful' (Buckeridge, 404). His works, known through mezzotint engravings by John Smith, include 'St George', several cupids, and 'Venus and Adonis'; his 'Acteon Changed into a Stag by Diana' was engraved by Nicolas de Larmessin the younger. For his patron, the amateur architect William Emmett, he painted portraits of Emmett and his wife, a ceiling painting of the nine muses (after 1698; destroyed) for their house in Bromley, Kent, and religious subjects. According to Vertue, van Lemens had a brother who practised in Brussels and who painted his portrait. He died in London in 1704, of 'a Diabetis in the 66 year of his Age... & was buried in the Chappell Church yard Westminster' (Vertue, 'Note books', 2.137). 


@@@@@


doc= 28096


Mildert, William Van (1765-1836), bishop of Durham, was born on 6 November 1765 at his father's residence in Blackman Street, Southwark, London, the fourth child and second son of Cornelius Van Mildert (1722-1799), gin distiller, and his wife, Martha, 'nee' Hill (1732-1804). He was baptized on 8 December by the rector of Newington, Samuel Horsley. Cornelius Van Mildert was the great-grandson of an Amsterdam merchant who migrated to London around 1670. His father Abraham and grandfather Daniel were deacons of the Dutch Reformed church at Austin Friars; Cornelius himself was a devout Anglican and fringe associate of the writer and pamphleteer William Stevens (1732-1807). He achieved little commercial success. Martha was the only daughter of William Hill of Vauxhall, Surrey, merchant and financier; her brother's influence with the Grocers' Company won William Van Mildert his first important preferment. 
Van Mildert was interested in his Dutch antecedents, touring the Low Countries in July-August 1792, but regarded himself emphatically as an Englishman. He attended St Saviour's School, Southwark, until, aged about thirteen, he persuaded his father to let him seek holy orders. Although Horsley advised against 'diverting the boy from trade' (Ives, 6), about 1779 Van Mildert entered Merchant Taylors' School to prepare for university. He was a commoner at the Queen's College, Oxford, from 1784, graduating BA in November 1787 and proceeding MA in July 1790. On 18 May 1788 he was ordained deacon to the Oxford curacy of Monk Sherborne, Hampshire, and Lewknor, Oxfordshire, moving in 1789 to become curate of Newchurch and Bonnington, on Romney Marsh in Kent. 
Ordained priest on 10 December 1789, in 1790 he became curate of Witham, Essex. There he courted Jane (1760-1837), third daughter of General Douglas, a former aide-de-camp to George II. Her brother Philip, master of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, from 1795, doubted Van Mildert's financial soundness, but in 1795 Van Mildert was instituted to the small living of Bradden, Northamptonshire, by Cornelius Ives, his cousin and brother-in-law, and he married Jane on 22 December. They never had children; Jane's nieces Mary and Helen Margaret became their foster-daughters and her nephew Henry was among Van Mildert's principal proteges. 
In July 1796, sponsored by his uncle William Hill, Van Mildert became chaplain to the Grocers' Company and rector of St Mary-le-Bow, Cheapside, London. There was no habitable parsonage, so he rented 14 Ely Place, Holborn, just outside the parish boundary. In 1800 he was prosecuted for technical non-residence and, although Archbishop Moore of Canterbury spoke on his behalf and the court accepted that he was performing all his duties, Van Mildert was found guilty. His case was cited in parliament and the press as demonstrating the injustice of the legal situation and the urgent need for reform. 
In London, Van Mildert became an active member of the high-church campaigning group known as the Hackney Phalanx. He was elected to William Stevens's exclusive Nobody's Club in 1802, co-edited a two-volume anthology of reprinted tracts, 'The Churchman's Remembrancer' (1802-8), and was briefly editor of the 'British Critic', bought about 1811 to promote the group's viewpoint. He served as treasurer of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge from 1812 to 1815 and helped to found the National Society (1811) and the Church Building Society (1818). 
Van Mildert's Boyle lectures of 1802-5 (published in 1806), which depicted Judaism, Islam, popery, freemasonry, and the French Revolution as elements in a conspiracy masterminded by Satan, established him among the foremost conservative theologians of his day. Their footnotes are particularly extensive. Van Mildert's knowledge of divinity was such that when his friends read snippets from obscure theological works and challenged him to name the author he was seldom caught out. From 1812 to 1819 he was preacher of Lincoln's Inn, and his 1812 sermon on the assassination of Spencer Perceval achieved wide circulation. He was Bampton lecturer in 1814, and in 1823 published a ten-volume edition of the works of Daniel Waterland. 
In March 1807 Van Mildert became chaplain to his wife's kinsman the fourth duke of Queensberry, an appointment which entitled him to hold two benefices in plurality. In April Archbishop Manners-Sutton made him vicar of Farningham, Kent. The parsonage was uninhabitable, and the building work ran dramatically over budget. In 1810 Van Mildert escaped bankruptcy only because his Hackney Phalanx associates paid his debts. He gave up Ely Place and lived economically at Farningham: in 1813 a messenger from Lord Liverpool could find no servant but 'a female presiding at the churn' who made him keep the churn moving while she fetched her master (Churton, 1.138). Liverpool's offer of the regius professorship of divinity at Oxford and the rectory of Ewelme in Oxfordshire was gratefully accepted. As regius professor Van Mildert also became BD, DD, and a canon of Christ Church. 
Consecrated bishop of Llandaff on 31 May 1819, Van Mildert unlike his predecessors resided in the diocese each summer from 1821, renting Coldbrook House near Abergavenny since the bishop's palace was in ruins. He proved a conscientious diocesan and able administrator, serving on a Queen Anne's Bounty committee to assist benefices under $50 yearly value and on the Church Building Commission. In 1820 he declined the archbishopric of Dublin, instead becoming dean of St Paul's 'in commendam' with Llandaff. In November 1820 he was notified of Queen Caroline's intention to attend worship at St Paul's in thanksgiving for her deliverance from the bill of pains and penalties. Van Mildert, whose support for the bill had caused disturbances at Ewelme, outraged 'The Times' by the curtness of his acknowledgement. His absence from the service was noted. On 25 March 1826 Van Mildert accepted Liverpool's offer of the palatine bishopric of Durham. He poured Durham's vast revenues into church building, parsonage building, augmenting small stipends, and establishing parish schools. In 1827 he hosted a resplendent banquet for the duke of Wellington, then making a triumphal tour of the north-east, but deliberately blunted the political edge of the festivities by also honouring Sir Walter Scott. 
As a parliamentarian he was eloquent, respected, and consistently unsuccessful. Although his close friend Charles Lloyd cajoled him into supporting the 1828 repeal of the 'Test and Corporation Acts', Van Mildert resisted Catholic emancipation to the end. His bitter public clash with Lloyd during the 1829 Lords debate contributed to Lloyd's early death. Burned in effigy at his castle gates in November 1831 for opposing parliamentary reform, Van Mildert was prominent in co-ordinating episcopal resistance to the ''Irish Church Spoliation Bill'' (the 'Irish Church Temporalities Bill') of 1833. His refusal to compromise even with tory political necessity guaranteed his omission from Peel's 1835 ecclesiastical commission and may explain why in 1828 Wellington, though regarding Van Mildert as the prime candidate for the archbishopric of Canterbury, recommended the king to choose William Howley instead. 
In June 1831 Archdeacon Thorp of Durham suggested to Van Mildert that founding a university at Durham would 'give to the Dean & Chapter strength of character & usefulness', help preserve ecclesiastical revenues from the threat of reform, and pre-empt moves to establish a London-style secular university at Newcastle upon Tyne, (Thorp to Van Mildert, 11 June 1831, Oxford, Balliol College, MS Jenkyns IV A). Van Mildert championed the proposal with the dean and chapter, the Grey government, and ultimately in parliament. Besides his advocacy and munificent financial contributions -- the dean and chapter collectively provided $3000 per annum, the bishop $2000 with many additional specific benefactions -- Van Mildert secured most of his fellow bishops' agreement to accept Durham degrees as qualification for holy orders. He also recruited H. J. Rose as Durham's first professor of divinity. The 'Durham University Bill' became law in July 1832 and the university admitted its first students in October 1833. 
Van Mildert was of medium height and slight build, with an expressive face, 'well able, when it behoved him, to assume a highly imposing step and mien' (Ives, 153). His health was never robust and he was known for the austerity of his diet. Following a surgical operation in 1824 his last years were narrowed by constant pain. His wife, after a stroke in 1833 which affected her personality, lived at Harrogate until her death in 1837. Van Mildert died at Auckland Castle, co. Durham, on 21 February 1836, collapsing after a minor illness into a week of steadily deepening stupor followed by a peaceful death. Although he wished to be buried in the Auckland chapel with sumptuous ceremonial, he was entombed in a vault in front of Durham Cathedral's high altar. Shortly after Van Mildert's death the bishopric was stripped of its palatine status and the remnant of its ancient secular powers. 


@@@@@


doc= 28097


Vannes, Peter (c.1488-1563), diplomat and dean of Salisbury, was born in Lucca, Italy, the son of Stefano Vanni of Lucca. Vannes was the kinsman of Andrea Ammonius, a close friend of Erasmus, Latin secretary to Henry VIII, and one of the many Italian humanists who enjoyed favour at the English court. Vannes referred to himself as Ammonius's kinsman ('consobrinus'), but their exact relationship has not been established, with some sources suggesting that Ammonius was Vannes's maternal uncle, and others that the two men were cousins. In 1513 Ammonius brought Vannes to England and employed him as his assistant. Silvestro Gigli, bishop of Worcester and a fellow Lucchese, introduced Vannes to Cardinal Wolsey, who retained him as his Latin secretary in 1514. Ammonius's death three years later, in August 1517, prompted Vannes to write immediately to Wolsey seeking some living previously held by his late kinsman. At the same time, a distraught Erasmus entrusted Vannes with the task of destroying or forwarding any of his extant correspondence with Ammonius. Exasperated at the slow response to his request, Erasmus berated Vannes in subsequent letters, calling him a 'monster' and complaining that he had none of the spirit of his relative Ammonius. 
In 1523 Vannes was incorporated a bachelor of theology at Cambridge, possibly because he had already taken that degree on the continent. Although he was unsuccessful in his efforts to become bishop of Lucca in 1526, he had sufficient patronage and influence to acquire several ecclesiastical livings in England: by 1530 he held prebends in the cathedrals of Hereford (Cublington) and Salisbury (South Grantham and Bedwyn), Bedwyn having been previously held by the illegitimate son of Wolsey, Thomas Winter. 
Vannes began his diplomatic career in earnest in 1527 when, with Cuthbert Tunstall, Sir Thomas More, and other luminaries, he accompanied Wolsey to France to establish a league between England, the Holy Roman empire, France, and Venice. In late November 1528 he and Sir Francis Bryan were sent to Rome as special ambassadors to the pope, each receiving a daily wage of 26's'. 8died Masquerading as an embassy to warn the papacy against agreeing to an imperial peace proposal, the mission was actually intended to induce Pope Clement VII to pronounce Henry VIII's marriage to Katherine of Aragon void 'ab initio'. The ambassadors had other objectives, too, including that of disproving the authenticity of a brief which undermined Henry's arguments for the divorce by removing disabilities found in the original dispensation for the marriage. Vannes was encouraged to use whatever means necessary to secure support, including hiring advocates, bribing cardinals, and even threatening the pope with the withdrawal of English allegiance to Rome. If all else failed, Vannes was instructed to seek Clement VII's approval for Henry to have two wives, 'making the children of the second marriage legitimate as well as those of the first, whereof some great reasons and precedents, especially in the 'Old Testament', appear' ('LP Henry VIII', 4/2, no. 4977). On their journey Vannes and Bryan stopped in France to meet the French king, Francois I, in mid-December, and finally arrived in Rome on 28 January 1529. Clement's ill health delayed the English embassy until late March, when the ambassadors met him informally; they only had a formal audience on 1 April. After the failure of the mission Bryan went to France to serve as ambassador, while Vannes returned to England, travelling via Paris to promote the divorce with the French king and clergy. 
Vannes survived the fall of his patron Wolsey, an event that did not impede his advancement. Indeed, some time after 1528 he became Latin secretary to Henry VIII. Appointed collector of papal taxes in England on 17 July 1533, he travelled later that year to Rome, Avignon, and Marseilles in his new capacity. He also continued to accumulate benefices, acquiring prebends in the dioceses of Bath and Wells (Compton Dundon) in May 1534 and York (Bole) in February 1535. He was appointed archdeacon of Worcester in May 1534, and was formally installed as dean of Salisbury on 3 February 1540, a post he appears to have held 'de facto' since 1536, and one that he retained until 28 March 1563. In 1541 he became rector of Tredington, Worcestershire, and acquired the further prebends of Caddington Major in St Paul's in April 1542 and Shipton in Salisbury in 1543. In 1545 he received a special pension of $26 13's'. 4died from King Henry VIII College, Oxford, as compensation for the canonry he had held in that college until its dissolution. 
Upon his accession Edward VI retained Vannes as his Latin secretary with an annual salary of 40 marks. He was reappointed for life on 13 December 1549. Shortly thereafter, in May 1550, Vannes was appointed English ambassador to Venice with a salary of 40's'. a day. He visited his native Lucca in November 1551. The protestant Edwardian regime instructed Vannes to keep close watch over Englishmen travelling in Italy, especially those with Catholic tendencies who sought out Cardinal Pole and his circle. Vannes continued to serve as ambassador during the first half of Mary's reign, when he prudently adopted a pro-imperial position. He may also have acted as the queen's spokesman in justifying her determination to execute Thomas Cranmer in spite of his recantation. During his tenure abroad Vannes became involved in some highly questionable activities. In 1554 he hired assassins who attempted to kill Sir Peter Carew. Circumstantial evidence suggests Vannes's involvement in the mysterious death in 1556 of Edward Courtenay, earl of Devon; it is possible that Vannes had him poisoned to foil a plot to marry the earl to Mary's sister, Elizabeth, and then take the English throne. In any event, Vannes requested his recall immediately after Courtenay's demise on 18 September, and returned to English soil some time after October 1556. Queen Elizabeth disregarded any unsavoury rumours and allowed Vannes to retain his livings after 1558. 
Vannes died between 28 March and 1 May 1563, leaving two wills, both dated 1 July 1562. His affairs took some time to settle, with one will granted probate on 21 May 1563 and the other being confirmed and proved a full year later, on 10 July 1564. He provided very well for his family: his sister Margaret received a comfortable living for the remainder of her life, and his brother's illegitimate daughter, also named Margaret, was given a dowry of 300 crowns ('scutos'). Vannes's principal heir, a 'Benedict Hudson, alias Vannes', was most probably his illegitimate son; not only did Vannes bequeath Benedict's mother, Alice, a cow and a valuable bed, but, much more telling, he also left Benedict all family lands in his native Lucca. It may be a pointer to his court connections that he left to Sir William Petre, royal secretary from 1544 to 1557, a 'new black satin robe adorned with black velvet newly acquired from Venice' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/46, fol. 173'v'). 
Vannes's standing at the English court attracted Italian humanists seeking patronage. Ortensio Lando, eager to honour a fellow Lucchese, dedicated his 1550 work 'Miscellaneae questiones' to him. It was through Vannes that Pietro Aretino in 1542 sent a copy of his second volume of letters to Henry VIII, to whom it was dedicated. Other literary figures appreciated Vannes's friendship, among them John Leland, who commemorated their relationship in an ode. 


@@@@@


doc= 28098


Nost, John van, the younger (d. 1780), sculptor, was born in Piccadilly, London, the son of John van Nost (died 1729), also a sculptor, who was a cousin of the well-known Dutch sculptor John Nost (d. 1710), who settled in London. John van Nost the younger, who had been apprenticed to Henry Scheemakers in 1726, arrived in Dublin around 1749 and quickly established a successful practice. Mrs Delany visited his studio in March 1752, and noted that he 'takes as strong a likeness as ever I saw taken in marble' ('Letters', 275). From 1750 onwards van Nost served as an instructor in the modelling classes at the Dublin Society Schools and took on apprentices, including John Crawley and Patrick Cunningham. John O'Keeffe, who later became a successful actor and playwright, entered the School of Figure Drawing around 1753 and remembered that 'Van Nost, the celebrated statuary, often came amongst us' (O'Keeffe, 16). Van Nost's own sister is recorded as having won a prize at the Dublin Society Schools for a bust in clay of the prince of Wales in February 1754. 
Among the first works van Nost produced in Dublin were a statue of George II, placed in an arched niche over the door of the Weaver's Hall in the Coombe, and busts of Thomas Prior and Samuel Madden for the Dublin Society. In 1752 he was asked to produce a monument to Thomas Prior (now in Christ Church Cathedral), and he was enlisted to design a monument to Dean Swift in Trinity College, Dublin, though that project was not carried out. Dr Bartholomew Mosse appointed van Nost to create a number of portrait busts and classical figures for display in the gardens of the Rotunda Hospital. This commission was not completed either, but the hospital did acquire in 1757 those sculptures which van Nost had finished. Among other important works are busts of Dean Delany, for Trinity College Dublin, and of Henry Boyle, speaker of the Irish House of Commons, for the farmers' club in Munster, as well as two sculptures for the gateway of Dublin Castle. Two statues by van Nost were erected in the city, one in Stephen's Green of George II (1758), and another, of General Blakeney, in Sackville Street (1759). In 1765 the earl of Northumberland commissioned van Nost to produce an idealized statue of King George III as a Roman general (NG Ire.) for the new exchange in Dublin. Van Nost also executed important works for locations in Cork, Longford, and King's county. 
When van Nost's residence and studio in Aungier Street were auctioned in November 1759, Cunningham, his former student, was provided with sufficient funds by the Dublin Society to purchase 'such molds and models as are useful and necessary for carrying on his Designs in the business of a Statuary' (Turpin, 'A School of Art', 54). These may well have included busts in varnished plaster of Seneca, Aristotle, Galen, and Horace, which Mrs Delany says van Nost ordered for his library in 1752. By 1763 van Nost was living in the garden of the Rt Hon. Anthony Malone, on the east side of Stephen's Green, and in 1779 at 21 Mecklenburgh Street. In 1777 he went to London, where he was forced by poor health to stay for four years. On his return to Dublin he moved back to Mecklenburgh Street, where, according to the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (50, 1780, 494), he died in 1780. 
Van Nost, the only significant sculptor at work in Ireland in the mid-eighteenth century, prospered in the capital. Described by a committee of the corporation of Dublin in 1752 as 'the most knowing and skilfull statuary in this Kingdom' (Strickland, 480), he drew on a Netherlandish style for his figures but was also influenced by Italianate idealization, and he shared the English and Irish penchant for classicism. 


@@@@@


doc= 28099


Andrew van Rymsdyk (1753/4-1786) and John ('fl'. 1778-1790). At the age of eleven, in 1765, Andrew (or Andries) was awarded a premium prize for drawing from the Society of Arts, and again in 1766 and 1767. He exhibited at the Society of Arts (1769, 1776) and the Royal Academy of Art, London (1775), and contributed drawings to the 'Museum Britannicum'. In the 1780s he advertised as a miniature painter (misleadingly claiming to be a member of the Royal Academy) in the local press of Norwich, Chester, and Bath, where he died on 13 November 1786. Miniatures by him, 'The Seventh Earl of Athlone' (1783) and 'Sarah Siddons' (1783), are in the National Gallery of Ireland, and two miniatures of unidentified sitters, male and female, are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, the latter signed and dated 1780. The 'Rymsdyk Jr.' who exhibited two enamels at the Royal Academy in 1778 has been identified as Andrew but is more likely to have been his brother, John van Rymsdyk, who is mentioned in his father's will of 1790. 


@@@@@


doc= 28100


Rymsdyk, Jan van (d. 1790), artist, was born in the Netherlands. Of his parents, nothing is known. He contributed to the great English obstetric atlases of the eighteenth century and was particularly active as an anatomical illustrator in London in the 1750s, working primarily in red chalk and pastels. By 1750 Rymsdyk was in London providing drawings (Hunterian collection, Glasgow University Library) for the plates to William Hunter's 'The Anatomy of the Gravid Uterus', eventually published in 1774. 
Familiar with his work for Hunter, William Smellie employed Rymsdyk to contribute preparatory drawings to his 'A Sett of Anatomical Tables', illustrated with life-size obstetric plates. The book is dated 1754 but did not appear until the following year. Most of Rymsdyk's drawings for Smellie were completed by 1752 and were later purchased by Hunter in Smellie's posthumous sale on 29 June 1770 (Hunterian collection, Glasgow University Library). Rymsdyk's portrait of Smellie is known only from the print after it by Charles Grignion. 
Rymsdyk was also employed by John Hunter, William's brother. All of the illustrations to 'The natural history of the human teeth: explaining their structure, use, formation, growth, and diseases' were drawn by Rymsdyk 'under the Author's direction'. Although published in London 1771, the book is based on work done by Hunter before 1755, and some of Rymsdyk's preparatory drawings, in the library of the Royal College of Surgeons, London, bear this date. Rymsdyk's exceptionally attractive red-chalk drawings of the entire skull for the book were truncated in the finished plates, since only the teeth and jaw area were of relevance. 
Rymsdyk's reputation as an anatomical draughtsman brought him to the attention of Charles Nicholas Jenty. Rymsdyk provided drawings for the mezzotint illustrations to Jenty's 'An Essay on the Demonstration of the Human Structure' (1757). In Jenty's opinion: 'none imitated Nature better than Mr. Van Riemsdyk; who... has been for some Time employed by the Doctors Smellie and Hunter in Pieces of Midwifery, &c. and is well known to be the ablest Person we have in London, in anatomical Performances. (pp. 6-7)' In the same year, six life-size mezzotint plates to Jenty's 'The Demonstrations of a Pregnant Uterus of a Woman at her Full Time' were published. These are described in the title as 'Done from the pictures painted, after dissections, by Mr Van Riemsdyk', although the first plate bears the signature of Thomas Burgess. Pastel drawings by Rymsdyk for Jenty, one dated 1755, were sent to the Pennsylvania Hospital, Philadelphia, by John Fothergill for teaching purposes, arriving in 1762. 
Despite his success in this genre, it is known from Rymsdyk's later comments in his 'Museum Britannicum' of 1778 that he felt that his talents as an artist had not been properly recognized. In 1758 he sought a change in career and moved to Bristol, where he advertised himself as a portrait painter and a drawing teacher in 'Felix Farley's Bristol Journal' (16 December 1758). Some of his subsequent sitters belonged to the Bristol medical community. Richard Smith recorded one such portrait of the surgeon John Page (1713-1792), now in the boardroom of the Bristol Royal Infirmary ('Bristol Infirmary biographical memoirs', 2.190). Rymsdyk failed to achieve financial success in Bristol and is described by Smith as being reduced to wearing the cast-off clothing of William Barrett, man-midwife and local historian (ibid.). A portrait of Barrett attributed to Rymsdyk ('c'.1764) is in the Bristol Museum and Art Gallery. 
By 1764 Rymsdyk had returned to London, where he was residing at Wych Street, Drury Lane, with his son Andrew ['see below'], and was again in the employ of William Hunter as an anatomical draughtsman. On 16 July 1772 Rymsdyk first obtained permission from the British Museum for access to the exhibits to make drawings (Add. MS 45869, fol. 49'v'). In 1778 the 'Museum Britannicum, being an exhibition of a great variety of antiquities and natural curiosities' was published, illustrated with prints after drawings by Rymsdyk and his son Andrew of a selection of objects in the British Museum. A second edition appeared posthumously in 1791. The text is by Jan van Rymsdyk and the extensive annotations frequently reveal his wide range of interests as well as a difficult and petulant character. There are several references to what he considered his lost career as a painter and his lengthy servitude to those who did not fully appreciate him, an allusion to William Hunter. The preparatory drawings, mainly in delicate coloured wash, are in the British Museum print room. The book, according to a supplementary obituary notice of Andrew van Rymsdyk, was not a financial success ('GM', 1145). Jan van Rymsdyk's last works were drawings for Thomas Denman's 'A collection of engravings, tending to illustrate the generation and parturition of animals, and of the human species' (1787) and an 'Introduction to the Practice of Midwifery' (1801). 
Further anatomical, pathological, and natural history drawings and pastels by Rymsdyk are in the Royal College of Surgeons, London, the British Museum, and the Hunterian collection, University of Glasgow, including those for illustrations to papers in the journal 'Medical Observations and Inquiries'. Few of his prints survive. He contributed only one engraved figure to Hunter's 'Gravid Uterus' and one plate to the 'Museum Britannicum', preferring instead to hire engravers for the latter book for which he advertised in the 'Daily Advertiser' (20 September 1775). Rymsdyk was also a collector of old-master drawings, those that he owned identifiable by the mark 'Rymsdyk's Museum'. These are now in various collections, including the British Museum. 
Rymsdyk had two sons, 
By 1775 Jan van Rymsdyk had moved to Charles Street, off St James's Square, London, and this is where he was resident with his sister, Maria, and second son, John, when he drew up his will on 14 February 1790. He died there shortly afterwards, on 20 February 1790. 


@@@@@


doc= 28101


Vaus, Sir Patrick, Lord Barnbarroch (d. 1597), diplomat and judge, was the second son of Sir John Vaus of Barnbarroch, Wigtownshire, and his wife, Janet, only child of Sir Samuel MacCulloch of Myreton, keeper of the palace of Linlithgow. Vaus was intended for the church and became rector of Wigtown, but succeeded to the family estates on the death of his elder brother, Alexander, in 1568; he later (May 1580) granted a nineteen-year 'tack' of the parsonage and vicarage of Wigtown. 
Vaus was threatened with escheat in October 1570 for absenting himself from the royal host, but on 1 January 1576 he was appointed an ordinary lord of session, with the title Lord Barnbarroch. By 1580 he had married Katherine Kennedy (died in or after 1593), and they had four sons: his heir, John, later one of the gentlemen of the chamber to James VI, and Patrick, Robert, and Alexander. Vaus also had a natural son, Richard, who was granted precept of legitimation on 1 May 1577. Probably knighted in the 1580s, Vaus was admitted on 21 April 1587 to membership of the privy council, and in the following month he and Peter Young went on embassy to Denmark to arrange for the marriage of James VI with Anne of Denmark; Vaus later accompanied James VI to Norway and witnessed the marriage, on 23 November 1589. In October 1589 the king granted him a new charter of his lands in 'blench ferm' in recognition of his services in Denmark, incorporated in the free barony of Bar. In August 1591 these lands were incorporated into the free barony of Barnbarroch. However, Vaus evidently had trouble collecting taxes assigned to him in Kyle Stewart on account of 'expenssis maid at his ambassadrie', as he complained to the privy council in February 1589 ('Reg. PCS', 353). 
In the parliaments of 1592 and 1593 Vaus was elected a lord of the articles, while in June 1592 he was granted an annual pension of $200 Scots. In January 1597, when the king returned to Edinburgh after the previous month's anti-Catholic riot, Vaus was among those called upon to attend James in arms at the 'mercat croce' for 'reduceing of certane disordourit personis... to his Majesteis obediens' ('Reg. PCS', 355). Vaus died, presumably in Edinburgh, later that year, on 22 July 1597. 


@@@@@


doc= 28102


Vansittart, George Henry (1768-1824), army officer, born on 16 July 1768, was the eldest son of George Vansittart (1745-1825), of Bengal and Bisham Abbey, Berkshire, MP for Berkshire (1784-1812), and his wife, Sarah, daughter of the Revd Sir James Stonhouse, baronet, of Radley, Berkshire. Henry Vansittart (1777-1843) was his younger brother. Henry Vansittart (1732-1770?) and Robert Vansittart (1728-1789) were his uncles. He was educated under Dr Warton at Winchester College, at a military academy at Strasbourg (when aged fifteen), and at Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated on 7 November 1785. 
After obtaining a commission as ensign in the 19th foot on 18 October 1786, he was allowed a year's leave to study military science at Brunswick and attend the Prussian manoeuvres. He became lieutenant on 25 December 1787, exchanged to the 38th foot on 12 March 1788, and obtained a company in the 18th on 23 June 1790. He joined it at Gibraltar, went with it to Toulon in 1793 to support the anti-Jacobin Toulonnais, took part in the defence, and was one of the last men to leave. He became major in the New South Wales Corps on 20 November 1793, and lieutenant-colonel of the 95th rifles on 21 February 1794. He took part with it in the expedition to the Cape under Sir Alured Clarke in 1795. He was made colonel in the army on 26 January 1797; but the 95th was broken up in the course of that year, and for the next three years he was on half pay and in the Berkshire militia, which his uncle, Colonel Arthur Vansittart, had previously commanded. 
On 10 April 1801 Vansittart became lieutenant-colonel of the 68th foot, went with it to the West Indies, and was present at the capture of St Lucia in June 1803. On 25 September he was promoted major-general, and served on the staff in England from 1804 to 1806, and in Ireland from 1806 to 1810, when he became lieutenant-general (25 July). While in command of the Oxford district he received the degree of DCL on 26 June 1805. He was made colonel of the 12th reserve battalion on 9 July 1803, and was transferred to the 1st garrison battalion on 25 February 1805. The colours of this battalion were afterwards presented to him, and later hung in the great hall in Bisham Abbey. He became general on 19 July 1821. 
On 29 October 1818 Vansittart married Anna Maria, daughter and coheir of Thomas Copson of Sheppey Hall, Leicestershire. She survived him, with one son, George Henry (1823-1885); a second son, Augustus Arthur (1824-1882), was born posthumously. Vansittart died on 4 February 1824. 


@@@@@


doc= 28103


Vansittart, Henry (1732-1770?), administrator in India, born on 3 June 1732 at his father's house in Ormond Street, London, was the third son of Arthur van Sittart (1692-1760) of Shottesbrooke, Berkshire, and his wife, Martha, who was the eldest daughter and coheir of Sir John Stonhouse of Radley, who had been comptroller of Queen Anne's household. Robert Vansittart was his elder brother, and George, his younger brother, who also served in Bengal, was the father of General George Henry Vansittart and Vice-Admiral Henry Vansittart. It was this generation that began spelling the name as a single word. Merchants and traders, the family traced its origin to Siddard, a town in the province of Limburg in the Netherlands, but Henry's ancestors had moved to Julich and eventually to Danzig, and from there his grandfather Peter van Sittart went to London about 1670. Having made a fortune in trading with Russia, India, and the south seas, he became a governor of the Russia Company and a director of the East India Company. His son Arthur, Henry's father, was also involved in both of the trading companies, from which he made a large fortune. By then the family were living in Reading, where Henry probably attended the grammar school before going to Winchester College. 
In 1745 Vansittart was given an appointment by the East India Company as a writer at their establishment at Fort St David, Madras. Some accounts have suggested, without giving any details, that he was sent to India at thirteen by his father to get him out of England since he was a dissolute and unruly youth ('DNB'), but a writer was, in effect, an apprentice who copied letters and other documents under the direction of more senior officials, and not until 1751 was sixteen made the minimum age for such appointments in the company's service. They were sought after as an opportunity to make money, especially by families like the van Sittarts, with a long connection to the East India Company. When Vansittart arrived at Fort St David to begin his career as a writer, it was a subsidiary establishment of Fort St George, about 50 miles to the north, the company's headquarters in south India. It was close to Pondicherry, and when the rival French trading company the Compagnie des Indes Orientales attacked Fort St David in 1746-7, he took part in its successful defence. He also began the study of Persian, which was the formal language of communication with Mughal officials, and while English writers praised his skill, a Frenchman said no Indian could understand him (Woodruff, 1.116), which would not preclude a good reading knowledge. Robert Clive was another recently arrived young company servant at Fort St David, and he and Vansittart began a close friendship, although later they became opponents when the company was involved in party struggles in England. In 1749 Fort St George was captured by the French, and Fort St David became the seat of the company's government in the Madras region until 1752, when it was returned to Fort St George. The move to Fort St David probably helped Vansittart's advancement, for in 1750 he was promoted to the grade of factor, or agent responsible for the sale and purchase of the company's goods in his area. At this time the company's servants were essentially private traders licensed by the company, not full-time civilian employees as was later the case. While serving its commercial needs, their positions gave servants the opportunity for political involvement, which, combined with the right to trade on their own account, and through deals of various kinds with Indian rulers and merchants, made it possible for even a young man like Vansittart to amass a considerable fortune very quickly. Although no exact details are known, he had made enough in five or six years to return to England from Madras in 1751. 
Vansittart now enjoyed the pleasures of an eighteenth-century rake, if contemporary accounts are true, for he became a member, along with his two brothers Arthur and Robert, of Sir Francis Dashwood's Franciscans or Monks of Medmenham whose members were said to engage in parodies of the mass, sexual orgies, and political conspiracies. Vansittart had his portrait painted by William Hogarth in 1753 dressed as a monk, and was said to have brought a baboon from India, which he had dressed as a chaplain for the club. In addition to these pastimes Vansittart apparently gambled heavily and lost much of his money before returning to Fort St George in 1753. 
While England and France were at peace, the French and English trading companies in India were engaged in local wars, and at the end of 1753 Dupleix, the great French commander in India, agreed to discuss peace. Vansittart was one of the two East India Company commissaries who met the French at Sadras during 21-6 January 1754, and, while the negotiations failed, the senior officials were impressed by Vansittart's skill. He became a junior merchant and then in 1756 a senior merchant, giving him more authority and more opportunities for private trade. He also became secretary, as well as Persian translator, to the secret committee, which consisted of the governor and four other members of his council and dealt with Indian rulers. In the following year he became a member of the council itself and 'searcher of the sea-gate', a position of profit and responsibility. 
An important concern of the council and secret committee at the time was the company's relationship to the most powerful ruler in the region, the nawab of Arcot. While the commander of the company's armies in 1754 proposed deposing him and taking over his territories, the council hesitated, on the grounds that the company lacked experience to manage such a large territory. A similar situation was to face Vansittart a few years later in Bengal, with even more momentous consequences. Another major concern of the council was prompted by the outbreak of war between France and Britain in 1756, when Madras was attacked in February 1759 by the comte de Lally, the commandant of all the French possessions in India. Vansittart became acting governor while the French were besieging Fort St George. 
Contemporary accounts give little information about Vansittart's private life, but whatever his youthful indiscretions, after his return to Madras he appears to have become a respectable family man. On 1 June 1754 he married Emilia Morse (died 1819), daughter of Nicolas Morse, the governor of Madras. They had two daughters, Emilia and Sophie, and five sons, Henry, Arthur, Robert, George, and Nicholas Vansittart. 
Robert Clive, now governor of Bengal, planned to return to England. He urged Laurence Sulivan, one of the most powerful figures in the company in London, to bring Vansittart from Madras to Bengal as governor as the best hope for maintaining the company's position there. Vansittart was appointed governor of Bengal by the company on 8 November 1759, but he did not arrive in Calcutta until July 1760, after the French threat to Madras had lessened. The language of the appointment letter -- as president of the council and governor of Fort William and the company's settlements in Bengal, Bihar, and Orissa -- sounds impressive, but the power and prestige with which the title resonates comes from a later time. Decisions were made by majority vote, and the majority of Vansittart's council were from the beginning opposed to him, partly as an outsider from Madras who, in their view, had usurped a place that by right of seniority belonged to them. However, the councils protests went unheeded as the directors supported Vansittart. The acting governor, John Zephaniah Holwell, felt especially aggrieved, but Vansittart in general accepted the plans he had made for dealing with the most pressing problem, relations with Mir Jafar Ali Khan ['see under 'Bengal, nawabs of], the nawab of Bengal, and he afterwards defended Vansittart when he was attacked by his enemies in London. 
Vansittart arrived in Bengal to find not only a hostile council, but, as he put it, 'the treasury was so low, and our resources so much drained, that we were obliged to put an entire stop to our investment [the goods that were purchased to be exported to Europe] and it was with the utmost difficulty the current expenses of the settlement could be provided for' (Vansittart, 1.14). His explanation for this situation, a few years after Clive had seemed to deliver the wealth of Bengal to the company, centred on the treaty that had been made with Mir Jafar to overthrow the nawab of Bengal and give the throne to him. By the treaty the company was to raise an army, which would be under its complete control but paid for by the nawab and at his service when required. The nawab had failed to provide the promised money, and Vansittart was faced with a mutinous army that had not been paid for months. The nawab was losing control of his own administration and, so far from being able to pay the arrears, asked Vansittart for loans. To add to his difficulties, no money had been sent from London, as the directors had assumed that the money from the nawab would pay for the investment and, in addition, Madras and Bombay had been told that they would have to depend on Bengal for their needs. From his recent experience he knew how much Madras needed supplies because of the war with the French for the control of the Carnatic, which, he pointed out, was 'an interesting object for the English nation' but a very expensive one for the company. Since there was no hope of getting money directly from the nawab, he soon concluded that the only solution was to get him to cede outright large territories to the company, from which it could collect the taxes. When Vansittart went to see him in October 1760, it became clear that the nawab was willing to see himself and his state ruined rather than put 'more power and more resources of money in our hands' (ibid., 1.15). Vansittart was convinced that the only course of action left open, if he was to save the company's foothold in Bengal, was the overthrow of Mir Jafar in favour of his son-in-law Mir Kasim ['see under 'Bengal, nawabs of], who, quite apart from the company, was already intriguing against him. Vansittart tried to save the nawab's reputation by suggesting that he could retain his title, with Mir Kasim as his deputy. However, he refused this offer, and turned over all power to Mir Kasim and went to live in Calcutta. Mir Kasim had already signed a treaty on 27 September 1760 giving the company what Vansittart wanted: full control of the three rich districts of Burdwan, Midnapore, and Chittagong. Often spoken of as a creature of Vansittart and the British, it is probable that Mir Kasim would have overthrown the nawab without their intrusion and without the costs that accrued from Vansittart's arrangement. 
Vansittart always referred in his writings to these events as 'the revolution', and believed that people were in general pleased with it, as evidenced by the fact that there had been no resistance, and 'not a drop of blood spilt' (Vansittart, 1.53). When the directors heard what had happened, they were also pleased; they told the council in Calcutta that they realized the revolution was principally due to Vansittart and 'returned him thanks for his great services' (ibid., 2.177). Warren Hastings was an active participant in bringing about the changes, and he remained Vansittart's most loyal supporter in the council and among the senior officials in charge of the company's factories. Almost immediately challenges to Vansittart's authority came from these officials, especially those at Patna. 
Patna, one of the most important inland posts, became the focus of Vansittart's troubles when the company's military officers there, Lieutenant-Colonel Eyre Coote and Major John Carnac, supported Ramnarian, the deputy governor of the region appointed by the previous nawab, in his refusal to submit his accounts to Mir Kasim. Their stand contravened the orders of Vansittart, who was anxious to remain on good terms with the nawab. Coote and Carnac continued to defy him and insulted the nawab, so Vansittart recalled them, leaving Ramnarian at the mercy of Mir Kasim, who had him put to death. This led to the charge then and later that Vansittart had sacrificed a friend of the British in order to placate and strengthen the nawab, instead of weakening him, which would have been in the company's interest. 
The most serious dispute involving Vansittart, the nawab, the company's servants, and London developed over the private inland trade of the company's servants. The company itself had been free from paying duties on goods they were exporting through the use of permits, or 'dastaks', granted to them by the Mughal authorities. After the battle of Plassey the private merchants began to use them for internal as well as external trade. Furthermore, the British traders employed Indian agents, 'gomastahs', who oppressed the Indian merchants by forcing them to sell goods at low prices. Mir Kasim realized that this misuse of the permits was depriving him of duties as well as ruining the local traders, and that the company's agents, both British and Indian, were setting up what amounted to their own system of law and order. He appealed to Vansittart to put a stop to what in 1758 the directors in London had called the 'scandalous prostitution' of the permits, and Vansittart saw the justice of the nawab's complaints. Along with Hastings he went to negotiate with the nawab at his capital, and they reached what seemed to him a fair settlement: the company's servants could participate in the inland trade on the payment of a 9 per cent duty, which was much less than Indian traders paid. However, when Vansittart reported this settlement early in 1763, the council, with its hostile majority, rejected it out of hand as one more concession by the governor to the nawab. Two members of the council accused Vansittart of having made a private arrangement with the nawab to protect his own private trade, but they could produce no evidence. When the nawab learned that Vansittart's agreement with him had been rejected by the council, he took the dramatic step of removing all duties on trade, for Indians as well as for the British. The council were enraged and Vansittart's plea that Britons could compete in a system of free trade with Indians and other foreigners was disregarded. The majority argued that by remitting the duties the nawab had declared war on the company, and the army should be prepared to march to force the nawab to restore the duties or to face the consequences of being deposed. 
The nawab prepared for war, which began after the company's agent at Patna, William Ellis, one of Vansittart's bitterest enemies, attacked the nawab's forces in June 1763. When Ellis and the other Europeans with him were captured and put to death, the council insisted that war was inevitable. Vansittart was against war, as he felt that Mir Kasim had been driven to desperation by the actions of Ellis, and he also opposed the council's plans to replace Mir Kasim with the old nawab, Mir Jafar, who would obviously be a puppet of the council majority. Vansittart and Hastings were attacked in the council as profiting from their relationship with Mir Kasim, a murderer of Britons, but being powerless before the majority, and unwilling to show publicly the extent of the divisions, Vansittart signed the declaration of war on 7 July 1763. The conflict dragged on for over a year until Mir Kasim's defeat, along with his allies the nawab of Oudh and the Mughal emperor Shah Alam, at Buxar on 23 October 1764, perhaps the most important of all British military victories in India as it gave the company effective territorial control of vast areas of Bengal and Bihar. 
This, however, was no triumph for Vansittart, who had long since wearied of India. Frustrated by the opposition in the council, and suffering from what may have been malaria, he had planned to resign in December 1763, but the majority of the council surprisingly urged him to stay until a successor could be appointed. He agreed to do so, not leaving until December 1764. 
Back in England Vansittart became involved in the complex and shifting politics of the proprietors and directors of the East India Company, where Robert Clive, once his chief supporter but now estranged because of Vansittart's deposing of Mir Jafar, vied with Laurence Sulivan for influence in the company and parliament. Vansittart sided with Sulivan in these contests. Clive's supporters, especially Luke Scrafton, assailed his record and his personal character in speeches, newspaper articles, and books, which were answered with equal venom by Vansittart's friends. The most interesting production of the literary war, however, came from Vansittart himself. Before he had left Bengal, he had sent copies of relevant documents to his friends in London, published as 'Original Papers Relative to the Disturbances in Bengal', which he then used as the basis for his remarkable book 'A Narrative of the Transaction in Bengal from 1760 to 1764', which, while defending his own policies and vindicating his character, provided details of the often very cogent counter-arguments of his opponents as well as numerous letters from the nawabs of Bengal. 
Vansittart was elected to parliament for the borough of Reading on 16 March 1768, using his connections to further his own and his friends' interests in the company and in parliament. His main concerns at this time seem to have been financial. How much money he had actually made in India is not known, but his brother George later remarked that one needed $50,000 to retire, and he probably had made at least that much. His enemies accused him, in fact, of 'trying to encircle the general trade of Bengal under his own direction', but it was assumed that governors of Bengal would be very wealthy men, for, without apology, 'they were in India to get rich' (Marshall, 'East Indian Fortunes', 217, 115, 3). He was able to buy an estate and a house in Berkshire, but he had difficulty in transferring his Indian money back to Britain. Remitting money from India, because of the company's rules, was often harder than making it, and Vansittart thought of returning to India to retrieve what he could of his fortune. His situation was made worse by heavy losses that he had sustained as a result of his involvement in the company's politics in London. 
In 1769 elections took place for the directors of the governing body of the East India Company. Since voting rights depended on stock ownership, Vansittart, in alliance with Laurence Sulivan, organized a complex system of borrowing money to buy stock. However, an unexpected financial crisis ruined many speculators in the company's stocks, with Vansittart among those hardest hit. Hope for his salvation came with news of the disastrous state of the company's affairs in India. The crisis prompted the decision to send out three commissioners with power to override the councils which had given such trouble to Vansittart and other governors. It was assumed that there would be opportunity of great financial gain for the commissioners, and Vansittart's friends, hoping that he would be saved from further ruin, got him appointed. He was balanced by an opponent, Luke Scrafton, and by Francis Forde, regarded as somewhat neutral in the company's internal politics, who had served with Vansittart in Madras. The commissioners sailed in September 1769, and were in Cape Town on 27 December, but the ship apparently foundered some time later, for it was never heard of again. How desperately Vansittart needed money was shown when his executors found he had virtually no resources in England, except the properties in Berkshire and Greenwich. 
It was an anticlimactic end for someone who, ten years before, Clive and other well-wishers had thought best suited to be governor of Bengal and to secure it for Britain. Historians of British India, looking back on the building of an empire, have not, however, dealt kindly with his reputation, measuring him against the great conquerors -- Clive, Hastings, and Wellesley. Thus H. H. Dodwell, one of the most influential, summarized his career by saying that he proved 'lamentably deficient in the art of government', for 'he could neither judge men, nor manage them, nor read the future' (Dodwell, 215-16). That Vansittart did not look at mid-eighteenth-century India and see it as a field for fulfilling Britain's imperial destiny is perfectly true. None the less what emerges from the record is a perceptive, humane intelligence, aware that the complex political organizations of the Mughals and their successor states were undergoing enormous changes, but that it was best to wait and try to understand what was happening and why. Perhaps this is what he was implying when he once wrote to Hastings that 'I love peace and quietness and have learnt to make allowances for the different tempers and passions of men' (Vansittart, 2.175). 


@@@@@


doc= 28104


Vansittart, Henry (1777-1843), naval officer, the fifth son of George Vansittart (1745-1825) of Bisham Abbey, Berkshire, and his wife, Sarah, the daughter of the Revd Sir James Stonhouse, bt, was born in George Street, Hanover Square, London, on 17 April 1777. George Henry Vansittart was his elder brother, Henry Vansittart, governor of Bengal, was his uncle, and Nicholas Vansittart, first Baron Bexley, was his first cousin. Having been entered on the books of the guardship 'Scipio' in the Medway in October 1788, he was afterwards nominally in the guardship 'Boyne' in the Thames, and probably actually served in the 'Pegasus' on the Newfoundland station in 1791. In 1792 he was in the 'Hannibal', stationed at Plymouth, and in 1793 went out to the Mediterranean in the 'Princess Royal', the flagship of Rear-Admiral Goodall. During the siege of Toulon by the republican army he was severely wounded. After the evacuation he was moved into the frigate 'L'Aigle', with Captain Samuel Hood, served at the siege of Calvi, and was in October 1794 moved into the 'Victory', in which he returned to England. On 21 February 1795 he was promoted lieutenant of the 'Stately' (64 guns), in which he was present at the capture of the Cape of Good Hope and of the Dutch squadron in Saldanha Bay. He was then moved into the 'Monarch', the flagship of Rear-Admiral George Elphinstone (later Viscount Keith), and returned in her to England. 
Vansittart was next appointed to the 'Queen Charlotte', Keith's flagship in the channel, and on 30 May 1798 was promoted commander of the sloop 'Hermes'. From her he was moved to the 'Bonetta', which he took out to Jamaica, and on 13 February 1801 he was posted to the 'Abergavenny' (54 guns), stationed at Port Royal. In July he returned to England in the 'Thunderer' (74 guns). After a few months on half pay he was appointed, in April 1802, to the frigate 'Magicienne', from which, in January 1803, he was moved to the 'Fortunee' (36 guns). He remained commander of this ship for upwards of nine years, in the North Sea, off Boulogne, in the channel, in the West Indies, and in the Mediterranean, mostly cruising and convoying. He married, in 1809, Mary Charity (died 1834), the daughter of the Revd John Pennefather, with whom he had five children, among them Edward Westby Vansittart. From August 1812 to March 1814 he was on the 'Clarence' (74 guns). With the exception of a few months in 1801-2 he had served continuously from 1791. He became rear-admiral on 22 July 1830 and vice-admiral on 23 November 1841. He died on 21 March 1843 at his seat, Eastwood, Woodstock, Canada. 


@@@@@


doc= 28105


Vansittart, Nicholas, first Baron Bexley (1766-1851), politician, was born on 29 April 1766 in Old Burlington Street, London, the fifth and youngest son of Henry Vansittart (1732-1770?), governor of Bengal, and his wife, Emilia (died 1819), daughter of Nicholas Morse, governor of Madras. In 1770, after the loss of his father at sea, Nicholas was placed under the guardianship of his uncles Sir Robert Palk and Colonel Arthur Vansittart of Shottesbrooke. He was educated at Mr Gilpin's school at Cheam in Surrey, and at Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated on 29 March 1784 and graduated BA in 1787 and MA in 1791. He received the honorary degree of DCL on 16 June 1814. He became a student of Lincoln's Inn on 21 April 1788, was called to the bar on 26 May 1791, and became a bencher of Lincoln's Inn on 12 November 1812. 
In the 1790s Vansittart took three steps which were greatly to help him in his pursuit of a political career. First, as a newly qualified barrister he attended the Crown and Rolls debating society in Chancery Lane, although throughout his life his voice remained feeble and indistinct. Second, between 1793 and 1796 he wrote four pamphlets supportive of the younger Pitt's fiscal and foreign policies, which gave him something of a financial reputation. Third, he made a number of useful political contacts by serving, from 1797, in the fashionable City of London and Westminster light horse volunteers 'which positively bristled with MPs and future ministers of the Crown' (Gash, 26). He was returned as MP for Hastings on 25 May 1796, and subsequently represented Old Sarum (1808-12), East Grinstead (1812), and the Treasury borough of Harwich from 1812 until his elevation to the peerage in 1823. Such closed boroughs in the unreformed parliament suited Vansittart as he did not have to rely upon his mediocre skills as a public speaker to get himself elected and once elected he did not need to pay much, if any, attention to constituency affairs. 
Politically Vansittart attached himself to Henry Addington, his cousin and another of Mr Gilpin's alumni. He was rewarded in February 1801 with the task of leading a mission on behalf of the Addington administration to Copenhagen to persuade the Danes to leave Tsar Paul's Northern League and abandon the policy of armed neutrality. When it became clear that the Danes were not amenable to persuasion, however, Vansittart reported to Addington that nothing remained but to strike a speedy and severe blow, and this was duly administered by Nelson at the battle of Copenhagen on 2 April 1801. 
In March Vansittart had been appointed joint secretary of the Treasury by Addington and he held this office until the ministry's resignation on 26 April 1804. He returned to office in January 1805 as secretary for Ireland and a privy councillor, despite Pitt's reservations regarding Catholic reaction to the appointment and doubts regarding Vansittart's debating ability. These obstacles were overcome thanks to the good offices of the duke of Cumberland, Addington's insistence that office be found for his closest supporters as a condition of his entering the ministry (as Lord Sidmouth and lord president of the council), and Bragge-Bathurst's declining the post. Sidmouth left the administration in July but Vansittart did not follow his patron's example until September. His undistinguished tenure of office had, however, been marred by his finding himself at odds with his lord lieutenant, Lord Hardwicke. 
Vansittart returned to the secretaryship to the Treasury when the Sidmouth connection entered Grenville's 'ministry of all the talents' in January 1806, only to resign with Sidmouth in March 1807 shortly before the administration was turned out. He played no part in Portland's ministry although his growing reputation as a financier and parliamentarian was confirmed by his carrying unopposed thirty-eight resolutions during debate on the resumption of cash payments (20 June 1809). 
Vansittart married the Hon. Catherine Isabella (1778-1810), second daughter of William Eden, first Baron Auckland, on 22 July 1806. Such was his wife's ill health, however, that he temporarily withdrew from public life in the spring of 1809 in order to accompany her on rest cures at Malvern and Torquay. The deterioration in his wife's health explains his declining Perceval's offer of the exchequer on 13 October, though he may well also have been influenced in his decision by the fact that Sidmouth was offered no place and he did not wish to desert his friend, or did not feel that it was politic to be seen to be deserting his patron. He was at least able to be at his wife's side when she died at Torquay on 10 August 1810 aged only thirty-two. 
On 24 April 1811, in response to the report of the bullion committee and Francis Horner's call for the resumption of cash payments within two years, Vansittart resumed his active political career by tabling his own anti-bullionist resolutions. He played a leading role in the debates which culminated in defeat of Horner's proposal on 9 May and thus allowed the Perceval administration to pursue its vigorous prosecution of the war effort. 
Sidmouth entered Perceval's government as lord president of council in April 1812 but failed to secure the exchequer for Vansittart who, on reflection, preferred to stay out of office rather than take the proffered post of a junior lordship of the Treasury. In the event, however, Vansittart returned to office on 20 May as the replacement of the assassinated prime minister in his role as chancellor of the exchequer. 
Few chancellors can have been faced with a more daunting set of circumstances on entering office. Massive population growth (up from 10.5 million in 1801 to 12 million in 1811) both fuelled Malthusian fears of famine and helped account for the quadrupling of poor rates between 1775 and 1817. Moreover, the war waged with France since 1793 (with only the fourteen-month respite brought about by the peace of Amiens in 1802) was equally unprecedented and deleterious in its impact, with the national debt increasing from $238 million in 1793 to $902 million in 1816. As if war with France was not bad enough, the attempt to break the continental system by restricting the scope for neutrals to trade with Napoleonic Europe not only induced recession at home but pushed the United States into declaring war on Great Britain in the very month of Vansittart's first budget. Last but not least, the new chancellor was aware that even if these wars could be brought to a victorious conclusion their close would pose questions of comparable magnitude and complexity in the shape of managing the transition from a wartime to a peacetime economy and accommodating the demand for the immediate relief of wartime taxation. Such a political and economic context would have tested the most adroit chancellor and certainly proved more than a match for Vansittart, notwithstanding his links with Rothschilds and Barings, and the financial advice he received from the Revd Henry Beeke. 
Vansittart's first budget, of June 1812, was in reality Perceval's last (with the qualification that Vansittart preferred to add to existing taxes on male servants, carriages, horses, and dogs, than tax private brewing establishments) and he only set his own mark on the national finances with his 'new plan of finance' of March 1813, which in practice involved raising loans for the sinking fund and increasing the customs by 25 per cent. 
Vansittart acted as Castlereagh's deputy in the Commons while the foreign secretary and leader of the house attended the negotiations for the first treaty of Paris from April to May 1814. He was, however, both politically and financially ill-equipped to appease the clamour both inside and outside parliament for immediate peacetime economy and relief from taxation. Napoleon's escape from Elba obliged him to defer premature speculation regarding alternatives to the income tax and impose unprecedentedly high taxation in his budget of 14 June 1815. 
The victory at Waterloo (four days later) increased the pressures on the exchequer to relax its demands on the public but Vansittart's room for manoeuvre was severely constrained by the size of the national debt (the interest payments on which amounted to roughly 80 per cent of government expenditure) while the transition to peacetime accentuated, where it did not create, economic difficulties which included recession, rising unemployment, and increasing local taxation. 
Matters were made worse by the government's loss of about a quarter of its revenue in 1816, following its failure to retain the income tax and decision not to renew the malt tax, as this delayed both the resumption of cash payments and pursuit of the policy of freeing trade. Indeed, it was not until 1819 that a phased return to the gold standard was approved, and in the meantime Vansittart had been forced to have recourse to both the money market and increased indirect taxation. 
If Vansittart was not the author of the government's financial difficulties he can certainly be accused of playing its hand badly in attempting to retain the income tax in 1816. First, by announcing on 9 February that discontinuation of the tax was dependent on ratification of the treaty of Ghent by the American senate (thereby formally ending the Anglo-American War of 1812-14), the government appeared to vindicate the popular view that it was only a wartime levy. Second, the substantial concessions proposed by the exchequer, which included lowering the standard rate from 2's'. to 1's'. in the pound so as to relinquish $7,500,000 of revenue per annum, were announced too late to have any chance of countering the arguments of those favouring repeal. Third, the government failed to make the most of those arguments in favour of the tax which MPs might have found most persuasive, such as the claim that it offered the prospect of deriving a steady and growing revenue from trade at a time when it appeared to be better able to make a contribution to the national coffers than the landed interest. The net result was that the income tax was lost by thirty-seven votes and the restoration of sound national finances was delayed by at least three years. 
1819 was marked not only by the reimposition of the malt tax but also by the first of a series of raids on the sinking fund which hastened the depreciation in Vansittart's own stock and which led to Lady Bathurst describing him as 'a millstone about their necks' who was not got rid of by his colleagues because 'they had scruples about telling him he was inefficient' ('Greville Memoirs', 72). Arbuthnot wrote to Castlereagh that Vansittart was 'abused, ridiculed & deserted by everybody', it being 'declared of him by all parties & all description of men, that altho' in private life a good man, there is no belief to be attached to a word he says, as he one day declares in the House that no funding will be required, & the next day it is generally known that there must be a great funding.' In the City 'he has fallen lower than could be imagined' with the 'Bank most loud against him' ('Correspondence of Charles Arbuthnot', 16-17). The low esteem in which Vansittart was generally now held in the house was demonstrated on 14 June 1821 when a motion for the repeal of the tax on horses employed in agriculture was carried against him. Confidence in his abilities slumped still further when his 1822 scheme to relieve some of the immediate burden of service pensions fell foul of the market place. 
However, it would be misleading to attribute Vansittart's retention of office so long purely to the wish of his cabinet colleagues not to hurt his feelings. Other, less altruistic, calculations were involved. Thus when it was suggested in March 1821 that the ministry should be strengthened in the Commons (among other changes) by Peel taking the exchequer and Vansittart moving to the Board of Control, Castlereagh effectively scotched the idea by objecting that such a change might undermine his own position as leader of the House of Commons. His argument that 'Mr. Peel had never done any thing to entitle him to so high a place as the one proposed' ('Journal of Mrs Arbuthnot', 1.82) ironically echoed George Rose's 1809 comment on the suggestion that Vansittart should receive the exchequer, that it was 'much more than he is worth, either from talents or experience' (Gray, 361). 
The latter judgement seemed to be borne out by events as Vansittart appeared incapable of imposing his will as chancellor. He argued in vain for the retention of the income tax in 1816 and his stewardship was marked by no innovations of note: the 1819 decision to embark on a phased return to the gold standard, for example, being due to the deliberations of the select committee on the currency chaired by Peel rather than to the chancellor himself. 
Certainly Vansittart's chancellorship was insufficiently distinguished to ensure his continued retention of that office when the question of strengthening the administration by readmitting Canning was resumed following Londonderry's suicide in 1822. George Canning had entertained a low opinion of Vansittart from the very outset of Liverpool's premiership, writing to Arbuthnot on 18 July 1812 that the disputed lead in the Commons between Castlereagh and himself might be put 'in abeyance... if continuing nominally with the Chancp. of the Ex. in a third hand -- even in Van's' ('Correspondence of Charles Arbuthnot', 8). By 1822 Canning's lieutenant, Huskisson (who had always hated Vansittart's lack of 'system' and hand-to-mouth financial expedients), was referring privately to the chancellor as 'the real blot and sin of the Government' and his confidant, Croker, could only pay the backhanded compliment of asserting that Vansittart 'though not a very creditable Chancellor of the Exchequer, was a very useful one' given his facility, over the previous year, of giving up his principles and eating his words ('Croker Papers', 1.229). However, an apparently inexhaustible capacity to consume humble pie, albeit with seemingly genuine humility, is no qualification for high office and Vansittart was persuaded in December 1822 to make way at the exchequer for Robinson in return for a peerage, a pension of $3000 per annum, and Bragge-Bathurst's place in the cabinet as chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster. 
George IV was prepared to confer the peerage on Vansittart not only out of a sense of the value of his past services but also out of the high estimation in which he held his private character. Vansittart was not only a lifelong engager in evangelical good works but exuded 'perpetual good nature', and by this stage his 'white hairs and unworldly gentleness' and the 'primitive simplicity of his manner' had resulted in his acquiring 'the sort of veneration with which men are accustomed to regard a saintly priest' ('The Times', 12 Feb 1851, 5). He was created Baron Bexley of Bexley in Kent on 1 March 1823 and proceeded to play a mostly ornamental role in the Lords. Canning was engaged in an unsuccessful intrigue to exclude him from office shortly before the close of Liverpool's premiership but found it convenient to court him when he succeeded Liverpool as premier in 1827 (Aspinall, 198). 
Although having initially indicated a willingness to continue in office, Bexley was among the 'protestant' tories led by the duke of Wellington who resigned when the king invited Canning to succeed Lord Liverpool as prime minister. However, he was ultimately persuaded to withdraw his resignation and retain his position thanks to the king's personal entreaty, the example of the duke of Clarence in taking office (as lord high admiral), and Canning's reassurances that he would balance 'protestants' and 'Catholics' in his administration, although at the time Bexley represented the sole survivor of the 'protestant' party from Liverpool's cabinet. These political somersaults were thus bound to give the impression in ultra circles that Bexley was more concerned to cling to office than to cleave to principle. Thus Lord Howard de Walden characterized him as 'a little hypocritical evangelical sneaking fox' (Aspinall, 129): an impression which was no doubt strengthened by the king's outburst that he would make Bexley his prime minister when Goderich presented him with difficulties in forming an administration in September 1827 ('Journal of Mrs Arbuthnot', 2.141). 
Not surprisingly Bexley lost office when the king turned to Wellington to form an administration in January 1828 and he thereafter devoted himself primarily to charitable and religious works including support for King's College, London, the Greenwich Hospital (of which he was a director), the port of Harwich (of which he was a high steward), the British and Foreign Bible Mission (of which he was the sometime president), and the Church Missionary and Prayer Book and Homily societies. 
Bexley died on 8 February 1851 at his country residence, Foot's Cray, Kent. His peerage became extinct. His political career was long and distinguished in terms of his tenure of office. It would, however, be difficult to deny that he was promoted above his abilities and that more than most chancellors he was buffeted by the economy he sought to control, and deserves as little credit for the favourable legacy he bestowed on his successor (a surplus revenue of $7,000,000 per annum) as he deserves blame for the unfavourable legacy which he himself inherited. He owed his initial success in politics largely to his Sidmouthite connections. His chancellorship proved him to be no better at arithmetic than he was at rhetoric. He lasted as long as he did as chancellor because Liverpool's affection for him outlived his confidence in his abilities and because Castlereagh regarded him, unlike Canning, as no threat to his leadership of the Commons. Ironically, Vansittart, as Bexley, enjoyed an extended lease of his post-exchequer political life at the hands of his long-standing critic Canning, precisely because he had by this time achieved iconic status as a tame 'protestant' veteran of Liverpool's administration. 
Historians generally take the view of most of Vansittart's contemporaries in seeing him as a man of unexceptional abilities who unsurprisingly experienced considerable difficulties in holding an office of first-rate importance in a period of national crisis. Such a view reinforces the indisputable fact that Vansittart's greatest political talent, and one not to be sneered at, was that for survival. 


@@@@@


doc= 28106


Vansittart, Robert (1728-1789), jurist, was born on 28 December 1728 at Great Ormond Street, London, the second son of Arthur van Sittart (1691-1760), merchant, of Shottesbrooke, Berkshire, and his wife, Martha, eldest daughter of Sir John Stonhouse, baronet, of Radley, Berkshire, comptroller of the household to Queen Anne. Henry Vansittart (1732-1770?) governor of Bengal, was his younger brother. 
Vansittart was educated at Reading School and at Winchester College. He matriculated from Trinity College, Oxford, on 3 April 1745, was elected a fellow of All Souls College in 1748, and graduated BCL in 1751 and DCL in 1757. In 1753 he was called to the bar by the society of the Inner Temple. On 17 May 1760 he was nominated high steward of Monmouth, in 1763 recorder of Maidenhead, in 1764 recorder of Newbury, and in 1770 recorder of Windsor. In 1767 he was appointed by the crown regius professor of civil law in the University of Oxford, a post he held until his death. For some years before his appointment he performed the duties of public orator for his predecessor, Robert Jenner. 
Vansittart was a close friend of the painters George Knapton and William Hogarth, as well as of the poets Paul Whitehead and William Cowper. In Italy he met Goethe, who named a character in one of his comedies after him. Through the classical scholar Joseph Warton, Vansittart became a friend of Dr Johnson, who regarded him with much affection, and who was invited to visit India with him by his brother Henry. In 1759, in a festive moment, Dr Johnson, while on a visit to Oxford, proposed that they should scale the walls of All Souls together; but Vansittart declined. On another occasion, while Vansittart was edifying Boswell with a lengthy story about a flea, Johnson burst in with 'It is a pity, sir, that you have not seen a lion; for a flea has taken you such a time that a lion must have served you for a twelve-month' (Boswell, 'Life', 2.194). 
Vansittart, who was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries on 4 June 1767, undertook antiquarian pursuits in his spare time. In the year of his election he edited 'Certain Ancient Tracts Concerning the Management of Landed Property', which consisted of reprints of Gentian Hervet's translation 'Xenophon's Treatise of the Householde' (1534), and Sir Anthony Fitzherbert's 'Boke of Husbandry' (1534) and 'Surveyinge' (1539). 
Vansittart was a man of licentious and debauched habits and, like his brother Henry, was a member of the 'Franciscans of Medenham'. To this society he presented with great pomp a baboon sent from India by Henry, to which Sir Francis Dashwood was accustomed to administer the eucharist at their meetings. As a young man, he was painted by Hogarth wearing a kerchief in the colours of the 'Franciscans', wound in turban fashion over the head, embroidered with the motto 'Love and Friendship'. On 23 August 1773 Mrs Thrale described Vansittart to Johnson as 'very ill and very wild, I fancy he wants a governess' (Redford, 2.113). 
Vansittart died at Oxford, unmarried, on 31 January 1789, and was buried in a vault in the chapel of All Souls College. He was tall and very thin, and the members of the Oxford bar gave the name of Counsellor Van to a sharp-pointed rock on the River Wye from a fancied resemblance (Bloomfield, 23). 


@@@@@


doc= 28107


Somer, Paul van (1577/8-1621/2), portrait painter, was probably born in Antwerp, perhaps the son of Lambert van Someren. In 1604 the artist and author Karel van Mander wrote about two brothers from Antwerp, Bernaert and Pauwels van Somer, who were at that time working as artists in Amsterdam. Bernaert, a portraitist who had spent some years in Italy, was married to the daughter of the painter Aert Mijtens. Pauwels, or Paul, was still a bachelor and 'excellent in all aspects of art, in invention as well as portraiture' (Mander, 1.458). Paul was recorded in Leiden in September 1612, when his age was given as thirty-four, and again in April 1614. In 1615 he passed through The Hague and in 1616 he was in Brussels where, according to J. de Maere and M. Wabbes, he was commissioned by the Brabant audit office to paint a portrait of the archdukes, Albert and Isabella. By December the same year he had settled in London. Although his working life in England was to last only five years, he seems to have been working for court patrons almost from the outset. His signed portrait of the lord chamberlain, 'William Herbert, Third Earl of Pembroke' (Royal Collection), is dated 1617, and this or another similar portrait of Herbert by van Somer was engraved by Simon van de Passe (Hind, 265). Also dated 1617 is van Somer's important full-length portrait of Queen Anne of Denmark (Royal Collection), which presumably postdates July of that year, when the classical gateway at Oatlands Palace, shown in the background, was completed. In this work he reinvented the queen's visual image in terms of the more advanced Netherlandish technique and with a complex iconographical programme. 
The date 1618 is inscribed on van Somer's full-length portrait of James I (Royal Collection) with the royal regalia on a table at his side. This, like the image of the queen, offered a fresh presentation of the monarch, and various copies and versions of it survive. On his visit to London in 1618, the English agent in Brussels, William Trumbull, discussed the commission of some portraits with Edward Norgate, who acted as an intermediary for him with van Somer. Van Somer queried the measurements requested for these full-lengths, for which he said he was usually paid $25 or $30, and which appear to have been portraits of the king and the queen ('Downshire MSS', 447, 601). In July 1619 Lady Anne Clifford wrote that her five-year-old daughter Margaret 'began to sit to Mr Vansommer for her Picture' at their residence in Kent, Knole ('Diaries of Lady Anne Clifford', 78-9); on 30 August her husband, Richard, third earl of Dorset, 'sat much to have his picture drawn by Van somer, & one picture was drawn for me' (ibid.). None of these pictures is known to survive. In the same year van Somer signed the paired canvases 'Second Earl of Devonshire and his Son' and the 'Countess of Devonshire and her Daughter' (both North Carolina Museum of Art, Raleigh), and in 1620 the head and shoulders portrait of 'Thomas Windsor, Sixth Baron Windsor' (1591-1642) (priv. coll.). 
In March 1619 van Somer attended Anne of Denmark's funeral as her 'picture maker', and his documented portrait of her former attendant Elizabeth Talbot, countess of Kent (Tate collection), attired in black, was probably painted about this time. The eighteenth-century engraver and writer George Vertue recorded seeing van Somer's signed and dated portrait of Robert Kerr, earl of Ancram of 1619, now lost. Van Somer was also documented as working for the earl of Rutland, and between 1619 and 1621 there are records of official payments to him for images of James I, Anne of Denmark, Prince Charles, and a posthumous copy of a portrait of Prince Henry. These include a warrant issued on 4 February 1620 for a payment of $170 to him for pictures made for 'the late Queen'. 
In London, van Somer lived in St Martin's Lane, as did two other Netherlandish painters employed by the Jacobean court, Daniel Mytens (his kinsman, through his brother's marriage) and Abraham van Blyenberch. James I's Swiss physician, Dr Turquet de Mayerne, who was deeply interested in artists' materials and techniques, questioned all three of them. The opening page of his manuscript 'Pictorja sculptorja & quae subalternarum artium' (BL, Sloane MS 2052) is dated 1620, and names van Somer as one of his initial sources. Van Somer told de Mayerne about the handling of various blue pigments, the properties of lavender and other oils, how to make a drying oil (by bleaching it in the spring sunshine), and how to create an 'incomparable varnish'. A recently rediscovered portrait of Dr Mayerne in classical attire (NPG) has been attributed by Karen Hearn to van Somer. 
Van Somer was buried in St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, on 5 January 1622. Payments for his last royal portraits were subsequently made to his widow, Cornelia. A portrait of van Somer was engraved by Simon van de Passe in 1622 (Hind, pl. 160b). 
Eighteenth- and nineteenth-century connoisseurs, particularly Vertue, tended to attribute to van Somer almost any early seventeenth-century English portrait that contained Netherlandish elements, especially if full-length. As a result, his name continues to be linked to works by other, now unidentified, hands. In reality, the short duration of his career in England means that his 'oeuvre' there must necessarily have been fairly small. No work painted by van Somer prior to his arrival in London has yet been identified. 


@@@@@


doc= 28108


Somer, Paul van (fl. 1670-1694), etcher and engraver, was a Frenchman, presumably of Dutch ancestry, who settled in London about 1675. Nothing is known about his origins and training, and he first appears in Paris between 1670 and 1674 making etchings of religious subjects and portraits. A plate of 'Hagar in the Wilderness' is signed 'Londini' and dated 1675, but forms part of a set that was published in Paris. For several years van Somer maintained his links with France by sending plates back for publication there, and in 1676 he made two title-pages for books published in Amsterdam. George Vertue says that van Somer was a protestant refugee, and this is confirmed by a series of etched portraits of French ministers of the Huguenot Savoy Chapel, of which the only recorded impressions are in the Pepys Library in Magdalene College, Cambridge. His first mezzotints were made in Paris; a plate made in London in 1676 is one of the earliest dated mezzotints made in England. But his output of thirty-three mezzotints does not begin to approach the total of 209 etchings listed in F. W. H. Hollstein's catalogue of early modern Dutch and Flemish etchings, engravings, and woodcuts. 
During the 1680s van Somer was publishing his own and others' plates at his address at the Eagle and Child, near Leicester Fields. He made some prints after the paintings of Paul Mignard (1639-1691), the nephew of Pierre Mignard, who spent a few years in London, and published a few plates of a fellow Huguenot refugee, Simon Gribelin. He was naturalized on 5 March 1691. The last appearance of his name is in the 'London Gazette' of 16 July 1694, when 'Paul van Somer's sale of fine plate, pictures and other curiosities' by lottery was advertised. It is not clear whether he was then still alive. 
Van Somer's career overlaps with that of Jan van Somer ('fl'. 1660-1687), who is stated by Vertue to have been one of the most prolific, albeit usually anonymous, of the early mezzotint engravers working in London. There are hardly any records of his career, and his relationship, if any, to Paul is unknown, although it has often been asserted that the two were brothers. 


@@@@@


doc= 28109


Son, Jan Frans van (b. 1658, d. in or after 1705), painter, born at Antwerp on 16 August 1658, was son of the still-life painter Joris van Son (1623-1667) and Cornelia van Heulem. Van Son was too young to have learned much from his father before the latter's death, but he may have studied with his father's friend, the still-life specialist Jan Pauwel Gillemans the elder. His name does not appear in the Antwerp guild registers, and so it seems likely that -- as Vertue claimed -- he came young to England, perhaps not long after Gillemans's death in 1675. He painted flowers, fruit, and game for a wealthy London clientele which included the earls of Dover and Ranelagh, and he decorated the earl of Radnor's house in St James's Square. He married the niece of Robert Streater, the king's sergeant-painter, and, according to Walpole, inherited much business after Streater's death in 1680. He signed his paintings J. van Son, which has led to confusion with his father's work, albeit that Jan's style is less polished. Vertue maintained that van Son died in St Alban's Street in 1700, at the age of about fifty. Weyerman went to London in late 1702 or early 1703, and wrote that the flower and fruit painter 'N. van Zon' had died shortly before. This, apparently, was the result of a heart broken with grief by the death of a daughter. Both sources are probably wrong, since a painting in Lille is signed and dated 1705; and van Son may not have died in St Alban's Street since his name has not been found in the burial register of St James's Piccadilly. 


@@@@@


doc= 28110


Straubenzee, Sir Charles Thomas Van (1812-1892), army officer, second son of Major Thomas Van Straubenzee (1782-1843), Royal Artillery, of Spennithorne Hall, Yorkshire, and his wife, Maria (died January 1871), youngest daughter of Major Henry Bowen of the 2nd Royal Veteran battalion, was born in Malta on 17 February 1812. His great-grandfather, Philip William Casimir Van Straubenzee (died 1765), captain in the Dutch guards, came to England about 1745, was naturalized by act of parliament (28 March 1759), and married Jane, only daughter of Cholmely Turner of Kirkleatham, Yorkshire, and Jane, granddaughter and sole heir of Sir Henry Marwood, baronet, of Buskby Hall, Yorkshire. He had a younger brother, General A. Van Straubenzee, who was governor of Zutphen in 1798. His third son, Charles Spencer, married a granddaughter of Sir George Vane of Raby, and had seven sons in the British army and navy; of these, the eldest, Henry, succeeded a great-uncle as head of the family and in the property of Spennithorne, North Riding of Yorkshire; and the seventh was the father of Charles Thomas Van Straubenzee. 
Van Straubenzee was commissioned ensign in the Ceylon Rifles on 28 August 1828, and arrived in Ceylon in June 1829. He was promoted lieutenant in the 39th foot on 22 February 1833. He joined it at Bangalore in India (Mysore), and on 17 March 1834 marched with it in the expedition under Brigadier-General Patrick Lindesay against Coorg. Mercara, the capital, was found undefended, and occupied on 6 April, the raja surrendering on 10 April, when Van Straubenzee returned with the 39th to Bangalore. 
Van Straubenzee was promoted to a company in the 39th foot on 10 March 1837, and in November he went to England on furlough. He married, on 18 November 1841, Charlotte Louisa (died 28 Nov 1900), youngest daughter of General John Luther Richardson of the East India Company, who was of the family of Lord Cramond; they had no children, and she survived her husband. In June 1842 he joined the 39th at Agra. In October 1842 he joined the army of reserve assembled at Ferozepore on the return of the troops from Afghanistan. On 27 August 1843 he was promoted regimental major, and in the autumn the 39th joined the army of exercise assembled at Agra because of the situation at Gwalior. Early in December he marched with it under Sir Hugh Gough against Sindhia. He distinguished himself at the battle of Maharajpur on 29 December, when the 39th, supported by the 56th native infantry, drove the enemy from their guns into the village, the scene of a bloody conflict; later the 39th with a charge captured the entrenched main position at Chouda, when the commanding officer of the regiment was desperately wounded, and Van Straubenzee, succeeding to the temporary command, brought it out of action after capturing two enemy standards. Van Straubenzee was mentioned in dispatches, and promoted brevet lieutenant-colonel on 30 April 1844. 
On 30 August 1844 Van Straubenzee exchanged into the 13th Prince Albert's light infantry, and, returning to England with it in July 1845, was quartered at Walmer. He took part in the ceremony of presentation of new colours by Prince Albert on 13 August 1846 at Portsmouth. On 28 August he exchanged into the 3rd Buffs and accompanied them to Ireland in October. In April 1851 he embarked with the battalion for Malta, and on 11 November was promoted regimental lieutenant-colonel to command it. On 20 June 1854 he was promoted brevet colonel. 
On 12 November Van Straubenzee took the 3rd to Piraeus in connection with the war with Russia. He was made a colonel on the staff on 15 November to command the British contingent in Greece. He remained at Piraeus until 23 March 1855, when the 3rd were relieved by the 91st, and he returned with them to Malta. The British minister at Athens wrote to Lord Clarendon on 4 April 1855, praising the conduct of the Buffs at Piraeus. 
On 14 April Van Straubenzee sailed with his battalion for the Crimea, and joined the division of Sir Colin Campbell. On 11 May he was made brigadier-general. His brigade, consisting of the Buffs, the 31st, and the 72nd, was posted to the right attack, and he commanded it in the fight at the Quarries on 7 June. On 30 July he was appointed to command the 1st brigade of the light division, and took part in both assaults on the Redan, was wounded in that of 8 September, and was mentioned in dispatches. He returned home in July 1856. He was made a CB, military division, and an officer of the Legion d'honneur; he also received the Mejidiye (third class), and he was promoted temporary major-general on 24 July 1856. On 29 July he was appointed to command the infantry brigade at Dublin. 
On 20 September 1857 Van Straubenzee was gazetted to the command of a brigade in the expedition to China under Lieutenant-General Thomas Ashburnham, having already sailed in June for Hong Kong. Many of the troops intended for China were diverted to India because of the Indian mutiny, and in November Ashburnham and his staff also left Hong Kong for India, leaving Van Straubenzee in command of the British land forces in China. In December the available troops from the garrison of Hong Kong were conveyed by the fleet to the Canton River, and the island of Hainan was occupied. Van Straubenzee arrived on 22 December, and the attack on Canton by the allied British and French naval and military forces began with a bombardment on 28 December; on 5 January 1858 the city was taken. On 19 June Van Straubenzee was made a KCB (military division). He was promoted major-general on the establishment on 11 August 1859. On 15 April 1860 he was compelled by ill health to resign his command, and returned to England. 
On 7 April 1862 Van Straubenzee took up the command of a division of the Bombay army at Ahmadabad. He was appointed colonel of the 47th foot on 31 May 1865. In this year he was temporarily in command of the Bombay army, pending the arrival of Sir Robert Cornelis Napier. He returned to England on 16 February 1866, was transferred to the colonelcy of the 39th foot on 8 December 1867, and was promoted to be lieutenant-general on 27 March 1868. 
On 3 June 1872 Van Straubenzee was appointed governor and commander-in-chief at Malta, and was promoted general on 29 April 1875. He was governor of Malta for six years, and was made a GCB (military division) on 29 May 1875. He returned to England in June 1878, retired from the army on 1 July 1881, and settled at Bath. He died at his home, 100 Sydney Place, Bath, on 10 August 1892, and was buried in the Bathwick cemetery, Bath. 


@@@@@


doc= 28111


Voerst, Robert van (1597-1636), engraver, was born in Deventer, Holland, on 8 September 1597. He was taught engraving by Crispijn de Passe the elder in Utrecht, and was a fellow pupil with Joachim von Sandrart in the Utrecht Academy in 1625-6. He had arrived in London by 1627, when he engraved a portrait of the earl of Lindsey, after a painting by Georg Geldorp. Since all his early English prints are after Geldorp, it is reasonable to conclude that it was Geldorp, whose father had been a close associate of de Passe in Cologne, who brought him to London. 
By 1630 Voerst had begun to work for the London publisher William Webb, for whom he made a series of at least five plates, including one of Philip Herbert, the future fourth earl of Pembroke. His breakthrough came the following year, when Charles I commissioned him to engrave Gerrit van Honthorst's portrait of his sister Elizabeth of Bohemia; the link was probably through Pembroke. The success of this led to a sequence of important commissions. For Pembroke he engraved a large plate of the third earl, his recently deceased brother, while for Charles he engraved the emperor Otho, one of the set of the twelve Caesars by Titian that had been purchased from Mantua in 1628. The plates of this and of Elizabeth are both recorded in van der Doort's inventory of Charles's collection. 
Voerst's greatest work followed in 1634, when he engraved on a large scale the double portrait of Charles and Henrietta Maria painted two years earlier, shortly after Van Dyck's arrival in London. This is a masterpiece, and explains why Voerst was the only engraver working in London with whom Van Dyck was willing to collaborate; none of the numerous other painted portraits of English sitters was engraved in London during Van Dyck's lifetime. The plate was published by Voerst himself with a royal privilege, and must be linked with his appointment as engraver to the king, a position that was newly created for him, probably in 1635. Voerst was working on another large plate after a marble bust of Charles when he died, a victim of the plague of 1636. 
About thirty plates by Voerst are known, all made in London and all portraits, as well as a set of twenty-one animal pattern sheets that was posthumously reissued by Crispijn de Passe. At least seven plates were made for Van Dyck, and were intended to form part of the series of portraits now known as the 'Iconography' ('c'.1632-1644), although only four were in fact included in the first edition. Among them was Voerst's own portrait, showing him holding a rolled-up sheet of paper, engraved after a drawing by Van Dyck that is now in the Louvre. In 1635 the eighteen-year-old Gerard ter Borch, his sister's stepson, came to work in Voerst's studio in London, and made a portrait drawing of the engraver that is now in the Rijksmuseum. 


@@@@@


doc= 28112


Vardy, John (1717/18-1765), architect, was born in Durham, where he was baptized on 20 February 1718. He was the second son of Ralph and Mary Vardy; his father was a labourer turned gardener, and John was one of at least seven children. He is next recorded in May 1736, when he was appointed clerk of the works at the Queen's House, Greenwich, at the age of only eighteen. There is no indication of how he made the transition as, unlike most of his colleagues in the office of works, his name does not appear in the records of any appropriate trade guilds. His subsequent official appointments were as clerk of the works at Hampton Court (1745-6), at Whitehall, Westminster, and St James's (1746-54), and at Kensington (1754-61). In 1756 he was made clerk at Chelsea Hospital, and from 1749 to 1763 he was surveyor to the Royal Mint. 
During the first ten years of his career Vardy seems to have established himself as an unofficial personal assistant to William Kent, preparing drawings for projects such as the Treasury building overlooking Horse Guards Parade (begun in 1733) and the Houses of Parliament. In 1741 he drew and engraved Kent's gothick pulpit design for York Minster, and three years later he made his sole venture into publishing with a volume of fifty plates entitled 'Some Designs of Mr. Inigo Jones and Mr. William Kent', thirty-three of which were devoted to buildings, furniture, vases, and other artefacts by the latter architect. Vardy performed a particular service both to contemporaries and to posterity by including the gothick court of king's bench and Gloucester Cathedral choir screen, as well as engraving separately the gothicized Esher Place. Apart from Batty Langley's 'Gothic Architecture Improved' (published initially in 1741-2), these were the earliest appearances in print of the new gothick style. 
In his official capacity Vardy was responsible (jointly with William Robinson) for supervising the posthumous execution of Kent's scheme for the Horse Guards in Whitehall (1750-59), and for designing the 'new stone building' at Westminster as accommodation for the king's bench records and exchequer bill offices: designed in 1753, it was partly realized in 1755-8, finally completed in 1821, and demolished in 1883. His 1748 design for a new royal palace in Whitehall (exhibited 1761) is not known to have survived. 
Like his office of works colleagues Isaac Ware and Henry Flitcroft, Vardy was essentially an architectural civil servant whose reputation rests mainly on private commissions, though most of these have been demolished or altered. His style, in both classical and gothick idioms, was formed by his close contact with Kent. This is seen in his earliest datable independent project, an unexecuted design (1746) for a four-towered mansion for the Hon. Richard Arundell, and in his design (1754; also unexecuted) for a British museum, the one indebted to Holkham, the other to Kent's parliament schemes. His classical designs are generally in a restrained Palladian manner, as with Milton (later Dorchester) House, Park Lane ('c'.1751; dem. 1849) for Baron Milton, first earl of Dorchester; Woodcote Park, Epsom, Surrey, a stylistically attributable design of the 1750s for Frederick Calvert, the sixth Baron Baltimore (burnt 1934 and rebuilt); and the remodelling of Hackwood Park in Hampshire for the fifth duke of Bolton ('c'.1761-3; altered out of recognition in 1805-13). However, fashionable rococo leanings can be detected in some of his garden building designs, in the plasterwork he designed for the interior of Milton House, and in his furniture designs for Hackwood and elsewhere. For Milton Abbey in Dorset he offered his client, Lord Milton, both Palladian and gothick options; work seems to have been started on the gothick scheme in 1753, but it was left unfinished and subsequently replaced by a house designed by Sir William Chambers. At Spencer House overlooking Green Park, London (1755-60, for the first Earl Spencer), the exterior and ground-floor rooms were completed to Vardy's Palladian scheme, but for the first-floor rooms he was superseded by the neo-classicist James 'Athenian' Stuart, despite his own attempts to introduce neo-classical motifs to his designs. 
Vardy died in London on 17 May 1765 at the age of forty-seven. His will, which shows him to have been comfortably off, with property in Derby Street, Westminster, and Egham, Surrey, mentions his wife (whose name is not given), brother Thomas (a carver who executed his furniture designs), daughters Margaret and Elisabeth, and sons Edward and John; to the last (also an architect) he left 'all my books, drawings, instruments and matters relating to architecture'. 


@@@@@


doc= 28113


Varley, Cornelius (1781-1873), landscape painter and inventor of optical apparatus, was born on 21 November 1781 at the Blue Post tavern in Mare Street, Hackney, the third of five children of Richard Varley (died 1791) and his second wife, Hannah Fleetwood, a descendant of General Charles Fleetwood and Oliver Cromwell's daughter Bridget. When Varley was ten years old his father died leaving the family inadequately provided for, and the large house in Hackney was vacated for a dark court opposite St Luke's Hospital in Old Street. Varley's elder brother, John Varley (1778-1842), became a famous watercolour artist, a profession also taken up by his younger brother William Fleetwood Varley (1785-1856) ['see under 'Varley, John (1778-1842)], and his younger sister, Elizabeth, who married the artist William Mulready in 1803. Two years after his father's death, Cornelius's uncle Samuel Varley, a watchmaker, jeweller, and natural philosopher, took charge of him. Varley later wrote in his autobiography that it was his uncle who opened his eyes to the wonders of science. Cornelius began to make lenses and microscopes and assisted his uncle in his chemical experiments and public lectures when the latter founded the Chemical and Philosophical Society at Hatton House in 1794, one of the forerunners of the Royal Institution. In 1800, however, Samuel Varley gave up his own business and the Hatton House lectures to work for Charles, third Earl Stanhope, and Cornelius Varley determined to become an artist like his elder brother. Instead of undergoing another apprenticeship, he taught himself by sketching from nature in the company of his brother John with whom he lived at Charles Street, Covent Garden. John introduced Cornelius to the influential patron of watercolour artists, Thomas Monro. Through Monro, Varley met George, fifth earl of Essex, who recommended him to his first students. 
Within a year of the start of his new career Varley was invited to teach the Bacon Schutz family at Gillingham Hall, Norfolk, and the Rous family at Henham Hall in Suffolk. After spending the winter of 1801-2 in Suffolk he returned to London to teach drawing and perspective. In June 1802 Varley travelled to north Wales with his brother John and Thomas Webster (1772-1844), a young architect who was later to become a prominent member of the Geological Society of London. He returned to Wales in 1803 with the artists Joshua Cristall and William Havell and again on his own in 1805. His sketches from these trips and another to St Albans in 1804 constitute some of his most significant output. Rather than showing a concern for one single impression or the construction of a successfully controlled pictorial space, they concentrate on the detailed observation of different landscape features as they appear at a particular moment rendered in colour on the spot. During and after his lifetime these works were not valued. In a review of the sale of Varley's work at Christies, the 'Telegraph' of 16 July 1875 saw little interest in the sketches, stating that 'we have got far beyond such work as his'. In the second half of the twentieth century, however, his work became appreciated for its freshness and its role in pioneering a 'naturalistic' mode of landscape depiction. The rediscovery of his drawings in the family's collection in the early 1970s finally opened up a new assessment. Varley's early watercolour drawings, such as 'Ross Market Place, Herefordshire' (V&A), one of his earliest exhibits, shown in 1805 at the Society of Painters in Water Colours (SPWC) (of which Varley was a founding member), are remarkable for their attention to detail and to changing atmospheric effects. 
Yet most of the works Varley exhibited publicly in the first two decades of the century bear poetic titles that indicate their more conventionally idealistic character. He exhibited work at the Royal Academy from 1803, and at the SPWC after its foundation in 1804. Varley did not sell many works in exhibitions, however. In 1809 he published a series of etchings and lithographs entitled 'Shipping, barges, fishing boats, and other vessels, commonly met with on the British coasts, rivers and canals' which does not seem to have been a great success, and only the first part was published. Although in 1819 the SPWC awarded him one of its first three prizes for the encouragement of the production of important work, Varley's main occupation from 1814 was once again as an optical manufacturer. 
In 1809 Varley invented the graphic telescope, a drawing instrument which combined the portability of the camera obscura with the two-way mirror arrangement of William Hyde Wollaston's camera lucida. Its much improved lens system allowed it to be used for objects or views of greatly varying size and distance. Varley patented the graphic telescope in 1811, but found that manufacturers were not able to work to his exacting specifications; this was perhaps a reason why he set up his own workshop. He had, however, never entirely abandoned his scientific interests after leaving his uncle's house. From 1804 until 1844 his name appears on many engraved illustrations in the 'Transactions of the Society of Arts', and he became a full member of the society in 1814. In 1807 and 1809 he contributed to the emerging science of meteorology by publishing two articles on atmospheric phenomena in the 'Philosophical Magazine', based on observations collected during his sketching trips to Wales in 1803 and 1805. He also became involved in the City Philosophical Society where he met the scientist Michael Faraday. After Faraday's election as director of the laboratories at the Royal Institution, Varley was invited to lecture there on the graphic telescope in 1826, and again during the 1830s, returning annually between 1838 and 1861. 
In 1821 Varley married Elizabeth Livermore Straker, a cousin of Faraday's own future wife. They had three daughters and seven sons, two of whom, Cromwell Fleetwood Varley and Frederick Henry Varley, became eminent as electrical engineers. Through the artist John Linnell's 'Journals' (vol. 1, FM Cam.) we know that Varley attended the services of the Revd John Martin at the Baptist church at Keppel Street, Bloomsbury, about 1811. He was a member of the Sandemanian sect from 1833 to 1847. 
In 1839 Varley co-founded the Royal Microscopic Society and contributed a series of communications to its 'Transactions'. In contrast to his work as an artist, he achieved recognition during his lifetime for developing optical instruments, receiving two silver medals from the Society of Arts in 1831 and in 1833, as well as an Isis gold medal for improvements in the construction of microscopes in 1841. Varley's distinction as a manufacturer was acknowledged when he and his sons mounted a display at the Great Exhibition in 1851. He was awarded a prize medal for his graphic telescope and its supporting table which by then had come to be widely used by artists such as John Sell Cotman and the land surveyor Thomas Hornor (1785-1844) when, in 1820, the latter drew his great panorama of London from St Paul's Cathedral for the Colosseum in Regent's Park. In 1845 Varley published a 'Treatise on Optical Drawing Instruments'. He never, however, entirely gave up his work as an artist and continued to exhibit at the Royal Academy until 1859, at Suffolk Street, and four times at the British Institution between 1815 and 1840. Not many pictures produced after 1814 are known to have survived, but the few that are, together with the titles given in the exhibition catalogues, show that the split between composed works bearing poetic titles and detailed topographical studies continued into his later life. A photograph taken of Varley in the studio of the family towards the end of his life shows a small man of stocky build with a white beard, deep-set eyes, and bushy eyebrows. Throughout his life he regularly attended scientific meetings and soirees. He was known for his range of knowledge, wide interests, and rapid speech. He died at 19 South Grove West, Stoke Newington, London, on 2 October 1873, at the age of nearly ninety-two years. Examples of his work are to be found in the Victoria and Albert Museum and British Museum, London, Tate Collection, Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, and the Yale Center for British Art, New Haven, Connecticut. 


@@@@@


doc= 28114


Varley, Cromwell Fleetwood (1828-1883), telegraph engineer, was born at Kentish Town, London, on 6 April 1828, the second of the ten children of the artist and inventor Cornelius Varley (1781-1873) and his wife, Elizabeth Livermore Straker. He claimed descent from Oliver Cromwell and General Charles Fleetwood, for whom he was named. His family was associated with the London Sandemanian congregation, as was the experimental philosopher Michael Faraday (1791-1867). In later years, however, Varley came to regard the Sandemanians as a 'very narrow-minded sect'. 
After completing his schooling at St Saviour's Grammar School, Southwark, Varley joined the newly formed Electric Telegraph Company in 1846; he rose to become chief engineer for the London area by 1852 and for the entire company by 1861. Soon after joining the company he devised an electrical method for locating faults in the insulation of underground lines, thus facilitating their repair. This method, known as the 'Varley loop test', was in use for many years. Similar techniques later proved of great value on submarine cables, aided by the employment of standardized resistance coils, which Varley helped introduce into telegraphic practice. He was among the first to trace the retardation and distortion of signals on underground lines to the effects of electrostatic induction, and in 1854 patented a double-current key that lessened the problem by using pulses of alternating polarity to discharge the line. Varley developed a variety of improved testing instruments and relays, and in 1870 patented the 'cymaphen', a type of harmonic telegraph that could transmit musical tones and, in a later variant, articulate speech. He also devised a simple way to use small electrical charges to generate much larger ones, and 'Varley's multiplier' became the basis of widely used electrostatic machines. 
Varley's most important work came in submarine telegraphy. After the failure of the short-lived first Atlantic cable in 1858, he was appointed to a joint investigative committee established by the British government and the Atlantic Telegraph Company. Its 1861 report helped restore enough confidence in the technology for a second attempt to span the Atlantic to be launched in 1865, with Varley now serving as chief electrician. Although the 1865 cable snapped during laying, a renewed attempt the following year succeeded; moreover, the broken cable was then grappled and brought to the surface, spliced, and also completed from Ireland to Newfoundland. Varley devised many improvements in cable testing and signalling techniques in the 1860s, including the use of condensers and 'curbed' transmission to sharpen signals, and artificial cables to mimic the effects of distributed resistance and capacitance. A strong-jawed man with mutton-chop whiskers and a receding hairline, Varley soon became a leading figure among telegraph engineers. He had a shrewd business sense, and the patent partnership he formed in 1865 with the physicist William Thomson 
(later Lord Kelvin; 1824-1907)
and the electrical engineer Fleeming Jenkin (1833-1885) eventually brought all three men large royalties from cable companies. 
Varley was elected a member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1865 and a fellow of the Royal Society in 1871. In the latter year he was also a founder member of the Society of Telegraph Engineers (later the Institution of Electrical Engineers). He wrote widely on telegraphic and electrical subjects, and in 1871 published a paper in the 'Proceedings of the Royal Society' on electrical discharges in rarefied gases, in which he suggested that cathode rays were streams of tiny electrified particles, later identified as electrons. A convinced spiritualist, he helped introduce the physicist William Crookes (1832-1919) to the subject in 1867, and in 1874 used a cable galvanometer to investigate the 'materializations' of the medium Florence Cook (1856-1904). 
Varley had two sons and two daughters with his first wife, Ellen Rouse, whom he married on 4 October 1855. On returning from a trip abroad on cable business, Varley found that she had gone off to live with Ion Perdicaris, a wealthy Greek-American, whom she had met at Malvern in 1871. After the divorce was granted in 1873, she and the children settled with Perdicaris at Tangier. In 1904 Varley's elder son, also named Cromwell, was kidnapped along with Perdicaris by Moroccan bandits, precipitating an international incident before both men were released unharmed. On 11 January 1877 Varley married Heleanor Jessie Smith of Forres, Scotland. After several years of failing health, he died at Cromwell House, Bexleyheath, Kent, on 2 September 1883, and was buried on 6 September at Christ Church, Bexley. 


Alfred Varley's lack of business acumen kept him from reaping the full rewards of his work. In 1866 he was one of several nearly simultaneous inventors of the self-exciting dynamo, which freed the generation of electric currents from reliance on permanent magnets. This was eventually recognized as a fundamental advance, as was Varley's later invention of compound winding, but his patents on both lapsed before they became commercially valuable. Soured by business failures and the lack of recognition given to his pioneering contributions, he became known in the late 1880s as a vocal critic of electrical engineers' increasing reliance on mathematical theory. He was awarded a civil-list pension in 1894, and later retired to Winchester, where he died at his house, Abbottsacre Lodge, Abbott's Road, on 4 August 1921. He was buried in the city's new cemetery on 9 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 28115


Varley, John (1778-1842), watercolour painter and art teacher, was born on 17 August 1778 in a converted inn, the Blue Post, Mare Street, Hackney, Middlesex. He was the eldest of five children of Richard Varley (died 1791) of Epworth, Lincolnshire, and his second wife, Hannah Fleetwood. By family tradition his mother was descended from Oliver Cromwell's daughter Bridget. Richard Varley's profession is unknown, but his brother Samuel Varley was a manufacturer of scientific instruments. In spite of parental disapproval, Richard Varley's three sons, John Varley, Cornelius Varley (1781-1873), and William Fleetwood Varley ['see below'], became artists, as did his daughter Elizabeth, who married the painter William Mulready. 
At the age of thirteen John Varley was apprenticed to a silversmith, but his father's death in 1791 left the family in poverty, and forced a move to lodgings opposite St Luke's Hospital in Old Street, Hoxton. Varley was next placed with a law stationer but his heart was in sketching and his mother was persuaded to support him. After a brief time with a portrait painter in Holborn, at fifteen or sixteen he became a pupil and assistant to Joseph Charles Barrow, who held an evening drawing school at 12 Furnival's Inn Court, Holborn; Francois Louis Francia was his fellow assistant. In 1796, while out sketching, Varley made the acquaintance of John Preston Neale. The two men formed a lasting friendship and frequently 'sallied forth in search of the picturesque' (Roget, 1.169) in the villages around north-east London. Barrow took him on a sketching tour to Peterborough and in 1798 Varley exhibited a drawing of Peterborough Cathedral at the Royal Academy, before becoming a regular exhibitor there until 1804. 
Varley's first tour to Wales in 1798 or 1799 laid the foundation of his art, providing him with inspiration and subject matter for the rest of his life. At this time Varley became acquainted with Dr Thomas Monro, taking part in the drawing sessions at the 'Monro academy' in the Adelphi Terrace from 1800 and visiting Monro at his country home, Fetcham Cottage, near Leatherhead. On Monro's advice Varley left Hoxton and moved to the West End, to live first with his brother Cornelius in Charles Street, Covent Garden, and then from 1801 at 2 Harris Place, Pantheon, Oxford Street. It was at this time that he is first recorded taking pupils. In 1802 he visited north Wales again and also became a member of the Sketching Society, chaired by John Sell Cotman, to draw subjects of literary inspiration. His marriage to Esther Gisborne (died 1824) in the following year produced five sons and three daughters but was not, according to the painter John Linnell and other friends, a happy one. Linnell provides a picture of Varley's heavy build and imposing physique, describing him as 'bull like in strength and figure'. Varley was a keen pugilist, though his skill was said to be marred by his ungainliness. He was also 'a man of the most generous impulses... but deficient in sagacity and most easily imposed upon by the crafty' (Linnell, autobiography, 10). 
Varley's early work may be divided into three groups: topographical views of English and Welsh towns, Welsh landscapes, and more informal studies from nature. The topographical views, mostly of Hereford (many in Hereford Art Gallery), Leominster, Chester, and Conwy (examples in the V&A), tend to conform to a pattern of rows of houses on a central receding street, reminiscent of the work of Thomas Hearne, with the addition of the picturesque irregularity of half-timbered houses, peeling paintwork, and crumbling masonry. The second group, of Welsh mountain views, form the bulk of his output throughout his career, though it is the earlier examples that most convincingly portray the awe-inspiring character of mountain scenery. Both in technique and composition they owe a prime debt to Thomas Girtin, and ultimately to Richard Wilson, whose 'Snowdon from Llyn Nantle' (Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool) was the progenitor of such Welsh views. These early watercolours are more naturalistic than later examples, with the views represented showing a regard for topographical accuracy. Nevertheless, Varley followed William Gilpin's advice in adapting nature to the requirements of composition. Distant mountains, for example, are brought nearer the picture plane to form a focal point. Indeed, as early as 1804, in his views of Bala Lake and Moel Hebog (V&A), the tonality follows in detail the rules Varley published later in his own 'A Treatise on the Principles of Landscape Design' of 1816-17: shadow in the foreground, succeeded by a mass of light contrasting with a middle tone in the further distance. In selecting his viewpoints Varley, like his contemporaries, followed the numerous pictorial models which had been called into being by the rapid increase of tourism and travel books in the eighteenth century. 
The third category of Varley's early watercolours were informal studies of the English landscape, several of them inscribed with the rubric 'Studies from nature'. They were usually panoramic views clearly based on direct observation but with the addition of the Claudean framing device of trees if the composition demanded, for example 'Polesden' (1800; Laing Art Gallery, Newcastle upon Tyne). At this time Varley developed his landscape compositions to produce works dominated by unbroken, unmodulated layers of wash with sharply defined edges, for example 'Harlech Castle and Tygwyn Ferry' (1804; Yale U. CBA), which are closely comparable to Cotman's work of the same period. 
Varley played a prominent role in the establishment of the Society of Painters in Water Colours in November 1804, which marked a significant rise in the status of that art form. He took a leading part in the society's early years and enjoyed a considerable personal success at its exhibitions. To the first, in 1805, he contributed forty-two watercolours out of a total of 275, of which thirty were sold for a total of $139 13's'. He continued to be the society's most prolific exhibitor, with an average of forty-four works in the exhibitions between 1805 and 1812. His ability to produce numerous fresh drawings for an opening earned them the sobriquet of 'Varley's hot rolls'. His principal buyers were members of the aristocracy and landed gentry: Sir Henry Englefield, Lord Essex, Thomas Hope, Lord Ossulston, William Ord, Sir John Swinburne, Walter Fawkes, and Edward Lascelles, later earl of Harewood. 
Varley was equally well known as a teacher of both professional artists and well-born amateurs. By about 1805-6 many of the rising generation of artists were his pupils. Mulready, Linnell, W. H. Hunt, William Turner of Oxford, and Copley Fielding, all in their teens, lived at his house for a sum of about $100 a year. David Cox and Peter DeWint, both in their early twenties, also took some lessons at this period. Varley was a firm believer in principles of composition which he published in very dogmatic terms. Paradoxically, however, he was praised by contemporaries for encouraging his pupils to draw from nature and offering only the most general supervision. According to Linnell, 'Copying drawings formed no part of the pupils' employment; they were constantly drawing from nature or trying to compose' (Linnell, autobiography, 7), and it is from the evidence of his pupils more than from his own work that Varley has been accorded recognition as a father figure of 'plein-air' painting in early nineteenth-century Britain. Yet it was as a teacher of well-born ladies at a guinea an hour that Varley enhanced his earnings and cemented his relationship with his patrons, and it was here that he applied his principles of composition which his pupils imbibed by copying his drawings. 
One of Varley's pupils, Elizabeth Turner, daughter of the Yarmouth banker Dawson Turner, who took lessons from him in 1822, described another aspect of his character: 'With all his nobility of mind he unites a more childish simplicity and credulity, and he entirely believes in astrology, palmistry, raising of ghosts and seeing of visions' (Kauffmann, 39). Astrology, in which Varley fervently believed, had long ceased to command respect in such sophisticated circles. Nevertheless, there were many who admired his prognostications, of which there are countless stories, not least that he foretold the fire that burnt down his house in 1825. It was his belief in visions that cemented his friendship with William Blake, whom he encouraged to envision and draw portraits of historical and imaginary figures during their evening sessions at Varley's house in Great Titchfield Street between 1819 and 1825. Many of Blake's figures were drawn into two of Varley's sketchbooks. Varley also shared Blake's interest in J. C. Lavater's theories of physiognomy, which sought to demonstrate that a man's innate qualities determine his outward appearance. In his own 'Treatise on Zodiacal Physiognomy', of which the first and only part was published in 1828, Varley located the mainspring of human physiognomy in the basic astrological belief that the influence of the heavens at the moment of birth accounts for the differing physical characteristics, abilities, and temperaments of mankind. However, apart from the profile heads which illustrate the 'Treatise' (preparatory drawings in the Tate collection), there is no discernible influence of his astrological interest on his work as a painter. 
In 1808 Varley made a tour of Northumberland, sketching the coastal castles, and henceforth Northumberland, like Wales, provided a reservoir of motifs and locations upon which he drew for the rest of his career. His work continued to be dominated by a simple flat wash style until about 1812, when he introduced more strictly classical motifs derived from seventeenth-century epic and pastoral landscape, for example, 'Suburbs of an Ancient City' (1808; Tate collection). 
In 1812 declining sales, owing partly to monotony of output, forced the Society of Painters in Water Colours to admit oil painters, and from 1813-1820 its name was changed to the Society of Painters in Oil and Water Colours. In the years 1816-21 the average number of works Varley exhibited dwindled to a mere eight; this decline in exhibited work mirrors a general reduction in his output. However, his name was kept before the public's eye with the publication of his 'Treatise on the Principles of Landscape Design' in 1816-17. This was in the tradition of illustrated teaching manuals which had proliferated since the 1790s. The works of Claude and Gaspard Poussin served as his main models, and were combined with picturesque theories of variety and intricacy. The basic theme of the 'Treatise', that 'emphasis must always be on the principal subject', also appears in several other such manuals, but Varley's publication is distinguished by its extreme formalism. His other publications in this field include 'Treatise on the Art of Drawing in Perspective' (1815-20), and three shorter manuals: 'A Practical Treatise on the Art of Drawing' ('c'.1815-20), 'Precepts of Landscape Drawing' ('c'.1818), and 'Studies of Trees' (1818-19), as well as the more interesting 'John Varley's List of Colours' (1816), which gives nineteen colour samples, with brief advice on their use. 
At this time Varley produced formulaic paintings by applying Claudean compositional arrangements to Welsh scenery, as for example in 'Landscape with Harlech Castle' of 'c'.1815-25 (V&A) and also, in strong contrast, several of his more direct, informal views of the Thames at Millbank and Lambeth ('Millbank Penitentiary', 1816; Museum of London). Thames views had formed part of his repertory since 1806, but these sketches of Millbank, several inscribed 'study from nature', are less finished and lighter in tonality than his more formal compositions of the villages of Chiswick and Chelsea. In the 1820s he tried to fall in with the prevailing taste for works of moral or literary content, exhibiting illustrations to the 'Bible', or to Milton, Byron, and Scott at the Society of Painters, but such subjects remain relatively rare in his 'oeuvre'. 
These were lean years for Varley, with eight children to support, few watercolours to exhibit, and little financial sense. From 1819 Linnell was inundated with requests for loans and in 1820 Varley was declared bankrupt and gaoled. Indeed, although there was a temporary revival in the number of works he exhibited at the Society of Painters in Water Colours in 1823-6, and also a display of his work at his house in Great Titchfield Street, Varley appears to have remained insolvent throughout the 1820s and early 1830s. His wife, Esther, died in 1824 and he married Delvalle ('b'. 'c'.1800), daughter of his friend the engraver Wilson Lowry, in the following year; this union proved to be happier and produced two more children. With the increasing importance of middle-class patronage during the 1830s dealers began to compete with the annual exhibitions for sales of works; in commercial dealings Varley depended first on Samuel Woodburn and then on William Vokins, who became a personal friend. 
The last years of his life saw a revival of Varley's fortunes based on a complete change of style. From the later 1830s he moved away from topographical subjects to concentrate on imaginary landscape compositions. Many of these were small, postcard-size sketches characterized by bold, rapid brushstrokes in dark brown wash. A more fundamental change of palette, inspired by the glowing, mystical landscapes of Samuel Palmer, followed in 1839-40. The sketchy brown wash technique was amplified by the introduction of dark red and purple colours and the use of coarse wove paper. In the final phase, 1841-2, he extended the use of hot tonalities with contrasting pink, purple, and orange areas and experimented with an increasing use of gum. These late works have an expressive intensity not seen in Varley's art since his early years, and in 1841 he once again exhibited thirty watercolours and sold twenty-four. Sadly, this revival of fortunes came too late to save him from the financial difficulties that had dogged him, and he died on 17 November 1842 at the house of William Vokins, 5 John Street, Oxford Street, London. His second wife survived him. 
Varley's reputation was summarized in his obituaries and in the early histories (Redgrave and Redgrave, 201; Kauffmann, 65). He was accorded the recognition due to one of the leading watercolourists of his day, but there was also an awareness of the monotony of his vast output. In his best work he rivals Girtin and Cotman, but he exhibited over 700 watercolours at the watercolour societies, a relatively small proportion of his total output (there are also a few oils), and his reputation never survived the ensuing glut of his work. 


Of John Varley's ten children, two became professional painters: Albert Fleetwood (1804-1876) and Charles Smith (1811-1887). 


@@@@@


doc= 28116


William Fleetwood Varley (1785-1856) appears to have been taught by his brother John, with whom he was still living at 2 Harris Place, Oxford Street, London, in 1804. His watercolours, of which fifteen are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London, reflect different aspects of John's style. He lived in London and exhibited at the Royal Academy between 1804 and 1818, but his principal reputation was as a drawing master in Cornwall, Bath, and Oxford. A brief publication, 'A Few Observations on Art' (1816), was followed by his fuller treatise 'Observations on Colouring and Sketching from Nature' (1820), a teaching manual of more practical use than many of its peers. While living in Oxford he was nearly burnt to death in a fire caused by undergraduates, an event from which he never fully recovered, and after which he apparently gave up working. This must have been after 1825, the date of his latest watercolour in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. He died in Ramsgate in 1856. 


@@@@@


doc= 28117


Varlo, Charles (b. c.1725, d. in or after 1795), agriculturist, was born in Snaith, Yorkshire, about 1725. He visited Ireland at the age of twenty-one, and spent several years working for Edward Synge (1691-1762), bishop of Elphin, whom he advised on agricultural matters. Synge knew him as Varley, probably the original form of his surname. While in Ireland, he was employed by the linen board to advise flax farmers on how to improve the quality of their flax, on the grounds that he came from a part of Yorkshire well known for flax farming. The post was obtained with Synge's help, as was the farm in co. Leitrim, acquired by 1748, where he experimented in the growing of turnips. He was seriously ill in 1750, Synge being 'in great pain for Varley's life' (Synge, 230). At the age of twenty-seven he married, and bought more land. He brought over English labourers and farm implements. It used to be thought that Varlo was the inventor of the Rotherham plough, which was in wide use by the end of the eighteenth century, but in fact this had been patented in 1730. 
In 1760 the prohibition on the export of Irish cattle to England was removed, and Varlo -- abandoning Synge, who may have regarded him almost as a 'surrogate son' (Synge, xix) -- sold his land in Ireland and prepared to bring his cattle over to England. This was a very unpopular move: Varlo's cattle were slaughtered by the mob in the streets of Dublin in May 1760, and he himself had a very narrow escape. With the help of the duke of Bedford, lord lieutenant of Ireland, he managed to get some compensation from the government, and he appears to have begun cattle farming in England, probably in Yorkshire. In 1764 he perfected a harrowing and sowing machine. He also invented a winnowing machine which he perfected in 1772, and a machine designed to remove friction. 
In 1784, while he was living in Sloane Square, in London, Varlo became involved in a somewhat ludicrous episode. He had bought papers and charters supposedly granted by Charles I to Sir Edward Plowden, entitling him to colonize New Albion (later New Jersey) in America. This attempt at colonization had failed and in Charles II's reign the charter was superseded by a new grant to the duke of York. Armed with his papers (which were probably forgeries), Varlo went out to the American colonies in 1784 hoping to be recognized as governor of the province of New Jersey and to take over one-third of the territory. The case was tried before the colonial courts, but Varlo's claim was dismissed. Varlo nevertheless printed his documents in America in a thirty-page pamphlet. Before returning to England he travelled for a year through New England, Maryland, and Virginia (where he met George Washington). Once back in Britain he unsuccessfully petitioned the king and the prince of Wales in the hope of getting some of the money granted to American loyalists. 
Varlo wrote widely on agricultural topics, with observations made on his travels in England and in America. His works include 'The Yorkshire Farmer' (1766), 'A New System of Husbandry' (1770, 5th edn 1785), and 'The Floating Ideas of Nature, Suited to the Philosopher, Farmer, and Mechanic' (1796). 
It is not known when Varlo died, but he appears to have been living in Southampton Row, New Road, Paddington, Middlesex, on 24 February 1795, when Sir John Sinclair sent him a formal letter of thanks for certain suggestions made by Varlo to the board of agriculture about the offering of premiums for the cultivation of maize. 


@@@@@


doc= 28118


Vashon, James (1742-1827), naval officer, son of James Volant Vashon ('bap'. 1707), Church of England clergyman at Eye in Herefordshire and lecturer of Ludlow, was born at Ludlow on 9 August 1742. He entered the navy in August 1755 on the 'Revenge', with Captain Frederick Cornewall, a local figure of property and influence. In the 'Revenge' Vashon was present at the battle of Minorca on 20 May 1756, and when Cornewall returned to England as a witness in the trial of Admiral John Byng he transferred into the 'Lancaster', with Captain George Edgcumbe, and took part in the capture of Louisbourg in July 1758. The 'Lancaster' then served in the West Indies, as part of the force under Commodore John Moore in the capture of Guadeloupe. 
Vashon was then moved to the 'Cambridge', Moore's flagship, and continued in her, under Captain Goostrey and Rear-Admiral Charles Holmes at Jamaica. While there he frequently served in the 'Boreas', a cruising frigate, and experienced some sharp boat service in cutting out enemy privateers. Holmes died in November 1761, and on 1 July 1762 Goostrey was killed in the attack on the Morro Castle at Havana. In summer 1761 Goostrey is said to have asked Holmes to make Vashon a lieutenant. Holmes demurred, saying he looked such a boy, but he would make him one in time. The death of both patrons nullified this plan, and though he passed his lieutenant's examination on 7 September 1763, and continued serving without interruption on the Newfoundland station and the West Indies, he was not promoted until 1 June 1774, when Sir George Rodney made him a lieutenant of the 'Maidstone'. After she received a refit in England he sailed in her in 1777 to the coast of North America, under the command of Captain Alan Gardner, and spent the early months of 1778 in active cruising. 
In March, Vashon commanded the boats which set fire to a ship they had driven on shore, where she was defended by several field-pieces. In July he carried intelligence of the French fleet to Lord Howe at New York and, having rejoined the 'Maidstone', assisted in capturing the privateer 'Lion'. Vashon, with twenty-four men, was put on the 'Lion', but the worsening weather prevented further communication, and the situation of the prize crew with some two hundred prisoners grew precarious. The ship was also in a sinking condition, but Vashon succeeded in keeping the 'Lion''s crew at the pumps, and so brought the prize safely to Antigua. For this service he was promoted to the rank of commander on 5 August 1779, and ordered home; and on 29 August 1779 he married Jane Bethell at Ludlow. 
Vashon was appointed to the 'Alert', in which he returned to the West Indies. He was sent home with dispatches from Jamaica early in 1781, was for some time attached to the fleet in the North Sea under Sir Hyde Parker, and in December went again to the West Indies with Rodney, where the 'Alert' was stationed off Martinique as a lookout ship. He was with the fleet off Dominica at the battle of the Saints (12 April 1782), when he took possession of the 'Glorieuse', and was active in saving survivors from the explosion of the 'Cesar'. He was promoted captain of the 'Prince William' by a commission dated the same day. Rodney soon afterwards appointed him flag captain of the 'Formidable', a mark of esteem, and, on Rodney's recall Vashon was moved into the frigate 'Sibyl', which he commanded until the peace. 
From 1786 to 1789 Vashon was captain of the 'Europa', with Commodore Gardner's broad pennant, and in the Spanish armament of 1790 he commanded the 'Ardent' (64 guns) and in 1793 was appointed to the 'St Albans' (64 guns), employed on convoy service to the Mediterranean and to Jamaica. He afterwards commanded the 'Pompee' (80 guns) in the Channel Fleet off Brest, and during the mutiny at Spithead. Following its conclusion a new and dangerous outbreak occurred in the 'Pompee' and though this was promptly quelled and the ringleaders tried by court martial and sentenced to death, Vashon applied to be relieved from the command. He commanded in turn the 'Neptune' (98 guns), the 'Dreadnought' (98 guns) in 1801-2, and the 'Princess Royal' (90 guns) from 1803 until his promotion to the rank of rear-admiral on 23 April 1804. 
The command of so many large second rates indicates recognition of solid though not brilliant, professional skills, yet further significant duties eluded Vashon, and for four years he commanded the ships at Leith and on the coast of Scotland. He was made a vice-admiral on 28 April 1808, and admiral on 4 June 1814. He died at Ludlow on 20 October 1827, and was survived by a son, then in holy orders. 


@@@@@


doc= 28119


Vassall, John (d. 1625), shipowner and colonial adventurer, was of French descent; his family, probably Huguenots, originated from near Caen in Normandy. Little is known of his parents or early career, though he apparently acquired a reputation as a competent authority on maritime matters, and was consulted by the high court of admiralty in suits concerning wreck in 1577 and mariners' wages in 1597. His seafaring career probably included voyages into the Mediterranean, to Leghorn and Genoa, during the early 1580s. In 1588 he set out two vessels to serve in the Armada campaign, serving as captain of one of them, the 'Samuel' (140 tons). In 1594 he was rewarded for building four ships in association with Thomas Barnes and Bartholomew Matthewson. He was a prominent member of the Trinity House of Deptford, serving as an elder brother during the early seventeenth century, when he was involved in a wide range of maritime business. In 1609 he joined the Virginia Company of London, with an adventure of $25. 
Vassall married three times. His first wife was Anne Howes, whom he married at the church of St Dunstan and All Saints, Stepney, on 25 September 1569. Following her death he married Anna Russell (died 1593), on 4 September 1580; their children included four sons and one daughter, among whom were Samuel Vassall (bap. 1586, d. 1667), MP and Virginia merchant, and William ['see below']. On 27 March 1594, after the death of his second wife, Vassall married Judith (died 1629), widow of Thomas Scott of Colchester and London, and third daughter of Stephen Borough of Stepney, with whom he had four daughters and two sons. A prominent and respected member of the maritime community in London, Vassall acquired various landed interests in the City and in Essex, including the lease on the parsonage and rectory of Eastwood, where he lived for a while, becoming a friend and neighbour of Samuel Purchas. In his will of 29 April 1625 he made generous provision for his wife and his surviving children. He died at Stepney, and was buried in the parish church on 13 September 1625. 


By the early 1640s Vassall was embroiled in controversy with the colonial authorities concerning membership of the church. In 1646 he was involved in a petition to relax restrictions on admission to the church, though it was dismissed by Edward Johnson as the work of 'persons of a Linsiwolsie disposition, some for Prelacy, some for Presbytery, and some for Plebsbytery' (J. Franklin Jameson, ed., 'Johnson's Wonder-Working Providence, 1628-1651', New York, 1910, 240). Vassall returned to London, where he tried to pursue his case with parliament. John Child's 'New England's Jonas Cast up in London' (1647) was heavily influenced by him, but it had little impact. In 1648 he migrated to Barbados, acquiring an estate in St Michael's parish. Able and hard-working, he was soon prominent within the colonial community. In 1652 he was a commissioner of the highways. During 1655 he was appointed a commissioner for implementing the 'Navigation Acts'; he was also chosen to serve in the recently established prize office. He died in Barbados later in the year, with property in the colony and a huge estate in New England. He was buried in Barbados in 1655. 


Vassall married Catherine Brandreth Backhouse, daughter of J. Evans, clergyman, on 30 June 1795. They had two sons and two daughters. His last campaign was with the ill-fated expedition to seize Buenos Aires in 1807. He was injured during the capture of Montevideo, on 3 February, and died from his wounds on 7 February 1807. Although his body was interred in the grand church of Montevideo, his remains were brought back to England and placed in a family vault in St Paul's, Bristol, to which a monument, designed by Flaxman, was added. He died leaving property in Britain and Jamaica to be held in trust for his widow and children. 


@@@@@


doc= 28120


Vassall, Samuel (bap. 1586, d. 1667), merchant and politician, was born in London and baptized at Stepney on 5 June 1586, the second of the five children of John Vassall (d. 1625), mariner and shipowner, and his second wife, Anna Russell (died 1593) of Ratcliffe. His father was a man of French background, whose family moved to England because of the religious conflict in France. Little is known of Vassall's education or early career, though he may have been an apprentice with Abraham Cartwright, a wealthy London draper, for whom he served as a factor in Italy during the 1620s. Vassall married Cartwright's daughter, Frances, with whom he had eight children, two of whom died young. 
During the early seventeenth century Vassall acquired extensive interests in trade, shipping, and colonial enterprise. By 1619 he was a member of the Drapers' Company, in which he served as a warden from 1636 to 1637 and as an assistant from 1636 to 1659. He was also a member of the Levant Company, serving as an assistant in 1625, 1628, and 1640. In 1628 he inherited a share of $4100 in the second joint-stock of the East India Company, from his father-in-law. Much of his overseas trade was in cloth, which was exported to markets in the Mediterranean and the American colonies in exchange for goods such as currants, silk, tobacco, hemp, and flax. During the 1620s he was briefly involved in privateering, setting out the 'Thomas' of London with letters of marque against France in 1627. About the same time he purchased a group of Moorish prisoners who were to be shipped as slaves to Leghorn. He regularly used his own vessels in the new transatlantic trades with Virginia and the West Indies, in occasional partnership with young city traders such as Maurice Thompson. With his brother William Vassall ['see under 'Vassall, John], he was a founder member of the Massachusetts Bay Company in 1629, when he was elected as an assistant. In 1630, in association with his brother-in-law, Peter Andrews, he was involved in a project to establish a colony in Carolina; although the enterprise failed, as late as 1663 Vassall was defending his rights in the region. 
Vassall was an ambitious entrepreneur, who was prepared to take risks to further his business interests. He claimed to be the sole English trader with Ragusa, where he built up a flourishing trade in high-quality cloth during the 1620s and 1630s. According to the Venetian ambassador, by the mid-1630s he was experimenting with a new fringed cloth, which other members of the Levant Company were unable to make. From Ragusa, Vassall sent most of his cloth to markets in Hungary, though he was forced out of this trade after 1636 by the city authorities of Ragusa. In December 1637 the Venetian ambassador was trying to persuade him to relocate his business to Venice, but the negotiations that followed were difficult and unsuccessful. Despite the pressure of other commitments, during the 1640s he was one of a small group of London merchants engaged in the development of the slave trade with Barbados, although his commercial ventures in west Africa led to accusations of interloping from the Guinea Company. By 1648 he was attempting to establish a trade with Brazil, under licence from the king of Portugal. 
At key times during the 1620s and 1630s Vassall's business activities became entangled with politics. In 1627 he was imprisoned for opposing the forced loan in the City. The following year he refused to pay impositions on currants, for which he was subsequently gaoled for contempt of court. Furthermore, in 1630 he opposed the continued levy of tonnage and poundage without parliamentary approval. After refusing to pay ship money in 1635 he was imprisoned and some of his plate was seized, though it was later returned. In September 1639, during the political crisis that grew out of the Scottish war, his house was searched and a number of papers, including covenanting tracts and a remonstrance against ship money, were seized. He was arrested again in July 1640, allegedly for organizing a petition among the inhabitants of London, to be presented to the king. Later in the year he complained to parliament that he had been committed sixteen times, for which he claimed $20,000 in damages for loss of trade and injury to his credit. 
Despite little experience in City politics or administration, Vassall was elected as one of the MPs for London to the Short and Long parliaments. Throughout the 1640s he was involved in a wide range of business, supporting and promoting the cause of the parliamentary leadership against Charles I, while looking after his own interests. In October 1641 he made a speech in the Commons on behalf of the Turkey merchants, and was instrumental in the passing of a prohibition against the import of currants from Venetian territories. He was also a supporter of John Pym's proposal for a company for America and Africa. He was involved in discussions for a loan from the City to parliament in November 1641, and in sending relief to Ireland later in the year. He was appointed to serve on committees for Virginia in December 1640, and for the relief of captives in Algiers in November 1641. These official duties increased following the outbreak of the civil war. In September 1642 he became one of the commissioners for the navy. At varying times thereafter several of his ships were hired for state service, though thinly veiled charges of corruption by Andrewes Burrell were dismissed as self-interested and ill-informed. In November 1643 he was appointed to the commission for plantations. In addition he was nominated to serve on committees for levying the assessment within London in 1642; for Barbados in 1643; for regulating the price of tobacco in 1644; for the excise and the assessment for the Scottish army in 1645; for bishops' lands and scandalous offences in 1646; and for the relief of Ireland, as well as scandalous offences, in 1648. In 1644 he was a prominent witness in the trial of Archbishop William Laud. Apparently he held Laud responsible for his imprisonment for refusing to pay tonnage and poundage, and claimed that the archbishop had warned him 'that he did eat the bread out of the King's children's mouths; and that if he were in another country he would be hanged for it' ('Works of... Laud', 4.102). 
Like the other members for London, Vassall played a leading role in organizing the parliamentarian war effort in the City, not only in managing financial assessments but also in administering decrees, such as the new model ordinance of February 1645. In July 1646 he was nominated as one of the commissioners for the conservation of the peace between England and Scotland. As a supporter of the presbyterian middle group, however, he was purged from parliament in 1648. He seems to have been in difficult financial circumstances during the 1650s. In April 1654 he petitioned the lord protector for assistance, claiming not to have received any of the compensation, amounting to $10,445 12's'. 2died, that parliament had voted for him. Following further petitions to Cromwell and the council of state he was in October 1655 awarded $2591 17's'. 6died with interest. He continued to petition the protectorate for assistance, after receiving only $1000 of this total. Both his petitions of 1654 and 1657 were printed, but in response to the latter he was told to apply to parliament for help, as there was no revenue left in Cromwell's hands to satisfy the debt. In June 1658 he was again in custody, possibly as a result of his financial situation. In February 1660 he was constituted one of the commissioners for customs in London, though the appointment was probably short-lived. Little evidence survives for Vassall's activities after 1660. He may have owned property at Bedale in Yorkshire, in addition to his landed interests in Massachusetts. He died in obscure circumstances overseas, possibly in Massachusetts, in 1667; letters of administration were granted to his son Henry on 24 October 1667, and confirmed the following month. 


@@@@@


doc= 28121


Spencer Thomas Vassall (1764-1807), army officer, a direct descendant of William Vassall, was born on 7 April 1764 in Massachusetts, the second son of John Vassall (1738-1797), merchant and planter, and his wife, Elizabeth Oliver (died 1807). His parents returned to England as a result of the political and military conflict in North America, settling at Bristol and subsequently at Bath. Apparently Vassall was educated at a foreign academy before joining the 59th regiment of foot as an ensign, at the age of twelve. Thereafter he acquired extensive experience, serving in varying capacities and campaigns with the regiment. As a young lieutenant he earned renown during the siege of Gibraltar in 1782. He took part in two campaigns in Flanders during the French Revolutionary Wars, when he was allegedly nearly executed on suspicion of being a spy. He also served as a senior officer in Antigua. He purchased the lieutenant-colonelcy of the 38th regiment, which he took command of in 1801. Under his leadership it became known as 'the Crack Regiment in Ireland' ('Memoir of... Lieutenant-Colonel Vassall', 18). In 1806 he participated in the capture of the Cape of Good Hope, where he served briefly as commandant. During his years in the service he became respected for his professional abilities; apparently, he was highly regarded by Sir John Moore, with whom he was compared. 


@@@@@


doc= 28122


William Vassall (1592-1655), born on 27 August 1592 at Stepney, was the fourth son of John and Anna Vassall. Little evidence survives for his education or early career. On 9 June 1613 he married Anna, daughter of George King of Cold Norton, Essex, with whom he had five daughters and a son, John ('c'.1625-1688). He was a leading figure in establishing the Massachusetts Bay Company during 1629, when he was selected as a member of council and assistant. In 1630 he and his family emigrated to the colony, leaving their home in Prittlewell, Essex, though they returned to England the following year, going back to Massachusetts in 1635. After a brief stay at Roxbury, however, Vassall moved to Scituate in Plymouth plantation, where he acquired land along the North River and soon became a prominent figure in the local community. In partnership with his brother Samuel he was very active commercially throughout the 1630s and 1640s. In 1642 he was chosen as one of the deputies for Scituate, and served on the council of war during a time of disturbed relations with the indigenous people. 


@@@@@


doc= 28123


Vaughan, Benjamin (1751-1835), diplomatist and political reformer, was born on 19 April 1751 in Jamaica, the eldest of the eleven children of Samuel Vaughan (1720-1802), a London merchant and West India planter of Welsh extraction, and Sarah (1727-1809), daughter of Benjamin Hallowell, a Boston merchant and founder of Hallowell, Maine. Vaughan's father operated his prosperous business from premises at Dunster's Court, London, and met his wife through an unsuccessful business partnership with her father. Soon after marrying Benjamin's parents moved to Jamaica, but returned to London after his birth to reside at Wanstead. Vaughan was sent to Henry Newcome's school at Hackney and on 27 August 1765 he was admitted to Lincoln's Inn. The following year, along with his brother William Vaughan (1752-1850), he was sent to the Warrington Academy and resided with the eminent dissenter Joseph Priestley. After three years' study at Warrington, Vaughan went to Trinity Hall, Cambridge, where he was admitted on 8 August 1768. Despite the fact that Unitarians could not graduate, he remained there until 1771, when he apparently began once more to study law, in the Inner Temple. By 1779 Vaughan had determined to marry Sarah Manning (died 1835), daughter of William Manning, a London merchant, but her father insisted that he acquire a profession to rely on if necessary, since both families' fortunes depended on West Indian trade. Thus, in 1780, Vaughan enrolled at the University of Edinburgh to study medicine, though he never practised the field, preferring instead to join Manning's business. He returned to London to marry Sarah on 30 June 1781 at the church of St Dunstan-in-the-East; the marriage produced three sons and four daughters. 
Through his father Vaughan was first introduced to politics. Samuel Vaughan was an active reformer as a member of the Society of the Supporters of the Bill of Rights in the 1760s and a friend of John Wilkes and John Horne Tooke. He was also a member of the Club of Honest Whigs, the meetings of which Benjamin sometimes attended, whereby he associated with the likes of Priestley, Richard Price, and James Burgh. In 1767 Vaughan also became acquainted with Benjamin Franklin, with whom he was to develop a close friendship and admiration, resulting in the publication of the comprehensive 'Political, Miscellaneous and Philosophical Pieces... Written by Benjamin Franklin' (1780). At other times, Vaughan was variously occupied with his father's business, spending twelve months in the early 1770s managing a plantation in Jamaica and then directing the London company from 1775 to 1777. Around this time, probably through his association with Horne Tooke and as a frequenter of parliamentary debates, Vaughan became known to Lord Shelburne, by whom he was often employed as an adviser and private secretary, and as such was an active and important mediator in Paris during the Anglo-American peace negotiations of 1782-3. 
In 1783 Vaughan returned to London to restart work for Manning and lived with his family at Jefferies Square. Engaging himself in his hobbies of music and bird breeding, Vaughan also entertained on a regular basis reform-minded men like Price, Priestley, Thomas Paine, and Samuel Romilly. About 1783 he also thought of establishing a newspaper, and served on a six-man board advising the government on behalf of the Committee of West Indian Merchants and Planters. He was, in addition, a part of the Association for Promoting the Discovery of the Interior Parts of Africa, and wrote a long, unpublished manuscript entitled 'The political state of the Austrian Netherlands'. For twelve months from January 1788 Vaughan's attention turned to editing his short-lived periodical, 'The Repository', and writing 'New and Old Principles of Trade Compared' (1788). 
Following the outbreak of revolution in France, Vaughan made a number of visits to Paris and was one of the privileged, though not impressed, few who sat near the royal box at the Fete de la Federation on 14 July 1790. That same year, writing as A Christian Politician, Vaughan composed 'A Collection of Testimonies in Favour of Religious Liberty' (1790), which he followed, in the year between July 1792 and June 1793, with a series of letters criticizing William Pitt's government in the 'Morning Chronicle', under the pseudonym A Calm Observer, and published collectively as 'Letters on the Subject of the Concert of Princes and the Dismemberment of Poland and France' (1793) and 'Two Papers by the Calm Observer' (1795). Vaughan also published his 'Comments on the Proposed War with France' (1793), wrote an introduction to David Ramsay's 'History of the American Revolution' (1793), and edited with Richard Price two volumes of 'Works of the Late Doctor Franklin' (1793). His enthusiasm for writing in these years, however, was not matched by his somewhat reticent term of office following his election to parliament in February 1792 as a member for Calne. Despite the numerous opportunities to voice his opinions, Vaughan apparently spoke only once, in February 1794, on account of William Wilberforce's bills for the abolition of the slave trade. 
In 1794, with the arrest of William Stone, brother of John Hurford Stone, an outspoken pro-French businessman living in Paris, the authorities found a letter from Vaughan, and he was subsequently summoned in May to appear before the privy council. Vaughan, however, fled to France without his family, taking refuge at Passy before being detained in a former Carmelite convent. By 27 June 1794 he had been released and travelled to Switzerland, where he spent time in Geneva, Bern, and Basel, and was befriended by the wealthy Fellensberg family and local liberals including Johann-Ludwig Iselin, J. L. Le Grand, and Francois Fesch. In 1795 he seemed determined to move to America, thus urging his wife and family to travel to Boston, where they arrived in September. Vaughan, however, stayed in Basel in the hope of promoting peace, and he made several trips to Paris on a false passport bearing the name John Martin and identifying him as an American citizen. In February and March 1796 he completed 'De l'etat politique et economic de la France sous sa Constitution de l'An III' (1796), which was published in Strasbourg, and for the next twelve months he lived outside Paris in the country house of Fulwar Skipwith, an American consul, and established a textile factory in partnership with the Stone brothers. 
Eventually, in July 1797, Vaughan joined his family in America, where they settled on inherited lands at Hallowell. Here, he retired from active politics, although he maintained an active mind through his writing efforts, which included 'Travels of a philosopher, or, Observations on the manners and arts of various nations in Africa and Asia' (1797), 'An abridgement of the second edition of a work by Dr. Currie... on the use of water in diseases of the human frame' (1799), 'The Rural Socrates' (1800), 'Remarks on a Dangerous Mistake Made as to the Eastern Boundary of Louisiana' (1814), and frequent contributions to local agricultural and medical journals. He devoted much of his time at Hallowell to promoting scientific and literary societies and as such was one of the founders of the Maine Historical Society and the Maine Medical Society, and he often opened his large personal library for use by scholars. Largely on account of this kind of patronage, Vaughan was bestowed an honorary doctor of laws degree from Harvard in 1807 and Bowdoin in 1812. He also dedicated much of his time in the final years to maintaining his extensive investments and properties in Maine, which included a lumber company he owned with his brother Charles Vaughan (1759-1839). Troubled by gout in his later years, Vaughan's duties became increasingly difficult, and he died on 7 December 1835. 


@@@@@


doc= 28124


Vaughan, Charles John (1816-1897), headmaster and dean of Llandaff, was born on 6 August 1816 at Leicester, the second son of the Revd Edward Thomas Vaughan (1772-1829), vicar of St Martin's, Leicester, and his wife, Agnes Pares, also of Leicester. The family consisted of five sons and five daughters. Vaughan was educated at Rugby School (1829-34) where he was a member of the inner circle of Thomas Arnold's pupils. He matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1834 and, after winning a series of university prizes, he was bracketed equal with the fourth Lord Lyttelton as senior classic and chancellor's medallist in 1838. He was elected to a fellowship at Trinity in 1839 (MA 1841; DD 1845), which he vacated in 1842. He was vicar of St Martin's, Leicester, from 1841 to 1844, when he was elected headmaster of Harrow School after having been an unsuccessful candidate for Rugby when Arnold died in 1842. Vaughan took over a school which was in very poor shape. In fifteen years he transformed its fortunes and won it a position among the leading public schools. When he arrived, there were about seventy boys; when he left, about four hundred and sixty. While at Harrow, in 1850, he married Catherine Maria Stanley (1821-1899), sister of a former Rugby schoolfellow, A. P. Stanley. 
Vaughan was a good scholar, albeit on rather narrow lines, and a strong disciplinarian. He favoured a monitorial system on the Rugby pattern, and defended this in a pamphlet (1853) when there had been publicity over a case in which a boy had been severely beaten by a monitor. During his time the school chapel was rebuilt, and his sermons and religious teaching exerted a strong influence. He appointed able men to the staff, was highly regarded by his colleagues, and remained in friendly contact with many of them long after he had left Harrow. Unlike most Victorian headmasters, Vaughan, with his wife, took a strong interest in local affairs. He was the first chairman of the Harrow local board, and he did something to meet the complaints of the parishioners about their exclusion from the benefits of the school by founding the English Class in 1853, against the wishes of his governors, where local boys could learn Latin and English subjects at modest cost. This later grew into the lower school of John Lyon. 
Many of Vaughan's old boys spoke of him very warmly, but as one of them wrote, 'There was an element of inscrutability about him... He found it convenient to see through others without being seen through himself' (L. A. Tollemache, 'Old and Odd Memories', 1908, 119). Vaughan resigned his headmastership in 1859. Since the publication of Phyllis Grosskurth's biography of John Addington Symonds (1964) and of her edition of Symonds's memoirs (1984), it has been generally accepted that Vaughan resigned as the result of pressure from Symonds's father, Dr Symonds, who had been told by his son (a former Harrovian) that the headmaster had sent 'a series of passionate letters' to another boy who was a fellow monitor. When Dr Symonds learned about the letters, he insisted, it is said, that if exposure were to be avoided, Vaughan should resign and should not accept any higher preferment in the church. 'The Times' obituary states that Vaughan had been offered two bishoprics. In 1860 the prime minister, Palmerston, who was also chairman of the Harrow governors, offered him the see of Rochester. Vaughan accepted it, and then withdrew a few days later. According to J. A. Symonds (though he dates these events to 1863), this withdrawal had been enforced by Dr Symonds. The story presents many difficulties: on the one hand Vaughan certainly withdrew his acceptance of the see and, when he died, he directed that no biography should be written; on the other hand the dates are discrepant and there is no evidence other than J. A. Symonds's statements. He himself was not the recipient of the letters and at the time of the alleged events he was in a highly excited mental state as he strove to come to terms with his own homosexuality. His credibility as a witness must be considered in relation to all these pressures. It seems impossible to go beyond a 'not proven' verdict; but in 1862 Vaughan was offered and refused another (unspecified) high office. 
In 1860 Vaughan was appointed vicar of Doncaster, where he threw himself with great energy and success into the work of a large town parish. He was on excellent terms with the corporation, he behaved with courage during a cholera epidemic, and, in a setting very different from that of Harrow, he accomplished a good deal for education, playing a major part in resuscitating the town's moribund grammar school, which was re-opened in 1862. Only a few years later the Taunton commission described it as one of the leading grammar schools in Yorkshire. When he left Doncaster in 1869 the local press was full of tributes which were clearly much more than conventional. He had, it was said, 'laboured and helped with a generosity unexampled for the spiritual and temporal benefit of his parishioners' ('Doncaster, Nottingham, and Lincoln Gazette', 10 Sept 1869). 
It was at Doncaster that Vaughan began what was to be the most important work of his later life -- the preparing of young men for ordination. He had announced his intention to receive young graduates in a Cambridge University sermon in 1861, and by the time he left Doncaster, 120 of the so-called 'doves' had been trained by him, 100 of whom came to the town from all over the country for special services. Vaughan was master of the Temple from 1869 to 1894, combining this from 1879 with the deanery of Llandaff, which he held until he died. In London he developed the considerable reputation as a preacher which he had gained at Harrow and at Doncaster. His published work consisted largely of sermons and of commentaries on some of the epistles, and he was a member of the committee which produced the 'Revised New Testament'. The training of the 'doves' continued almost until the end of his life; in all some 450 men passed through his hands. Two of them, Randall Davidson, archbishop of Canterbury from 1903 to 1928, and the Cambridge medievalist G. G. Coulton, have left accounts of their training. Vaughan concentrated on the detailed study of the 'Greek Testament' and on regular sermon preparation, while all the men did regular parish work under a local clergyman. Both Coulton and Davidson commented on the absence of party spirit and the encouragement to men to form their own opinions. 
At Llandaff, Vaughan became a major figure in Welsh life. He was much respected by nonconformists and co-operated with men of all opinions. In 1880 he re-founded the cathedral school, which his bishop called 'the Dean's favourite child'. He played an important part in the foundation of the university college in 1883, and was one of the two representatives sent to plead the case before the arbitrators that the new south Wales college should be located in Cardiff. He was a steady friend and supporter of the first principal, John Viriamu Jones, and he was president of the college in 1894-6. At this time his health broke down. He suffered from bronchitis and paralysis and he steadily weakened until he died on 15 October 1897, at the deanery, Llandaff. In its obituary, the 'Cardiff Times' wrote that 'in his death the whole Principality has lost a friend'. When he was buried in the cathedral precincts on 20 October, his funeral was attended by a very large concourse of mourners which included a formal delegation of the local nonconformist ministers and nearly half of all the students he had prepared for ordination. 


@@@@@


doc= 28125


Vaughan, Sir Charles Richard (1774-1849), diplomatist, son of James Vaughan, physician, of Leicester, and Hester, daughter of John Smalley (who had married a daughter of Sir Richard Halford), was born at Leicester on 20 December 1774. His brothers were Sir Henry Halford (Vaughan), who dropped this last name; Sir John Vaughan (1769-1839), baron of the exchequer; and Peter Vaughan, warden of Merton College, Oxford. Charles Vaughan was educated at Rugby School, where he entered on 22 January 1788, and at Merton College, Oxford, matriculating on 26 October 1791. He graduated BA in 1796 and MA in 1798, in which year he was also elected a fellow of All Souls. He intended to follow the medical profession, attending lectures in both Edinburgh and London, and took the degree of MB in 1800. He was, however, elected Radcliffe travelling fellow on 4 December 1800, and spent the next three years in Germany, France, and Spain. In 1804 he visited Constantinople, Asia Minor, and Syria. The following year he made his way from Aleppo to Persia, fell ill near the Caspian, and was indebted perhaps for his life to the kindness of some Russian officers. With them he sailed for the Volga in November, was shut out by the ice, and had to spend the winter on the desert island of Kulali, but eventually arrived at Astrakhan in April 1806, reaching England by way of St Petersburg on 11 August 1806. 
In 1808, in a private capacity, Vaughan accompanied Charles Stuart (afterwards Lord Stuart de Rothesay) to Spain, and was present at the assembly of the northern juntas at Lugo; thence he went to Madrid, and travelled to Saragossa with Colonel Charles William Doyle. On his return to Madrid he was sent with dispatches relating to the battle of Tudela to Sir John Moore at Salamanca, and returned to England in December 1808. In 1809 he published his 'Narrative of the Siege of Saragossa', which reached a fifth edition within the year. 
In 1809 Vaughan was also appointed private secretary to Henry Bathurst, third Earl Bathurst, secretary for foreign affairs. On 5 January 1810 he became secretary of legation (later of embassy) in Spain, whither he returned with the minister, Henry Wellesley. He was sent to Britain in 1811 to give information as to the state of politics in Spain. He acted as minister-plenipotentiary during the absence of his chief from August 1815 until December 1816, and his correspondence during these years throws much light on Spanish politics. On 5 April 1820 he went to Paris as secretary of embassy under his old friend Sir Charles Stuart, and on 8 February 1823 became minister-plenipotentiary to the confederated states of Switzerland. He was appointed envoy-extraordinary and minister-plenipotentiary to the United States in 1825, and on 23 March he was made privy councillor. Between 11 July and 13 August 1826 he travelled nearly 1800 miles in the United States; three years later he accomplished another long tour. From 1831 to 1833 he was on leave of absence in England, and during this time had a personal conference with the king on American affairs. In 1833 he was created knight grand cross of the Royal Guelphic Order of Hanover. Ill health caused his retirement from Washington in October 1835. Though, in Sir Charles Webster's view, a man of 'no great ability' (Webster, 1.69), he dealt with important matters such as the Canadian boundary, the Latin American republics, the slave trade, and the tariff. On one occasion he was fiercely reprimanded by Canning for exceeding instructions (Temperley, 288). Palmerston thought him 'a steady sensible man, though not very showy' (Bourne, 466). 
In 1835 Vaughan made a protracted tour of the continent. On 4 March 1837 he was sent on a special embassy to Constantinople, and proceeded by way of Malta, where he heard that the mission was no longer required; he therefore went to Venice, and thence travelled home through Italy and Switzerland. In such travel he spent most of the years that were left to him. He left minute itineraries of his later journeys. He died unmarried in Hertford Street, Mayfair, Westminster, on 15 June 1849 and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 28126


Vaughan, Edward (early 1450s-1522/3), bishop of St David's, was almost certainly a Welshman, born somewhere in south Wales in the early 1450s. His parentage is unknown. He was educated at Cambridge University, where he was admitted as bachelor of canon law in either 1474 or 1475, and he incepted as doctor of canon law in 1482. He may have stayed on at Cambridge or returned home for a time, for it was not until 1487 that he received his first known preferment, as rector of St Matthew's Church, Friday Street, London, and portioner in the church of St Probus, Cornwall. These were granted presumably in anticipation of his ordination as subdeacon on 1 March, deacon on 22 March, and priest on 5 April 1488. He was made archdeacon of Lewes, Chichester diocese, in the same year. His clerical preferment, mainly in the dioceses of London and Chichester, has been fully recorded by A. B. Emden and in Le Neve's 'Fasti ecclesiae Anglicanae'. He had already held prebends in St Paul's Cathedral when he was rewarded with the lucrative and prestigious office of treasurer there, together with its prebend of Broomesbury, in 1503. In London he gained a reputation for generosity and public spirit, building a house there for his successors and distributing 500 marks to the poor in time of dearth. In 1504 he became precentor of Abergwili and prebendary of Llanbister. 
Vaughan was appointed bishop of St David's by papal provision on 13 July 1509 and consecrated by Archbishop Warham on 22 July the same year. He brought down to St David's, to act as choirmaster, a talented English organist and composer, John Norman, some of whose music has survived. By experience a careful manager, he commissioned a new copy of the 'Black Book of St David's' (a fourteenth-century survey of the episcopal estates) in 1516, and in 1517 he renewed the appropriation of the church of Llansanffraid, Cardiganshire, to the vicars-choral to help them repair and maintain their houses within the close. 
At St David's, however, Vaughan's reputation rests chiefly and securely on his building work. John Leland, who had visited St David's within two decades of the bishop's death, records that he built the chapel of Holy Trinity, the chapel of St Justinian, and the great barn at Lamphey, and that he repaired the castle of Llawhaden and built a new chapel there. Later authorities have attributed to him other building work at his palace at Lamphey, including the chapel, where a perpendicular-style east window has survived. At the cathedral he was responsible for the roof of the lady chapel and its ante-chapel, the south porch, and the third stage of the tower, although neither of the two latter, as W. Basil Jones caustically remarked, 'would confer immortality on his taste in architecture' (Jones and Freeman, 309). This was to be expected, for the diocese was in a depressed state and the money was just not available for lavish, large-scale reparations -- witness the long list of tax exemptions that the bishop recorded in his register for 1513 and 1517 to religious houses and churches that had been 'diminished, impoverished and destroyed by wars, fires, inundations of rivers and other misfortunes and chances' (Isaacson, 2.790-803, 818-27). Holy Trinity chapel, however, with its fine ashlar finish and fan vaulting, remains one of the glories of the cathedral. It was constructed in an empty, enclosed, roofless space east of the presbytery, an area described by George Owen as 'the most vile and filthy place in the whole church' (Robson, 58). Built at the bishop's own expense, it was designed to be his resting-place and chantry chapel. It has been acclaimed as 'one of the finest pieces of Perpendicular work in the Principality' (Williams, 433). The same high-quality work can be seen in the traceried east window of the chapel at Lamphey Palace where the bishop seems to have spent his retirement. Here he rationalized the building of the palace in an attempt, as C. A. Ralegh Radford argued, 'to concentrate the life of the palace in one block and under one roof, abandoning the extensive establishment laid out in the more spacious days of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries' (Radford, 12). 
Vaughan died in late 1522 or early 1523 (certainly before 27 January 1523 when his will, dated 20 May 1521, was proved), and was buried in Holy Trinity chapel where, in Browne Willis's day, a brass memorial was still attached to his marble grave marker, lauding him as a supporter and ornament of his country who had managed and augmented the talents that God had given him skilfully, wisely, and well. He left numerous bequests to religious houses within his diocese and the large sum of $40 for a priest to sing masses for six years to secure the repose of his soul. 


@@@@@


doc= 28127


Vaughan, Sir Gruffudd, fychan (d. 1447), soldier, was the son of Gruffudd ab Ieuan ap Madog of Powys and his wife, Mallt (Maud), daughter of Griffri ap Rhys Bongam of Broniarth. The father was implicated in Glyn Dwr's rebellion and his estates (valued at 20 marks) were forfeited in 1404. Of Broniarth and Trelydan in Powys, the son was one of that breed of independent Welsh gentry ('uchelwyr') who prospered after Glyn Dwr's rebellion in the service of marcher lords, in Vaughan's case the lords of Powys and the Stafford lords of Caus. Lack of evidence obscures much of his career, and the native Welsh poetry addressed to him concentrates primarily on his military prowess. Gruffudd Vaughan was apparently not involved in the rebellion; a later pedigree identifies him as a burgess in Welshpool in 1406, though the identification is uncertain. He may have accompanied Henry V to France, but the tradition that he was made a knight-banneret at Agincourt (1415) is unsubstantiated. In November 1417 Vaughan and his brother, Ieuan ap Gruffudd, described as gentlemen, with two others made themselves notorious by capturing, on their ancestral estate at Broniarth, Sir John Oldcastle, the Lollard upon whose head a price of 1000 marks had been set. Various privileges were granted them for this act -- including a pardon of murders and felonies and the right to hold their lands free of certain rents and services -- by a charter dated 6 July 1419 from Edward Charlton, lord of Powys, to whom they had delivered Oldcastle at Welshpool. At Shrewsbury on 4 March 1421, in the presence of Henry V, the duke of Gloucester, and the earl of Stafford, the four captors acknowledged that they had received their portion of the reward from Charlton. 
According to the poet Hywel Cilan, Vaughan was honoured in London and then knighted, with others, in a town beyond Rouen, presumably an allusion to service in France. If, as Hywel states (and the poet Lewys Glyn Cothi repeats), he was 'aureated' by Henry VI and his counsellors, this may have occurred when the king visited Rouen and Paris in 1430-32; the earl of Stafford was in the royal entourage. As a knight Vaughan was in receipt of an annuity of 5 marks from Stafford by 1441-2. In the following year he appears in the retinue of Sir Christopher Talbot, the youngest son of the earl of Shrewsbury and a notable jouster: on 10 August 1443 his lance pierced Talbot's heart at Caus and, as a result, Vaughan and his son Rheinallt (or Reynold) were outlawed and a price of 500 marks was placed on the father's head. His capture was effected by Henry Grey, count of Tancarville and one of the heirs of the Charltons of Powys, who summoned Sir Gruffudd to Powis Castle and gave what Sir Gruffudd considered a 'safe conduct'. Immediately on his arrival within the courtyard he was summarily beheaded, on 9 July 1447. This event was the occasion of poetical laments by Lewys Glyn Cothi and Dafydd Llwyd of Mathafarn. On 20 July 1447 a treasury warrant was issued for the payment of the 500 marks to Grey. The deed has been attributed to jealousy on Grey's part because Sir Gruffudd claimed descent from the ancient princes of Powys, and may have laid claim to some of Grey's lands. His sons Rheinallt and Dafydd accepted a pardon on 21 December 1448. 
Sir Gruffudd married first Margaret, daughter and coheir of Gruffudd ap Jenkin of Broniarth, and second Margaret, daughter of Madog of Hope. He had three sons and three daughters. The eldest son was David Llwyd (died 1489) of Leighton, ancestor of the Lloyds of Marrington, Marton, and Stockton; the second, Cadwalader, was ancestor of the Lloyds of Maes-mawr; and the third, Rheinallt, was ancestor of the Wynnes of Garth and of the Lloyds of Broniarth and Gaerfawr. 


@@@@@


doc= 28128


Vaughan, Sir Henry (1587?-1660/61), royalist army officer, was the sixth son of Walter Vaughan (died 1598) of Golden Grove, Carmarthenshire, and Mary Rice (died before 1588), daughter of Sir Walter Rice of Newton; he was the brother of the poet and promoter of Newfoundland, William Vaughan, and John Vaughan, first earl of Carbery. He settled at Derwydd, Llandybie, Carmarthenshire, about 1602 or 1603, having married a widow, Sage Rice ('fl'. 1590-1640), the only child of the heir of that house, Elizabeth, first wife of John Gwyn William. Vaughan was sheriff for Carmarthenshire in 1619-1620, and represented Carmarthen Boroughs in successive parliaments from 1621 to 1629, except for the 1625 parliament, when he was unseated after a double return. He was elected as representative for the county on 26 March 1640 and again on 5 November 1640. During the Long Parliament he was nominated as a commissioner to root out scandalous ministers in a bill that was proceeding through the Commons. However, on 7 April 1642 a long-time opponent of his family, Hugh Grundy, presented a petition to parliament alleging misconduct against him in his care of the church, and sought to have him removed as a commissioner. Vaughan held six parish churches which he had obtained from Sir Henry Percy, son of the earl of Northumberland, at a rent of $750 a year. Grundy claimed that he grossly underpaid the curates and employed 'six unworthy and scandalous persons that are no preachers' in these churches. He further alleged that Vaughan entertained papists in his house and employed recusants in his own service (Parl. Arch., Main MSS, 1644). 
At the outbreak of civil war Vaughan closely followed the position of his nephew Richard Vaughan, second earl of Carbery, who had been given command of the royalist forces in south-west Wales. Indeed one commentator, writing shortly after the Restoration, described Vaughan as 'principled and actuated' by Carbery (E. D. Jones, ed., 'The gentry of south west Wales in the civil war', 'National Library of Wales Journal', 11, 1959-60, 143). In 1642 he was nominated as a commissioner of array in Carmarthenshire, and made lieutenant-colonel of the foot in Carbery's regiment. On 14 January 1643 he was knighted by Charles I at Oxford and on 26 October the king appointed him sergeant-major-general of the royalist forces in the counties of Carmarthen, Cardigan, and Pembroke. Vaughan moved into these counties and was described as 'the instrument of much mischief', apparently treating his opponents with some brutality (Phillips, 2.142). He was disabled from sitting in the Commons on 5 February 1644. Vaughan based his headquarters at Haverfordwest but abandoned that town in March 1644, reputedly after a panic induced by a stampede of frightened cattle, which was mistaken for the parliamentarian troops of Rowland Laugharne. He fled to Carmarthen, but that town was also taken by parliament a few weeks later. 
Vaughan returned to Oxford and sat in the king's parliament there. He was taken prisoner at the battle of Naseby on 14 June 1645, and on 18 June was brought before the House of Commons and committed to the Tower, where he remained until his removal to the Fleet on 1 October 1647. Vaughan wrote to his wife from prison on 29 July 1648 that he was 'like to be in a starving condicion' (Jones, 'Cadets', 139). On 27 April 1644 a fine of $160 had been set for him by the parliamentarian authorities and on 20 August 1645 he was assessed at $500, by the committee for compounding, his estate being valued at $600 a year. He was in severe financial difficulties, however, and about this time assessed his debts at $3603, including $20 for his 'lodging and diet' in the Tower. He informed the authorities that 'all the demeans where I live was my wife's, and the best part of my estate was my wife's inheritance' (Carmarthenshire RO, Cawdor (Vaughan) MS 22/658). 
Supporting the view that Vaughan's conduct in the war was particularly vicious is the fact of his exclusion from any pardon under the Newcastle propositions of 1646. He was similarly exempted from the general pardon of 13 October 1648, being described as a 'capital offender'. A parliamentarian writer described him as ''Act-all', now prisoner in the Tower for all [the family?]', brother to 'the honest Richard (Tell-all)' ('The Earle of Carberyes Pedegree', 1646). His strong affection for the king's cause was also indicated by a royalist song of 1647: '
Sir Harry Vaughan looks as grave 

As any beard can make him. 

Those [who] come poore prisoners to see 

Doe for our Patriarke take him. 

Old Harry is a right true blue, 

As valiant as Pendraggon, 

And would be loyall to his king 

Had King Charles ne'er a rag on. 
(Jones, 'Cadets', 140)' Though it was reported that Vaughan was in prison in London until 1659, he was listed as a potential royal activist in Carmarthenshire during 1658. He made his will on 27 November 1660 but died at Derwydd, Llandybie, before 5 January 1661, when an inventory of his goods was drawn up; his will was proved at Carmarthen on 22 January. His eldest son, John, predeceased him so the estate devolved on his second son, also 


@@@@@


doc= 28129


Sir Henry Vaughan (c.1613-1676). He was a lieutenant-colonel in his father's regiment, and was first noticed in arms when Tenby was captured by Cromwell in 1648 during the second civil war. In his father's letter from prison of July 1648, Henry was described as being a 'prisoner in Denby Castle'. A contemporary pamphlet called him 'Sergeant-Major' but his memorial inscription gives his rank as 'Colonel' (Phillips, 2.378; Harrison, 12, 84). After the Restoration he was knighted at Whitehall, on 9 January 1662. He was appointed as captain of the foot for the borough of Carmarthen in 1662 by the earl of Carbery, and served as mayor for the town in 1670. He was returned as MP for the county of Carmarthen at a by-election in January 1668, but a question arose over his eligibility to sit as he had been outlawed for debt. After consideration it was decided that his election should stand, and he retained the seat until his death (caused by a fall from his horse) on 26 December 1676. It has been suggested that he was 'interested in Parliament solely as a refuge from his creditors: he made no recorded speeches and sat on no committees, but he loyally supported the court party' (Naylor and Jagger, 3.628). He was buried at Llandybie church, where an elaborate monument was erected to his memory by his widow, Elizabeth (died 1694), eldest daughter and coheir of William Herbert of Coldbrook, Monmouthshire. Many writers have erroneously assumed the existence of only one Sir Henry Vaughan, while some have still further confounded them with their namesake, who hailed from Cilcennin, Cardiganshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 28130


Vaughan, Henry (1621-1695), writer and translator of devotional works, was born at Newton by Usk in the parish of Llansanffraid (St Bridget's), Brecknockshire, the eldest known child of Thomas Vaughan ('c'.1586-1658), of Tretower, and Denise Jenkin ('b'. 'c'.1593), only daughter and heir of David and Gwenllian Morgan, of Llansanffraid. Vaughan was the elder of twins; his brother Thomas Vaughan (1621-1666) was also an author, under the pseudonym Eugenius Philalethes. Vaughan could claim kinship with two powerful Welsh families, one Catholic and one protestant. His paternal grandmother, Frances, was the natural daughter of Thomas Somerset, who spent some twenty-four years in the Tower of London for his adherence to Catholicism. As she survived into Vaughan's boyhood, there may have been some direct Catholic influence upon his early nurturing. Vaughan shared a common ancestry with the Herbert family through the daughter of the famous warrior of Agincourt Dafydd ap Llywelyn, the 'Davy Gam, esquire' of Shakespeare's 'Henry V'. He is not known to have claimed kinship with George Herbert, but must surely have been aware of the connection. 
Thomas later remarked that ''English' is a 'Language' the 'Author' was 'not born to'' ('Works of Thomas Vaughan', 94). Their father, however, had a command of English, and they were probably bilingual. Both boys were sent to school under Matthew Herbert, rector of Llangattock, and both wrote tributes to him. Since their interest was so clearly shared, the two brothers' intimate acquaintance with hermeticism may have dated from those years. Herbert doubtless reinforced the devotion to church and monarchy that the boys would have learned at home. Like several others among Vaughan's clerical acquaintances, he was to prove uncompromising during the interregnum, suffering sequestration and imprisonment and narrowly avoiding banishment. 
The buttery books of Jesus College, Oxford, show that Thomas was admitted to the college in May 1638 (Hutchinson, 30), and it has long been assumed that Henry went up at the same time, though Wood states that 'he made his first entry into Jesus College in Michaelmas term 1638, aged 17 years' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 926). There is no clear record, as there is in Thomas's case, to establish Henry's residence or matriculation, but the assumption of his association with Oxford, supported by his inclusion in 'Athenae Oxonienses', is reasonable enough. He informed Aubrey, who wrote to him on Wood's behalf, 'I stayed not att Oxford to take any degree' ('Works of Henry Vaughan', 687). Recent research in the Jesus College archives suggests that 'Henry did not enter Jesus College before 1641, unless he did so in 1639 without matriculating or paying an admission fee, and left before the record in the surviving Buttery Books resumes in December of that year' (Allen, 'The Vaughans at Jesus College, Oxford, 1638-48'). The suggestion that Henry went to Oxford some time after Thomas may be strengthened by a comparison of the poems each wrote for the 1651 edition of the 'Comedies, Tragi-Comedies, with Other Poems' of William Cartwright, who had died in 1643. Thomas had clearly attended Cartwright's lectures, which were the great draw of the time ('When He did read, how did we flock to hear!'; 'Works of Thomas Vaughan', 582), while Henry apparently had not, since he begins his verses 'I did but see thee' ('Complete Poems', 88). On the other hand Hutchinson thought that a reference, in 'On Sir Thomas Bodley's library; the author being then in Oxford', to the library being T-shaped ('all our fame / Meets here to speak one letter of thy name') suggests a date before 1640, when the addition of the Selden end produced the shape of an H (Hutchinson, 31). 
It was quite usual for elder sons of the gentry not to graduate, and to proceed to the inns of court. In the letter to Aubrey already cited, dated 15 June 1673, Vaughan wrote that he 'was sent to London, beinge then designed by my father for the study of the Law, which the sudden eruption of our late civil warres wholie frustrated' ('Works of Henry Vaughan', 687). If he indeed left London upon the outbreak of civil war, that would have been soon after Charles raised his standard at Nottingham on 22 August 1642. The mist which surrounds Vaughan's Oxford career is not dispelled by Aubrey, who writes ''Eugenius Philalethes' was of Jesus College. Whither Henry was I have forgotten; but he was a Clarke sometime to Judge Sir Marmaduke Lloyd' ('Brief Lives', 303). Such employment seems probable enough: Vaughan said that he had been sent to London to study law, and he and Lloyd had their ardent royalism in common. Vaughan could have held this position from 1642 to 1645; Lloyd was taken prisoner at the siege of Hereford in December 1645, fined, and dismissed from his position as judge. 
Apart from the periods of study, at Llangattock, Oxford, and one of the inns of court, Vaughan's life was spent in his native village. His first wife was Catherine Wise, daughter of Richard and Lucy Wise of Gilsdon Hall, Coleshill, Warwickshire. They were probably married before the publication of 'Poems' in 1646, and had four children, Thomas, Lucy, Frances, and Catherine. The date of Catherine Wise's death is unknown, but the elegy 'Fair and Young Light' in the 1655 'Silex scintillans' probably celebrates her memory. 
The Latin poem addressed to posterity prefaced to 'Olor Iscanus' (1651) was once thought to indicate that Vaughan had not fought in the civil war; a more likely interpretation is that he had not fought on the wrong side, had not taken part in the 'great overthrow' which had swept away the church, the monarch, and the peace of the kingdom. His 'An elegy on the death of Mr. R. W. Slain in the late unfortunate differences at Rowton Heath, near Chester, 1645' clearly suggests that he participated in that battle. Further, among the 'Captaines' taken prisoner on 24 September 1645 after the royalist defeat at Rowton Heath we find Thomas Vaughan. Henry Vaughan seems to have been among the survivors of Rowton Heath who withdrew to Beeston Castle, about 9 miles south-east of Chester, which surrendered in November 1645 ('Works of Thomas Vaughan', 6). In the splendid humorous poem 'Upon a cloak lent him by Mr. J. Ridsley' Vaughan refers to 'that day, when we / Left craggy 'Beeston', and the fatal 'Dee'' ('Complete Poems', 84). Moreover, his name appears in a list, dated 1663, of officers claiming their share in relief promised by the crown, just where we would expect it, along with 'Cap. Tho. Vaughan' in the company of Colonel Sir Herbert Price, of Brecon Priory (Hutchinson, 64-5). Vaughan's younger brother William ('b'. 'c'.1628) died on 14 July 1648, possibly as a result of wounds or sickness incurred during the second civil war, and Vaughan mourned William's death in a series of fine elegies. 
Henry Vaughan's first volume, 'Poems, with the Tenth Satire of Juvenal Englished', appeared in 1646. The civil war had been in progress for four years, and Vaughan had by then seen military service. Two major causes of distress were still in the future: the death of his beloved younger brother William in 1648, and the execution of Charles I in 1649. The title-page indicated the author's status as gentleman, and its preface is addressed to 'Gentlemen' whose 'more refined spirits out-wing these dull Times, and soar above the drudgery of dirty intelligence'. Vaughan claims detachment, yet he reminds his readers that they are living in 'the dregs of an age'. He is aware that his love poems might seem anachronistic; the echoes of Habington's 'Castara', a celebration of wedded chastity, would have appealed to Charles I and Henrietta Maria. In reference to his translation he describes Juvenal as one whose pen 'had as much true passion, for the infirmities of that state, as we should have pity, to the distractions of our own' ('Complete Poems', 31). He hints darkly, and with good reason, at topical application. 
In the 'Poems' of 1646 we find, lightly handled, themes and interests that will take on deeper resonance in the later 'Silex' (the theme of the restoration of all things, for example, in 'To my Ingenuous Friend, R. W.' and in 'Upon the Priory Grove'). On the other hand, some of the more successful poems differ markedly from Vaughan's mature verse, suggesting that religious lyricism was not his sole talent. Lines 35-56 of 'A Rhapsody' indicate that Vaughan had used his eyes and imagination to some purpose during his time in London; lines 27-36 of 'To Amoret Weeping' show that Vaughan had read or heard the Jacobean dramatists with attention: he captures their manner, their concreteness of moral perception, very well. 'A Rhapsody' also suggests that in spite of his claim to detachment, Vaughan had been considerably stirred by the political events of the time. 

'Olor Iscanus', published in 1651 but with a preface dated 17 December 1647, is the book one might expect from a young royalist of that time and place. Vaughan writes a joking poem on his poverty (the royalist ruined in his fortunes); he writes verse letters to his friends (as royalists scattered by their adversities did); he writes elegies for acquaintances slain in battle; he participates (at one remove in the case of Fletcher and directly in the case of Cartwright) in two of the great royalist publishing ventures of the time. One royalist theme, treated in the secular verse with uncommon 'gravitas', is that of retirement. Vaughan treats this theme mostly through translation, of the poems of Ovid written during his banishment, of those of Boethius written during his imprisonment. Vaughan's treatment of the Horatian theme of the royalist contentedly retired to his estates is unconventional. In translating the Polish Jesuit neo-Latin poet Casimir Sarbiewski, he answers Horace's 'Beatus ille' ode with the reflection that the '
worldly he... 

Ploughing his own 'fields', seldom can 

Be justly styled, 'the blessed man', 

' for 'That title only fits a 'Saint'', who '
can gladly part 

With 'house' and 'lands', and leave 

... [the] loud strife 

Of this world for a better life. 
('Complete Poems', 127)' In 'Silex scintillans' the theme of retirement deepens into the theme of hiddenness. There we see it in such poems as 'The Book', where the world of all that has lived within nature is hidden in the artefact which is the book, waiting for that day when God will 'make all new again' ('Complete Poems', 310); we see it in the alchemical imagery of the poem 'Holy Scriptures', when Vaughan addresses the 'Bible' and says, '
In thee the hidden stone, the 'manna' lies, 

Thou art the great 'elixir', rare and choice; 
(ibid., 198)' we see it in 'The Timber', where Vaughan relates death to new life, to the growing up of fresh groves and the shooting of green branches, 'While the low 'violet' thrives at their root' (ibid., 262); we see it in 'The Seed Growing Secretly', with its typical reference to that 'Dear, secret 'greenness'!' which is nursed below the level of tempests and winds, and whose growth is apparent only to God (ibid., 277); we see it even more movingly expressed in the elegiac poem 'I Walked the Other Day', in which the poet represents himself as digging in winter in a place where he had once '
seen the soil to yield 

A gallant flower, 

' and there '
saw the warm recluse alone to lie 

Where fresh and green 

He lived of us unseen. 
(ibid., 240-41)' We see it, finally, in the hidden God of 'The Night', in whom there is a 'deep but dazzling darkness', and in whose night the poet wishes to 'live invisible and dim' (ibid., 290). 
In virtually all these examples the theme of hiddenness is linked with the theme of potentiality, as expressed through notions like new growth, alchemical transmutation, resurrection of the dead. If our 'life is hid with Christ in God' ('Colossians' 3: 3), then the possibility of new life, of transfiguration, is there. Vaughan brings together the notion of potentiality as expressed through alchemical philosophy and the same notion as expressed through the parables of the kingdom, in which mustard seeds grow into great trees, or scattered seed brings forth a hundredfold, in which, that is, hidden and apparently insignificant things gather to a greatness. Vaughan's response in such poems as these is religious and spiritual rather than directly political. Nevertheless, it is a spiritual response to a political situation. Whether drawing on Dante or on more ancient sources, Vaughan was aware of the polysemous possibilities of poetry; so much in his world is hidden, quietly biding its time, waiting for a new life, that the alert and sympathetic contemporary reader may have seen in such images hidden and buried royalism and Anglicanism waiting for their potentialities to be actualized, for their new day to dawn. 
Most of Vaughan's work in prose consists of translations, the titles of which make clear their application to historical circumstance, for example 'Of the Benefit wee may Get by our Enemies', 'The Praise and Happinesse of the Countrie-Life', 'The World Contemned', 'Of Temperance and Patience'. A significant original work is 'The Mount of Olives, or, Solitary Devotions' (1652). Vaughan may well have thought of it as an alternative to the 'Book of Common Prayer', use of which was proscribed. It is interesting that, in spite of the Anglican rite being banned, Vaughan provides prayers, a meditation, and admonitions in relation to receiving 'the holy Communion', as well as 'A Prayer in Time of Persecution and Heresie' ('Works of Henry Vaughan', 160-66). It seems probable that clandestine services were held, yet in the Brecon gaol records for the relevant period only one prosecution for use of the 'Book of Common Prayer' has been found. 
In his letter to Aubrey of 15 June 1673 Vaughan wrote that his brother's employment was in 'physic and Chymistrie', and added, 'My profession also is physic, whch I have practised now for many years with good success (I thank god!) & a repute big enough for a person of greater parts than my selfe.' Both Hutchinson and the two women, Gwenllian Morgan and Louise Guiney, on whose researches he based his biography, gave careful attention to the questions of when Vaughan is likely to have begun work as a medical practitioner and where he received his medical degree. They found no evidence that Vaughan had graduated in medicine from any British or European university. Legal documents dated 1677, 1690, 1691, 1693, and 1695 refer to Vaughan as doctor of medicine or of 'physick', but he himself does not use the title, referring to himself only as 'Physitian' (Hutchinson, 190). He is described as 'M.D.' on his gravestone. Hutchinson conceded that the College of Physicians would probably have been unable to enforce regulations against unlicensed practitioners in a county so remote as Brecknockshire; but he thought it unlikely that 'a man of honour like Henry Vaughan would have adopted the custom of none too scrupulous astrologers, or have suffered popular use to give him a degree to which he was not entitled' (ibid., 193). Such an assumption may well be anachronistic; it certainly dates from an era when the literary persona of the author of 'Silex scintillans' was assumed to be virtually identical with the man himself. In Vaughan's translation of Heinrich Nolle, 'Hermetical Physick' (1655), we find 'And after all the coyl of Academical licentiated Doctors, he onely is the true Physician, created so by the light of Nature, to whom Nature her selfe hath taught and manifested her proper and genuine operations by Experience' ('Works of Henry Vaughan', 581). The first nine words of this sentence are Vaughan's interpolation, and suggest that if he was acting as a physician by 1655, he was unlicensed. 
The twinship and obviously shared intellectual interests of Thomas and Henry make some comparison of their careers relevant. Thomas was evicted from his living in 1650, and needed a source of income. In a letter of May 1650 Samuel Hartlib noted that he 'for some years hath tried Chymical or Physical Conclusions', and we also learn from Hartlib that in that year there was a project to form a 'chymical club' of which Vaughan was to be a member. It seems likely that this society was actually formed ('Works of Thomas Vaughan', 11-13). Thomas was married on 28 September 1651, and his wife, Rebecca, died on 17 April 1658. He writes in his manuscript notebook 'Aqua vitae: non vitis' (BL, Sloane MS 1741) that he had employed himself all her lifetime 'in the Acquisition of some naturall secrets' ('Works of Thomas Vaughan', 588). There is also an apparent reference to Henry Vaughan's first wife staying with them in London and making, with Rebecca, 'a great glass of eye-water' (ibid., 17). Thomas Vaughan's alchemical and 'philosophical' publications run from 1650 to 1655. He seems to have been working at 'physick' for some considerable time before 1655, the date before which, Hutchinson argued, Henry could not have given himself to continuous medical training. If Hartlib is to be trusted, Thomas's work in 'physick' began before 1650. If Henry Vaughan's position as a legal clerk ended in or before 1645, it is likely enough that he would have needed at least some supplementary income. His father was a younger son, there is reference in the verse to poverty, and, given its strongly royalist leanings, the family is unlikely to have prospered financially during the civil war. Vaughan's clerical neighbour Rowland Watkyns, who was dispossessed in 1648, probably practised as a physician while he was deprived of his living, and he and Vaughan may have been rivals. If a dispossessed cleric could have been an unlicensed practitioner, why not the elder son of a poor royalist gentry family who had completed no other professional training? After all, Vaughan's interest in hermetic authors, whose writing had practical as well as theoretical implications, can be documented from the poems as early as 1650. 
Since Hutchinson's biography, further evidence that Vaughan was taking a strong interest in medicine before 1655 has come to light. Fourteen medical books he once owned are now in the Library Company of Philadelphia. Probably Vaughan's widow at his death sent them to Bristol, the nearest market, where they were purchased by Dr William Logan, then practising medicine in Bristol. Logan's library was sent to America after his death, and incorporated into the library of his brother James Logan, William Penn's agent. One of the books, Jean Pecquet's 'Experimenta nova anatomica' (Paris, 1651), was first owned by Thomas Vaughan, the flyleaf bearing his signature and the motto 'Deo duce: comite natura', with the date 1652, which presumably represents the date on which Thomas acquired this work. On page 107 there is a marginal note in Henry's hand concerning the cause and cure of fever and dropsy, signed 'H:V:S'. The form of signature suggests that Henry owned, or had access to, and felt free to write in, this book while he was still thinking of himself as Silurist (a native of the district anciently inhabited by the Silures), since books of a later date are signed simply 'Vaughan'. Nicholas Fonteyn's treatise on paediatric medicine 'Commentarius in Sebastianum Austrium: de puerorum morbis' carries the autograph signature and motto ''Henr: Vaughan Siluris'. 1654. 'Salus mea ex Agno''. The earliest work which bears both the signature 'Vaughan' and the date of acquisition was published in 1669, and acquired by Vaughan in 1676. The collection shows that he began to buy medical books at least as early as 1654 and continued to do so until 1682. No book signed merely 'Vaughan' has any religious motto in his hand. 
Aubrey thought of Vaughan as taking a strong and informed interest in natural history; on 27 November 1675 he wrote to Anthony Wood that he was sending to his cousin Vaughan for the 'Naturall History' of Brecknockshire and of 'other circumjacent counties: no man fitter' (Hutchinson, 212). This request was in connection with a natural history of England and Wales projected by Dr Robert Plott, keeper of the Ashmolean Museum at Oxford. Vaughan replied to Aubrey on 9 December 1675, assuring him that he would take care to assist Plott 'with a short account of natures Dispensatorie heer', and requesting Aubrey to acquaint him 'with the method of his writinge' ('Works of Henry Vaughan', 692). As it was not until 1681 that Aubrey forwarded queries from Plott to Vaughan, it is scarcely surprising that nothing came of Vaughan's collaboration. However, Vaughan's marginalia to Simon Paulli's 'Quadripartitum botanicum', acquired for 12's'. in 1682, suggest that his interest in natural history persisted. Vaughan did not complete this project, but roughly 400 plants are given their common English names; medicinal properties attributed to some are mentioned; and the note on 'Agnus castis' suggests that Vaughan retained in his seventh decade that respect for Catholicism, evident in his translations, which he may well have learned as a child from his grandmother. He gives the English name as 'Park-leafs, or Chaste tree', adding the note 'A kind of withie, of which the most holy monks & nuns make them girdles' (p. 188). 
After the death of his first wife Vaughan married her sister Elizabeth Wise ('b'. 1630). There were four children of the second marriage: Grisell, Lucy, Rachel, and Henry. It has been found surprising that a devout Anglican should have married his deceased wife's sister. The table of kindred and affinity would have made the validity of such a marriage challengeable; however, under the Commonwealth that document shared the fate of the 'Book of Common Prayer', and the 'Act for Marriages' of 1653 did not touch upon the prohibited degrees. The totally unworldly, devoted Anglican of 'Silex scintillans' was a literary construct, only partially representative of Vaughan's non-literary self. It was natural enough that his dead wife's sister would help to care for his children. 'Isaac's Marriage', in the 1650 'Silex scintillans', indicates that Vaughan had given thought to that biblical marriage which the 'Book of Common Prayer' held up as an example, and which involved marriage with a kinswoman 'in-law'. 
Vaughan's own statements indicate three significant periods of illness. In the preface to the 1655 'Silex scintillans', he intimated that he was 'nigh unto death' when he wrote the last poems in it ('Complete Poems', 143). The title-page of 'Flores solitudinis' (1654) states that the pieces in it were 'Collected in his Sicknesse and Retirement', suggesting a protracted illness ('Works of Henry Vaughan', 211). In 1662 he wrote to the commissioners of account, who had been appointed to inquire into alleged misuse of tithes, 'I had not fayled to wayt upon you my selfe, if weaknes, & other violent effects of a late feaver, had not resisted my real intentions' (Hutchinson, 199). Aubrey records that he wrote to Vaughan 'on that very day that the Pr[ince] of Orange came to London' -- 18 December 1688 (ibid., 209). On 25 March 1689 Vaughan wrote to Wood, 'I received a letter in the beginning of my sicknes from my Cousin John Awbrey about those inquiries you make now.... but it was my misfortune to continue so very weak and such a forlorn Clinic, that I could not to this day return him an answer' ('Works of Henry Vaughan', 694). Such glimpses of Vaughan as we have in his later years derive from two principal sources. First, a correspondence with Aubrey and Wood began with a letter of 15 June 1673 to Aubrey, giving an account of his and Thomas's publications, and ended with another, also to Aubrey, of 9 October 1694, on the subject of Welsh bards (ibid., 689-97). He refers to himself and Thomas as 'low & forgotten things' and expresses pleasure that their names are to be 'revived, & shine in the Historie of the Universitie' (ibid., 689, 692). This correspondence is interesting, but not rich in biographical fact. 
The other source is less happy, consisting of lawsuits indicating serious tensions within Vaughan's family, especially between the children of his first and second marriages. By an indenture dated 1689 Vaughan and his wife gave the Newton estate to his eldest son, with Thomas agreeing in return to pay $100 each to the children of the second marriage, to allow his father $30 a year for life, and his stepmother $20 a year after his father's death. However, this affair was not concluded until 1694. Thomas did not make the agreed payments to the children of the second marriage, and alleged that his father and stepmother had 'in a most clandestine manner... taken away the said articles and indenture... and cut the signatures therefrom' (Hutchinson, 230). The matter was finally settled out of court and an agreement was reached which acknowledged Thomas's right to the estate. In 1693 Vaughan's daughter Catherine, whose hand had been burnt when she was an infant and who was lame, petitioned the justices of the great sessions to 'order her father to give her necessary maintenance' (ibid., 232). The judge of assize awarded her $6 a year, but this appears not to have been paid, and Catherine received no support from the local magistrates. In a second petition to the next meeting of the great sessions she complained that she had received only 2's'. 6died This occasioned a bitter letter from Vaughan to the judge who had made the award: 'your Lordship will give me leave to tell you that among heathens noe parents were ever compelled to maintain or relieve disobedient & rebellious children, that both despise and vilifie their parents' ('Works of Henry Vaughan', 699). The case seems to have been concluded by the local magistrates ordering a quarterly payment of 15's'. At some time after the house at Newton was conveyed to his son Thomas in 1689, Vaughan and Elizabeth moved to a cottage in Sgethrog; its lintel-stone may be seen at the foot of Vaughan's gravestone. On it are inscribed the initials HVE over the date 1689; however, it is unclear when they actually vacated Newton. 
There is no portrait of Vaughan, and no description of his appearance. Aubrey wrote that he was 'ingeniose, but prowd and humorous', that is, capricious or moody ('Brief Lives', 303). This seems an apt description of Thomas Vaughan. The brothers may have been identical twins. Thomas Powell wrote of them, 'Not only your 'faces', but your 'wits' are 'twins'' ('Complete Poems', 67), and the second half of this seems apt enough. Stevie Davies considers the fact of Vaughan's twinship central to understanding of his personality and, by extension, his work. 
The cause of Vaughan's death is unknown; he died in Brecknockshire in 1695, on 23 April, like Shakespeare before him, and Wordsworth after him. His wife survived him. He died intestate, and his possessions were valued at $49 4's'.: not much, but almost ten times what his father's had been at his death in 1658. Vaughan's gravestone, of unusual size and thickness, may still be seen in St Bridget's churchyard, Llansanffraid. Vaughan was buried not inside the church, as was fairly usual for gentlemen at that time, but in the churchyard, a statement of humility perhaps. At the top is written in Latin: 'Henry Vaughan, Silurist, Doctor of Medicine. He died on April 23 in the year of our salvation 1695 and in the 73rd year of his age.' (Vaughan's age at death, as recorded on his gravestone, is at odds with the now generally accepted year of his birth.) Immediately below is the family's coat of arms: a statement of claim to gentlemanly status. Below that is written in Latin: 'What he wished on his tomb: unprofitable servant, greatest of sinners, here I lie; glory to God; may He have mercy.' The combination of worldliness and humility is not merely conventional: memorials to the gentry of that time were apt to celebrate the virtues of class, such as free-handed hospitality, rather than Christianity's more rigorous virtues. 
The gravestone, a kind of retrospective, sums Vaughan up as gentleman, Silurist, medical man, and Christian. Arguably he came at last to present himself under two principal aspects, of gentleman and of Christian, which are, as George Herbert clearly saw when he wrote 'Church Monuments', in some tension with one another. 
Vaughan anticipates the Romantics in expressing a loving appreciation of the natural world. His sense of the sacredness of nature may be related to his reading in the hermetic books. These speak of a god transcendent, hidden, utterly beyond all sense and thought; but also of a god nearer than was the Lord in the garden of Eden, a god moreover whose presence is uninterrupted. Of all paradoxes, this is the most favoured by the hermetic writers. To the author of the fifth 'libellus', as to Henry Vaughan, the Lord manifested himself 'ungrudgingly through all the universe'; he 'beheld God's image with his eyes, and laid hold on it with his hands' ('Hermetica', ed. W. Scott, 4 vols., 1924-36, 1.159). Since he creates by emanation, there is no sharp distinction between God and his universe. No place is especially sacred, because every place is sacred; to use Vaughan's words, God is 'in all things, though invisibly' ('Complete Poems', 242), and ''each bush' / And 'oak' doth know I AM' (ibid., 193). Such a viewpoint had its appeal for a mid-century Anglican who had lost his accustomed liturgy and his former places of worship. Vaughan's devotion to the God who manifested himself ungrudgingly through the universe surely marks a new phase of religious sensibility in seventeenth-century England. 
As Vaughan's nineteenth-century editors and his twentieth-century biographer were clergymen, it is not surprising that they found him most interesting as a religious poet. 'Silex scintillans' is indeed as great a sequence of religious lyrics as we have. However, discussion of Vaughan, for some considerable time after the appearance of Hutchinson's 'Life' in 1947, tacitly accepted his view that 'We can admire his loyalty to his ideals in Church and State, and yet regret that the calm and remote air of his divine poems and devotional pieces should so often be ruffled by these political and ecclesiastical outbursts' (Hutchinson, 109). Since then, however, criticism has been increasingly focused on Vaughan's religio-political intentions (religion and politics were scarcely separable), which can be descried even in poems in which polemical intent is not obvious. The founding, in the year of the tercentenary of his death, of a society devoted to the study and celebration of his work and that of his brother has resulted in an increase of critical attention. This is a welcome development; the ratio of work, during the second half of the twentieth century, on Marvell and Herbert to that on Vaughan is unjustified. While much interesting criticism has sharpened our sense of Vaughan as a poet of political purpose, it does not follow that his understanding of political processes was superior. What then about his work makes it worthy of continued attention? 
As one of the defeated, Vaughan wore his rue with a difference, in two senses. His finest lyrics challenge the best in their age; his achievements in rhythm have no peer until Hopkins; and if others had a better understanding of political process, none of his contemporaries understood better than he the relatedness of all living things and their relationship to what we call the inanimate world. He understood the 'New Testament''s most important passage on the theology of nature, 'Romans' 8: 19-22, as modern theologians do. What the science of his time could not prove, the intuition of the poet could express. Jurgen Moltmann understood well when he prefaced his 'God in Creation' with Vaughan's poem 'The Book', which asserts the unity of creation and the value of all creatures. Victorian criticism of the metaphysicals may often seem dated, but it was astute of H. C. Beeching, introducing E. K. Chambers's edition of Vaughan's poems in 1896, to sense the force of an observation first made of Wordsworth and say that Vaughan too 'makes us feel that Nature is not a mere collection of phenomena, but infuses into her least approach some sense of her mysterious whole'. At the beginning of the twenty-first century some students of 'environmental literature' consider it anachronistic to think of 'ecological consciousness' as anything but a post-Darwinian phenomenon. Closer study of Vaughan, as of Milton, his greatest contemporary on the other side of the political divide, might convince them otherwise. 


@@@@@


doc= 28131


Vaughan, Henry (1809-1899), art collector, son of George Vaughan and his wife, Elizabeth Andrews, was born into a Quaker family on 17 April 1809 in Southwark, London, where his father carried on a successful business as a hat manufacturer. He was privately educated at Walthamstow, and on the death of his father in 1828 succeeded to a large fortune. He spent much time travelling and became a cultivated, enthusiastic, and eclectic collector of works of art, especially of prints and drawings by J. W. M. Turner, with whom he was personally acquainted. He was a member of the Athenaeum, was elected FSA in 1879, and was one of the founders and most active members of the Burlington Fine Arts Club. Though undoubtedly one of the outstanding English collectors of his time, and a generous lender to exhibitions and museums, he appears to have been something of a recluse, whose reputation is largely based on his important gifts and bequests to British museums. He died, unmarried, on 26 November 1899, at 28 Cumberland Terrace, Regent's Park, London, where he had lived since 1834. 
In 1886 Vaughan had presented (anonymously) John Constable's celebrated 'Hay Wain' to the National Gallery, having purchased it at Christies twenty years earlier. In 1887 he gave five important Michelangelo drawings, all bought at the Woodburn sale in 1860, to the British Museum. By his will Vaughan distributed his wealth among various medical charities and hospitals, and the bulk of his art collections among museums. Thus the British Museum department of prints and drawings received a further 555 items, including fifty-seven old master drawings, over 300 drawings by John Flaxman, Thomas Lawrence, and Thomas Stothard, and, above all, nearly a hundred proofs of Turner's 'Liber Studiorum' and twenty-three drawings connected with it. Some of the drawings were transferred from Vaughan's bequest to the National Gallery, which also received various sculptures and Italian and British paintings (the latter now in the Tate collection). To the Victoria and Albert Museum he assigned his collections of stained glass and carved panels, six Turner watercolours, and the full-scale studies for Constable's 'Hay Wain' and 'Leaping Horse', which had been on loan to that museum since 1862. To University College, London, he bequeathed the remainder of his 'Liber' prints, his collection of Constable mezzotints, his Rembrandt etchings and other prints, and a number of English drawings. The rest of Vaughan's outstanding and scholarly collection of Turner watercolours -- he was described by Ruskin as 'a great Turner man' (Dawson, 39) -- was divided between Edinburgh and Dublin. The National Gallery of Scotland received a representative selection of thirty-nine drawings, and a similar group of thirty-one drawings went to the National Gallery of Ireland. 


@@@@@


doc= 28132


Vaughan, Henry Halford (1811-1885), historian, was born at 1 Montague Place, London, on 27 August 1811, the second son of Sir John Vaughan (1769-1839), subsequently justice of common pleas, and his first wife, the Hon. Augusta St John (died 1813), daughter of Henry Beauchamp, twelfth Baron St John of Bletso. In 1822 Vaughan went to Rugby School where Thomas Arnold, according to his son Matthew, considered him the ablest boy in the school. (His prize essay there was published in 1829.) He matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, in 1829, and was awarded a Fell exhibition, often, but not in his case, the preliminary to a studentship. His contemporaries included W. E. Gladstone and H. G. Liddell. Vaughan took a first class in 'literae humaniores' in 1833, and in 1835 was elected to a fellowship at Oriel, one of the most coveted distinctions in Oxford, having, it was reputed, read nothing beforehand except Bacon's 'Advancement of Learning'. He was awarded the chancellor's prize in 1836 for an English essay (highly praised by Mark Pattison) on 'The effects of a national taste for general and diffusive reading'. Vaughan was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn in 1838 but never practised as a barrister, and in 1839 became clerk of assize for the South Wales circuit, which gave him a permanent income of $500 a year plus fees. In 1839 he stood for election to the recently revived praelectorship of logic (subsequently the Wykeham professorship), but was defeated because of his unwillingness to reside in Oxford and the bitter opposition of the Newmanites who accused him of heresy for questioning scriptural authority as the sole basis of morality. In 1842 he was deprived of his fellowship for refusing to take holy orders; in the same year he acted as a special poor law commissioner, inquiring into the employment of women and children in agriculture. Undeterred by failure, he sought election to the White professorship of moral philosophy in 1841 and 1846, and for a second time to the praelectorship of logic in 1848. 
In 1848, Vaughan was appointed professor of modern history at Oxford. As the nominee of a prime minister committed to university reform, the first layman to hold the chair, and the victim of Tractarian hostility and obsolete statutes, he was enthusiastically welcomed by the radical reformers who included Liddell, A. P. Stanley, Mark Pattison, and Benjamin Jowett. In his two inaugural lectures delivered shortly before the creation of the school of jurisprudence and history, Vaughan enunciated a scientific and evolutionary view of history then novel in Oxford. History was defined as 'a disclosure of the critical changes in the condition of society', and although it did not repeat itself was subject to laws discovered by observation and by 'instincts of expectation', a concept later echoed in a famous phrase of Pasteur. Although Lord John Russell was dissuaded from appointing him to the royal commission on Oxford University in 1850, Vaughan had immense influence on the commission's recommendations for reviving the professoriate through his friendship with Liddell, who was a commissioner and was said to idolize Vaughan. In evidence often anticipating Mark Pattison, Vaughan proposed a body of professors who would 'investigate, reflect, and write', even if they were not very active as lecturers, pursuing learning for its own sake wherever it led. The university was to be governed by an intellectual oligarchy of mainly lay professors with a permanent majority in reformed institutions and in five faculties, including a separate faculty of theology. Lay fellowships were to be increased and college endowments redistributed. Vaughan's idea of a university not only strengthened the university at the expense of the colleges but advocated a secular university imposed by the state and divorced from the Church of England. He was bitterly attacked by Pusey, who accused him of Germanizing the university, and defended himself in 'Oxford Reform and Oxford Professors' (1854). An acrimonious correspondence with Pusey was published in a 'Postscript' in the same year. As opinion polarized, Vaughan became the champion of a radically reformed professoriate. 
Gladstone, who piloted the 'Oxford Bill' through parliament in 1854, judged that the professorial question would be best left to the university, but Vaughan believed the collegiate and Anglican character of Oxford made legislation essential to implement the commission's proposals. Petitions to a sympathetic Lord John Russell having failed, Vaughan, without the support of the radical reformers except for Liddell and apparently ready to see the bill fail, took the drastic step of lobbying the anti-clerical dissenting opposition in parliament by preparing briefs and drafting amendments. His allies deserted when concessions were offered on religious tests, but obstruction caused such serious delays that Gladstone was forced to make sweeping revisions to the bill, none of which favoured the professoriate, and complained of the opposition offered by 'the 'London' portion of the Oxford Reformers' (Vaughan resided in Hampstead). As a reformer Vaughan was an original and powerful advocate, but his intransigence won few converts, and he undoubtedly contributed to the animus towards professors in general which lingered in Oxford for many years. 
From 1849 to 1856, except in 1855, Vaughan went annually to Oxford to lecture on English and continental history to the reign of King John, but only the inaugural lectures were published. His audiences were spellbound by his eloquence and presence. Liddell wrote that: 'His features were large, well-defined, and mobile, especially his eyes [which] were fixed on you with an intensity of expression that seemed to pierce to your very soul. He had an immense 'fell' of rough hair [which] gave a sort of wild Olympian character to his head. (H. L. Thompson, 'Henry George Liddell', 1899, 124-5)' Of his lecture on the death of William I, George Butler recorded, 'the lecture was a powerful, poetical, and sometimes sublime oration... Vaughan is almost too brilliant, both in conversation and in lecturing. He dazzles one' (J. E. Butler, 'Recollections of George Butler', n.d., 88). So well attended were his lectures in 1852 that he transferred to the Sheldonian. Yet Vaughan's contribution to the establishment of historical studies at Oxford was negligible, and neither Goldwin Smith, Freeman, nor Stubbs mentioned him in their inaugural lectures. A principal cause of his lack of influence was a refusal to live in Oxford. He disliked Oxford society and preferred the intellectual Bohemian salon at Little Holland House, to which he was introduced by his wife's aunt Mrs Thoby Prinsep, and where he was affectionately known as Boodh (Buddha). For study he preferred the London Library, of which he was a foundation subscriber, to the Bodleian. Above all, his elevated conception of the professoriate was irreconcilable with the prevalent view in Oxford that, at least until more fellowships in new studies were provided by the reform of college statutes, the professor ought to be a superior tutor. To Vaughan this meant that learning was sacrificed to education and was replaced by the drudgery of 'hand-to-mouth' lecturing with almost continuous residence. The irony of a radical reformer perpetuating the longstanding abuse of non-resident professors was not lost on Vaughan's detractors. Owing to his non-residence, he was never an examiner, he was not consulted when special subjects were introduced in 1855, and he was ineligible for election to the hebdomadal council, the governing body of the university. When Oriel endowed the chair on condition that the incumbent resided, Vaughan resigned in March 1858, despite the pleas of Jowett and others who even petitioned Palmerston on his behalf. 
In 1861, Vaughan served on the public schools commission where Lord Lyttelton praised his 'laborious industry, fertility of thought and subtlety of expression', while regretting that 'his practical wisdom is not commensurate' (BL, Add. MS 44239, fol. 235). Vaughan contributed an account of Rugby and a remarkable minority report on mental development and liberal education in which he advocated the teaching of natural science. As with university reform, many of his ideas later gained acceptance. 
Vaughan retired to Upton Castle, Pembrokeshire, in 1867, intending to complete the philosophical treatise on the origin of moral ideas which had occupied him since the 1840s. He was initially influenced by Hume and later by the study of history and anthropology, but the complexity of the subject and its long gestation eventually overwhelmed him. Substantial fragments of the manuscript survive but inexplicable losses have destroyed its coherence. Vaughan believed that many of his ideas were appropriated by J. M. Wilson and T. Fowler in 'Progressive Morality', which was printed in 1875 but not published until after Vaughan's death. He published a three-volume work on Shakespeare's tragedies (1878-86). 
On 21 August 1856, Vaughan married Adeline Maria Jackson (1837-1881), the eighteen-year-old daughter of John Jackson MD and Maria Pattle. It was, said Goldwin Smith, 'the most startling event of the kind since the marriage of Luther' (Oxford, Christ Church Archives, MS Estates 117, fol. 22'v'). The surviving children were William Wyamar Vaughan (headmaster of Rugby), Augusta, Margaret, Millicent, and Emma. Vaughan died at Upton Castle on 19 April 1885. The 'Oxford Review' recalled the impress which he 'stamped on the best men of his day' by his 'rare and commanding intellect', but Goldwin Smith described his life as 'one of genius, mournfully, almost tragically, thrown away' (G. Smith, 'Reminiscences', 1911, 274). 


@@@@@


doc= 28133


Vaughan, John, first earl of Carbery (1574/5-1634), courtier and politician, was the eldest son of Walter Vaughan (died 1598) of Golden Grove, Llanfihangel Aberbythych, Carmarthenshire, and Mary (died before 1588), daughter of Sir Walter Rice of Newton, Carmarthenshire. Sir William Vaughan (c.1575-1641) and Sir Henry Vaughan (1587?-1660/61) were his brothers. He matriculated, aged seventeen, from Jesus College, Oxford, on 4 February 1592, and entered the Inner Temple in 1596. His early career was influenced by his ties with Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex, whom his father also followed. The earl described Vaughan as his 'servant' in 1598; on 13 February that year Vaughan married Margaret, daughter of Sir Gelly Meyrick, Essex's steward and man of business in Wales (TNA: PRO, C115/100/7409). This marriage ended by 1614 after producing two sons, the elder of whom was Richard Vaughan, second earl, and he then married Jane Meredith ('nee' Palmer). Vaughan followed Essex on his expedition to Ireland in 1599, when the earl knighted him. These ties caused suspicion to fall on Vaughan after the Essex revolt of 1601, and he felt the need to demonstrate his innocence to Sir Robert Cecil after reports circulated of his complicity in the plot. Vaughan was also removed from the commission of the peace in Carmarthenshire for a time while his political loyalties were in question. It was possibly with a view to defending his reputation that he represented Carmarthenshire in the parliament of 1601. 
Vaughan's campaign to clear his name was successful, and was probably aided by the accession of a new monarch in 1603. For a period he busied himself with local office and consolidated his position in Carmarthenshire, until he initiated a campaign to secure a post in the prospective household of Prince Charles. In 1614 he approached the king's favourite, the earl of Somerset, asking him to intercede with James I on his behalf, and also wrote to Sir Henry Neville requesting to be 'sworn in the place I have desired' (TNA: PRO, SP 14/78/64). His efforts were rewarded with the profitable position of comptroller when Prince Charles's household was created in 1616. Vaughan now acquired a house in Fulham, where he sheltered Sir Francis Bacon after his impeachment in the 1621 parliament. Vaughan also sat in this assembly, again representing Carmarthenshire. It was during the parliamentary recess that King James elevated him to an Irish barony, as baron of Mullingar, and this caused Vaughan some difficulties when parliament reconvened in November, as some members questioned whether his title disqualified him from sitting in the Commons. This probably helps explain why he never again sought election to parliament. 
Vaughan's position in the prince's household meant he was one of the servants who followed Charles into Spain in 1623 when he left to expedite his marriage to the infanta. The trip caused him some difficulties, however, with reports entering England that he had become a Catholic, while he later recalled that the expedition had cost him between $3000 and $4000. 
Charles's accession in 1625, rather than furthering Vaughan's career at court, actually occasioned its cessation. He was removed as comptroller, and although he was reported to be in line for some monetary reimbursement, no further court appointment was forthcoming. In 1628 he approached Sir John Coke requesting compensation for his losses on the Spanish trip, and estimated that his time in service had cost him $20,000. Nevertheless, this did not stop him addressing the duke of Buckingham with a request that he 'work my re-establishing into my precedent place', but his entreaties were to no avail (TNA: PRO, SP 16/86/16). His elevation to an Irish earldom in 1628, when he was created earl of Carbery, may have been some form of compensation, but, like many others, he may simply have paid for the honour. He lived out the rest of his life at Golden Grove where he made a nuncupative will on 29 April 1634, bequeathing his estates to his only surviving son and heir, Richard, the future royalist lieutenant-general. Vaughan died at Golden Grove on 6 May 1634 and was buried in the family vault in the parish church of Llandeilo Fawr, Carmarthenshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 28134


Vaughan, Sir John (1603-1674), judge, was born on 14 September 1603 at Trawscoed, Cardiganshire, the eldest of the eight children of Edward Vaughan (died 1635), esquire, and Lettice, daughter of John Stedman, Strata Florida, Cardiganshire. In 1625 he married Jane Stedman (died 1680) of Cilcennin, Cardiganshire. Vaughan was educated at the King's School, Worcester (1613-18), and at Christ Church, Oxford (1618-21), though he did not graduate. He was admitted to the Inner Temple in November 1621, was called to the bar in 1630, and became a bencher in 1660. It was in the Star Chamber that he first made his name. In 1628 he entered the Commons as member for Cardigan borough and would represent it again in the Short and Long parliaments. Like Edward Hyde, he opposed the extraordinary measures adopted during the period of Charles I's personal rule. He helped to prepare charges against Laud and to fashion the 'Triennial Act', but although he participated in the early proceedings against Strafford he drew the line at attainder, as being unconstitutional. Hyde, the future earl of Clarendon, with whom he was then friendly, later said that Vaughan was 'without inclination to any change of government' ('Life of... Clarendon', 1.31). In short he was a constitutional royalist, and so remained. 
Vaughan returned home before the outbreak of the civil war. Marriage settlements and the purchase of eight Cardiganshire granges, formerly belonging to the dissolved monastery of Strata Florida, led to a perceptible increase in the annual rental of the Trawscoed estate, estimated to be about $1200 before his death. In an economically poor county he was thus regarded as one of the leading gentry. At first he loyally supported the royalists. The fall of Tenby in March 1643 disturbed him and he was soon placing some order upon the undisciplined Cardiganshire trained bands. Reprisals followed. In January 1645 his house was totally plundered and in September he was disabled from sitting in parliament. The assertion that he helped parliamentary forces to capture Aberystwyth Castle cannot be corroborated and only his own testimony records that he compounded for his estate. When the Cromwellian government encouraged moderate men to return to public life Vaughan refused even to exercise his profession. Vaughan seldom emerged during these turbulent years into the clear light of day, leading Clarendon to the reasonable conclusion that he lived 'as near an innocent life as the iniquity of that time would permit' ('Life of... Clarendon', 1.31). 
Vaughan represented Cardiganshire in the Cavalier Parliament from 1661 to 1668. His silver-tongued eloquence was widely admired. In praising Sir Thomas Littleton, Pepys declared that he was 'the usual second to the great Vaughan' (Pepys, 'Diary', 7.210). He opposed the repeal of the 'Triennial Act', expressly desired by the king. In the 1668 dispute concerning Thomas Skinner he may justly be regarded as the architect of the victory of the Commons over the Lords, who henceforth abandoned all attempts to exercise original jurisdiction in civil cases when the parties were commoners. As a debater he is best remembered for his sustained attack on Clarendon who, he was now convinced, was a menace to constitutional government. 
Vaughan was knighted on 20 May 1668 and sworn chief justice of the court of common pleas on 23 May. His presidency preceded the period when party faction influenced judicial appointments. He defended the court of common pleas against the jurisdiction of the courts of king's bench, chancery, and Admiralty. His authoritative opinion helped to preserve the Welsh court of great sessions from the encroachment of the Westminster courts until its extinction in 1831. In 'Thomas v. Sorrell' (1674) he showed that an act of parliament could not be suspended except by legislative power. His fame chiefly rests upon 'Bushell's case' (1670). Edward Bushell was a member of the jury fined for persistently acquitting the Quakers William Penn and William Mead for holding an unlawful assembly. Bushell, imprisoned for refusal to pay, sued out a writ of habeas corpus which was returned to the court of common pleas. Vaughan demonstrated beyond doubt that jurors, not the judge, are to decide questions of fact. Ever since 'Bushell's case' juries who have honestly felt that they could not follow the direction of a judge have retired to consider their verdict under the full protection of Vaughan's historic judgment, and his name is appropriately included on a plaque in the Old Bailey which commemorates the endurance of Bushell and his fellow jurors. Lord Campbell considered him to be a 'really consummate common law judge' (J. Campbell, 'Lives of the Chief Justices', 3, 1857, 2). 
Occasionally said to be aloof and opinionated, Vaughan was nevertheless much esteemed by a constellation of able men. John Selden dedicated to him his 'Vindiciae... Marie Clausi' (1653) and Vaughan was one of the executors of his splendid library at length placed in the 'Selden end' of the Bodleian Library. John Evelyn thought him 'a very wise and learned person' (Evelyn, 'Diary', 514). Matthew Hale loved to converse with Vaughan, his Acton neighbour, while Aubrey records that Thomas Hobbes delighted to visit Vaughan, his 'great acquaintance', thrice weekly ('Brief Lives', 1.369). Vaughan died on 10 December 1674 at Serjeants' Inn and was buried twelve days later in the Temple Church where the latitudinarian Edward Stillingfleet paid him high tribute. His only son, Edward, briefly a lord commissioner for the Admiralty, published his father's 'Reports' in 1677 and a corrected version in 1706. 


@@@@@


doc= 28135


Vaughan, John, third earl of Carbery (bap. 1639, d. 1713), politician and colonial governor, was baptized on 18 July 1639 at St Dunstan-in-the-West, London, the second son of Richard Vaughan, second earl of Carbery (1600?-1686), and his second wife, Frances (1620/1621-1650), daughter and coheir of Sir James Altham of Oxhey in Watford, Hertfordshire. He was educated at home at Golden Grove, Llanfihangel Aberbythych, Carmarthenshire, by Dr Jeremy Taylor, who was chaplain to the family under the second earl's protection during the protectorate. Despite being royalists, the Carberys benefited from the personal favour of Cromwell, who admired Frances Vaughan's piety. Vaughan matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, in 1656 and proceeded to the Inner Temple in 1658. He was knighted at Charles II's coronation in 1661 and became MP for the borough of Carmarthen in the same year. In parliament Vaughan was a fierce promoter of the king's personal interests, especially those involving providing money for Charles. He opposed Lord Chancellor Clarendon's austerity measures, and played a role in Clarendon's impeachment in 1667. Vaughan's activities caused Pepys to declare him 'one of the lewdest fellows of the age, worse than Sir Charles Sedley', and Clarendon described him as having 'as ill a face as fame' (Pepys, 8.532 and n). Vaughan enjoyed life in Restoration London to the fullest. He was fond of the theatre and especially of the plays of John Dryden for whom he wrote a poetic prologue to 'The Conquest of Granada'. He became his father's heir in 1667 upon his elder brother's death and claimed the courtesy title Lord Vaughan. He married Mary Brown, of Green Castle, Carmarthen, a couple of years before her death in 1674; they had no children. 
Vaughan was appointed governor of Jamaica in 1674. He intended to run Jamaica's government with the English parliament as a model. His instructions for running the island from the king and the lords of trade and plantations included stopping piracy, encouraging planting of sugar, and negotiating prices of slaves with the Royal African Company. Once he arrived in the colony, he was in constant conflict with his lieutenant-governor, the ex-buccaneer Sir Henry Morgan, and with the Jamaican assembly, which opposed his tough measures against pirates. In piracy cases the accused were often supported by Morgan as they were prosecuted by Vaughan. Vaughan made piracy an executable offence in 1677 when the Jamaican assembly was given the right to issue death sentences without appeal. None of the laws passed by the Jamaican assembly under Vaughan were given the royal assent, but his leadership marks the start of the constitutional history of the island. He corresponded with Henry Oldenburg, secretary to the Royal Society, while on Jamaica, and thereby kept up with all the latest scientific developments in London. An element of scandal followed Vaughan throughout his life from his time in Jamaica; he was accused by his enemies of selling his Welsh servants, including his clergyman, into slavery on the island. Vaughan was an unpopular governor, and the assembly failed to vote him an income for his last year on the island. He suffered from ill health in the tropical climate and was no doubt happy to return to London in 1678. 
Vaughan regained his place in parliament as MP for the county of Carmarthen (1679-81, 1685-6). Despite his dubious reputation his life and career flourished after his return from Jamaica. His friend Dryden dedicated his coarsest comedy, 'The Kind Keeper, or, Mr Limberham', to Vaughan in 1680. The play was forced to close after only three days, even in the relaxed moral world of Restoration London, though Dryden had been initially confident that his learned and witty patron would protect the play, which had first been performed when Vaughan was away in Jamaica. Vaughan married Lady Anne Savile (1663-1690), daughter of George Savile, first marquess of Halifax, in 1682. With her he had his only surviving legitimate child and heir, Anne, before his wife died in childbirth in 1690. On the death of his father in December 1686 Vaughan became third earl of Carbery and also inherited the baronies of Mullengar and Emlyn. His wide learning and love of mathematics were acknowledged when he became president of the Royal Society in 1686; he held the position for three years. He supported the accession of William and Mary in 1688 and remained a member of the whig establishment until his death. He built a house at Tite Street, Chelsea, subsequently called Gough House after a later owner, which was his chief London residence. The earl was a member of the Kit-Cat Club, and his portrait was painted by Kneller as one of the famous collection commemorating the club. It is now on display at Beningbrough Hall. Carbery died suddenly on 16 January 1713 while returning to Chelsea after visiting his banker in London. He was buried in Westminster Abbey on 28 January in St John the Baptist's chapel. His titles died with him, and his daughter inherited the wealth he carefully accumulated throughout his life. She married, almost immediately after her father's death, Charles Powlett. The marriage was unhappy, and she died without children in 1751. Carbery's house at Chelsea was demolished in 1966. 


@@@@@


doc= 28136


Vaughan, Sir John (c.1731-1795), army officer, was the second son of Wilmot Vaughan, third Viscount Lisburne (died 1766), of Crosswood (Trawscoed), Cardiganshire, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1764), daughter of Thomas Watson of Berwick upon Tweed and Grindon Ridge, Northumberland. Without prospects, as the younger son of an impecunious holder of an Irish peerage, Vaughan embarked early on a military career, becoming a second lieutenant in the marines in 1746. The political connections of his whig family, his own military aptitude, and the opportunities of wartime ensured his steady promotion. He became a cornet of dragoons in 1748, lieutenant in 1751, and captain in 1754, and served in Germany early in the Seven Years' War. In 1759 he raised the 94th foot, becoming its lieutenant-colonel in 1760. This regiment, the Royal Welsh volunteers, served in North America and the West Indies, where Vaughan distinguished himself at the capture of Martinique in 1762. When the regiment disbanded later that year Vaughan transferred to the command of the 16th foot, serving in North America until 1767 and then in Ireland; he was promoted colonel in 1772. In 1775 he became colonel of the 46th foot and took them to America. In 1774 he had entered parliament as MP for the venal freeman borough of Berwick upon Tweed, where the Vaughan brothers had inherited the interest of their childless uncle, another Thomas Watson; he represented that constituency until his death. Military duties in the American War restricted his attendance in parliament, where, like his brother Wilmot, the fourth viscount and first earl of Lisburne, who sat on the Admiralty board from 1770 to 1782, he was a supporter of Lord North's ministry. He also sat in the Irish parliament for St Johnstown from 1776 to 1783. 
Vaughan rose to military prominence during the American War of Independence, making a name for himself as a bold battlefield commander. In 1776 he led attacks at the battles of Brooklyn Heights and Manhattan Island prior to the capture of New York city. Later that year he was wounded at the battle of White Plains. Promoted major-general in August 1777, Vaughan had a horse shot from under him when storming Fort Montgomery two months later. He was commended for his bravery by General Sir Henry Clinton, who suggested that the fort should be renamed Fort Vaughan. Vaughan then commanded the small army of 2000 men dispatched by Clinton in a vain attempt to reach General Burgoyne before his surrender at Saratoga. His burning of the town of Aesopus (later Kingston, New York) -- which he alleged was 'a Nursery for almost every Villain in the Country' (Hurst, 29) -- outraged the Americans, who called him General Aesopus. His force burned and destroyed farms until within 46 miles of Albany, then returned to New York city. George III in 1778 ordered that Vaughan be informed of royal approbation of his spirited behaviour. In 1779 Vaughan commanded part of Clinton's second expedition up the Hudson River, and left New York in December. He returned to Britain, and was given a dormant commission to succeed Lord Cornwallis as commander in the southern American colonies in case Cornwallis declined to return there. When Cornwallis did go back, Vaughan was sent to command in the Leeward Islands, arriving in Barbados in February 1780. He promptly reversed the previous defensive strategy of scattered garrisons by collecting a force of 5000 men to attack French islands, but his plans were foiled by Admiral Rodney's inability to win control of West Indian waters. Vaughan had to remain inactive until, on news of the war with the United Provinces, he initiated the capture in February 1781 by Rodney and himself of the Dutch island of St Eustatius, an international entrepot and the main supply base for the American war. Both Vaughan and Rodney busied themselves for some months in arranging the disposal of the vast plunder; Vaughan's share was 9.2 per cent, $150,000. Much of what was sent back to England was intercepted by the French fleet. Sixty-four civil claims were lodged against the two commanders by British merchants who contended that the confiscation of their goods on St Eustatius was illegal, cases which dragged on until 1793. In Vaughan's only known speech in parliament, on 4 December 1781, he defended himself against Edmund Burke's charge that he had made a personal fortune from St Eustatius. He claimed that 'neither directly nor indirectly... had he made a single shilling from the business' (HoP, 'Commons, 1754-90', 3.576). 
After the war Vaughan, who was promoted to lieutenant-general on 20 November 1782, retired from active military service. Among his rewards was the governorship of Berwick Castle, bestowed in 1780 after he had held that of Fort William for a year. Both this post and the colonelcy of the 46th foot he retained until his death. Such sources of income do not explain the considerable wealth he acquired. As early as 1773 he paid $10,000 for an estate in Cardiganshire, and he now made other purchases and gave large loans to his brother. This circumstance puts into perspective his 1781 parliamentary denial that he had profited from the St Eustatius booty. In parliament Vaughan supported the Shelburne ministry of 1782-3, apparently in the hope of being appointed governor of Canada or Gibraltar. Disappointed, he joined his brother Lord Lisburne in support of the 1783 Fox-North coalition, and later opposed the ministry of the younger Pitt. However, in 1788 he admitted personal respect for the prime minister, and made it known that some mark of royal approval of his military services would secure his political allegiance. Pitt demurred, in view of his previous hostility, and Vaughan remained in opposition until won over by being made KB in 1792. In the French Revolutionary Wars he was recalled to army duties. In 1794 he was appointed to succeed Sir John Grey as army commander-in-chief in the Windward Islands. It was a thankless task, as he was beset by slave risings and Carib uprisings instigated by French revolutionaries, and was denied the soldiers needed to reinforce his fever-ridden troops. His proposal to raise black regiments was vetoed by the secretary for war, Henry Dundas, at the behest of the British plantation-owners, a decision against which Vaughan protested vigorously as the subordination of the national interest to private advantage, and which he partly defied. He died, unmarried, reportedly of a bowel complaint, though poison was also suspected, in Martinique on 30 June 1795, with the military conflict still unresolved; he was buried at Mamhead, Devon. 


@@@@@


doc= 28137


Vaughan, Sir John (1769-1839), judge, was born in Leicester on 11 February 1769, the third son of James Vaughan MD of Leicester and his wife, Hester, daughter of John Smalley, alderman, also of Leicester. Charles Richard Vaughan and Sir Henry Halford were his brothers. Educated at Rugby School, he matriculated at Queen's College, Oxford, on 17 October 1785. Leaving Oxford without a degree, he was admitted to Lincoln's Inn on 11 February 1786, and was called to the bar on 30 June 1791. Vaughan joined the midland circuit, where his style of advocacy brought him popularity with juries. Elected recorder of Leicester on 14 February 1798, he was created serjeant-at-law on 12 February 1799. A strong supporter of Pitt, he threw himself into the movement for raising funds for the war with France by public subscription. 
On 20 December 1803 Vaughan married his first wife, Augusta (died 1813), second daughter of Henry Beauchamp, thirteenth Baron St John of Bletso. They had six children: Henry Halford Vaughan, another son, and four daughters. 
Vaughan was appointed solicitor-general to Queen Charlotte on 1 May 1814, being promoted to attorney-general in the Trinity vacation 1816, and in the Easter term 1816 was appointed king's serjeant. As such in March 1820 he conducted the crown's case against Sir Francis Burdett for seditious libel following Burdett's comments upon the 'Peterloo massacre' of 1819. In August 1821 Vaughan led for the crown in the prosecution for seditious conspiracy of George Edmonds and others who had resolved to elect a 'legislatorial attorney' to represent Birmingham in parliament. 
On 4 August 1823 Vaughan married his second wife, Louisa (1785-1860), eldest daughter of Sir Charles William Rouse-Boughton, bt, and widow of St Andrew, fourteenth Baron St John of Bletso; they had a son and a daughter. 
On 23 February 1827 Vaughan was raised to the exchequer bench following the resignation of Sir Robert Graham and was knighted on 24 November 1828. His reputation for legal learning was not high, and it was said that he owed his judicial appointment to the influence of his brother Sir Henry Halford, though he was credited with a sound understanding both of court practice and of human character. He was one of the judges to whom was referred in 1829 the Irish case of 'Harding v. Pollock', on the question of whether the right of appointing clerks of the peace for a county was vested in the crown or in the 'custos rotulorum' of the county, his opinion being given against the crown. 
On 29 April 1834 Vaughan was transferred to the court of common pleas, and in June of the same year was sworn of the privy council and admitted to the Oxford degree of DCL. Consulted in the Camoys peerage case in 1839 about the rules regulating the determination of abeyances of baronies, he concurred in the judgment of Chief Justice Tindal. 
Vaughan died of heart disease on 25 September 1839 at his home, Eastbury Lodge, near Watford, Hertfordshire, and was buried in the burial-ground of the parish of Wistow, Leicestershire. His brother Sir Henry Halford placed a mural tablet to his memory in Wistow church. 


@@@@@


doc= 28138


Vaughan, Rice (d. c.1672), lawyer, was the second son of Henry Vaughan of Gelli-goch, Machynlleth, and Mary, daughter of Maurice Wynn of Glyn, near Harlech. He attended Shrewsbury School (1615), entered Gray's Inn (1638), and was called to the bar on 20 June 1648. Vaughan sided with parliament in the civil wars and became a member of the committee for Cardiganshire, Pembrokeshire, and Carmarthenshire. He failed to be elected MP for Merioneth in 1654 and petitioned the council of state formally on 24 August 1654 because of the alleged irregularities and corrupt practices of the sheriff, Maurice Lewis, who, in collusion with Edward Vaughan of Llwydiarth, ensured that John Vaughan of Cefnbodig, near Llanycil, Merioneth, was elected. In the previous year, however, Rice Vaughan had been appointed prothonotary for Denbighshire and Montgomeryshire in the court of great sessions, having petitioned for the post on 3 January 1646. He served in the commission for sequestration from 1649, examined with others the miscarriages of the trustees and surveyors for the sale of forfeited estates, and was actively engaged with the business of the council of state in 1656. In 1659 he served as judge of great sessions for the Anglesey circuit (Williams, 100). Vaughan's subsequent career is unclear, but he appears to have been imprisoned in the Tower for two years from May 1665. 
Vaughan wrote three works at least, namely 'A Plea for the Common Laws of England' (1651), a pamphlet addressed to the House of Commons replying to Hugh Peter's book 'A Good Work for a Good Magistrate'; 'Practica Walliae, or, The Proceedings in the Great Sessions of Wales' (1672), which was published posthumously; and 'A Discourse of Coin and Coinage' (1675), again published posthumously and edited by Henry Vaughan, 'the Silurist'. Vaughan was part of a group of lawyers that was 'opposed to all law reform or did not want changes to go further than those made during the Interregnum' (Veall, 98). In 'A Plea for the Common Laws of England' he claimed that common laws were 'one of the most excellent and humane laws that any nation had'. They had not been imposed by any king 'but consisted of laudable and righteous customs, based on reason and convenience, in common use over hundreds of years. As for the defects that did remain, Parliament was gradually throwing off the chaff; the task could not be done all at once. (ibid., 24)' 



@@@@@


doc= 28139


Vaughan, Richard (c.1553-1607), bishop of London, was born at Dyffryn, Llyn, Caernarvonshire, second son of Thomas ap Robert Vaughan (Vychan) and his wife ('nee' Griffin). If, as has been assumed, Vaughan pursued his studies under the auspices of his kinsman John Aylmer, future bishop of London, it was without initial financial assistance. It was only as a sizar that on 16 November 1569 he matriculated from St John's College, Cambridge, where his tutor was John Becon. It was presumably as a result of his own efforts that he was admitted a scholar on Lady Margaret's foundation on 6 November 1573. Indeed Vaughan's kinship with Aylmer, whose wife was born Judith King (alias Bures), may date only from 25 June 1581 when Vaughan married Joan Bewers at Great Dunmow, Essex. 
Having graduated BA in 1574 and proceeded MA in 1577, Vaughan gave his age as 'about' twenty-four when ordained deacon and priest by Aylmer on 21 and 22 December 1577, as a master of arts of Chipping Ongar, Essex. As curate there he received a diocesan preaching licence on 4 January 1578. 
Vaughan thus began his career as protege of an influential godly family: the patron of the living was the future attorney-general of the court of wards, James Morice, and the incumbent rector Thomas Morice. On 22 April 1578, on Thomas's resignation, Vaughan succeeded to the rectory, resigning when instituted on 24 November 1580 to nearby Little Canfield. On 24 February 1582, only months after his marriage there, Aylmer collated Vaughan vicar of Great Dunmow, which he held in plurality with Little Canfield until January 1591. He then seems to have resigned both livings. On 19 August 1591 he was instituted rector of Moreton, Essex, once again at the presentation of James Morice and a kinsman, John Morice. 
Meanwhile Vaughan's route to higher preferment had been smoothed by Aylmer. Collated prebendary of Holborn in St Paul's on 18 November 1583, he was promoted archdeacon of Middlesex on 26 October 1588. Having already proceeded BTh he was granted the degree of DTh in 1589. While no act books survive for his tenure Vaughan appears to have been an active, sympathetic 'oculus episcopi', contriving to win the confidence of the moderate puritan clergy whom Aylmer was always disposed to harry. In this he resembled John Still, archdeacon of Sudbury, evidently a close friend. Vaughan was granted letters patent for the prebend of Combe IX in Wells, 'sede vacante', and instituted by Archbishop John Whitgift on 5 February 1593, six days before Still's consecration as bishop of Bath and Wells. Still had presumably requested his appointment. 
Sir John Puckering, lord keeper from May 1592, made Vaughan examining chaplain of clerics applying for the crown's ecclesiastical patronage in his gift. Sir John Harington noted with approval that he was 'precise' in that office, turning away unsatisfactory candidates, and described Vaughan in his prime as mild, 'very prompt and ready in speache, and withall facetious' (Harington, 2.49). It was perhaps a reference to his Welsh origins, which, indeed, Vaughan never forgot, maintaining a series of Welsh curates in his Essex livings. When William Morgan dedicated his Welsh translation of the 'Bible' to Elizabeth in 1588, he named Vaughan, 'provost of St John's Hospital at Lutterworth', as one of the six scholars who had given him particular assistance (Hughes, 85). 
Thus by October 1594, perhaps prompted by Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex, Lord Burghley and Robert Cecil were proposing Vaughan for a Welsh bishopric. Whitgift approved his candidacy and urged his selection for Bangor. Probably not yet forty-three, Vaughan was elected on 22 November 1595 and consecrated on 25 January 1596, conscientiously resigning all his preferments in London diocese. Since Bangor was poorly endowed, its bishops traditionally enjoyed other privileges: thus Vaughan was granted the archdeaconry of Anglesey 'in commendam', his revenues from his predecessor's resignation (the crown therefore claiming no 'sede vacante' profit), and five years to discharge his first fruits. Thereafter his rise was rapid. At Christmas 1596 Essex promised to promote his candidacy for Salisbury and his name was one of three being canvassed in April 1597. He may have refused it for financial reasons, as did others during 1596-7, and in the event he followed Hugh Bellot at Chester, as he had already done at Bangor. 
Vaughan's election was confirmed on 4 June 1597 and again he received favourable financial terms: five years to pay his first fruits, the cancellation of sums 'behind' for Bangor, and restitution of the temporalities from Bellot's death, fully twelve months earlier. He also held the valuable rectory of Bangor Is-coed, Flintshire, throughout his tenure. In August 1597 he expressed to Robert Cecil his unqualified satisfaction with these arrangements. 
During his years at Chester, Vaughan became preoccupied with the suppression of Catholicism, firing off to Cecil a vivid series of letters on the subject. In 1604 he alleged that he had 'reclaimed' over 600 recusants in three years, yet his visitation that year revealed more than 3500 known recusants in Lancashire. Although in 1601 he threatened to deprive eight nonconforming ministers for failing to wear the surplice, he did not in the event remove any of them and he stoutly defended his choice of Richard Midgeley as queen's preacher in Lancashire. At the Hampton Court conference in 1604, when Laurence Chaderton obtained a measure of tolerance from James I for the nonconforming Lancashire ministers, Vaughan was instructed not to proceed against them too peremptorily. He probably had no intention of doing so: although during his visitation later that year he dutifully attempted to enforce the new canons, which enshrined the three articles which Whitgift had first promulgated in 1583, he acted with restraint and again no minister was deprived. 
Vaughan was translated to London in 1604 and enthroned in St Paul's on 26 December; his selection as successor to the disciplinarian Richard Bancroft is not easy to account for. King James perhaps gambled that an energetic anti-Catholic was more likely in so radical a diocese to win over nonconformist consciences than a man of more conservative stamp. Yet Vaughan arrived at Fulham to discover that James had now become obsessed with the question of clerical conformity and was pressing for the removal of all who refused to accept the new canons. He seems to have played his hand with consummate skill, to the extent that James commended his 'industry'. John Chamberlain reported in February 1605 that, while proceeding 'slowly', he had finally silenced 'all that continue disobedient', adding that he was much commended for 'gravitie, wisdome, learning, mildnes and temperance, even among that faction' and was held 'every way the most sufficient man of that coate' (McClure, 1.203). 
Indeed during 1605 Vaughan sanctioned the deprivation of only two city incumbents, while a mere handful, of whom Stephen Egerton and Anthony Wotton were the most prominent, were suspended. Between April and June, Vaughan also appears, pending his primary visitation, to have tacitly issued an amnesty to those Essex and Hertfordshire clergy who remained under threat as a result of Bancroft's last visitation in 1604. Following his visitation in October only about thirty men were subsequently examined for nonconformist practices and none was deprived as a result. Many radical incumbents, including Thomas Stoughton, vicar of Coggeshall, Essex, escaped further summons altogether. Stoughton's deprivation in 1606 was probably the culmination of earlier high commission proceedings against him and was perhaps sanctioned by Vaughan only with reluctance. 
Harington proposed that Vaughan's efficiency was impaired by illness. He grew corpulent 'of a sudden' and shortly after reaching London 'fell into that drowsie disease of which he after dyed, growing thereby unfit for that place', which required 'a 'Vigilantius', and not a 'Dormitantius'' (Harington, 2.50). This is misleading evidence. There can be little doubt that Vaughan's leniency towards nonconformity was dictated by his own abiding sympathies. Richard Rogers recorded that after the discovery of the Gunpowder Plot he restored 'the Most Suspended Ministers' (Knappen, 32). Thus did he apparently attempt to reverse the trend of 1604 by laying stress on the church's anti-Catholic, rather than its conformist, stance. On 30 May 1606 Rogers celebrated eighteen months' freedom in the pulpit with the telling comment 'The Bishop my good friend'. Finally he noted the 'sorry news' of the death of 'our Bp. Vaughan, who... permitted the godly ministers to live peaceably and enjoy their liberty' (ibid.). No other prelate of his generation was accorded such an epitaph by a leading nonconformist. 
Vaughan died of apoplexy on 30 March 1607 and was buried in Bishop Kemp's chapel in St Paul's with a memorial inscription, destroyed in the great fire of 1666. He was succeeded by Thomas Ravis, a prelate of more authoritarian cast. 
Vaughan and his wife, Joan, are credited with three sons and six daughters, of whom Elizabeth, wife of Thomas Mallory, dean of Chester, became mother of the royalist clergyman Thomas Mallory, whilst Dorothy married John Jegon, later bishop of Norwich. Katherine was baptized at Stanford Rivers, Essex, on 29 January 1596, four days after Vaughan's consecration. This circumstance has led to the assumption, which cannot be substantiated, that he was rector there. The brief document which he wrote as bishop of Chester on 19 April 1601, accepted as his will, was no more than a list of assets to be equally divided between his (here unnamed) wife and children. It was not witnessed and named no executor, but on the basis of it letters of administration were granted to his widow on 15 April 1607. 
Vaughan published nothing except some early Latin verses and two sermons printed in 1599, but his visitation articles for London, based on three sets by Bancroft, proved the most influential of the Jacobean church. 'Vaughanus redivivus', a virtually impenetrable hagiography in Latin by his kinsman John Williams, archbishop of York, survives in manuscript (BL, Harley MS 6495, art.6). 


@@@@@


doc= 28140


Vaughan, Richard, second earl of Carbery (1600?-1686), royalist army officer, was the principal magnate of south-west Wales during the mid-seventeenth century, and its leading local royalist during the great civil war. He was the elder of two sons of John Vaughan (1574/5-1634) of Golden Grove, Carmarthenshire (later first earl of Carbery), and his first wife, Margaret Meyrick, daughter of the soldier and courtier Sir Gelly Meyrick, and was probably born in 1600; the dearth of local records for this period makes it possible only to surmise the date of birth from later references to his age. It is known that he travelled to Spain in his youth, perhaps accompanying his father in the train of the prince of Wales in 1623. The first contemporary notices of him come with his elections to represent Carmarthenshire in the parliaments between 1624 and 1629. He was knighted at the coronation of Charles I in February 1626, and succeeded to the earldom on his father's death in 1634. On 15 February 1638 he was admitted a member of Gray's Inn. Carbery first married Bridget Lloyd, daughter of Thomas Lloyd of Llanllyr, Cardiganshire. Neither the inception nor the end of the marriage can be dated, but she was dead by 8 August 1637, when he wed again. His new wife reflected his widening horizons, being Frances Altham (1620/21-1650), daughter of Sir James Altham of Oxhey in Watford, Hertfordshire. She was the mother of Carbery's two sons, Francis (died 1667), first husband of Lady Rachel Wriothesley, the future Lady Rachel Russell (1637-1723), and John Vaughan (bap. 1639, d. 1713), who was to succeed his father as earl of Carbery. 
The parliamentarian propagandist John Vicars called Carbery a man of 'pride and menacing insolencies' (John Vicars, 'Magnalia Dei Anglicana, or, England's Parliamentary-Chronicle', 4 parts, 1646, 2.177), but if this comment is not a mere reflection of partisan hostility then it can at least be said that his fiery character was not related to ambition; the very paucity of reference to him before the outbreak of civil war argues for an unusual lack of interest in national affairs. He played no part in the politics of the Short or Long parliaments, and at the opening of the war itself he was such a dark horse that parliament appointed him to execute its militia ordinance in Carmarthenshire and Cardiganshire, while the king clearly trusted him likewise to act as his own most distinguished supporter in the region. It was Charles who was correct, but we have no trace of his actions until a regiment raised by him and led by his uncle Henry Vaughan reached the royal army in January 1643. On 4 April, as part of the establishment of regional royalist commands, Carbery himself was commissioned lieutenant-general of the three south-western Welsh counties and instructed to secure them for the king's cause, with a system of county committees intended to provide him with the money and recruits for a local army. Carmarthenshire and Cardiganshire were firmly royalist, but in Pembrokeshire the towns of Tenby and Pembroke contained a party sympathetic to parliament, and thus the new-made general certainly had work to do. He seems, however, to have preferred to observe an informal local truce; as the parliamentarians of those seaports did not trouble him, so he left them in peace, and both waited for the war to be resolved elsewhere. 
This amicable situation was ended by Charles's truce with the Irish insurgents in September 1643, and his decision to withdraw the royal army in Ireland to reinforce the English royalists. The ports of Pembrokeshire were thus placed in a vital strategic position, perfectly positioned for use as parliamentarian bases to disrupt the flow of soldiers to the king, and their reduction by his supporters became an urgent matter. Carbery set about it on 18 August, as the armistice with the Irish seemed to be certain, by persuading most of the Pembrokeshire gentry to declare their intention of helping him to secure Tenby and Pembroke, and provide him with $2000 towards any necessary military action. It seems likely that the earl was hoping that no such action would in fact be necessary, and that this show of strength would cow the ports into compliance; and this is what initially occurred. On 30 August the corporation of Tenby had declared for the king, and by 24 October that of Pembroke had done the same. Carbery appeared to have secured a total and bloodless victory, and was lavishly rewarded. On 24 October he was given an English peerage as Baron Vaughan of Emlyn and on 17 November he was commissioned governor of Milford Haven, a position which gave him direct military control of Pembroke and any outlying forts along the inlet leading to it. It may have been this commission which precipitated a rising among the parliamentarian zealots in Pembroke, led by John Poyer, who seized the port and made actual warfare inevitable at last. 
Carbery himself had absolutely no experience of war, and no aptitude for it; nor did he have the services of a gifted veteran. In these circumstances he did his best, issuing a declaration on 11 January 1644 which called up the militia of his three counties to besiege Pembroke, and settled county rates to pay them. These forces were drawn into the towns and castles around Pembroke, and a new fort built across the Haven, and left to blockade the town into surrender, without risking a direct attack upon it. In the absence of siege guns or experienced soldiers this was probably all that he could have done, but the strategy underestimated the enterprise both of parliament and of its adherents in Pembroke. The former relieved the port with a naval squadron, and the latter included the sort of talented veteran whom Carbery lacked, in the person of Rowland Laugharne. On 22 February, reinforced by the sailors from the squadron, Laugharne commenced a series of assaults upon the royalist garrisons around Pembroke, and took them one after the other, including Tenby. Carbery's fatal mistake had been to keep no mobile force in reserve, and so he was unable to halt this process. By the end of March 1644 he had lost the whole of Pembrokeshire, and was recalled to the royal court at Oxford to account for the disaster. His departure -- and perhaps his leadership -- left the local royalists completely demoralized, and in April, Laugharne took possession of Carmarthenshire and Cardiganshire as well, without resistance. Carbery had lost the entire region of his command. 
At Oxford, Carbery was personally exonerated from blame, but it was obvious that he would have to surrender his commission to a proven soldier, so on 8 May 1644 he commenced his journey back to Wales as adviser to his replacement as commander in the south-west, Charles Gerard. After this he vanishes from view for the remainder of the war, apparently retiring to his seat at Golden Grove to sit it out. When Laugharne made a second, and final, conquest of Carmarthenshire in November 1645, parliament resolved that Carbery should be fined $4500 for his former actions. He was, however, defended by Laugharne himself, who wrote to the speaker of the Commons on 18 November, explaining that the earl promised to be an eager and reliable collaborator and that his local standing would make him very useful to parliament in settling the region. Laugharne therefore requested that the fine be remitted. He was opposed by the Pembrokeshire county committee, which had more bitter memories of Carbery as a former opponent. The balance was tipped when the earl himself went to London to plead his case and to mobilize old and new friends in his behalf; Sir John Meyrick and the earl of Essex seem to have been especially influential in achieving the decision of the Commons to cancel the fine upon 16 February 1646. The formalities of this discharge were not completed until 9 April 1647, but after that he was safe. 
Carbery repaid his new masters well, by his utter refusal to support the uprising against them in south Wales in April and May 1648, when his old enemies Poyer and Laugharne made common cause with most of the region's royalists and declared for the king. Whatever compelled his decision -- caution after his previous narrow escape or a disinclination to ally with former local foes -- it proved prudent, as the uprising was crushed while he continued inactive and undisturbed at Golden Grove. A local tale that he narrowly evaded capture by Cromwell, who was instead entertained and charmed by his wife, is a fiction. Throughout the interregnum he led a retired and comfortable life, achieving some vicarious literary fame as the patron of Jeremy Taylor. While a guest in his house, this Anglican divine published several of his most notable works, from 'The Great Exemplar' (1649) to the collection of sermons published in 1655 under the title 'Golden Grove'. Countess Frances died on 9 October 1650, leaving Carbery to make a last and most prestigious match in July 1652, with Lady Alice Egerton, eleventh and youngest daughter of John Egerton, first earl of Bridgewater (1579-1649). She was to outlive him by two and a half years, dying in July 1689. 
At the Restoration, Carbery was appointed president of the newly re-established council in the marches of Wales, an honour which reflected both his former services as a royalist leader and his status as the foremost resident Welsh peer. He carried out his duties with apparent diligence until 1672, when he was dismissed because of a public scandal concerning his alleged ill treatment, extending to physical mutilation, of servants and tenants on his estate at Dryslwyn, Carmarthenshire. The main legacy of his tenure of the presidency was a literary one, resulting from his patronage of Samuel Butler whom he made his secretary, and steward of Ludlow Castle, the seat of the council; it seems to have been there that Butler wrote the first part of 'Hudibras'. After his disgrace Carbery slips from public view; he died on 3 December 1686, probably at Golden Grove, and is presumed to have been buried in Llandeilo Fawr parish church. 
Carbery deserves some honour as a patron of letters and a conscientious administrator, but it is very clear that his contemporaries felt more respect for his social position than his personality. He never showed any interest in politics, and his role as a general was forced upon him and became one of the most inglorious of the civil war. His conduct in that war can be praised for prudence and realism rather than for any other virtues, and it is clear that his own taste was for a quiet life as a provincial nobleman; his part in national history may almost be described as accidental. 


@@@@@


doc= 28141


Vaughan, Robert Powell (1591/2-1667), antiquary, was the only son of Hywel Fychan ap Gruffydd ap Hywel (died 1639) of Gwengraig, near Dolgellau, and his wife, Margaret, second daughter of Edward Owen of Hengwrt, Merioneth, and granddaughter of Lewis Owen (d. 1555), baron of the exchequer of north Wales. On 4 December 1612 he matriculated from Oriel College, Oxford, at the age of twenty, but he left without taking a degree. He married Catherine (1594-1663), daughter of Griffith Nanney, with whom he had four sons and four daughters: Howell Vaughan of Vanner, later sheriff of Merioneth, Ynyr, Hugh, Griffith, Margaret, Jane, Elin, and Ann. His father had acquired Hengwrt from Catherine's brother-in-law by a mortgage but Hywel never lived there himself. Robert was still living at Gwengraig in 1624 and possibly moved to Hengwrt on his marriage, although the date of this is not known. He was on the commission of the peace for Merioneth. 
Vaughan's only real publication was 'British Antiquities Revived' (1662) which was largely concerned with the debate over which of the sons of Rhodri Mawr (died 878) was the eldest; a debate to which the most notable other contribution was that of George Owen's 'An aunswer to north-Wales men that would maintayne Anarawd to be the eldest of his brethern and the superior prince of Wales'. It also included a correction of the pedigree of the earl of Carbery that had appeared in Percy Enderbie's 'Cambria triumphans' (1661), making the distinction between Gwaethfoed of Powys and Gwaethfoed of Ceredigion, as well as a short tract on the five royal tribes of Wales. For Vaughan a history ought 'to testifie the truth by consent of the tymes, and immediate succession of princes, otherwise will appeare like a broken chaine, wantinge some necessarie linkes to unite the whole' and he thus produced 'British Antiquities' 'cheefeley out of a desire to cleere the way for a perfect historie of Wales, yf any shall undertake it'. 
Vaughan's other historical labours were also matters of translation and supplementation rather than original writing. He translated 'Brut y Twysogion' for James Ussher. In 1663 he also commenced printing an expanded version of David Powel's 'Historie of Cambria' before discovering that his material had been used without permission in Enderby's 'Cambria triumphans'. Only 128 pages had been printed at that stage and all but a few copies were sold for waste paper. He is also thought to have had a large hand in the writing of Thomas Ellis's 'Memoirs of Owen Glendowr'. Other works by Vaughan include 'Trioedd ynys Prydain', a scripture concordance, and a collection of Welsh proverbs with translations. He had John Meredith enquire the cost of publishing the latter two in London in 1655. 
Vaughan died on Ascension day (16 May) 1667. In his will he asked to be buried at Dolgellau. He left what has been regarded as the 'premier collection' of Welsh manuscripts, both in quantitative and qualitative terms. It included the oldest manuscripts of the laws of Wales, of Arthurian and other romances, and of the holy grail, together with an early translation of part of 'Matthew's gospel', historical and medieval theological works, and a very substantial amount of poetry. Disputes over the manuscripts went to law and in 1697 Edward Lhuyd described the library as 'much rifld' (R. T. Gunther, 'Early Science in Oxford', 14, 1945, 348), but the collection remained largely intact, and incorporated into the Peniarth collection donated by Sir John Williams it formed a cornerstone of the National Library of Wales's collection when it was established at Aberystwyth. Vaughan's collection of books fared less well, being finally dispersed in the early nineteenth century, but various catalogues of both manuscripts and books are extant (Tibbott, Davies, and Jones). 'Robert Vaughan and his library' was set by the council of the national eisteddfod as a topic for a major essay in the late 1940s. 


@@@@@


doc= 28142


Vaughan, Robert (1795-1868), Congregational minister, of Welsh descent, was born in Bristol on 14 October 1795. His parents belonged to the established church. He had no early advantages of education, but showed a taste for historical reading, one of his first purchases being a copy of Sir Walter Ralegh's 'History of the World'. He came under the influence of William Thorp (1771-1833), Independent minister at Castle Green, Bristol, who trained him for the ministry and from whom he took his early, over-demonstrative style of preaching. 
While still a student Vaughan was invited to serve Angel Street Congregational Church, Worcester, and was ordained on 4 July 1819; among his ordainers were William Jay and John Angell James. He married in 1822 Susanna Ryall of Melcombe Regis, Dorset. They had several children: Robert Alfred Vaughan was the eldest son; the eldest daughter married Dr Carl Buch, principal of Government College at Bareilly, upper India, who was murdered in 1857 at the outbreak of the Indian mutiny. In March 1825 Vaughan accepted a call to Hornton Street, Kensington, in succession to John Leifchild. 
Through the publication of his 'Life and Opinions of John de Wycliffe' (1828) and 'Memorials of the Stuart Dynasty' (1831) Vaughan gained some reputation as a historical writer. In 1833 he was appointed to the chair of history in University College, London, and he published his introductory lecture, 'On the Study of General History', in 1834. In the same year he delivered the Congregational lecture, a series of disquisitions published as 'Causes of the Corruption of Christianity' (1834). His connection with University College brought him into contact with whig leaders, and increased his influence as a preacher; people of social position, including Harriet, duchess of Sutherland, were drawn to his services. In 1836 he received a DD from Glasgow University. He continued his historical research, and published the 'Protectorate of Oliver Cromwell' (2 vols., 1838) and 'The History of England under the House of Stuart' (1840). 
In 1843 Vaughan succeeded Gilbert Wardlaw as president and professor of theology at the Lancashire Independent college, which moved on 26 April to new buildings at Whalley Range, Manchester. He published his inaugural discourse, 'Protestant Nonconformity', in 1843. He was dissatisfied with the tone of the 'Eclectic Review', which, under the editorship of Thomas Price, was favouring the militant policy of Edward Miall. Vaughan was opposed to radical political dissent. Only during his last year did he embrace the principles of the Liberation Society. He was also opposed to the voluntary principle in education. To present his own views he launched the 'British Quarterly Review', bringing out the first number in January 1845. During the twenty years of his editorship he kept it at a high intellectual level and, while retaining its nonconformist character and its theological conservatism, admitted on other topics a wide range of writers of different schools. Some of his own articles were collected in 'Essays on History, Philosophy, and Theology' (2 vols., 1849). The 'British Quarterly Review' was his most influential contribution to the hold that Congregationalism was to achieve in the great centres of population by 1870. Such an outcome coincided with the view that he had expressed in his book 'The Age of Great Cities' (1843) that Congregationalism was the authentic religion of urban industrial society. In 1846 Vaughan occupied the chair of the Congregational Union. Returning to the subject of his first publication, he edited for the Wycliffe Society 'Tracts and Treatises of John de Wycliffe... with... Memoir' (1845), and published 'John de Wycliffe, DD: a Monograph' (1853). 
Vaughan was not entirely fitted to be a successful president of the Lancashire Independent college. He had no competence in dogmatic theology and his manner towards students was reserved and undemonstrative. He resigned his post on 20 July 1857, in great perturbation of mind, in the wake of the bitter controversy over the endorsement of the principles of higher criticism by his colleague Dr Samuel Davidson. Although Vaughan voted against Davidson in the college committee, he did not initiate the action. He was succeeded by Henry Rogers (1806-1877). 
After ministering for a short time to a small congregation at Uxbridge, Vaughan retired to St John's Wood, and occupied himself with literary work, publishing 'Revolutions in English History' (3 vols., 1859-63) and taking his part in the nonconformist publications occasioned by the bicentenary of the 'Act of Uniformity' of 1662. It was a speech by Vaughan at the Congregational Union in autumn 1861 that was the main inspiration for the bicentenary commemoration of 1862. In 1867 Vaughan accepted a call to a newly formed congregation at Torquay. Scarcely had he moved there when he was seized with congestion of the brain followed by typhus. He died at Torquay on 15 June 1868, and was buried there. 
Vaughan was a man of striking presence and great platform power, but otherwise he was not popular, and his ministerial career was not as successful as those of contemporaries such as William Jay, John Angell James, and Thomas Binney. However, beside the works specified above and single sermons and speeches, other books of his are significant, particularly because they provide provocative comments on contemporary religious life: 'Thoughts on the... State of Religious Parties in England' (1838); 'Congregationalism... in Relation to... Modern Society' (1842); 'The Modern Pulpit' (1842); and 'English Nonconformity' (1862). 


@@@@@


doc= 28143


Vaughan, Robert Alfred (1823-1857), Congregational minister and writer, was born at Worcester on 18 March 1823, the eldest child of Robert Vaughan (1795-1868), also a Congregational minister, and his wife, Susanna, 'nee' Ryall. He was two months premature and never robust. Educated first by his father, he entered University College School, London, in 1836 at the age of thirteen. He passed on to University College, from which he graduated BA with classical honours in 1842. Vaughan's prevailing tastes were literary, and he believed that the life of a scholar clergyman would be congenial to his reserved temperament. In 1843 he became a student in the Lancashire Independent college, Manchester, under his father's presidency. Next year he published his first piece, 'The Witch of Endor', an unremarkable three-act dramatic poem. On his father's encouragement, he read Origen for a long, scholarly article published in the 'British Quarterly' (October 1845). It won the commendations of Sir James Stephen and Sir Thomas Noon Talfourd. In 1846 he contributed a dramatic piece, 'Edwin and Elgiva', to the 'London University Magazine'. 
Having finished his course in Manchester, Vaughan spent a session (1846-7) at the University of Halle, where he came under the influence of Julius Muller and Tholuck. A religious and psychological crisis made him doubt his vocation for a time. He decided that the work of his life was to be the production of a series of ecclesiastical dramas to illustrate the history of the church. Between June and October 1847 he travelled in Italy with his father. 
In April 1848 Vaughan became assistant to the octogenarian William Jay at Argyle Chapel, Bath. It was an unfortunate appointment. The congregation were accustomed to Jay's forceful preaching and not all of them took kindly to the very different style of an introverted, scholarly young man who while he was at the chapel was writing articles for the 'British Quarterly' on Schleiermacher and Savonarola and planning his work on the mystics. A few months after his installation, on 7 June 1848 he married Jane ('b'. 1827/8), the only child of James Finlay, a bookseller, of Newcastle upon Tyne. With his new financial responsibilities in mind, he stated that the condition of his remaining at the chapel was to be co-pastor with Jay. This was not acceptable either to Jay or to the deacons, and Vaughan therefore resigned, preaching his last sermon on 24 March 1850. 
Accepting a call from Ebenezer Chapel, Steelhouse Lane, Birmingham, Vaughan was ordained there on 8 September 1850. The fact that the ordination prayer was offered by John Angell James shows that he had not lost the confidence of the Congregationalist establishment. However, he was unsuited, both in health and temperament, to minister to a large congregation. While his health declined, he overworked himself in his study. He was learning Spanish and Dutch (being already proficient in French, German, and Italian) to gain access to the writings of mystics, and was contributing constantly to the 'British Quarterly'. In the autumn of 1854 he visited Glasgow, but declined a call to succeed Ralph Wardlaw. He returned home ill. In the spring of 1855 he showed symptoms of tuberculosis; he resigned his charge, preaching his last sermon on 24 June. In August he put to press his 'Hours with the Mystics', which was published in March 1856. 
This followed Vaughan's own design and interspersed a series of dialogues with studies in narrative form. The literally minded reviewer in the 'Christian Observer' declared, 'This sort of literary olio is not at all to our taste' ('Christian Observer', 1856, 573). The book is extremely broad in scope, ranging from the early oriental mystics, the Neoplatonists, and the Sufis to Teresa of Avila, George Fox, and the Swedenborgians. The overall approach is sympathetic, but infused with Vaughan's English protestant prejudices. 
The brief remainder of Vaughan's life was that of an invalid at Bournemouth, St John's Wood, and Westbourne Park, London. Yet he continued to contribute articles to 'Fraser's Magazine' as well as to the 'British Quarterly'. He died at 19 Alexander Street, Westbourne Park, on 26 October 1857; his wife survived him. An enlarged edition of 'Hours with the Mystics' appeared in 1860, edited by his father, while a third edition (1880) was edited by his son Wycliffe Vaughan. 


@@@@@


doc= 28144


Vaughan, Roger William (1834-1883), Roman Catholic archbishop of Sydney, born at Courtfield, near Ross-on-Wye, Herefordshire, on 9 January 1834, was the second of the thirteen children of Colonel John Francis Vaughan (1808-1880) of Courtfield, and his first wife, Elizabeth Louisa (1810-1853), daughter of John Rolls of Hendre, Monmouthshire. Four of the five daughters of the marriage became nuns, and of the six sons who became priests, two besides Roger were appointed bishops: Herbert Vaughan, cardinal-archbishop of Westminster, and John, auxiliary bishop of Salford; another brother, Bernard John Vaughan, became a Jesuit priest. 
At the age of six Vaughan was sent to a private boarding-school in Monmouth, but was withdrawn in 1842 because of poor health. He was to suffer from a weak heart throughout his life. In 1850 he entered St Gregory's College at Downside, near Bath, and on completing his studies joined the Benedictine community there, entering the noviciate on 12 September 1853 and taking his solemn vows on 5 October 1854. The following year he was sent at his father's expense to study in Rome, where he resided at the Benedictine abbey of St Paul's-outside-the-Walls. There he was ordained priest in April 1859. On returning to England he spent two years in charge of the mission at Downside before being appointed in November 1861 professor of metaphysics and moral philosophy at the priory of St Michael at Belmont, Hereford, recently established as the common noviciate and house of studies of the English Benedictine congregation. It also served as the cathedral priory of the diocese of Newport and Menevia. Vaughan was elected prior in 1862, at the early age of twenty-eight, and was twice re-elected. Under his leadership Belmont became a centre of monastic and liturgical renewal. His interest in Thomism bore fruit in the two-volume 'Life and Labours of St Thomas of Aquin', which he published in 1871. 
As early as 1866 the ageing archbishop of Sydney, John Bede Polding (1794-1877), himself a Downside monk, had tried to obtain Vaughan as his coadjutor, with right of succession, but it was not until February 1873 that Vaughan accepted the appointment. His pedigree commended him to the British government, but not to the largely Irish Australian episcopate, who had hoped for the appointment of one of their number. Consecrated at Liverpool on 9 March 1873 by Cardinal Manning, Vaughan arrived in Sydney to a tumultuous welcome on 16 December. He took up residence at St John's College, and soon established a style more assertive and decisive than that of Polding, by now universally venerated, but a spent force. His imposing stature and dignified manner were of advantage to him in his dealings with the New South Wales government. On the death of Polding in March 1877 he entered into full possession of the metropolitan see of Sydney. He proved combative and even confrontational, taking the bold step of setting up a separate Catholic elementary school system, independent of state aid. He introduced new teaching orders to run the schools, which more than doubled in number between 1873 and 1883. In carrying through this policy he had to face the opposition not only of the state premier, Sir Henry Parkes, but also of some of his own suffragans, who resented his avowed determination to break what he termed 'the Irish masonry'. His other major achievement was the successful raising of funds for the construction of St Mary's Cathedral. He presided over its dedication on 8 September 1882. 
The strain of conflict and personal isolation took its toll of Vaughan's health. In April 1883 he left Sydney for a European tour which was to have culminated in an 'ad limina' visit to Rome. He landed at Liverpool on 16 August and proceeded the following day to his uncle's house at Ince Blundell Hall, Lancashire. There, on the night of 17-18 August, he died suddenly of a heart attack. He was buried temporarily at Ince Blundell. His death marked the end of the special relationship of the English Benedictines with the Australian church -- an association which had begun with William Ullathorne. His Irish successor, Patrick (later Cardinal) Moran, declined to pay the costs of having his predecessor's remains brought to Sydney. They were removed to Belmont in 1887 and remained there until 1946, when on the initiative of Cardinal Gilroy, archbishop of Sydney, they were finally interred in St Mary's Cathedral, Sydney. 


@@@@@


doc= 28145


Vaughan, Rowland (c.1590-1667), translator and poet, was as he himself says 'ennyd iau' ('a little younger'; NL Wales, Wrexham 3, 125) than Hugh Nannau, who was born in 1588. He was born at Caer-gai, Llanuwchllyn, the eldest son of John Vaughan of Caer-gai, a manor situated not far from Bala in Merioneth, and his wife, Ellen (or Elin) of the family of Nannau, another manor, situated near Dolgellau in the same county. There is no record of what school he attended, but he did spend at least some time in Oxford, probably at the university there. He refers to this in a letter to a Dr Sion Elis prefixed to his own translation 'Yr arfer o weddi yr Arglwydd' ('The practice of the Lord's prayer', 1658): 'pan fum yn brith sugno peth ar fronnau eich mammaeth dda chwi, Rhydychen' ('when, after a fashion, I suckled at the breasts of your foster mother, Oxford'). There is no record of his having taken a degree. 
Vaughan married Jane, the daughter and heir of Edward Price of Tref Prysg (or Coed Prysg) in Llanuwchllyn, Merioneth. In an elegy composed on his death Hugh Cadwaladr does not mention Vaughan's wife so, presumably, she predeceased her husband. He names six children: John, Edward, William, Elin, Elsbeth, and Marged. In his 'Pedigrees of Anglesey and Carnarvonshire Families' (1914) J. E. Griffiths records that Vaughan and his wife had eight children, four boys and four girls. He does not mention William, and the other two names he records are Gabriel and Mary. So it may be that there were nine children all told. The eldest, John, entered Hart Hall, Oxford, in 1635. He later married Catherine, daughter of William Wynne of Y Glyn, Llanaber, Merioneth. 
Rowland Vaughan's father, John, was high sheriff of Merioneth in 1613 and 1620; Rowland held the same office in 1642, and his son and heir, John, was high sheriff in 1670. During the turbulent period of the civil war Rowland Vaughan was a staunch royalist in politics and a staunch Anglican in his religion. A contemporary poet, William Phylip, refers to Vaughan being away 'in the war' (W. L. Davies, 'Phylipiaid Ardudwy', 'Y Cymmrodor' 42.233). Another poet, Hugh Cadwaladr, refers to his 'bearing arms in war' (NL Wales, 11990, 571). It is said that he was a 'Captain' at the battle of Naseby in 1645 (D. Williams, 'A History of Modern Wales', 1950, 109). His home, Caer-gai, was burnt by parliamentary forces in the same year. His inheritance was given to his nephew. After 1645 it is likely that Vaughan spent some time in hiding, in Cilgellan, on the slopes of Aran Benllyn in Merioneth, and in 1650 he was imprisoned at Caerleon. About that time he began to translate 'Eikon Basilike', purportedly written by Charles I. The translation was left incomplete, and never published. After the wars it was only as a result of years of litigation that he succeeded in regaining his patrimony. He built a new house at Caer-gai, and died there on 18 September 1667. 
Rowland Vaughan was a poet, the type 'living on his own food' as it was said -- in order to differentiate him and others from poets who attempted to make a living by composing praise poetry to the gentry. His strict-metre poems are what could be expected of a seventeenth-century Welsh squire liking, as he himself said of a friend, 'yn hoffi march a gwalch a milgi' ('liking a horse and a hawk and a hound'; Ellis, 144). His free-metre poetry is of a religious and didactic nature, or is used for political propaganda. 
But it is as a translator that Rowland Vaughan is best-known, especially as the translator of 'Yr ymarfer o dduwioldeb' (1630), his version of Lewis Bayly's 'The Practice of Piety'. Other works published by him, such as 'Yr arfer o weddi yr Arglwydd' (1658), a translation of 'The Practice of the Lord's Prayer' by John Despagne, provide practical guidance on devotional matters, or hold forth against nonconformists -- 'Ymddiffyniad rhag pla o schism' (1658), a translation of 'A Defence Against the Plague of Schism' by William Brough, is an example. Papists were also told that they had strayed from the true path of the Christian faith. To his way of thinking both they and the nonconformists should be, as he was, devoted members of the Church of England. All his translations fit into the tradition of devotional translations that dominated Welsh prose in the seventeenth century. 
In his address to the reader of 'Yr ymarfer o dduwioldeb' Vaughan makes the interesting comment that he gained the 'weak mastery' that he had of Welsh letters from his love of the strict-metre poems called 'cywyddau' ('deall, mai wrth fwrw fy serch ar gywyddau cymraeg y cefais i y gyfrwyddyd wan sydd gennif'). 


@@@@@


doc= 28146


Vaughan, Stephen (b. in or before 1502, d. 1549), merchant and administrator, was born into the London branch of the Vaughan family, which was of Welsh descent and had joined the ranks of the London mercantile community in the fifteenth century. His father is thought to have been an undistinguished London mercer, who was still alive in 1535 and probably educated his son at St Paul's School. Stephen Vaughan spoke in later life as though he knew John Colet. 
Vaughan followed in his father's footsteps, embarking on a commercial career. He was an active member of the Merchant Adventurers. Each year his business caused him to pursue a hectic peripatetic course between the Low Country marts, about which he recorded: 'after the exigencies of the same, so that I am never at rest. I am now at Barrugh [Bergen op Zoom], now at Bruce [Bruges], now at Gamut [Ghent], now here now there, so that not without exceeding trouble can I satisfy to all those to whom I minister... as to please all if it were possible. (BL, Cotton MS Galba B.x, fol. 9'r')' Unfortunately, such sources relating to his commercial activities only describe his later years as a merchant. He was held in high regard by the mercantile community and received a pension from the Merchant Adventurers from 1529. On the death of Sir John Hackett in October 1534 he acted as chief factor for the English merchants operating at Antwerp, residing at the English House. Finally, on the death of John Hutton on 5 September 1538, Vaughan was chosen to succeed him both as governor of the company and as Henry VIII's ambassador in the Low Countries. The years 1538 to 1539 marked a high point, not only in his career as a mercer and merchant adventurer but also in his developing role as a diplomat in the service of Sir Thomas Cromwell, principal secretary, and the crown. 
As early as March 1524 Vaughan was in Cromwell's service and rose with his master. During the 1520s the two men developed a strong, enduring, and mutually supportive relationship. Vaughan enjoyed the hospitality of his master and the wide acquaintanceship that it afforded. It was through Cromwell's influence, for instance, that he was employed by Cardinal Thomas Wolsey, archbishop of York, to 'write the evidence' for his college at Oxford (Richardson, 18). In return Vaughan assisted Cromwell in business negotiations and, as a personal spy during his frequent trips to the Low Countries, he kept him informed of rumours and significant political trends there. Nor was this a fair-weather friendship. 
With Cromwell's initial disgrace, following the fall of Wolsey in 1529, he found in Vaughan a true and loyal friend. His letters to his master at this fateful time are worth quoting in full. Writing on 30 October he declared: 'I commend me unto you and am greatly in doubt how you are entreated in this sudden overthrow of my lord your master [Wolsey]. I never longed for to hear from you as now, and like as a true heart is never overthrown with no tempest, like so cannot the same in your trouble, but be now much more thrifty to know your state, and more greedy to show you, if it were possible, by works how much it counteth to serve you. Wherefore, if there be any service in the world which I may do for you, let me have knowledge and be assured of me as of yourself... Though I hear many things of you which please me no, yet do I doubt but your truth and wisdom shall deliver you from danger. You are more hated for your master's sake than for anything which I think you have wrongfully done any man. (TNA: PRO, SP 1/55, fol. 246'r')' Vaughan wrote on 3 February 1530 from Bergen op Zoom, immediately following Cromwell's restoration to favour, telling him how relieved he was to learn that his master had weathered the storm successfully. 'You now sail in a sure haven', he observed, but hastened to warn him against further complications, 'a merry semblance of weather often trusteth men into dangerous seas, not thinking to be suddenly oppressed with tempest, when unawares they be prevented and brought in great jeopardy' (TNA: PRO, SP 1/56, fol. 252'r'). Such steadfast and unstinting support was given, moreover, at a time when he was beset with his own problems. No longer able to depend on Cromwell's protection he fell prey to internecine struggles of a religious nature, which in 1529 wrought havoc within the ranks of the Merchant Adventurers. He was cited to appear before Cuthbert Tunstall, bishop of London, on charges of heresy at the instigation of Hutton, the then governor of the company, charges from which he only finally freed himself in 1531. 
With Cromwell's return to Henry's favour in 1530, the heat went out of this affair and Vaughan was once again able to pursue his career based as it was on his intimate association with his master and friend. Throughout the years 1530 to 1539 life was hectic for Vaughan as he combined the roles of diplomat and merchant. November 1530 again saw him in the Low Countries. Cromwell dispatched him to find William Tyndale, in order to urge him to return to England, a task that not only absorbed much of Vaughan's time during the years 1530 and 1531 but also ultimately proved completely fruitless. Neither his lack of success nor the king's resultant displeasure seems to have set back his career as a diplomat. Another four major missions followed between 1532 and 1539, during which time he never gave up his mercantile activities. In December 1532 he was sent to France to report on the political situation, returning to Calais by the end of July 1533. Almost immediately thereafter, on 28 July, he left that city to join Christopher Mont at Antwerp, from where the two men set out to undertake negotiations with the German princes, a mission that finished only in December. Then after a year's respite, during which he became chief factor for the English merchants operating at Antwerp, he was again employed in 1535, in the role of confidential messenger, on a secret mission to Denmark. Returning to England in January 1536 he was sent by the king to observe an interview between Eustache Chapuys and Katherine of Aragon, which took place just before 'the Dowager's' death. His role on this occasion, as the imperial ambassador made clear to Charles V, was to 'spy on my movements and report what I might say or do during my visit' ('CSP Spain', '1536-8', no. 3). Vaughan married Margery (died 1544), whose brother John Gwyneth was his executor. They had a son, Stephen ('b'. 1536/7), and two daughters, Anne Locke (c.1530-1590x1607) and Jane. Finally, in the autumn of 1538 he accompanied Thomas Wriothesley, clerk of the signet, on an embassy to the Low Countries to establish closer amity and to confer with the regent, Mary of Hungary, regarding Henry's proposed marriage with Christina, dowager duchess of Milan. When these negotiations broke down Wriothesley returned home in March 1539. Vaughan remained in Brussels as resident ambassador and governor of the Merchant Adventurers. It was in this capacity that he entertained Anne of Cleves on her passage to England in December 1539, accompanying her to London, where they arrived at Christmas. He returned to Brussels in January 1540. 
The 1530s saw Vaughan rise rapidly in the service of the crown, yet the rewards for his devoted service were limited in comparison with leading courtiers. In July 1531 he was appointed writer of the king's books, which carried an annual salary of $20. In 1533, as a reward for his work in Germany, he was granted an annuity of $20 and in 1534 he was appointed as clerk of dispensations and faculties in chancery, a post that he held 'in absentia'. Nor did he fare as well as he might have expected from Cromwell, who obtained for him the priory of St Mary Spital, in Shoreditch, London, and secured for his wife her appointment as silk-woman to Anne Boleyn. At least until 1544 he still relied on his earnings as a merchant. 
From 1539 to 1544 Vaughan's work for the crown in the Low Countries was mainly of a commercial character. Following his return to Brussels in January 1540 he became embroiled in the economic turmoil of the summer and autumn before returning to Flanders in 1541 to assist Sir Edward Carne in securing the repeal of imperial legislation impeding English commerce. With the long-awaited outbreak of war between Valois and Habsburg in July 1542, Vaughan's service to the crown centred on the recruitment of mercenaries and raising loans on the Antwerp bourse. In March 1544 he was appointed commissary in the Low Countries and Germany and was dispatched with Thomas Chamberlain to recruit mercenaries to operate with the English army. This task was vitally important because Henry needed more professional soldiers. For three months Vaughan and Chamberlain pursued a hazardous course. Vaughan's life was on more than one occasion threatened, before he was able to bring this motley array of recruits (or at least some of them) to join the king's army at Calais. 
Only with this work completed was Vaughan permitted to arrange his oft-requested passage to London to be at the bedside of his ailing wife -- and even then he arrived too late. She had died on 16 September, ten days before his arrival. Nor did an uncaring privy council leave him long to grieve. In October he was back in Antwerp and only after the strongest representations was he allowed in early November to make a hurried trip home to put his affairs in order -- on the condition that he returned to the continent by 21 October. Most pressing was the task of providing for the care of his children. Vaughan's thoughts thus turned to marrying again but, confined as he was to the Low Countries, this was no easy task. Pleas to find him a wife addressed to the king's secretary, Sir William Paget, and then to Baron Wriothesley, lord chancellor, produced no result. Indeed it was to be another year before in February 1546 he found himself another partner -- Margery Brinklow (died 1557), the impoverished widow of the London mercer Henry Brinklow, who died in 1545/6. Even then, so little could he be spared from his official duties that his new bride had to pass over to Calais, where the couple were married in the private chapel of Sir George Brooke, ninth Lord Cobham, deputy of Calais, on or shortly after 27 April. They had no children. 
From the time of his appointment as the crown's chief financial agent in the Low Countries in May 1544 until his resignation from the post on 8 September 1546, whatever his personal problems, Vaughan was rarely absent from Antwerp. Ever since the fateful instruction in May 1544 when, amid a myriad of fund-raising schemes, the king ordered Vaughan to raise a loan on the Antwerp bourse, his stay in that city was virtually uninterrupted. Under his guidance, during the years from 1544 to 1546 Henry's mounting debts were managed with exemplary care. Secure in the support of the privy council, initially Vaughan's primary concern was with gaining some knowledge of the labyrinthine tactics of the denizens of the bourse -- the southern German merchant bankers, brokers like Jaspar Ducci, and underwriters. Exploiting Vaughan's ignorance of market operations during his first year as royal factor, these men managed to milk the English crown by creating a major difference between the nominal and real interest rates on loans raised for it. Vaughan, however, was an apt pupil. Before leaving his post he was able to cut through the tangle of financial ploys. He simplified the process for negotiations and established direct links with the Antwerp agents of the southern German merchant bankers, which allowed him to reduce transactions costs and the real interest rate paid by the English crown. By the accession of Edward VI in 1547, Vaughan had managed to establish a place for the crown on the Antwerp market, which was commensurate with its true credit standing. 
Yet once again, in spite of giving up his mercantile activity and devoting himself wholeheartedly to the exigencies of royal service, he was not as well rewarded as he might have expected to be. In November 1542 he was the recipient of seven small pieces of property in London. He acquired a better position as under-treasurer at the Tower of London mint on 25 March 1544, which brought with it an annual salary of $133 13's'. 4died It was to this post and the clerkship of faculties in chancery that he returned after his resignation in September 1546. He lived in London with his new wife until his death there on 25 December 1549. He was buried at St Mary-le-Bow, London. It would be difficult to disagree with W. C. Richardson's view that Vaughan rose from obscurity and despite years of devoted royal service, during which he firmly established English crown finance at Antwerp, died inconspicuously, and was soon forgotten. 


@@@@@


doc= 28147


Vaughan, Sir Thomas (d. 1483), courtier, was the son of Robert Vaughan of Monmouth and his wife, Margaret; claims that he was related to the Vaughans of Brecknockshire are not substantiated ['see 'Vaughan family (per. c.1400-c.1504)]. He entered royal service, perhaps with Beaufort patronage -- on 30 March 1443 John Beaufort, earl of Somerset (died 1444), urged his grant of denizenship. In 1446, as king's esquire, he was appointed steward and receiver of the Beauchamp estates in Herefordshire and the marches, but by 1450 he had moved to London as an esquire for the body, and (18 July) master of the king's ordnance for life. He was well rewarded, became a king's serjeant, and acquired a house named Garlick in Stepney which was a meeting-place of the influential. By 1456 he was a councillor of the king's half-brother, Jasper Tudor (died 1495). Vaughan was employed as an envoy to Burgundy (1457-8), and he sat as MP for Marlborough (1455-6) and JP for Middlesex (1457-8). In 1459 the approaching conflict between Queen Margaret and Richard, duke of York, made him reassess his loyalties, and it was later alleged that he entered into a conspiracy with York's friends (4 July). He was among the Yorkists dispersed at Ludford Bridge (12 October), and was attainted in the Coventry parliament in December; but he returned with the Yorkist lords from Calais in 1460. Once they had captured Henry VI at Northampton (10 July), Vaughan resumed mastership of the ordnance and became keeper of the great wardrobe. He soon -- between 28 July and 18 October -- married Eleanor, daughter of Sir Thomas Arundel of Betchworth, Surrey, and widow of the Lancastrian Sir Thomas Brown; for $1000 Vaughan secured Brown's forfeited estates in south-east England. Queen Margaret's victory at St Albans (17 February 1461) caused him to flee with York's treasure, but he was captured at sea by French pirates. 
Louis XI resisted Margaret's request that he hand Vaughan over to her, and in October 1461 Edward IV contributed $200 to his ransom. He returned to Yorkist service in 1462 as esquire for the body and (June 1465) keeper of the great wardrobe, treasurer of the chamber, and master of the king's jewels. Thereafter he was a favoured and protected royal servant, who was again employed on embassies to Burgundy, France, and the Hanse, and was appointed JP in Kent, Surrey, and Sussex (1464-6), and sheriff of Surrey-Sussex (1466-7). In January 1469 he became keeper of the hanaper. 
Vaughan may have shared Edward IV's exile in 1470-71; after the king's return he assumed further responsibilities, especially in royal estate management. In July 1471 he was appointed chamberlain and councillor of the prince of Wales, and was prominent in supervising his estates and his upbringing. In the 1470s he was a central figure in exploiting the estates that fell to the crown, including those of Mowbray (1477) and Clarence (1478), and in developing the prince's council in the marches of Wales; as a king's councillor he was knighted in 1475 and was MP for Cornwall in 1478. Vaughan had close relations with prominent nobles, including the Woodvilles and Richard of Gloucester -- the latter resided at Garlick in 1473-4; at Westminster he built a mansion ('c'.1474) which seems to have served as a residence for the prince. When Edward IV died (9 April 1483) Vaughan was with the prince at Ludlow. He was in the party which left on 24 April to accompany Edward V to his coronation. They were intercepted by Gloucester and the duke of Buckingham, and Vaughan, along with Richard Grey and Sir Richard Haute, was arrested in the king's lodgings at Stony Stratford on 30 April, accused of plotting against Gloucester. By now an 'aged knight' ('Crowland Chronicle Continuations'), he was confined at Pontefract. Some weeks later, he was condemned and on 25 June executed, a victim of Edward IV's trust and Richard of Gloucester's ambition. 


@@@@@


doc= 28148


Vaughan, Thomas (1621-1666), hermetic philosopher and alchemist, was the son of Thomas Vaughan ('c'.1586-1658) of Llansanffraid (St Bridget's), Brecknockshire, and his wife, Denise Jenkin ('b'. 'c'.1593), daughter and heir of David Morgan of Llansanffraid. Thomas and his elder twin brother, the poet Henry Vaughan, were born at Newton by Usk and were the oldest surviving children of the marriage for whom there is clear evidence. Although no portrait is known of either Henry or Thomas, they may have been identical twins, since their similar appearance in adulthood was remarked upon by their friend Thomas Powell in a poem prefacing Henry's 'Olor Iscanus' (1651). Allusions in the brothers' writings indicate that the family was bilingual in Welsh and English. 
Between 1632 and 1638 Henry and Thomas were tutored by the rector of nearby Llangattock, Matthew Herbert, to whom both brothers later wrote verses that indicated their affection and respect. They were then sent to Oxford; Thomas Vaughan was admitted to Jesus College on 4 May 1638, matriculated on 14 December 1638, was promoted from commoner to scholar in May 1641, and took his BA degree on 18 February 1642. Early in his Oxford years he demonstrated his royalist sympathies in a Latin poem contributed to a volume celebrating the birth of Henry, duke of Gloucester, 'Horti Carolini rosa altera' (1640). He also became an admirer of William Cartwright, to whose posthumously published 'Comedies, Tragi-Comedies, with other Poems' (1651) he was to contribute a complimentary poem. The latter part of his time at Jesus was disrupted by the civil war; Henry Vaughan, in his 1673 letter to John Aubrey retailing biographical information about himself and his twin, says only that Thomas remained at Oxford for ten or twelve years, 'and (I thinke) he could be noe lesse than Mr of Arts' (H. Vaughan to Aubrey, 1673, Bodl. Oxf., MS Wood F.39, fol. 216), but he was clearly unsure of the details. 
Henry is more definite about Thomas's ordination: 'ordayned minister by bishop Mainwaringe & presented to the Rectorie of St Brigets by his kinsman Sr George Vaughan' (H. Vaughan to Aubrey, 1673, Bodl. Oxf., MS Wood F.39 fol. 216). No date is given, but the previous rector of Llansanffraid died in 1643 or 1644, and by 1645 Thomas would have reached the age of twenty-four, the legal minimum for ordination as a priest. However, he did not long enjoy the benefice. Although he is described as rector of Llansanffraid in Michaelmas term 1649, in a lawsuit that he brought for trespass on a plot of ground known as Little Island, sequestrations were being carried out against Anglican clergy and royalist sympathizers in Wales from as early as 1645, and in 1650 Thomas Vaughan was formally evicted under the 'Act for Better Propagation and Preaching the Gospel in Wales, Ejecting Ministers and Schoolmasters, and Redresse of Grievances'. The propagators' charges against him were that he was 'a comon drunkard, a common swearer, no preacher, a whoremastr, & in armes personally against ye Parliament' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Walker e.7, fol. 213b). 
Evidence from their own writings and from other records corroborates this last charge: the Vaughan twins did indeed take up arms in the royalist cause. Both were probably present at the defeat suffered by the king's forces at Rowton Heath near Chester on 24 September 1645, and a Captain Thomas Vaughan is mentioned in a list of royalist officers taken prisoner, along with a Captain Henshaw. This may be a cousin of Vaughan's associate Thomas Henshaw, to whom Vaughan dedicated 'Magia Adamica' in 1650, describing him as his 'best of Friends'. In July 1648 the Vaughans' younger brother William died as a result of what Thomas described in 'The Man-Mouse' as a 'glorious imployment' ('The Man-Mouse', 1650, 85), which perhaps alludes to a fatal injury suffered in the royalist cause; he himself seems to have been at Oxford at the time, as the preface to 'Anthroposophia theomagica' is dated 'Oxonii 48' and the book itself concludes with an apology to the effect that it was 'compos'd in 'Haste', and in my 'Dayes of Mourning', on the 'sad Occurence of a Brother's Death''. 
By May 1650, on the evidence of Hartlib's 'Ephemerides', Vaughan ('the author of 'Anthroposophia'', as Hartlib calls him) and Thomas Henshaw were living at Kensington and collaborating on alchemical enterprises. Henshaw's circle of alchemical acquaintance was wide, and his family connections included William Backhouse of Swallowfield; if he were not already acquainted with them, Vaughan could have been introduced by Henshaw to men like Robert Child (who included Vaughan in his plans for a 'chymical club') and Elias Ashmole. 
Vaughan's first tracts on hermetic philosophy, 'Anthroposophia theomagica' and 'Anima magica abscondita', were issued together in 1650. They attracted considerable interest in his own circle, as well as the hostile attentions of the Cambridge Platonist Henry More. They were followed in the same year by 'Magia Adamica', issued with 'The Man-Mouse', and in 1651 by 'Lumen de lumine', issued with 'The Second Wash', the latter items in both volumes being Vaughan's refutations of More. All these titles appeared under Vaughan's pseudonym of 'Eugenius Philalethes' and were brought out by the same publisher, Humphrey Blunden, known for his interest in occult writers, including Boehme. He is likely to be the same H. Blunden who appended a verse postscript to 'Anima magica abscondita' and who was reputed a 'happy Operatour in Chymistrie' (H. More, 'The second lash', in 'Enthusiasmus triumphatus', 1656 edn, 208). 
The dedication of 'Anthroposophia theomagica' to the Rosicrucian brotherhood may be only one nail in the coffin of Vaughan's credibility in the eyes of posterity, but responses among his contemporaries were more mixed. His vehement anti-Aristotelianism and his espousal of such authorities as the fabulous antique sage Hermes Trismegistus, the occult philosopher Cornelius Agrippa, the cabbalist Johann Reuchlin, and the alchemist Michael Sendivogius positioned him in an intellectual milieu that attracted, even if fleetingly, some of the most original minds of his time. Henry More attacked him in frivolous or scatological terms in two publications: 'Observations upon 'Anthroposophia theomagica', and 'Anima magica abscondita'' (1650) and 'The Second Lash of Alazonomastix' (1651). Vaughan responded in kind in his point-by-point counterblasts, 'The Man-Mouse' and 'The Second Wash'. Neither party comes well out of this exchange, but underlying the Oxford versus Cambridge logomachy and 'odium academicum' there is a serious confrontation between two opposing world-views: Vaughan's magical, hermetic, and cabbalistic, More's anti-enthusiastic and (somewhat incoherently) Cartesian. 
Vaughan was clearly given to cantankerous criticism, and not only in his controversy with More. His comments on Ashmole's 'Theatrum chemicum Britannicum' (1652), themselves acidly annotated in cipher by Ashmole (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. D 864 fol. 222), include remarks on the level of 'ha ha hie. Sympleton' and 'Away Animal thou liest'. Of the ending of 'The Magistery' ('Theatrum chemicum Britannicum', 342-3) by Ashmole's alchemical mentor William Backhouse: '
Oh happy man that understands 

This Medicen to atchieve! 

' Vaughan sneered 'The author was never so happy', to which Ashmole retorted 'If the observator was as happy he would be more modest in his censures'. None the less, Ashmole's annotated copy of Pierre Borel's 'Bibliotheca chimica' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 1374) shows that he possessed all Vaughan's philosophical publications. 
Vaughan's next work, 'Aula lucis', came out in 1652 under the initials 'S. N.' (the last letters of his names) but despite the change of pseudonym and publisher it is vouched for as his by Henry Vaughan. It has been suggested that the dedicatee, 'Seleucus Abantiades', who, Vaughan says, knew him from his childhood, was Matthew Herbert. Also in 1652 Vaughan published an English version by an unidentified translator of the key Rosicrucian text, the 'Fama et confessio'. To this 'Fame and Confession of the Fraternitie of R: C:' Vaughan added an extensive preface. For his final philosophical discourse, 'Euphrates, or, The Waters of the East' (1655), he reverted to the pseudonym of Eugenius Philalethes; its publisher was Humphrey Moseley, who was also Henry Vaughan's publisher. Finally, in 1657, Vaughan wrote an introduction to 'The Chymists Key', Henry's translation of Heinrich Nolle's 'De generatione rerum naturalium liber'. The 'Discourse' of his own to which he alludes in the concluding words of this piece was apparently never published, and no further work of his appeared in print in his lifetime. Nor did any work achieve a second edition, although 'Magia Adamica' and 'Euphrates' were reissued in 1656 and 1671 respectively. 
Vaughan married on 28 September 1651; his wife's name was Rebecca, but that and the details that Vaughan himself preserved about their life together are all that is definitely known about her. She died on 17 April 1658, probably in London at lodgings owned by a Mistress Highgate, with whom Vaughan left some of her belongings. On 26 April Rebecca's burial was recorded at Meppershall in Bedfordshire, which led Hutchinson to suggest that she came from there. The name Rebecca occurs in the family of the ejected rector of Meppershall, Timothy Archer, but there is no evidence for the existence of a Rebecca Archer who might have been Thomas Vaughan's wife. 
On the evidence of Vaughan's notebook 'Aqua vitae: non vitis' (BL, MS Sloane 1741), the marriage was a happy one. He appears to have begun 'Aqua vitae' shortly after Rebecca's death; the title-page motto suggests that he saw it partly as therapy for his grief, and many pages are adorned with their joint initials, T. R. V., and pious exclamations. It seems that the Vaughans had supported themselves by the 'naturall secrets' ('Aqua vitae', fol. 105'v') that enabled them to practise chemical medicine, and 'Aqua vitae' was intended in the first instance as a record of the alchemical work Vaughan carried out with his wife's encouragement. Rebecca, too, was active in the preparation of medicaments, as among her belongings listed by Vaughan after her death was 'a great glass full of eye-water, made att the Pinner of Wakefield, by my deare wife, and my sister vaughan [Henry's first wife Catherine], who are both now with god'. (Hutchinson identifies the Pinner (or Pinder) of Wakefield as an inn in the parish of St Pancras, half a mile north of Gray's Inn; prior to living there, the Vaughans had lodged at a Mr Coalman's in Holborn.) 
Vaughan continued to make additions to 'Aqua vitae' for several years, the latest dated entry being an alchemical extraction on 8 August 1662, but the dreams and premonitions and affectionate remembrances of his wife were mainly written down in the year following her death, to April 1659. The entry for 9 April 1659 suggests that there may have been some truth in the propagators' accusation of disorderly behaviour against Vaughan, since he describes a dream encounter with 'a certaine person, with whom I had in former times revelled away many yeares in drinking' (fol. 103). 
Towards the end of the 1650s Vaughan became involved in an unfortunate episode with a chemical practitioner of apparently parliamentarian sympathies called Edward Bolnest. A typical alchemical imbroglio, it began with Bolnest's advancing money to Vaughan on the understanding that Vaughan would disclose to him the secrets of his art, only to be disappointed. Vaughan's counter-claim, in a deposition dated 18 May 1661 (Chanc. Pro. Hamilton 354.45) that shows him to have been living at the time in the parish of St Giles-in-the-Fields, hinged on Bolnest's threats and violence in his attempts to recover the moneys and goods he believed that Vaughan had accepted under false pretences. There is apparently no record of how or if the dispute was resolved. 
The political and religious settlement after the Restoration would have been to Vaughan's liking, but, for whatever reason, he did not reclaim the Llansanffraid living. Possibly he had hopes of advancement from his new patron, Sir Robert Moray; Moray was not only a good chemist but also a favourite with Charles II, whom he assisted in chemical operations in the royal laboratory in Whitehall. At the end of 1665 Moray withdrew from London to Albury, between Oxford and Thame, because of the plague; there he kept himself occupied with chemical experiments. Vaughan seems to have joined him, as it was in the house of Samuel Kem, minister at Albury, that Vaughan suddenly died on 27 February 1666. Wood, in noting the circumstances, cited an unidentified Harris of Jesus College as his source: 'Eugenius Philalethes died as twere suddenly when he was operating strong mercurie, some of which by chance getting up into his nose killed him' (Wood, 3, col. 722). The expenses of Vaughan's burial at Albury on 1 March were paid by Moray, to whom, according to Henry Vaughan, Vaughan left all his books and manuscripts. 
The canon of Vaughan's works is based on information given by Henry Vaughan to Aubrey in 1673, supplemented by Ashmole's 'Bibliotheca chimica' list. 'A Breif Naturall History' by 'Eugenius Philalethes' (1669), though placed among Thomas Vaughan's oeuvre by William Cooper in his 'Catalogue of Chymicall Books' (1675), was rejected from the canon by Anthony Wood on stylistic grounds. One posthumous publication should, however, be added. Those of Thomas's Latin poems that were available to Henry were published by the latter as a separate section at the back of 'Thalia rediviva' (1678); they conclude with a note to the effect that many other pieces were lacking, among them 'Alcippus et Jacintha', described as 'Poema heroicum absolutissimum' ('Thalia rediviva', 93), having been left behind in Oxford. Besides conventional love poems to 'Stella' and some complimentary verse, Thomas's contributions to 'Thalia rediviva' include epitaphs on Charles I and Archbishop Laud, a virulent satire on an unidentified political opponent under the name of Vertumnus, and a series on the executed royalist Colonel John Morris, hero of the siege of Pontefract in 1648. Apart from these Latin poems and the 'Horti Carolini rosa altera' and Cartwright poems already discussed, he also contributed complimentary verses in English to his brother's 'Olor Iscanus' and in Latin to Thomas Powell's 'Elementa opticae' (1651). 
Vaughan's reputation has undergone both neglect and misrepresentation at the hands of posterity, and his standing among his contemporaries was ambiguous. In character he was capable both of the coarseness and arrogance seen in his dealings with More and Ashmole and of the reflective tenderness of the memoranda in 'Aqua vitae'. Of himself he observed in his postscript to 'The Fame and Confession' that his nature was 'more 'Melancholy' then 'Sociable'' ('The Fame and Confession', 57). As a prose stylist too he ranged from the lyricism of his description of Thalia and the 'prima materia' in 'Lumen de lumine' to the crude invective of his polemics with More. In the latter he 'Clevelandized', affecting a prose version of the swaggering satire of John Cleveland, the royalist poet of whom there are many echoes in his writings. Vaughan may well have known Cleveland personally after Cleveland had abandoned Cambridge for Oxford in the mid-1640s; Cleveland had many imitators, but in Vaughan's case the taunting of More, the Cambridge man, in the language of this prestigious refugee from the other university would have had a particular piquancy. 
Opinions about Vaughan differed sharply at the time of his first publications. Child and Hartlib both alluded to his books in terms that suggest they caused a stir among the natural philosophers, and in late 1650 George Starkey was planning a refutation (which seems never to have been written, or not to have survived). As regards his fame as an alchemical operator, Hartlib in his 'Ephemerides' seems to be inclined to give Vaughan the benefit of the doubt over whether he possessed the 'Menstruum Universale' or 'prima materia'; the passage is obscure, but seems to indicate that the experience that Robert Boyle had had of this substance -- whatever it might have been -- corroborated Vaughan's. Vaughan gives a recipe for the 'Menstruum Universale' in 'Aqua vitae' (fol. 12'v'.) About this time, Backhouse told Ashmole that Vaughan was experimenting on the spirit of saltpetre 'and of late he added May-dew to it' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. D 864 fol. 207). 
Although some took Vaughan and his work seriously, there were contemporary detractors other than Henry More. For instance, John Gaule's 'Mus-mantia' (1652) -- the title is an obvious pun on Vaughan's 'Man-Mouse' -- contains much detailed quotation derived from a hostile reading of 'Magia Adamica'. Later Vaughan received the back-handed compliment of being among the victims of the many and various plagiarisms of John Heydon, particularly in 'The Harmony of the World' (1662). Samuel Butler pokes fun at Vaughan in part 1 of 'Hudibras' (1663) as one of the gurus of the mystical squire Ralpho and also in his prose portrait 'An Hermetic Philosopher'. In a more serious vein, Samuel Parker, bishop of Oxford, debunks 'our late English 'Rosie Crusians'' and singles out 'the controversial Rencountres of Eugenius Philalethes', along with the writings of Heydon, as examples of language unbecoming philosophical discourse ('A Free and Impartial Censure, of the Platonick Philosophie', 2nd edn, 1667, 75). Swift complained in 1704 that 'Anthroposophia theomagica' was 'a Piece of the most unintelligible Fustian, that, perhaps, was ever publish'd in any Language' ('A Tale of a Tub', 1704). Notwithstanding this, Vaughan's writings were known in continental Europe, and in the late seventeenth and first half of the eighteenth centuries several of his works were circulated in German translation. 
Nineteenth-century enthusiasm for the occult brought a new lease of life to Vaughan's reputation as a Rosicrucian and as the purported possessor of the elixir of life, and he was endowed in occultist circles with the character of a magus. It is largely in this context and for this readership that A. E. Waite prepared his collected edition of Vaughan's works for the Theosophical Society (1919). Only in the last third of the twentieth century did the reassessment of Rosicrucianism against the background of seventeenth-century philosophy and politics enable a fresh look to be taken at those who associated themselves with the movement; the intellectual bases of alchemy too, stripped of the pretensions and secrecy of its more dubious practitioners, likewise came under serious reappraisal, and both trends served to situate Vaughan more securely in the intellectual milieu of his day. Vaughan certainly preferred to think of himself as a philosopher: 'for 'Alchymie' in the common acceptation, and as it is a 'torture of metalls', I did never believe; much less did I study it' ('Euphrates', sig. A3-3'v'). 


@@@@@


doc= 28149


Vaughan, Thomas (fl. 1772-1820), playwright, was the son of a lawyer, and was educated in the same profession. He obtained the post of clerk to the commission of peace of the city of Westminster, and about 1782 became captain of a company of the Westminster Volunteers. He had a great love of the stage, and devoted much of his leisure time to dramatic literature. In 1772 he wrote a series of essays in the 'Morning Post' on the Richmond Theatre. In 1776 he produced a farce entitled 'Love's Metamorphoses', which was acted for Mrs Wrighten's benefit at Drury Lane on 15 April. It was afterwards rejected by John Philip Kemble, manager of Drury Lane, in 1789, and by George Colman the younger, manager of the Haymarket, in 1791. Vaughan published it in 1791, under the title 'Love's Vagaries', with a dedication to the rejectors. In 1776 he published another farce, entitled 'The Hotel, or, The Double Valet', which appeared at Drury Lane on 21 November. His next dramatic venture was 'Deception', a political comedy, which was acted at Drury Lane on 28 September 1784. None of Vaughan's plays possessed much merit, and they met with no success. He was the author of a novel entitled 'Fashionable Follies' (1782), which had some vogue; one reviewer called it 'The best of his writings' ('European Magazine', 58). He republished it in 1810 with considerable additions, and with a dedication to Colman, with whom he had formerly quarrelled, and who bestowed on him the nickname of Dapper. Though much earlier, 'The Retort' (1761), a reply to Churchill's 'Rosciad', which contained an allusion to Vaughan as 'Dapper', is also assigned to him (Churchill, 31n.; 'New Cambridge Bibliography of English Literature', 2.859). He was a friend of Sheridan, and is said to have been the original of Dangle in 'The Critic'. 


@@@@@


doc= 28150


Vaughan, Thomas (1782-1843), singer, was born in Norwich, where he was a chorister at the cathedral under John Christmas Beckwith. His father died while Vaughan, still very young, was preparing to enter the musical profession, which he was able to do under the patronage of Canon Charles Smith. In June 1799 he was elected lay clerk of St George's Chapel, Windsor, where he attracted the notice of George III. On 28 May 1803 he was admitted a gentleman of the Chapel Royal, and about the same time became vicar-choral of St Paul's Cathedral and lay vicar of Westminster Abbey. In 1806 he married Miss Tennant, a soprano singer well known from 1797 in oratorio performances. After some nine or ten years of married life they separated, and Mrs Vaughan was heard, as Mrs Tennant, at Drury Lane Theatre. 
In 1811 Vaughan joined Charles Knyvett in establishing vocal subscription concerts in opposition to the Vocal Concerts; but on the death of Samuel Harrison in 1812 the two enterprises were merged, and from 1813 Vaughan became principal tenor soloist at all the prominent concerts and festivals. He sang at the Three Choirs festivals from 1805 to 1836, and took part in the performance of Beethoven's ninth symphony in 1825. For twenty-five years he was the leading singer of oratorio in England. He died on 9 January 1843 at a friend's house near Birmingham, and was buried on the 17th in the west cloister of Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 28151


Vaughan, Sir William (c.1575-1641), writer and promoter of colonization in Newfoundland, was the second son of Walter Vaughan (died 1598), twice member of parliament, of Golden Grove, Llanfihangel Aberbythych, Carmarthenshire, and his first wife, Mary (died before 1588), daughter of Sir Walter Rice of Newton, Dinefwr, Carmarthenshire. William matriculated, along with his elder brother John Vaughan (created earl of Carbery in 1628), from Jesus College, Oxford, on 4 February 1592, and graduated BA on 1 March 1595 and MA on 16 November 1597. Sir Henry Vaughan, royalist army officer, was a younger brother. William supplicated for the degree of BCL on 3 December 1600. As a young man he travelled extensively in France and Italy, and also visited Vienna, where he received a doctorate in law, being incorporated DCL at Oxford on 23 June 1605. 
Vaughan showed early his aptitude for writing accomplished poetry, especially of a religious nature, in Latin. While at Oxford he published ''Erotopaignion' pium' (1597) and 'Erotopainion pium', part 2 (1598), containing verse paraphrases of the 'Bible'. The contents of the two publications again appeared in the more widely known 'Poematum libellus' (1598). This volume also contains an encomiastic ode addressed to Robert Devereux, earl of Essex (with whose family the Vaughans were closely connected); 'De sphaerarum ordine', a didactic cycle of verses on the sun, moon, and planets; and a section entitled 'Palaemonis amores philosophici', seventeen poems in which themes from classical poets like Catullus and Ovid are combined with sonnet-like effusions of a Petrarchan nature. Also included in 'Poematum libellus' is a memorial poem on the death of Vaughan's father ('Speculum humanae condicionis'), which was also printed separately. 
In 1600 Vaughan's most famous work appeared, 'The Golden-Grove, Moralized in Three Bookes' (a second edition, 'now lately reviewed and enlarged by the Author', was published in 1608). The title recalls both the name of the Vaughan family home (the work is dedicated to William's brother John) and 'the golden grove of the ancient Hesperides'. Among liminary Latin verses to greet the work are poems by notable Oxford contemporaries of the two brothers, among them John Williams and Griffith Powell (both Carmarthenshire men who became principal of Jesus College), and the Latin dramatist Matthew Gwinne. The prose text of 'The Golden-Grove' is written in English, and presents a learned and elaborate treatise 'very necessary for all such as would know how to governe themselves, their houses or their countrey'. The arrangement is in three books, dealing in Aristotelian fashion with the religious and moral ('virtue'), economic ('family'), and political ('civility' or 'commonwealth') aspects of human life. Vaughan is particularly sensitive to social relationships; he displays advanced views on farming and estate management, and his concern for the plight of yeomen (as in his native Carmarthenshire) foreshadows his later commitment to colonial enterprises: 'There is no life more pleasant than a Yeomans life... But now a dayes yeomanrie is decayed, hospitalitie gone to wracke, and husbandrie almost quite fallen' (1608 edition, sig. v4ii-iii). Throughout 'The Golden-Grove' quotations from classical authors abound, notably Persius, on whose satires Vaughan says in his preface that he had prepared an unpublished commentary. Other references to literary matters also give an indication of some of Vaughan's attitudes. In book 1 he delivers a diatribe against 'stage playes', but in book 3 the 'excellency' of true poetry is extolled. From the time of Moses and Homer poets 'were the first that observed the sacred operations of nature' (sig. Z1'v'), and poetry the chief cause of the heathen's 'civility'. 'Neither is our owne age altogether to be dispraysed' (sig. Z7'r'), and he singles out the earl of Surrey, Sir Philip Sidney, and James VI of Scotland for special mention. 
Details of Vaughan's life in the years immediately after returning from his European tour are patchy. In the early 1600s he married Elizabeth, daughter and heir of David ap Robert of Llangyndeyrn. Her home, Tor-y-coed (which Vaughan sometimes quaintly spelt 'Terra-Coed'), thereafter became his main residence. A son of the marriage, Francis, appears to have died young. Further tragedy came upon the family in January 1608, when the house was struck by lightning and Elizabeth Vaughan killed. Vaughan himself escaped, one of several preservations that he came to interpret as signs of divine calling to special service. His wife's death affected him deeply, and for a time he appears to have suffered from something close to religious mania. He was also the victim of insinuations about the circumstances of his wife's death. To refute these he wrote a strangely mystical work entitled 'The spirit of detraction conjured and convicted in seven circles: a work both divine and morall, fit to be perused by the libertines of the age, who endeavour by their detracting and derogatory speeches to embezell the glory of God and the credit of their neighbours' (1611). 
Another of Vaughan's early interests was medicine. In 1600, the same year as the first edition of 'The Golden-Grove', he published 'Naturall and Artificiall Directions for Health', a work that he was to revise and enlarge through several editions and under slightly different titles ('Approved Directions for Health'; 'Directions for Health') for the rest of his life. This work, like 'The Golden-Grove', was in part occasioned by his concern for the condition of ordinary people, and his directions, 'derived from the best Phisitians, as well as moderne as antient', come under six headings: 'air, fire and water'; 'food and nourishment'; 'evacuations, as purgations, Tobacco taking, etc.'; 'infirmities, humours, and death'; 'perturbations of the mind, and spiritual sicknesses'; 'quarterly, monthly, and daily diet with Medicines to prolong life'. 
William Vaughan married as his second wife Anne (died 1672), daughter of John Christmas of Colchester, and with her had one son, Edward, and five daughters, Margaret, Jane, Dorothy, Mary, and Anne. As became a member of his family, he was involved in the public affairs of Carmarthenshire and was sheriff of the county for 1616. His major concern, however, from 1616 onwards was with promoting colonization in the New World, in part as a hoped-for means of alleviating social and economic problems of the kind that he had described in 'The Golden-Grove'. Various possibilities were considered, but in the end his choice fell on Newfoundland. In 1610 'a company of adventurers' had been granted, by James I, territory in Newfoundland for the purposes of colonial development. In 1616 Vaughan purchased from the company land south of a line extending from Placentia Bay to Caplin Bay on the Avalon peninsula, on the eastern part of the island. In token of its Welsh origin, the colony was named Cambriol. The first group of settlers was sent out in 1617, at Vaughan's expense, to the Aquafort area, and a governor, Captain Richard Whitbourne, was appointed in 1618. Whitbourne reorganized the colony, and made Renews its centre. The venture proved, however, extremely precarious, and by 1619 the colony had collapsed, although some of the settlers probably remained. According to the autobiographical material in 'The Newlanders Cure', Vaughan assigned part of his land to Henry Cary, Viscount Falkland, and another portion to Sir George Calvert. Nevertheless, his interest in Newfoundland remained unabated: 'my Zeale to Newfoundland is not frozen', he wrote in 1630 ('The Newlanders Cure', sig. A5'v'). Although there is no hard evidence to support the claim, often made, that Vaughan himself visited the territory on the Avalon peninsula, his attempts to promote it continued throughout the 1620s. In 1625 he published a Latin poem, 'Cambrensium Caroleia', in honour of the marriage of Charles I, and included with it John Mason's map of Newfoundland. This shows names of many Welsh towns and counties, and also Vaughan's Cove and Golden Grove. 
Mason's map was also included in the most extraordinary of all Vaughan's works, written under the pseudonym Orpheus junior: 'The golden fleece divided into three parts, under which are discovered the errours of religion, the vices and decayes of the kingdome, and lastly the wayes to get wealth, and to restore trading so much complayned of: transported from Cambrioll Colchos, out of the southermost part of the iland, commonly called the Newfoundland, by Orpheus junior, for the generall and perpetuall good of Great Britaine' (1626). The work fancifully draws a parallel between the mission conducted by Jason and his fellow Argonauts to win the golden fleece and the opportunities offered to colonists, especially Orpheus junior's 'countreymen of Wales', in Newfoundland. The book abounds with classical allusions, many of them symbolically interpreted. The god Apollo is shown passing judgment in religious, political, economic, and moral matters. Leading historical figures are brought before him to plead the cause of their actions, and are approved or otherwise by the god. The 'Cambrioll Colchos' of Newfoundland is finally shown to be the answer to all ills. Although 'The Golden Fleece' is a rambling work, and bigoted in its hostility to Roman Catholicism, it remains a remarkable piece of colonial propaganda, and is one of the earliest books concerned with America. 
In 1626 Vaughan's anti-Catholic passion found further expression in the publication of 'The New-Found Politicke', a translation by Vaughan, John Florio, and another, unnamed, author of selections from Traiano Boccalini's 'Ragguagli di Parnaso'. Dedicated to Charles I, the work is an earnest, although indirect, warning against concluding any alliance with Spain. In 1630 a further medical work, 'The Newlanders Cure', came from Vaughan's pen. The book is primarily aimed at emigrants undertaking the voyage to the New World, and in particular discusses remedies for scurvy and other likely complaints. The knowledgeable discussion of colonists' ailments has sometimes been taken to signify that Vaughan did at last cross the Atlantic in the late 1620s, but the autobiographical material contained in the dedication strongly suggests that visiting Newfoundland was for him still only a dream rather than a realized fact. 
In 1628 Vaughan was knighted, in Ireland. As far as is known, he lived for the rest of his life in Carmarthenshire, and 'consoled himself for the failure of his dreams with his meditations and writings upon religion' (Cell, 'Newfoundland', 26). At the end of his life he produced two bulky books of verse, 'The church militant, historically continued from the yeare of our Saviours incarnation 33 untill this present 1640' (1640) and 'The soules exercise in the daily contemplation of our Saviours birth, life, passion, and resurrection' (1641). 'Poor, Cambriol's Lord', to use Robert Hayman's appellation for Vaughan, died in August 1641, probably at Tor-y-coed, and was buried at Llangyndeyrn 'without vain pomp', as was enjoined in his will (dated 14 August and proved at Carmarthen on 27 August 1641). 


@@@@@


doc= 28152


Vaughan, Sir William (d. 1649), royalist army officer, was the son and heir of a Shropshire or Herefordshire family, and entered Shrewsbury School on 30 January 1596. He learned his military skills in Europe, and in 1620 may have served as a captain in Lord Cromwell's regiment of foot, raised for Mansfeld's expedition to the Netherlands. By 27 July 1639 he had decided to serve the king in the bishops' wars, and late in 1641 he led a troop in the earl of Carnarvon's regiment of horse, sent to Ireland to help suppress the October rebellion. After commanding Sir Richard Grenvile's cavalry at Rathconnell (7 February 1643) he carried news of the victory to Dublin, and was knighted by the marquess of Ormond. 
Vaughan was made a colonel, and, in charge of over 300 horse, part of a large body of reinforcements sent by Ormond to relieve Chester, he joined Lord Byron's forces there early in February 1644, and played an important role in Shropshire and north Wales for the remainder of the war. He helped Colonel Robert Ellice capture Apley Castle, Shropshire (24 March 1644), and rout Thomas Mytton at Longford the following day. His regiment then joined Prince Rupert's army, and Vaughan was probably at the storming of Bolton on 28 May and the siege of Liverpool (7-12 June). He served with Byron on the royalist right wing at Marston Moor on 2 July, and was with him in the disastrous rout at Montgomery on 18 September. Byron complained of how little Vaughan contributed to the action; but, earlier in the month, Vaughan and Sir Michael Erneley had broken Sir Thomas Myddleton's army there, before settling down to besiege the castle. On 28 September he garrisoned Shrawardine Castle in Shropshire, of which he had been appointed governor, but two weeks later, on 13 October, he was taken prisoner by Mytton while on his knees receiving communion in Shrawardine church. Allowed back into the castle, on the pretext of persuading it to surrender, he failed to re-emerge, and within a fortnight defeated Sir John Price at Welshpool. 
During the winter Vaughan was made general of Shropshire. He had put his troops into garrisons all over the county -- at Dawley House, Lilleshall Abbey, Caws Castle, Leigh Hall, and High Ercall -- with his parson brother commanding Shrawardine itself. Unscrupulously living off the country and confiscating the property of local parliamentarians, the best-documented example being his robbery from the drapers of Dolgellau of $140 and sundry cloths (27 November 1644), Vaughan acquired the sobriquet 'the Devil of Shrawardine' ('Mercurius Aulicus', 1 Feb 1644). But his actions were effective: he cut off Myddleton from his Shropshire colleagues, and ensured that his men were well paid, clothed, and housed; and his regiment emerged from winter quarters 400 strong, a number rivalling Rupert's own regiment, usually the strongest in the royalist army. During the early 1640s Vaughan was a member of the close circle of Thomas Chaloner, headmaster of Shrewsbury School, who met regularly at The Sextry inn in the town. 
After being defeated and captured by Cromwell at Bampton, Oxfordshire (27 April 1645), Vaughan was soon exchanged, and he beat off some Shropshire horse near Wenlock on 9 May before joining the king eight days later on his march from Oxford to Chester. He was present at the storming of Leicester (30 May); and at Naseby (14 June), in the second line of the royalist right wing, he participated in the great charge which pierced Ireton's opposing troops. After the defeat he fell back on Shropshire, where local clubmen in the south-west of the county were withholding supplies from the royalist garrisons, and the parliamentarian forces had captured Caws and Shrawardine (24-5 June) and were besieging High Ercall. 
Vaughan defeated his opponents at Broncroft Castle (4 July) and the following day relieved High Ercall, capturing nearly 400 prisoners, whom he used to help ransom royalist foot taken at Naseby. He joined the king at Ludlow on 7 August, and was with him at Doncaster (19 August) and Huntingdon (23 August). Towards the end of the month Vaughan burnt Bishop's Castle, and he was present at the defeat at Rowton Heath (24 September). After accompanying the king to Newark, in October he was appointed general of the horse in Wales and the marches, and promised to continue provisioning Chester from north Wales. He defeated Sydenham Poyntz at Drayton in mid-October, and managed to get a supply of brimstone into Chester before being crushed by Michael Jones and Mytton, with a much larger force, at Denbigh on 1 November, while he waited for the Caernarvonshire levies to arrive. Vaughan's routed cavalry retreated to Knighton, Radnorshire, where they broke up on 13 November. He found temporary quarters at Leominster, but was then forced back on Worcester. Early in December he was ordered to renew the attempt to relieve Chester, but each time he managed to weld together his troops in Herefordshire and Shropshire for the task, strong sallies by Jones or Mytton scattered them, and he was denied admittance to Ludlow. 
On 9 December Vaughan was reported to be quartered between Bridgnorth and Bewdley with 1000 men; after burning the village of Wrockwardine, Vaughan again relieved High Ercall, and in January 1646 joined Lord Astley at Bridgnorth in the frustrated hope of amalgamating with Lord St Paul's Welsh troops in a further assault on Chester. Instead he retreated with Astley to Worcester, and finally abandoned the attempt on 29 January. February saw Vaughan engaged in further raids in the marches, especially at Clun, Presteigne, and Leintwardine, and at the end of the month he plundered Richard Jones of Tre-wern, Radnorshire, of over $400 and the very rings from his wife's fingers. Early in March he rejoined Astley, and he was with him when the royalist forces were comprehensively defeated by Sir William Brereton at Stow on the Wold, Gloucestershire, on 21 March. 
Vaughan, though wounded, escaped capture and made his way to The Hague, where in November 1648 Rupert gave him command of a ship, in which he seems to have crossed over to Ireland. He became major-general of horse under Ormond. When, at Rathmines on 2 August 1649, Michael Jones surprised the royalists, Vaughan led the counter-charge, only to be killed fighting bravely at the head of his men. On 8 October 1651, leave to compound for his estates was granted to Charles Vaughan, his administrator. Vaughan's main overall achievement was, in every adversity, to keep his regiment of horse up to strength; in this regard no royalist commander achieved more, and the spectres of his cavalrymen are rumoured still to canter across the Shropshire countryside. 


@@@@@


doc= 28153


Vaughan, William (bap. 1640, d. 1719), merchant and colonial official, was baptized on 3 January 1640, probably in Wales, the first of three children of George Vaughan ('bap'. 1615, died 1699) and Mary Boxall (died 1645). His paternal grandfather was Sir Roger Vaughan, a member of the minor Glamorgan gentry. He was living at an early age in London, the protege of Sir Josiah Child, a prominent and wealthy London merchant, who made a fortune supplying the navy and later virtually ruled the East India Company. Vaughan was sent to New England as a representative of the merchant house to investigate the prospects of the lumber trade which had been boosted by the demand generated by the Anglo-Dutch wars. He had arrived in Portsmouth, New Hampshire, by 1666. He married Margaret (died 1690), the daughter of Richard Cutt, in 1668 and became a partner in the Cutt fishery trade, which he inherited after Cutt's death in 1676. 
By the 1680s Vaughan was a leading merchant and politician in Portsmouth and remained so until his death. In the charter granted by Charles II constituting New Hampshire as a separate province from Massachusetts, he was named as one of the councillors of the new royal colony. The royal governor was attempting to make the Piscataqua region a model for the effective implementation of trade regulations. Vaughan and other traders used their political and commercial influence to undermine the royal governor and acted as if the region was a free port. When an official tried to search a vessel owned by him, the infuriated Vaughan beat him so badly with a cane that it took him several months to recover. In 1683 he was deprived of his seat on the council. Vaughan spent nine months in prison in 1684 for gathering dispositions, signed by nearly half of the adult male population, complaining that the proprietary government threatened total ruin to New Hampshire. In July 1684 the privy council ordered a full investigation and the governor was removed from office; the evidence provided by Vaughan from prison to the agent in London had helped the case, but the continuing support of Sir Josiah Child was perhaps more crucial. Vaughan was part of a group that tended to think and act in terms of New England looking to Boston as their capital, supporting the position of Congregationalism, liberty, hard money, and property against those who saw New Hampshire as an independent beachhead of royal authority in New England. As well as a commission in the militia, Vaughan held a succession of offices in the province: he was a justice of the common pleas from 1680 to 1686, and, reappointed to the council in 1692, he continued to be a member until 1698. For a brief period in the 1690s Vaughan and a few others assumed total executive control in New Hampshire. From 1706 to 1715 he was the president of the council and at the same time chief justice of the superior court. He died at Portsmouth on 12 November 1719. The Vaughans continued to be one of the leading families of New Hampshire as exemplified by his son George, who became lieutenant-governor in 1715. 


@@@@@


doc= 28154


Vaughan, William (b. c.1716, d. in or after 1780), army officer in the Jacobite and Spanish service, was the third son of John Vaughan (1675-1752) of Courtfield, near Ross, Herefordshire, and his second wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Philip Jones of Llan-arth Fawr, Monmouthshire. Both families were recusant. After the landing of Prince Charles Edward, the Young Pretender, in Scotland in 1745, William Vaughan left Monmouthshire for the north, in the company of David Morgan (executed for high treason, 30 July 1746), who 'seldom kept company with any Gentleman of his Neighbourhood' ('Complete History of the Trials of the Rebels', quoted in Blaikie, 'Origins', 172), and Francis Townley, of Towneley Hall. They joined the prince's army at Preston on 27 November, with 'some few common people, but no numbers as was expected' (Blaikie, 'Itinerary', 28). Vaughan was at first attached to the prince's life-guards, but subsequently served as lieutenant-colonel in the Manchester regiment. He was present at Culloden, but succeeded in effecting his escape into France. His name was included on a list of rebels guilty of treason (22 May 1747), and he was later excepted from the general act of pardon. 
Early in 1747 Vaughan accompanied Prince Charles on his journey from Paris to Madrid, and on Charles's recommendation was admitted into the Spanish service, with the rank of lieutenant-colonel, in the regiment called Hibernia. In this he served over twenty-nine years, attaining in December 1773 the rank of major-general. On 26 October 1777 he was appointed 'mariscal de campo', or 'major-general', of the royal armies, but towards the end of 1778 he joined the Spanish expedition to Buenos Aires. He is last mentioned in the Spanish records under the date of 29 March 1780 as being nominated to serve with the troops under the general command of Don Vittoria de Navia. He probably died soon after. 
Vaughan's elder brother, Richard ('b'. 1708), the second son, also took part in the Jacobite rising, joined the duke of Perth's division, and was also present at Culloden. He was indicted, by Justice Henry Fielding of Bow Street, for forging English banknotes. He also subsequently entered the Spanish service, and died in that country, having married a Spanish lady, Dona Francesca, with whom he had a daughter, Elizabeth (who married the count of Kilmallock, colonel in the Spanish service), and a son, William (1740-1796), who succeeded to the Courtfield estate, and continued the line, Cardinal Vaughan and Roger William Vaughan, Roman Catholic archbishop of Sydney, being his great-grandsons. 


@@@@@


doc= 28155


Vaughan, William (1752-1850), promoter of the London docks, was born in London on 22 September 1752, the second son of Samuel Vaughan (1720-1802), a London merchant, and his wife, Sarah (1727-1809), daughter of Benjamin Hallowell of Boston, Massachusetts. He received a good education, first at Newcome's school at Hackney, Middlesex, then at the academy at Warrington in Lancashire, where he and his elder brother Benjamin Vaughan resided with the eminent Dr Joseph Priestley. His studies were much directed to geography, history, travels, and voyages of discovery. After leaving school he entered his father's business, and soon became prominent in mercantile and commercial affairs. In 1783 he was elected a director of the Royal Exchange Assurance Corporation, and continued in it, as director, sub-governor, and governor, until 1829. 
In 1791 Vaughan endeavoured to form a society for the promotion of English canals, and, with this end in view, made a collection, in three folio volumes, of plans and descriptions relating to the subject. Failing in his objective, he turned his attention to docks, on which he became one of the first authorities. From 1793 to 1797 he published a series of pamphlets and tracts advocating the construction of docks for the port of London, and on 22 April 1796 he gave evidence before a parliamentary committee in favour of the bill for establishing wet docks. In 1839 he published many of these papers, prefaced by a memoir of his own life. The great development of London as a port must be regarded as partly due to his unceasing exertions. 
During the naval mutiny at the Nore in 1797 Vaughan formed one of the committee of London merchants convened to meet at the Royal Exchange to take prompt measures to restore tranquillity. He proved extremely active, and independently drew up a short address to the seamen which was put in circulation by the naval authorities. 
Vaughan was for many years a fellow of the Royal Society, the Linnean Society, and the Royal Astronomical Society, and a member of numerous societies dedicated to the physical and moral welfare of various groups in England and North America. He was a member of the New England corporation, and filled the office of governor until 1829. As a member of the Society for Bettering the Condition and Improving the Comforts of the Poor, he was involved in 1815 in establishing the first savings bank in London, at Leicester Place, Westminster. He was a governor of Christ's Hospital and an honorary member of the Society of Civil Engineers. Beset by failing sight in old age, and apparently unmarried, Vaughan died in London on 5 May 1850, at his residence, 70 Fenchurch Street. 


@@@@@


doc= 28156


Vaus, John (c.1484-c.1539), grammarian, came of a well-established family in the city and diocese of Aberdeen, where a number of its members served as aldermen, councillors, and priests throughout the fifteenth century. It is not known, however, whether John Vaus was born in Aberdeen; records in the Vatican archives merely state that he was the son of a priest and an unmarried woman, that Pope Alexander VI had dispensed him from his illegitimacy on 23 June 1503 in order to allow him to proceed to the priesthood and be beneficed, and that on 14 June 1504 Julius II had confirmed him as vicar of Alness in the diocese of Ross while he was still a student at the University of Aberdeen. From these facts and the later statements of Hector Boece, it is possible to argue that he was born about 1484, attended the cathedral grammar school in Old Aberdeen under his kinsman Alexander Vaus, and was a student in the arts faculty at the university under Hector Boece between 1500 and 1504 before the foundation of King's College in 1505. It would also appear that when Boece was appointed principal of that college in 1505, he sent Vaus for further studies in Paris, where the latter graduated MA in 1505. 
The date at which Vaus returned to take up his appointment as the grammarian employed to teach Latin at Aberdeen University (one of the earliest recorded) is not known, but during his first stay in Paris he is known to have made the acquaintance of such publishers as Josse Bade of the Ascensius Press and to have purchased a number of works on Latin grammar. He is known to have visited Paris again in 1523 to oversee the publication of his commentary on the first part of the 'Doctrinale' of Alexander de Villa Dei, along with the printing of his translation into Scots of the 'Ars minor' of Aelius Donatus, and with that of his own 'Rudimenta puerorum in artem grammaticam', a textbook which was still being reprinted, with changes and additions, at the Ascensius Press in 1553. Indeed, a study of the twenty-eight incunables in Aberdeen University Library which Vaus once possessed shows him to have been familiar with a wide range of textbooks on Latin grammar and on the principles governing the language and its literature; taken together with the warm tributes paid to his teaching ability by Hector Boece and his own students, they reveal him to have been both an industrious and elegant master of his subject, and to have given a flying start to the university's early development in humanist studies. In 1520, during his period of office as grammarian, Vaus is also noted as being chaplain of the Holy Name of Jesus altar at St Nicholas parish church in Aberdeen, and he is likewise recorded as having gifted an image of the crucified Christ to hang above the organ loft on the rood screen in King's College chapel. The date of his death is unknown, but his successor, Theophilus Stewart, is named as the university grammarian in a document dated 12 April 1539, while another university record confirms Vaus as being deceased in 1542. 


@@@@@


doc= 28157


Vautor, Thomas (fl. 1592-1619), composer, first appears as a household musician in the family of Mary Beaumont of Glenfield, Leicestershire. On her first marriage in 1592 he passed into the service of her husband, Sir George Villiers, at Brooksby. Following Sir George's death in 1606, his widow moved with her sons to Goadby, also in Leicestershire, where on 19 June she married Sir William Rayner, who himself died four months later. She subsequently married Sir Thomas Compton. In 1616 Vautor was admitted BMus at Oxford. By this time Lady Compton's son, George Villiers, was rising in the king's favour; upon his creation as marquess of Buckingham in 1618 Vautor dedicated to him his only collection of madrigals, entitled 'The first set: being songs of divers ayres and natures, of five and six parts: apt for viols and voices' (1619). 
This volume contains Vautor's only known music, but it suffices to reveal him as one of the most interesting minor composers of this rich period in English music. Its twenty-two items are markedly varied and, as Vautor's preface makes clear, were composed over an extended period, some pieces dating from its dedicatee's 'tender yeares'. These probably include the three lively 'ballets' that open the collection, and which are in a typical 1590s style. Vautor was not a contributor to 'The Triumphs of Oriana' (1601), the collection of madrigals published in honour of the ageing Queen Elizabeth, but 'Shepherds and nymphs', included in his own collection and ending 'Farewell, fair Oriana', is a posthumous tribute to that sovereign. Two pieces are explicit elegies, the first a pair of madrigals, 'Melpomene, bewail' with 'Whilst fatal sisters', for Prince Henry (died 1612), the second 'Weep, weep, mine eyes', for Sir Thomas Beaumont of Stoughton, Leicestershire (died 1614); curiously, both are viol-accompanied duets in an antiquated 'grave' style more characteristic of early Elizabethan music, though the former concludes with a six-voice, madrigalian-style chorus that is thoroughly up-to-date. In the sharpest contrast to these sober pieces is 'Mother, I will have a husband', a torrent of babble from a girl intent on matrimony at all costs. 
The remaining pieces further reveal Vautor's range and quality -- some of them may be counted among the finest of English madrigals. To name but two: 'Sweet Suffolk owl', whose initial chattering declamation and lively word painting are deftly balanced by its conclusion's haunting melancholy, and the pair of madrigals, 'Lock up, fair lids' with 'And yet, O dream' (a setting of a sonnet by Sir Philip Sidney), impressive for its often spacious paragraphs laced with quietly expressive dissonance, and its masterly use of chromaticism and word painting. Nothing is known of Vautor after the publication of his madrigal volume. 


@@@@@


doc= 28158


Vautrollier, Thomas (d. 1587), bookseller and printer, was born in Troyes, France. He was among the large number of French immigrants who came to England at the beginning of the reign of Elizabeth. After settling in London, he soon found employment in the book trade, first as a bookbinder and then as a bookseller in partnership with another French immigrant, Jean Desserans. He was granted letters of denization on 9 March 1562, and was admitted as a 'brother' (a form of associate membership) of the Stationers' Company on 2 October 1564 (Arber, 'Regs. Stationers', 1.279). As only a brother rather than a full freeman, Vautrollier was technically not allowed to operate a printing press without direct permission from the crown. Nevertheless, he was printing from 1570 when he dissolved the partnership with Desserans and began to print on his own account, beginning a thoroughly successful career that won him a reputation as one of London's most accomplished printers. Between 1570 and 1587 he published some 150 books, including a number of extremely rich and lavish volumes: the tax assessments on his property in the Blackfriars reveal that this work also brought him considerable prosperity. 
The first book entered by Vautrollier in the Stationers' Company registers was a writing book of the French schoolmaster Jean de Beauchesne which was published in 1570 (the first such writing book to be published in England). This first project set the tone for his future career in several important respects. From this point Vautrollier would establish an important niche market, bringing to the English public translations of books from the French; these ranged from Beauchesne, through the poetry of Guillaume du Bartas, to political tracts such as the life of the martyred Huguenot leader Gaspard de Coligny. Vautrollier also brought to the Beauchesne project the typographical sophistication and style that would characterize all of his work and exploit his connections with the sophisticated European book world. In London, Vautrollier functioned from an early stage as an agent for the Antwerp printer Christopher Plantin, though his own printing types were obtained from two French giants of the art, Robert Granjon and Claude Garamond. Vautrollier also patronized the influential Huguenot designer Pierre Haultin, whose nephew Jerome was working in England at this time. 
Vautrollier was deeply committed to the protestant church. In London, like so many of his co-religionists, he joined the French stranger church (to which he would leave $3 at his death), and a number of his most important projects reveal his close ties to the protestant hierarchy. In 1574 he published an English translation of Calvin's 'Institutes', the first of a number of Calvin editions that included four editions of this work in Latin. At a time when demand for Latin books was still overwhelmingly met by imports Vautrollier was one of the few printers with the confidence and resources to take on such a substantial project, in this case in partnership with the English author and theologian Edmund Bunny. Vautrollier also published an edition of Bunny's hugely popular abridgement of the 'Institutes'. More singular still was Vautrollier's initiative in publishing a series of the work of Martin Luther, in most cases the first editions of Luther's biblical commentaries for many years. To Vautrollier falls much of the credit for keeping Luther in the public eye during an era when Calvinist theology ruled the roost. Vautrollier's work and protestant sympathies won approval in high places and valuable official patronage. 
In April 1573 Vautrollier was granted a ten-year patent for two Latin texts, and the following year, on 19 June 1574, he received a further ten-year privilege to print a number of Latin works, including Beza's Latin 'New Testament' and works by Cicero, Ovid, and Pierre Ramus; he was allowed to employ 'six woorkemen Ffrenchmen or Du[t]chemen' to help him (Arber, 'Regs. Stationers', 2.746). As this suggests, Vautrollier continued to specialize in educational books, through which he established (particularly with the privilege for the modish Ramus) close connections with Cambridge University. He also continued to print primers and schoolbooks for elementary education, particularly the work of the French schoolmaster Claude Holyband. 
The growth of Vautrollier's business caused predictable tensions with competitors in the London publishing trade. In 1578 he was fined 10's'. for printing the 'Special and Chosen Sermons of Dr Martin Luther' without licence, the first of a number of bruising encounters with the regulatory authorities. One such clash led to his temporarily withdrawing from London and settling in Scotland during the 1580s after he had incurred the displeasure of the privy council for printing the work of the visionary Italian philosopher Giordano Bruno. The departure north was not, however, unprepared. Vautrollier's connections with Scotland were of sufficiently long standing to make him fully aware of the commercial opportunities north of the border. In 1577 he had printed two books for the Scottish bookseller Henry Charteris and by 1580 he was systematically engaged in the book trade in Edinburgh. In that year the town council of Edinburgh demanded from him payment for books he had imported from London. In 1582 a complaint was made against him for retailing and binding books while not free of the burgh. But in Scotland, too, Vautrollier had friends in high places. He supplied schoolbooks to James VI through his tutor Peter Young, and in 1580 the general assembly of the Church of Scotland had recommended that he be given licence and privilege to print in Scotland, arguing the 'great necessity of a printer within this country'. Vautrollier set out for Scotland in the spring of 1583, only for the ships in which he had entrusted his precious cargo of books and printing materials to be waylaid and plundered by pirates. Vautrollier persevered and with official encouragement eight books were published under his name in Edinburgh in 1584. But even with royal patronage, there seems to have been insufficient business to justify his remaining there, and the following year he returned to London. 
In a 1582 report on printing privileges, Christopher Barker, the queen's printer, felt Vautrollier was not fully exploiting his patents, and that 'he doth yet, neither great good, nor great harme withall' (Arber, 'Regs. Stationers', 1.144). This did not prevent a 1582-3 privy council commission into the printing trade recommending that Vautrollier's patent be opened up in order to benefit poorer printers. In 1583 and 1586 his London printing house was recorded as operating two printing presses. His wife, Jacqueline (died after 1588), seems to have been an active member of the business; on 17 July 1581 she was granted permission by the Stationers' Company to finish printing an edition of Cicero 'in her husbandes absence' (Greg and Boswell, 11). 
In 1583 Vautrollier was noted as being infirm, but he did not die until some point between 10 July 1587 when he drew up his will and 22 July 1587 when the will was proved. He bequeathed to his son Manassess the press he had used in Edinburgh; three other children, Thomas (who later became a bookseller in London), Simon, and James, were also mentioned in the will. Jacqueline continued the business on her own for a short time, although on 4 March 1588 the Stationers' Company ordered that she 'shall not at anye tyme or tymes hereafter prynte anye manner of Booke or Bookes whatsoeu[r], as well by Reason that her husband at the tyme of his decease was noe prynter'; shortly afterwards she married Richard Field, a former apprentice of her husband, in whose name the printing business was carried on (Greg and Boswell, 26). 


@@@@@


doc= 28159


Vaux, Anne (bap. 1562, d. in or after 1637), recusant, was the third daughter of William Vaux, third Baron Vaux of Harrowden (1535-1595), and his first wife, Elizabeth, daughter of John Beaumont, master of the rolls from 1550 to 1552. Anne was baptized at Irthlingborough, Northamptonshire, on 9 July 1562; her mother was buried in the same parish on 12 August that year. 
The family was strongly attached to Catholicism. For several years Anne Vaux worked hard and took considerable risks on behalf of the Jesuit provincial, Father Henry Garnett, to whom she was clearly devoted. Anne and her widowed sister, Eleanor Brooksby, used their wealth to rent houses where missionary priests might meet in safety. One such property was White Webbs in Enfield Chase. In 1604 Anne Vaux, under the assumed name Mrs Perkins, and Garnett were dwelling in a house at Wandsworth, and both there and at White Webbs they were visited by, among others, her 'cousin german removed' Francis Tresham, the final man to be admitted to the Gunpowder Plot in 1605 (TNA: PRO, SP 14/216/212). Tresham's aunt, Mary, was Anne's stepmother. During the summer of 1605 Anne accompanied Garnett and other prominent English recusants on the much publicized 'pilgrimage' to St Winifred's Well (Holywell), Flintshire. Although kept in ignorance of the conspirators' plans Anne certainly had her suspicions: White Webbs was visited by several Gunpowder Plot conspirators that summer and autumn, and on the way to Holywell she had noted the 'fine horses' in the stables of Catholic houses, later recalling how she had 'feared these wild heads had something in hand, and prayed him [Garnett] for God's sake to talke with Mr Catesbye and to hinder any thinge that possibly he might' (TNA: PRO, SP 14/216/200). 
A theory that Anne Vaux wrote the warning letter to Lord Monteagle which ultimately frustrated the Gunpowder Plot rests solely on perceived similarities between her handwriting and the 'disguised hand' used by the author; it lacks credibility (Nicholls, 214). She was at Coughton Court in late October and early November. When the plot was discovered she was arrested, but swiftly discharged on Lewis Pickering's bond. She concealed the fugitive Garnett in his vain efforts to avoid capture at Hindlip, Worcester, the home of Thomas Abington (or Habington). Garnett was arrested there on 25 January and conveyed to the Tower of London. 
The ever-loyal Anne Vaux followed Garnett to the capital and managed to establish a channel of communications through his gaoler, writing to Garnett in an invisible ink at the foot of innocuous messages about spectacles and unpaid bills. Unfortunately, the gaoler passed every letter to the authorities. Anne was arrested in March and joined Garnett in the Tower. Records survive for her examinations on 11 and 24 March, in which she insisted on her innocence from any complicity in treason while admitting to the by now well-documented visits of conspirators to her various residences. She was released in August 1606, and was in part responsible for publicizing 'Garnett's straw', an ear of corn, allegedly from the straw spread around the scaffold at Garnett's execution, which upon magnification appeared to carry a likeness of the dead man. 
For many years the two Vaux sisters lived quietly at Shoby on the Brooksbys' Leicestershire estates, harbouring the Jesuit Father William Wright. In 1625 they were convicted of recusancy at Leicester Castle, but neither paid the fine demanded. After Eleanor Brooksby's death that same year, Anne, still with Father Wright in tow, moved to Stanley Grange in Derbyshire. There she kept what amounted to a school for the sons of Catholic gentlefolk: an attempt was made by the ecclesiastical authorities to suppress the establishment in 1635, but this may not have been entirely successful. The last extant reference to Anne Vaux comes in a parish register entry for the death of one of her servants in February 1637. Stanley Grange, however, long remained a centre for Jesuit activities in England. 


@@@@@


doc= 28160


Edward Vaux, fourth Baron Vaux of Harrowden (1588-1661), was born on 13 September 1588, the son of George Vaux (1564-1594) and his wife, Elizabeth ('fl'. 1585-1625), daughter of John Roper, first Baron Teynham, and his wife, Elizabeth. Edward was the grandson of William Vaux, the third baron, and the great-grandson of Thomas Vaux, the second baron, inheriting a strong devotion to Roman Catholicism. 


@@@@@


doc= 28161


Vaux, Laurence (1519-1585), Roman Catholic priest, was born in Bolton-le-Moors, Lancashire. He appears from the similarity in their coats of arms to have been distantly related to the Vaux family of Harrowden. He seems to have moved from Manchester grammar school to Queen's College, Oxford, and then to Corpus Christi College, where he attracted the attention of James Brooks, who was a fellow of the college and was bishop of Gloucester in Mary's reign, when Vaux served him as a chaplain. Cuthbert Scott, the bishop of Chester, ordained him priest in the collegiate church at Manchester on 24 September 1542. With the Edwardian dissolution of the college Vaux received a pension of $8 13's'. 4died In 1548 he was listed as a curate of Manchester church with a yearly salary of $12 19's'. 6died In 1556 he was admitted BTh at Oxford. In 1558 he became warden of the refounded collegiate church at Manchester. Towards the end of Mary's reign the college was used as a prison for protestants, but Vaux was never accused of cruelty. 
After Elizabeth's first parliament passed the 'Acts of Uniformity and Supremacy', Vaux fled Manchester and took with him some of the college plate and vestments. Dodd reports that he went to Ireland where he fell in among brigands who robbed him of all his substance. Vaux himself did not mention the loss of the college plate, however, and he left some of it in his will. Vaux gave no indication why he had gone to Ireland, but his stay there was short, because he was hiding in Lancashire in 1561. His religious work came to the attention of the council who ordered him to remain in Worcestershire. Shortly after this Vaux left England and settled in Louvain, where he found his former bishop, Cuthbert Scott, who died on 3 October 1564. Vaux seems to have kept a school there. 
During Vaux's stay in Louvain, Pope Pius V appointed Thomas Harding and Nicholas Sander apostolic delegates for England with faculties to be communicated to priests in England. The pope also forbade English Catholics to attend services in the Church of England. In 1566 Vaux visited Rome and was present at a papal consistory where the pope explained the faculties he had granted to Harding and Sander; Vaux was to communicate that explanation to them. After Vaux told Sander and Harding of the pope's directives they suggested that Vaux and William Allen return to England to announce the papal ban on attending the Church of England. They could not go themselves because they were involved in a pamphlet war with protestant divines which would make them marked men in England. Sander wrote a pastoral letter announcing the papal ban which Vaux and Allen were to circulate among their friends. Sander's letter does not survive, but Vaux also wrote a letter which preserved Sander's principal points. Vaux's work in Lancashire spreading the news of the papal prohibition again attracted the attention of the government, and a warrant was issued for his arrest. 
Vaux was back in Louvain in 1567, having left England at the same time as Allen. While teaching at his school Vaux wrote a catechism for his students which he had printed as 'A Catechisme, or Christian Doctrine, Necessary for Children and Ignorant People' (Louvain, 1567). It was his only publication, although another edition appeared at Antwerp in 1574, and two further editions in 1583. While similar in some ways to Bonner's 1555 'A Profitable and Necessary Doctrine', the catechism differed in others. Vaux, like Bonner, avoided some controversial topics such as saints, purgatory, transubstantiation, and indulgences. Where Bonner's catechism treated holy water simply as a reminder of baptism, Vaux endowed it with apotropaic powers. The most significant difference between Bonner and Vaux is that Vaux defined salvation as resulting from faith and works as distinct from the Marian position, which cited faith alone joined with charity. Vaux's catechism also reproduced the medieval canon law for marriage. On 10 August 1572, the feast of St Laurence, he became a novice in the canons regular of St Augustine. Upon his entrance he received a letter from Thomas Goldwell, Marian bishop of St Asaph and a religious exile in Rome. Before taking his religious vows on 3 May 1573 he executed legal documents to preserve the Manchester plate and property 'until such time as the college should be restored to the Catholic faith' ('DNB'). Vaux was later elected sub-prior and may have returned to England to seek vocations for the foundation of an English community. 
In 1580 William Allen persuaded the superior-general of the Society of Jesus to begin an English mission. Gregory XIII realized that the only Catholic bishop left in England was Bishop Watson, who had been in confinement for years. He decided to send Bishop Goldwell back to England and with him his friend Laurence Vaux; Goldwell's presence in England would restore regular ecclesiastical government, and may have been based on the hope of limited toleration that was expected to result from the negotiations for the French match. By the time that the party of missionaries left Rome the negotiations had failed. Because of the publicity attending the departure of Campion and Persons for England, Goldwell did not leave the continent; Vaux, however, did. Upon his arrival he and another priest were turned over to the English by a French spy who had sailed the channel with them. After his initial examination Vaux was imprisoned at the Gatehouse at Westminster where the conditions were not bad. His letters describe the neat room he had and the quality of the food, all of which cost him $16 per year. In April 1584 Vaux was moved to the less comfortable Clink, apparently because copies of his catechism began circulating in the Manchester area. In 1585 he appeared before John Aylmer, bishop of London, and other royal commissioners. Aylmer asked Vaux if he were any relation to the Vaux who had written the popish catechism; Vaux admitted that the catechism was his. The bishop thought that Vaux should be executed, but Lord Burghley seems to have intervened for him. He died in the Clink some time in 1585. The cause of death is unknown. The Jesuit John Gibbons lists him as a martyr in his 'Concertatio', but that term is not normally used to describe those who died for their faith while in prison. The chronicle of the convent of St Martin in Louvain claimed that he was 'famished to death' (Gibson, 187). 


@@@@@


doc= 28162


Vaux, Nicholas, first Baron Vaux (c.1460-1523), courtier and soldier, was of an old Northamptonshire family. The Vaux estate of Harrowden had been acquired through the marriage of Margaret Vaux, Nicholas's great-aunt, to William Harrowden early in the fifteenth century. Nicholas's father, 
Nicholas Vaux's childhood is obscure; he may have lived in the household of Margaret, countess of Richmond, given the comment in a pedigree that he 'floruit summa gratia apud Margaretam comitissam Richmundiae' ('DNB'). Certainly Vaux rapidly found favour under Henry VII. In Henry's first parliament Vaux petitioned for, and was granted, reversal of his father's attainder and the return of his lands; and on 2 November 1485, as an esquire of the body, he gained the stewardships of Olney and Newport Pagnell in Buckinghamshire. Throughout his life he performed his share of local service in his home county of Northamptonshire, through regular inclusion in commissions of the peace and for matters ranging from gaol delivery to sewers, and he was sheriff of Northamptonshire for the years commencing 5 November 1495, 5 November 1501, and 10 November 1516. Further fruits of royal favour included a grant on 1 June 1502 of the constableship of Rockingham Castle and stewardship of the lordships of Rockingham, Brigstock, and King's Cliffe with various associated offices. 
Some time early in Henry's VII's reign Vaux married Elizabeth, daughter of Lord Fitzhugh and widow of Sir William Parr. They had three daughters: Katharine, who married Sir George Throckmorton; Ann, who married Thomas, Lord Strange; and Alice, who married Sir Richard Sapcote. After Elizabeth's death (before July 1507), Vaux made an advantageous second marriage before February 1508 with Anne ('b'. 'c'.1489, died in or before 1523), daughter of Sir Thomas Green, who inherited lands in York, Kent, Nottinghamshire, Northamptonshire, Buckinghamshire, Leicestershire, and Lincolnshire on her father's death in December 1506. Vaux paid heavily for the marriage. His children with Anne were: Margaret, who married Sir Francis Poulteney; Bridget, who married Maurice Welsh; Maud, who married Sir John Fermor; and two sons, Thomas Vaux, who married Vaux's ward Elizabeth Cheyne, and William. 
Anstruther described Vaux as a jouster, courtier, and soldier, and his courtly and military talents were particularly exercised in French affairs. He was knighted on 16 June 1487 at Stoke, and made banneret in June 1497 after Blackheath, but though nominated several times for the Order of the Garter he was never chosen. On 23 December 1488 Vaux was among those commissioned in Northamptonshire to muster archers for the king's expedition to Brittany. He was with the knights who met the French delegates in 1492 during the settlement of the treaty of Etaples. In 1500 he accompanied Henry VII to Calais for his meeting with the archduke. An indenture dated 1 June 1502 appointed Vaux lieutenant of Guines, and Henry VIII renewed Vaux's indenture at Guines as 'keeper, governor, surveyor and lieutenant' for twenty years from 6 October 1509. Vaux's tenure in France was graced by triumphs and trials. He was called to serve in the vanguard of the king's army with 300 men under Lord Lisle in the campaign that captured Therouanne and Tournai in April 1513; he fought at the battle of the spurs, but was forced to flee for his life from the ambush of a supply train travelling from Calais to the army at Therouanne about 27-9 June. When policy turned to alliance, Vaux and his wife were summoned on 4 September 1514 to join the escort of Henry VIII's sister Mary to Abbeville for her marriage to Louis XII, and Vaux attended the marriage ceremony on 9 October. 
From 1518 to 1520 Vaux was at the centre of Anglo-French affairs. On 9 November 1518 he was commissioned along with the earl of Worcester, the bishop of Ely, and Thomas Docwra to receive Francois I's oath accepting the treaty of London, which established peace and a marriage agreement between Henry VIII's daughter Mary and the dauphin Francois, and surrendered Tournai to the French on payment of 50,000 francs. Vaux was received by Francois with the other ambassadors on 12 December and was present at Notre Dame in Paris two days later when Francois gave his oath. On 30 January 1519 he was in Tournai with Worcester, Docwra, and Sir Edward Belknap, and on 10 February the town was surrendered. Vaux's next task was to prepare for the Field of Cloth of Gold; he served on the commission to appoint the time and place of the meeting. In January 1520 Francois I asked for Vaux to assist the earl of Worcester in choosing a place for the meeting, in lieu of the sieur de Chastillon. On 17 March Vaux, Belknap, and Sir William Sandys 'landyed at Caleys' charged with 'the makynge of a palace before the castle gate of Gwines' and making other necessary arrangements for lodgings, feasting, jousting, and fortifications (J. G. Nichols, ed., 'A Chronicle of Calais in the Reigns of Henry VII and Henry VIII to the Year 1540', CS, 35, 1845, 18). Vaux appears to have had a major role in supervising the building and had no easy time of it, judging by his letters to Wolsey of March, April, and May 1520, complaining of dilatory provisioners and lack of money. He was summoned as a knight of Northamptonshire to be present with Henry at the meeting. On 7 June 1520, the day the festivities commenced, he and the other English ambassadors had audience with Francois I. 
Vaux's life was not without controversy. Treason was hinted against him in a letter of September 1504 or 1505 in which Sir Hugh Conway, then treasurer of Calais, claimed that Vaux and Antony Browne, lieutenant of Calais, had indicated that if the Tudor dynasty were challenged they 'should make ther peaxce hoo ever the worlde tourne' (Gairdner, 1.231-40). An anonymous letter to Wolsey of 1520 touching on the duke of Buckingham's treason also included articles of indenture between Vaux and Henry VII for Guines, and advised Wolsey to review them and determine if Vaux had fulfilled the terms. Vaux was present at Buckingham's indictment for treason, on 8 May 1521 in the London Guildhall, and with Sir William Sandys led the duke through London to the Tower after his conviction. He was mentioned as briefly harbouring a chaplain of Buckingham's after his death, but does not seem to have suffered from this incident. 
Vaux's jousting appearances seemed more for service or show than sport. He and his brother-in-law Sir Richard Guildford were prominent at the jousts held for the marriage of Prince Arthur and Katherine of Aragon; according to one chronicler they 'were ever for the most party in the feld every day of the justes... and by them the Kynges Grace did sende his myende and messages into the feld' (Kipling, 65/543-9). Vaux played a similar role at the Field of Cloth of Gold, keeping order on the field rather than jousting, not surprisingly considering his age. On and off the field, his rich apparel prompted comment. At the wedding jousts he and Guildford wore 'great and massy cheynes of golde abought ther nekkes' (ibid., 65/547). The day of the marriage, Vaux wore 'a goune of purpyll velvet the which was pygth or sett wyth pesis of gold soo thyk & massy, that yt was Reportid to be worth In gold beside the sylk & furre M li'. Two days later he wore a 'coler of Essis' which weighed 'viiiC li. of noblys' (Thomas and Thornley, 311-12). Vaux made another notable appearance at the jousts to celebrate the birth of a prince to Henry VIII and Queen Katherine in February 1511. On the second day of the tourney, he wore 'a gown of Goldsmyth werk to the knees and theryn a Furre of Rygth broun & Fyne Sablys of grete valu' (ibid., 371). 
The family was well represented at other court functions: a Lady Vaux, probably Katharine, was at Prince Arthur's baptism in September 1486. In 1487 Vaux was one of twelve knights of the body who alternated in bearing a canopy over Queen Elizabeth's litter as she was borne through London to Westminster before her coronation, while Katharine Vaux was with the queen when she sat in state the day after her coronation. Vaux was at the feast to celebrate Prince Henry's creation as duke of York at All Hallows in 1494, and was one of the knights with Prince Henry when he met Katherine of Aragon at St George's Field to escort her into the city of London in November 1501. He was in procession and presumably at the feast to celebrate the receipt of Wolsey's red hat in November 1515 and was among those who bore the canopy over the Princess Mary at her baptism, on 20 February 1516. 
Vaux may have resided mainly at Harrowden after 1486; on 27 July 1511, Henry VIII visited 'Sir Nicholas Vaux's place', presumably Harrowden. Yet recognizances of February and July 1517, and October 1518, also describe him as of Norton, Northamptonshire (probably Green's Norton, part of his wife's inheritance), and Norton as well as Harrowden figures in his will. From 1502 his duties took him between Northamptonshire and France, and Anstruther suggests he spent winters in England and the rest of the year at Guines. Vaux's interest in improving his lands led him into enclosure, and a 1517 survey discovered offences against the acts forbidding enclosures on his lands in Buckinghamshire, Northamptonshire, and Bedfordshire, for which he was later pardoned. He also had to seek pardon in 1518 for failing to appear to submit accounts for his term as sheriff. 
It was said that Vaux 'lieth very sore' in Guines on 22 September 1522, but death held off until after his creation, before 28 April 1523, as first Baron Vaux of Harrowden. A letter of 14 May said Vaux was very ill, and he probably died that same day at the hospital of the knights of St John of Jerusalem in Clerkenwell. His will requested burial at Harrowden, Blackfriars in London, or Guines, depending on his residence at death, and it is believed he was buried at Blackfriars. 


@@@@@


doc= 28163


Vaux, Thomas, second Baron Vaux (1509-1556), poet, was born on 25 April 1509, one of the two sons of Nicholas Vaux, first Baron Vaux of Harrowden (c.1460-1523), courtier and soldier, and his second wife, Anne ('b'. 'c'.1489, died in or before 1523), daughter of Sir Thomas Green of Boughton and Green's Norton, Northamptonshire, and his wife, Jane. Just after his fourteenth birthday in 1523, Vaux married Elizabeth (1504x9-1556), daughter of Sir Thomas Cheyne of Fen Ditton, Cambridgeshire, and of Thenford and Irthlingborough, Northamptonshire, and his second wife, Anne, daughter of Sir William Parr. They had two sons and two daughters. One of their sons was William Vaux, third Baron Vaux of Harrowden (1535-1595). Vaux is said to have been educated at Cambridge University, but there is no surviving evidence for this. 
In July 1527 Vaux was a member of Cardinal Wolsey's retinue on his embassy to France, where he negotiated with Francois I at Amiens. He first sat in parliament in 1529, and attended King Henry VIII and Anne Boleyn on their visit to Francois I at Calais in September 1532, taking twelve retainers with him. On 18 April of that year a man of his name wrote to the duke of Norfolk from Ampthill, revealing his unhappiness with his role in relation to the king's treatment of Katherine of Aragon (BL, Cotton MS Otho C.x, fol. 177), but this was probably not Lord Vaux. On 30 May 1533 Vaux was created a knight of the Bath for the coronation of Anne Boleyn on the next day. In March 1535 he signed a document acknowledging the payment to him of $280 by Roger Chomley for the manor of Newington Luces, Kent; the other witnesses were Sir Thomas Wyatt and Sir Thomas Poynings. 
Vaux's only public office seems to have been that of governor of Jersey which he held from January to August 1536: he sold the office on to Edward Seymour, Viscount Beauchamp, for $150. It seems likely that at about this time he withdrew from the court and retired to his Northamptonshire estates, probably because his religious views were opposed to the growing influence of protestantism. Except for one day in November 1547, he did not attend parliament between 1534 and 1554. With other noblemen he attended the third of a series of disputations on questions appointed by the royal visitors at Cambridge University on 24-5 June 1549, and was part of Queen Mary's train at her coronation. 
Vaux is usually associated with the courtly poets Sir Thomas Wyatt and Henry Howard, earl of Surrey. Vaux's poems are all original compositions rather than translations or imitations. They are mainly concerned with the trials of love and strike moralizing, sententious, and occasionally religious notes. On a few occasions Vaux produces an unexpected metrical effect and a fresh or intimate tone, but his meaning is sometimes obscure. In 'The Arte of English Poesie' (1589), George Puttenham included Vaux among the 'new company of courtly makers' who sprang up during the reign of King Henry VIII. Beginning the long confusion between father and son by calling him Nicholas Vaux, Puttenham described him as 'a man of much facillitie in vulgar makings', adding that 'his commendation lyeth chiefly in the facillitie of his meetre, and the aptnesse of his descriptions such as he taketh upon him to make, namely in sundry of his Songs, wherein he sheweth the counterfait action very lively & pleasantly' (Puttenham, 60, 62). Elsewhere, again getting his first name wrong, Puttenham describes Vaux as 'a noble gentleman, and much delighted in vulgar making, & a man otherwise of no great learning but having herein a marvelous facillitie' (ibid., 239). 
The canon of Vaux's surviving poetry is small. Describing the figure of ''Pragamatographia'. or the Counterfait action', Puttenham quoted twenty-two lines of a poem which he attributed to Vaux. The complete poem of fifty-six lines, with a few textual changes, was printed, without attribution, under the title 'Thassault of Cupide upon the Fort where the Lovers Hart Lay Wounded and how he was Taken' in Richard Tottel's 'Songes and Sonnetes' (1557), a year after Vaux's death. The poem (no. 211 in 'Tottel's Miscellany') remained popular during the rest of the century: it was adapted and printed by John Awdely ('c'.1560), registered for publication as a ballad in 1565-6, adapted again in 'A Gorgeous Gallery of Gallant Inventions' (1578), where it is described as 'To the tune, when Cupid scaled first the Fort', and copied in a manuscript miscellany (BL, Harley MS 6910) in the mid-1590s. 
The following poem in Tottel's miscellany (no. 212 in Rollins's edition), headed 'The Aged Lover Renounceth Love' and beginning 'I Lothe that I did love', is again unattributed, but ascribed to Vaux in two contemporary manuscript miscellanies (Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 48 and BL, Harley MS 1703); in the second of these it is said to have been written during the reign of Queen Mary. It was registered as a ballad for publication in 1563-4, and perhaps again in 1579; in his 'Posies' of 1575, George Gascoigne referred to the poem's first line as written by Vaux, and 'thought by some to be made upon his death bed' ('Posies', sig. PP PP iii'r'). The poem's first line also supplies the name of a tune for a poem in 'A Gorgeous Gallery': two more or less contemporary settings of the tune are known. It is a corrupt version of three stanzas (1, 3, and 8) of this poem which the gravedigger sings in 'Hamlet' (V.i). 
Two other poems in Tottel's miscellany have been attributed to Vaux in two manuscripts once owned by the Harington family. BL, Add. MS 28635, and the collection of poems, now at Arundel Castle, which is known as the Arundel Harington manuscript both have copies of the sonnet entitled 'The Frailtie and Hurtfulnes of Beautie' which begins 'Brittle beautie, that nature made so fraile' and of the alliterative epigram 'Against an Unstedfast Woman' (respectively, nos. 9 and 217 in Rollins's edition of Tottel and nos. 298 and 299 in the edition of the 'Arundel Harington Manuscript' by R. Hughey). Puttenham printed his own imitation of the first of these 'made to daunt the insolence of a beautifull woman' (Puttenham, 123). Two further poems in the Arundel Harington manuscript can be associated with Vaux. One, a short poem beginning 'Syns by examples daylye we are taught' (no. 173 in Hughey's edition), is unique to the manuscript and attributed to him in it. The second, beginning 'When I looke back and in my self behold' (no. 22 in Hughey's edition), is one of fifteen poems printed above Vaux's name in the collection 'The Paradise of Dainty Devices' (1576), where it has the title 'Of the Instabilitie of Youth' (no. 17). In addition to being copied in the Harington family collection, BL, Add. MS 28635, it is also found in two late sixteenth-century manuscript miscellanies (BL, Add. MSS 26737 and 30076): in the second of these it appears to be used as a song, and music for it survives, perhaps by Robert Parsons, in the Bodleian Library (MS mus. sch. e. 423). A shorter version of the poem, which seems to be independent of these sources, was printed in the Harington family collection 'Nugae antiquae' in 1769 with the heading 'SONNET 'wrote in the' 'Tower', 1554', with the implication that the poem was by John Harington the elder. The other poems attributed to Vaux in 'The Paradise' are nos. 8 ('In his Extreame Sycknesse'), 16, 37 (another version is in 'A Gorgeous Gallery of Gallant Inventions' of 1578), 48, 71 ('How can the tree but wast', for which musical settings survive), 80-81, 87-92, and 113 in Rollins's edition: nos. 48 and 88 are probably by William Hunnis. 
In March 1556 Vaux was recorded as living at Arnold, Nottinghamshire; the date of his death is not known, but he was buried in October of that year. His wife died on 20 November, and it is likely that both were victims of the plague. He was succeeded by his son William. 
There are two different drawings of Vaux by Hans Holbein the younger in the Royal Collection and one of his wife: they probably date from before 1536 and were executed in preparation for a pair of portraits of the couple. No painted versions are known of the portrait of Lord Vaux, but early painted versions of the picture of Lady Vaux are at Hampton Court and Prague, and probably derive from a lost original by Holbein. 


Vaux was a ward of Queen Elizabeth I, but his mother bought back the wardship in or before Hilary term 1598, and he was brought up by his mother and her sisters-in-law, Anne Vaux and Eleanor, the wife of Edward Brooksby. He was educated with other boys by private tutors at Harrowden. From 1598 his mother sheltered the Jesuit priest John Gerard there, and mother and son were both suspected of being implicated in the Gunpowder Plot. Vaux travelled to Italy with Sir Oliver Manners in 1609-11, and was committed to the Fleet on his return for refusing to take the oath of allegiance. Sentenced to perpetual imprisonment and the loss of all his lands, he was pardoned and transferred to the custody of the dean of Westminster, George Montaigne, or Mountain, in October 1612, had his forfeited lands restored, and was released on the payment of sureties of $1500 in 1614-15. He attended parliament, served as a colonel of an English regiment in the Spanish service in Flanders in 1622-4, and, after a search of his house at Boughton for arms, was again committed to the Fleet for a short period in November 1625. During the civil war, in which he seems not to have taken an active part, his recusancy resulted in the confiscation of his estates. 
In 1632, within five weeks of her husband's death, Vaux married Elizabeth (1586-1658), widow of William Knollys, first earl of Banbury, the daughter of Thomas Howard, first earl of Suffolk, and his second wife, Catherine. Vaux had probably lived with her while her husband was alive, and the couple had two sons, Edward (1627- 'c'.1645) and Nicholas ('b'. 1631), who bore the surname Vaux. Their paternity was in fact generally regarded as doubtful, and when Vaux died, on 8 September 1661, and was buried in Dorking church, he was found to have added to the uncertainty, for in his will he left bequests of $10 apiece to his presumed son Nicholas Knollys ['see under 'Knollys, William, first earl of Banbury], who took the title of third earl of Banbury, and his brother Henry Vaux ('c'.1591-1663), who succeeded as fifth Baron Vaux of Harrowden. But perhaps in an effort to avoid committing himself on the paternity of the Knollys boys Vaux left the bulk of his estate to Augustin Belson, a close friend and fellow recusant. Henry Vaux died unmarried and without children. The title then fell into abeyance until it was revived on 12 March 1838 by George Charles Mostyn of Kiddington (1804-1883) who claimed it through his mother and the families of Vaux, Simeon, and Butler. The House of Lords decided in favour of Mostyn's claim to the title in preference to that of Edward Bourchier Hartopp; a third coheir, Robert Henry Herbert, twelfth earl of Pembroke, did not pursue his claim. Mostyn and Hartopp both traced their descent to daughters (Mary and Catharine, respectively) of George Vaux, the son of William Vaux, the third baron. 


@@@@@


doc= 28164


Sir William Vaux (1437-1471), married before 22 December 1456 Katharine Peniston (died in or after 1509) of Provence, probably a lady-in-waiting to Margaret of Anjou. William Vaux, who was knighted about 1460, was attainted in November 1461 by Edward IV's first parliament, and he was next noted by Fortescue among the exiles in St Mighel with Queen Margaret in a letter of 13 December 1464. Vaux returned to England, probably with the queen in 1471, as he died on the field of Tewkesbury on 4 May and was buried in Tewkesbury Abbey. Katharine Vaux was among the ladies taken after the battle with Queen Margaret, and was said to have returned to France with the queen in January 1476. In February 1478 Edward IV granted Katharine life interest in the manors of Stanton and Markham, which she had held with Vaux, because she 'hath none erthly thing for her and her children to lyve upon' (TNA: PRO, C81/863/4673). Those children were Nicholas and his sister Jane, or Joan, who married Sir Richard Guildford, perhaps by November 1487, as a Dame Joana Guildford is listed among the ladies attending Elizabeth of York's coronation. 


@@@@@


doc= 28165


Vaux, William, third Baron Vaux (1535-1595), recusant and priest harbourer, was probably born at Harrowden, Northamptonshire, in August 1535, the son of Thomas Vaux, second Baron Vaux (1509-1556), and Elizabeth (1504x9-1556), daughter and heir of Sir Thomas Cheyne of Irthlingborough. William succeeded to the title upon the death of his father in October 1556, and at some time before 1 June 1557 he married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir John Beaumont of Grace Dieu, Leicestershire. They had four children: Henry ['see below'], Eleanor Brooksby (c.1560-1625), Elizabeth ('b'. 1561), and Anne Vaux (bap. 1562, d. in or after 1637). Upon the death of his first wife (12 August 1562) William married Mary, daughter of John Tresham of Rushton and sister of Sir Thomas Tresham. They had five children: George (1564-1594), Edward (died 1585), Ambrose (died 1626), Muriel, and Catherine. 
On 20 January 1558 Vaux took his seat in the House of Lords and appeared there several times during the final year of Mary Tudor's reign. After her death he was one of the noblemen appointed to escort the new queen, Elizabeth, from Hatfield to London. He stayed away from parliament in 1559 and gave his proxy to the earl of Bedford, a protestant. Despite being known as a Catholic in 1567 and being listed as a supporter of the queen of the Scots he was a commissioner for musters in 1569-70, on a committee dealing with vagabonds and the eating of meat at forbidden times in 1572, and on a commission for gaol delivery in 1578-9. Persons believed that Vaux was arrested after the invasion of Ireland, but he was still at liberty at that time because he signed the certificate of musters on 22 September 1580 and sat in parliament on 19 January 1581. The queen and council viewed Vaux as a loyal subject despite his recusancy and support for Mary Stuart until his association with the Jesuit Edmund Campion. 
In 1567 or 1568 Vaux looked for a competent tutor for his precocious son Henry. He decided upon Campion, who accepted the invitation and spent several months at Harrowden. Campion's letter to Henry, written on the eve of his departure from Oxford to Ireland in July 1570, testified to his deep friendship with the Vaux family and to the cultivated atmosphere in which Henry was raised. Vaux's troubles began after Campion's capture at the end of July 1581. On 6 August the privy council instructed Sir Walter Mildmay to summon Vaux and commit him to the custody of someone sound in religion because it was believed that Campion had stayed at his house. On 18 August he was questioned in the presence of members of the privy council. He and Sir Thomas Tresham were asked to swear that Campion had stayed at their houses. Both refused and were committed to the Fleet as close prisoners. Along with Tresham and others Vaux appeared before Star Chamber on 15 November. Asked again if Campion had stayed at his house, Vaux replied: 'And as to the receiving of Mr. Campion I (albeit I confess he was school master to some of my boys) yet deny that he was at my house. I say that he was not there to my knowledge, whereof reprove me [that is prove me wrong], and let me be punished with that punishment I deserve' (Anstruther, 122). They remained close prisoners after the trial. None the less at least once, 'c'.7 January 1582, he and the other Catholic prisoners attended a clandestine mass in the Fleet. For this offence he and Tresham were fined 100 marks each. During his imprisonment his daughter Elizabeth entered the Poor Clares in Rouen in March 1582, and his sons Edward and Ambrose visited the English College in Rome in April. George visited the college in Rheims later the same year. Interestingly Vaux was never tried for sending his children abroad. About 19 April 1583 he and Tresham were released. During his imprisonment he had conveyed land to his sons so that it could not be seized to pay his recusancy fines. 
Vaux was forced to remain in the London area, and rented a house in Hackney which was frequented by priests, as the council knew. Because of his fines and his conveyances of land, he could not pay his levy for light horse and lances. Lord Vaux's house received attention in the winter of 1585-6 as the site of an exorcism performed by the Jesuit William Weston upon a servant of Anthony Babington, later infamous for his role in the Babington plot. On 7 December 1587 Vaux was committed to the care of the archbishop of Canterbury. He was released in February 1589 when he appeared in the House of Lords. In 1590 Vaux was allowed to go to Northamptonshire for the first time in nine years. By this date his physical and mental health had deteriorated. In 1591 a government spy commented of Vaux and Thomas Tresham that they were good subjects and opposed the plans of the Spanish. The spy found their loyalty most remarkable. Vaux died on 30 August 1595 at Irthlingborough. The title passed to his grandson Edward Vaux ['see under 'Vaux, Thomas, second Baron Vaux (1509-1556)], first-born son of George Vaux and Elizabeth Roper. 


Throughout the 1580s Henry provided accommodation for and assistance to priests. He attended the meeting of leading recusants, priests, and Jesuits in Hoxton in the spring of 1585 that resulted in the establishment of a fund for the support of the clergy. Henry promised 100 marks to the fund. Periodically he was named in interrogations and confessions. On 5 November 1586 Henry was captured when the Vaux house in Hackney was raided. After examination by the privy council he was sent to the Marshalsea prison. Because of the deterioration of his health he was released for three months on 22 May 1587. He went to stay with his sister Eleanor Brooksby at Great Ashby, where he died of consumption on 19 November 1587. In a letter to Claudio Acquaviva, Jesuit father general, on 16 April 1596, Henry Garnet claimed that Henry Vaux pronounced the simple vows of the Society of Jesus immediately before his death. Few seem to have been aware of the vows. Indeed the Jesuit John Gerard wrote that the only thing that caused Henry Vaux regret on his deathbed was that he could not then be admitted into the society. 


@@@@@


doc= 28166


Vaux, William Sandys Wright (1818-1885), antiquary, was born in Oxford on 28 February 1818, the only son of William Vaux (1783/4-1844), Church of England clergyman, who was prebendary of Winchester from 1831. He was educated at Westminster School from 1831 to 1836, when he matriculated at Balliol College, Oxford (where his father had held a fellowship); he graduated BA in 1840 and proceeded MA in 1842. On 13 April 1841 he entered the department of antiquities of the British Museum as a first-class assistant. When the department was split on the retirement of the keeper, Edward Hawkins, he became on 21 January 1861 the first keeper of coins and medals. He married, on 11 July 1861, Louisa, eldest daughter of Francis Rivington of Harley Street, London. 
Vaux's administration of the department was criticized following the abrupt departure of Frederic Madden junior in 1868. In July 1870 he appears to have had a breakdown and disappeared without warning, only to be located at Portsea. He was subsequently obliged to appear before a trustees' committee investigating losses from the collection, but was cleared of blame and allowed in October 1870 to resign with a pension. From 1871 to 1876 Vaux was engaged in cataloguing the coins in the Bodleian Library. 
From 1846 Vaux was a member of the council of the Numismatic Society. In 1852 he became one of the secretaries, and for some time assisted John Yonge Akerman in editing the first series of the 'Numismatic Chronicle', in which he himself wrote twenty-five papers. He was president of the society from 1855 to 1874. For many years the society met in Vaux's rooms in Gate Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields. On 4 June 1868 he became a fellow of the Royal Society. From November 1875 to his death he was the secretary of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland, and for many years he was secretary to the Royal Society of Literature and was a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. He was also connected with the early development of the Oxford Movement in London, and his rooms were a frequent place of meeting for the subcommittees connected with the London Church Union and the foreign chaplaincies. He died at his home, 102 Cheyne Walk, Chelsea, London, on 21 June 1885. 
Vaux's knowledge was large and varied, more especially in all that related to oriental antiquities. His 'Nineveh and Persepolis' (1850; 4th edn, 1855) is still of interest and did much to popularize the discoveries of Layard and others. He was responsible for 'Inscriptions in the Phoenician Character... Discovered on the Site of Carthage, etc' (1863; lithographed facsimile), a transliteration into Hebrew characters with Latin translation. In 1864-5 he worked with A. W. Franks revising Hawkins's 'Catalogue of British Medals', which eventually appeared in 1885. He also wrote: 'Handbook to the antiquities in the British Museum: a description of the remains of Greek, Assyrian, Egyptian, and Etruscan art' (1851), 'Ancient History from the Monuments: Persia from the Earliest Period to the Arab Conquest' (1875; rev. edn by Prof. A. H. Sayce, 1893), and 'Ancient History from the Monuments: Greek Cities and Islands of Asia Minor' (1877). In 1854 he edited for the Hakluyt Society 'The World Encompassed by Sir F. Drake'. 
Vaux's contribution as a numismatist is not now regarded as of great significance. Little cataloguing took place during his keepership and he wrote relatively few articles. He is described as 'kind-hearted and unselfish' with 'a large circle of friends and acquaintances' ('Proceedings', 145). 


@@@@@


doc= 28167


Vavasour, Sir John (d. 1506), judge, was the eldest son of John Vavasour of Spaldington in Yorkshire, and his wife Isabel, daughter and coheir of Thomas de la Hay, lord of Spaldington. He studied law at the Inner Temple. His first employment in court recorded in the year-books took place in Trinity term 1467, and in Trinity term 1478 he was invested with the order of the coif. He acted as legal adviser to various corporations and individuals, including Richard, duke of Gloucester. On 15 June 1483, in the last fortnight of the reign of Edward V, he was nominated a king's serjeant, an appointment renewed by Richard III and Henry VII. On 23 September 1485 he was appointed second justice at Lancaster, and was promoted to chief justice there in 1495. In the first year of Henry VII's reign the king and the earl of Northumberland put forward candidates for the post of recorder of York, but the corporation defended its autonomy and elected Vavasour (who had acted for the city for some years) in spring 1486. He continued in office until his appointment as puisne justice of the common pleas on 17 October 1489. He was knighted in 1501. 
Vavasour married, possibly as his second wife, Elizabeth (died 1509), daughter of Robert Tailboys, son of Sir William Tailboys. She was the widow of an unidentified Greystoke, probably Sir Robert (died 1483). In 1494 she and Vavasour were estranged, with Vavasour denying her any share of his land unless she repaid $700 she had taken away; but matters were apparently settled by 1502 when Vavasour granted her a life interest in Badsworth, Yorkshire. In the sixteenth century Vavasour was remembered as 'a very homely man and rude of condycyons and lovyd never to spend mych money' ('Testamenta Eboracensia', 4.90). From a memorial dated 1505-6 it appears that he was concerned in Sir Richard Empson's lawsuit against Sir Robert Plumpton, and that he allowed himself to be influenced by Empson. Vavasour was discharged as judge on 16 October 1506. He died without issue on 26 November 1506 and was buried in St Helen's, Bishopgate, London. His heir was Peter, son of his brother William. 


@@@@@


doc= 28168


Vedder, David (bap. 1789, d. 1854), poet, son of a small landowner, was baptized on 29 December 1789 in the parish of Deerness, near Kirkwall, Orkney, the son of John Vedder and Jean Shewrie. His father died when he was young, and he was educated by his mother. She died when he was about twelve, and he went to sea as a cabin boy. Ten years later he became captain of a Greenland whaler, which he commanded for several years. In 1815 he was appointed first officer of an armed cruiser, and in 1820 became a tide surveyor, officiating successively at Montrose, Kirkcaldy, Dundee, and Leith. 
Vedder wrote and translated verse from an early age, publishing his first poem in his early twenties. In 1828 he published 'The Covenanters' Communion and other Poems'. In 1830, after a quarrel with Henry Glassington Bell, editor of the 'Edinburgh Literary Journal', Vedder set up the rival 'Edinburgh Literary Gazette', which was supported by De Quincey among others. In 1832 he published 'Orcadian Sketches', a prose and verse miscellany, as well as a popular 'Memoir of Sir Walter Scott'. In 1839 he edited 'Poetical Remains of Robert Fraser', a Kirkcaldy poet, together with a memoir. He contributed text for Walter Geikie's 'Etchings' in 1841, and the following year he published 'Poems, Legendary, Lyrical, and Descriptive', illustrated by Geikie. Among these his lyric 'The Temple of Nature' was a favourite with Thomas Chalmers, who often recited it to his students. The same year Vedder collaborated with Frederick Schenck in 'The Pictorial Gift-Book of Lays and Lithographs'. In 1852 he published his 'Story of Reynard the Fox', with lithographs by Schenck and MacFarlane, considered on its appearance 'by far the best edition of this famous story yet presented in English' ('Literary Gazette', 1852, 789). He was a contributor to many anthologies and magazines, including the supplementary volume of George Thomson's 'Scottish Melodies', Blackie's 'Book of Scottish Song' (1844), 'Whistle-Binkie' (1853), Constable's 'Edinburgh Magazine', the 'Christian Herald', 'Tait's Magazine', and 'Chambers's Journal'. A posthumous volume of Vedder's 'Poems, Lyrics, and Sketches' was published in 1878, with a memoir by George Gilfillan, who remembers him as 'tall, considerably above 6 feet, rotund, red faced, and with a world of sagacity in his rugged features, and of warmth in his big heart' (Gilfillan, xiv). 
Retiring on a pension in 1852, Vedder died of kidney disease at 173 Causewayside, Newington, Edinburgh, on 11 February 1854, and was buried in the Grange cemetery, Edinburgh. He was survived by his widow, a son in the Royal Navy, and two daughters, one of whom was married to Frederick Schenck, a well-known Edinburgh lithographer. 


@@@@@


doc= 28169


Veal, Edward (1632/3-1708), clergyman, ejected minister, and nonconformist tutor, is of uncertain origins. He is perhaps the son of the Lancashire gentleman Edward Veal of Laughton who was an elder of the seventh Lancashire classis in 1646. It has, however, also been suggested that he was probably born in Gloucestershire. He matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 27 February 1651, graduating BA in 1652 and proceeding MA on 21 February 1654. From 1655 he was minister of Dunboyne, co. Meath, on a stipend of $40 per annum under the civil establishment of Henry Cromwell; he was ordained at Winwick, Lancashire, by the fourth Lancashire presbyterian classis on a call from his Irish parish on 14 August 1657. Nevertheless, in March 1655 it was by a petition of the Independent churches of Ireland that Veal was proposed as one of a raft of eight men suitable to remedy the lack of godly fellows at Trinity College, Dublin, and was duly one of the five elected fellows; he had been promoted to a senior fellowship by 24 November 1656. He was created BD there on 3 July 1661. Shortly afterwards he was deprived of both parish and fellowship for his nonconformity to the re-established Church of Ireland and, having received a certificate (dated 31 December 1661) testifying to his usefulness from Stephen Charnock and six other nonconformist divines, he left Ireland in January 1662. The certificate described him as: 'a learned, orthodox, and ordained minister, of a sober, pious and peaceable conversation, who during his abode in the college, was eminently useful for the instruction of youth, and whose ministry hath been often exercised... with great satisfaction to the Godly. (Calamy, 'Continuation', 1.83)' He became chaplain to the former parliamentarian general Sir William Waller, after whose death in 1668 he became pastor to a small congregation in the East End of London. In 1669 it was reported that at Stepney 'one Mr Veale, an Independent hath lately set up a meeting in this parish, And first sollicited for Subscriptions, before he would come' ('Calamy rev.', 501). This must be the same meeting over which he presided (if not in precisely the same location) near or in Globe Alley, Wapping; that was broken up by the authorities in 1670 but Veal took out a licence as its presbyterian minister under the declaration of indulgence two years later. In 1689 he was certified as a preacher in the parish of Whitechapel (consistent with the congregation at Wapping, to which he himself alluded in 1703). He also ran an academy at Wapping for ministerial students, for which he suffered prosecution. Among his pupils were Samuel Wesley ('bap'. 1662, died 1735), the father of John and Charles Wesley; despite his later career in the Church of England, at the time that he attended Veal's academy in the late 1670s Wesley was intended for the Independent ministry. Veal gave up the academy about 1680. The apparent ambiguities over his denominational label reflect, no doubt, both the insensitivities and carelessness in reporting of the authorities and even more the fluidities of association within Restoration dissent. It is probably most significant that Veal was co-editor of works by Stephen Charnock, like himself an Independent in Ireland in the 1650s who found himself comfortable within Restoration presbyterianism; he also contributed along with other presbyterian divines to the continuation of Matthew Poole's 'Annotations upon the Holy Bible' (1683). 
Having lost his voice 'and ability to speak out of the pulpit' and having 'thought fit to supply the want of it', Veal published 'Practical Discourses' on sin, wickedness, and Christ as healer and saviour (Veel, sig. A2). Another volume of 'Practical Discourses' followed in 1705. Besides these he wrote many sermons on a variety of topics such as 'what spiritual knowledge they ought to seek for that desire to be saved'. Many of these were published in the various editions of the 'Morning Exercises', the majority being republished in James Nichols's 'The Morning Exercises at Cripplegate' (1844). 
By late November 1705, when he made his will, Veal had retired south of the river to suburban Peckham. His wife (whose name is unknown) had died before him and the only kin mentioned in his will were a sister, Martha, to whom he left $5 for mourning and 'my Pools Annotations on the Scripture in two Volumes in Folio'; his widowed sister-in-law; and his unmarried daughter, Katherine, who received the bulk of the estate (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/502, sig. 157). Veal died on 6 June 1708, aged seventy-five. He had originally wished to be buried in Battersea, but was in fact buried in the parish church of Wapping on 13 June. His funeral sermon was preached by Thomas Simmons, his successor as pastor to the Wapping congregation. Preaching on a text from '2 Timothy', Simmons declared that 'every part of the apostle's character may be accommodated to the case of our deceased friend and father' who had been 'very laborious in his attempts to pull down the strongholds of sin and Satan, in the souls of other men' (Simmons, 41-2). 


@@@@@


doc= 28170


Veel, Robert (1647/8-c.1674), poet, probably born at Alveston, Gloucestershire, was the younger son of William Veel (died 1656), of Symondshall, Gloucestershire, and Elizabeth (died in or before 1656), daughter of Robert Culliford. Veel's family had been impoverished by the post-civil war sequestrations of the estates of his father and his grandfather, the royalist plotter Colonel Thomas Veel. His father's will, while leaving Robert $500 when he came of age, also made provisions for binding him as an apprentice. Veel entered St Edmund Hall as a commoner at the age of fifteen on 25 April 1663 and spent ten terms at Oxford, but he did not take a degree. He later went to London, presumably after coming into his inheritance in 1668 or 1669. There, according to Wood, he 'lived after the manner of poets in a debauch'd way, and wrote partly for the use of his idle and vain Companions, but more to gain Money to carry on the Trade of Folly' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.517). In 1672 Veel published 'New Court-Songs and Poems' under the name R. V. gent., dedicating it to 'Mr. T. D.'. It has been suggested that this was the playwright and poet Thomas D'Urfey; however, this is unlikely as D'Urfey was only born in 1653. Collections like these were quite in vogue at the time among young aspiring blades about town, but few of the 129 'New Court-Songs and Poems' are of any literary merit. The majority are love poems in rhyming couplets addressed to various of the poet's muses, most commonly 'Clariza', interspersed with loyal odes, drinking songs, and some savagely misogynist celebrations of bachelorhood and the roistering life. 'A Rant Against Marriage' puts it plainest: '
And when with Sorrow their [bachelors'] hearts are sunk 

They may go to the Tavern, and be drunk 

And never be dogg'd by a Bitcherly Punk 

To ask them why, or wherefore. 

' The best is 'Snow', a more mature poem which defuses worldly vanity by comparing individuals to snowflakes which might fall on a palace or a dunghill but which are all doomed to be melted by the sun. It is not possible, however, to say which pieces are Veel's own; some, indeed, have attributed the whole collection to Robert Vine. Wood records that Veel also published 'Poor Robin's Intelligence', which appeared in a half-sheet weekly in 1672 or 1673, and that this attack on 'the Misses of the Town' provoked a retort from one 'K. C.' entitled 'Poor Robin's Elegy, or, The Imposter Silenc'd'. Veel died about 1674, leaving no children. His grave is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 28171


Veel, Thomas (c.1591-1663/4), royalist army officer and conspirator, was born at Alveston, Gloucestershire, the third or fourth son of Nicholas Veel and his wife, the daughter of Robert Bridges of Combe, Gloucestershire. He was also the scion of an ancient family of minor gentry, who leased another Gloucestershire estate at Symondshall in Wotton under Edge from the Berkeleys of Berkeley Castle, with whom they had strong historic ties. Veel married first Dorothy Wynneate, with whom he had a son, William (died 1656), father of the poet Robert Veel, and three daughters. He also had two more sons, Nicholas and Thomas, with a second wife whose name is unknown. 
According to one source, Veel saw military service overseas, though he may only have been a trained bands colonel (Newman). He was one of the earliest and most active royalists in the county from the outset of the civil war, defying the efforts of John Smyth to hold the Berkeley interest neutral. He was named to the royalist commission of the peace in March 1643, then appointed governor of Berkeley Castle in November 1643 after the resignation of Captain Maxwell. According to John Corbet the troops under his command were formidable only in plunder, hemmed in as they were by parliamentarian garrisons at nearby Slimbridge and Frampton. Veel was dismissed as governor in August 1644, apparently because the earl of Bristol wished to place Colonel Richard Power there, but he remained in arms at least until June 1645. He later compounded for his estates, paying $704 13's'. 4died, after enduring plundering, sequestration, and other charges which, on top of heavy debts, quite ruined the estate. A descendant's claims that Veel was related to the presbyterian royalist (and former parliamentarian governor of Gloucester) Sir Edward Massey, that he raised a horse regiment which fought alongside Massey at Worcester on 3 September 1651, and that he escaped to the continent afterwards are unproven and implausible. However, Massey certainly trusted the Veel family implicitly, writing later that they were 'all zealously his Ma[jes]ties servants' ('Nicholas Papers', 4.158-9). 
After Penruddock's abortive rising of February 1656 and the rise of the 'action party' among royalist plotters, Veel became a pivotal figure in local plans for an uprising against the interregnum regimes. These plans varied over the years but generally revolved around his raising up to 3000 men to take Gloucester and Bristol in preparation for a landing. Charles II sent him blank recruiting commissions in November 1656 and again in May 1659. Massey spent several months in hiding at the Veel family house in Symondshall in mid-1659 while organizing a revolt. On 31 July, shortly before this was due to start, troops from the Gloucester garrison arrested Veel, his two surviving sons, and his grandson (another Thomas), then Massey himself. The estates were briefly re-sequestered. Both Thomas the grandson and Nicholas were imprisoned, and Nicholas was imprisoned again in Hurst Castle in September. The former, who had fled when the estates were ordered to be sequestered, returned to assault the commissioners' agent in November and taunt him that Monck was coming from Scotland to restore the king. 
After the Restoration, mindful of Veel's huge sacrifices, Charles and Clarendon discussed several ways of rewarding him. These included the profits from the sale of a baronetcy, the rights to certain bonds from merchants bound over for defrauding the customs, the rights to smuggled French goods, a share of receipts from the West Indies from the commissioners of prizes, and the lease of the ballast office. However, as Clarendon admitted, Veel repeatedly lost out to less deserving petitioners. In 1661 his son Nicholas and grandson Thomas were granted the office of making and registering assurances in London, which they held in trust for Veel to pay him profits which were worth over $400 per year. They later became county collectors of the royal and additional aids and the hearth tax and embarked on chequered careers in the royal service, facing constant resistance from JPs and the populace until they lost their positions, poorer by thousands of pounds, in 1668. By then Colonel Thomas Veel was dead, having died at some point between 7 October 1663, when he made the final codicil to his will, and 26 May 1664, when the will was proved; he was buried in Alveston church. 


@@@@@


doc= 28172


Veitch, James, Lord Elliock (1712-1793), judge, was born on 25 September 1712, the eldest son of William Veitch (died 1747) of Boigend and Elliock in Dumfriesshire, and his wife, Christian Thomson, daughter of a provost of Peebles. Educated at Edinburgh University and at Leiden University (which he entered in 1733), and perhaps also at Halle, Veitch began his legal career as an apprentice to his father, an eminent writer to the signet. He was called to the bar on 15 February 1738. Shortly afterwards he went abroad to continue his studies in Holland and Germany, where his 'abilities and conversation' attracted the attention of Crown Prince Frederick of Prussia (from 1740 Frederick II, 'the Great'), who persuaded him to cut short his grand tour and remain at his court for some years. 
Veitch was a sociable character with an attractive personality, sharp mind, and wide range of interests. On his return to Scotland he became a popular member of Edinburgh legal and literati circles. He also kept up a correspondence with Frederick. On 13 July 1747 he was appointed sheriff-depute of the county of Peebles, one of the first wave of legally qualified and salaried sheriffs-depute appointed following the 'Heritable Jurisdictions Act' of 1747. 
Politically Veitch had connections with Charles Douglas, third duke of Queensberry, who in 1755 brought him in as member for Dumfriesshire, a constituency dominated by the Queensberry family. At Westminster, Veitch appears to have taken a fairly independent line. Despite the approaches of Newcastle, he voted against Newcastle and Fox over the Minorca enquiry in 1757. A member of the committee to prepare the 'Scottish Militia Bill' of 1760, he objected to Pitt's proposal to 'draw the Highland line' and seems to have abstained in the vote on the bill on 15 April. 
Later that year Newcastle, anxious to secure a parliamentary seat for Thomas Miller, the new lord advocate, advised Miller to propose to Queensberry that if Veitch were promoted to the bench on the first vacancy, Queensberry might bring in Miller in his place. Queensberry agreed to the proposal. On 22 October 1760 Andrew Macdowall, Lord Bankton, died. A month later, on 22 November, Miller, 'from long and intimate acquaintance', recommended Veitch to Hardwicke for the vacancy: 'He is a man of great worth and as much in the favour and esteem of his country as any man I know, and though he has not had much practice at the bar yet he is a man of learning and solid knowledge of the law and I observe that the prospect of his promotion gives very general satisfaction both to the judges and to the bar. (BL, Add. MS 35449, fol. 284)' Veitch duly resigned in February 1761 and took his seat on the bench on 6 March with the title of Lord Elliock. He was a well-respected judge, with a scholarly bent. He was appointed a commissioner for the forfeited estates in 1767, a deputy governor of the Royal Bank of Scotland in 1776, and a commissioner for fisheries and manufactures the following year. He died at his home in St Andrew's Square, Edinburgh, on 1 July 1793. He was unmarried and his estates were inherited by his nephew. 


@@@@@


doc= 28173


Veitch, John (1829-1894), philosopher, born in Biggiesknowe, Peebles, on 24 October 1829, was the eldest and only surviving child of Sergeant James Veitch, a Peninsular War veteran, and his wife, Nancy Ritchie. Both parents, particularly the mother, held those high ideals of the value of education characteristic of some of the Scottish peasantry. Until sixteen years of age Veitch was educated successively at Mr Smith's 'adventure' school and at the high school of Peebles. In 1845 he proceeded to Edinburgh University, where he at once gained a bursary or entrance scholarship. 
Two years before, at the time of the Disruption, Veitch, with his parents, had joined the Free Church of Scotland, and, after one session's attendance at Edinburgh University, he entered the New College there, just instituted for the benefit of Free Church students. Here he first met Professor A. Campbell Fraser, who became his lifelong friend. The year 1848 found him back at the university, hearing the brilliant lectures of John Wilson and of Sir William Hamilton, by whom Veitch was profoundly influenced. Originally destined for the ministry of the Free Church, he turned his attention in 1850 to theology but was repelled by the dogmatic tendencies of the day. Until 1856 he supported himself by private tuition. 
In 1856 Veitch was appointed assistant to Sir William Hamilton in the chair of logic and metaphysics in the University of Edinburgh. Hamilton's death took place in the same year, and was followed by the transference of Campbell Fraser from the professorship of philosophy in New College. Veitch continued in his position as assistant to Fraser until, in May 1860, he was elected to the chair of logic, rhetoric, and metaphysics in the University of St Andrews. During the same period he aided his chief in the editorial work of the 'North British Review'. Veitch's duties at St Andrews required him to teach English literature as well as philosophy, and he began studies in the literature and antiquities of the Scottish border. At this period his friends included many remarkable men, among others James David Forbes, James Frederick Ferrier, John Tulloch, William Young Sellar, and John Campbell Shairp. On 17 June 1862 he married Eliza Hill Wilson, only daughter of George Wilson of Dalmarnock and Auchineden. They had no children. 
In the summer of 1864 Veitch was elected to the professorship of logic and rhetoric in the University of Glasgow, which he occupied until his death. Six months of the year were thenceforth spent in Glasgow, and the remainder in Peebles, where he built a residence, The Loanings, and enjoyed unique opportunities of studying the scenery, history, literature, and lore of his native borderland. He took an active part in the leading border associations, in the politics of Peeblesshire, and in various benevolent institutions. In 1872 he received the honorary degree of LLD from Edinburgh University. He died at The Loanings on 3 September 1894 and was buried in the Old Town in Peebles. His wife survived him. 
As a thinker Veitch was at odds with the chief movements of his day, and by adopting an extreme, and often contemptuous, attitude of criticism, he precluded himself from having a formative influence on the thousands of students who came under his care. Those of them who knew him intimately were affected by his personal character, not by his lectures. One former pupil, J. H. Muirhead, commented that 'Veitch's real interest was not in philosophy at all except, as with so many in these theology-ridden days, as it seemed to provide a rod with which to chastise Hume and assert the rights of uncritical belief' (Drummond and Bulloch, 228). Contemporaries judged him to be limited to the work of criticism, incapable of much original thought. His critique of idealism in 'Knowing and Being' (1889), some of whose themes were continued in 'Dualism and Monism' (1895), demonstrated the exhaustion of the Scottish school of philosophy, pitting a naive realism against the new problems posed by T. H. Green's reading of Kant and Hegel. His philosophical publications also include translations of Descartes, and memoirs of Dugald Stewart (1857) and William Hamilton (1869), both of which are strictly biographical, attempting only limited accounts of their subjects' thought. His 'Hamilton' (1882) was an exhaustive statement of Hamilton's contribution to philosophy. 
Inborn inclination, extraordinary opportunity, and rare power of observation combined in the production of Veitch's work on 'The History and Poetry of the Scottish Border' (2 vols., 1893). The same qualities reveal themselves in the fine volumes on 'The Feeling for Nature in Scottish Poetry' (2 vols., 1887), as well as in his three small books of verse, 'The Tweed, and Other Poems' (1875), 'Hillside Rhymes' (1872), and 'Merlin and Other Poems' (1889). The poems are less successful than the prose works. Occasionally they reach a high level, but always within a limited range. 


@@@@@


doc= 28174


Veitch, William (1640-1722), Church of Scotland minister, was born at Roberton, Lanarkshire, on 27 April 1640, the fifth son of John Veitch (1589-1673), minister of that parish, and his wife, Elizabeth Johnston, daughter of a Glasgow merchant. He studied at the University of Glasgow, graduated MA in 1659, and was awarded the title of laureate. The following year he became tutor to the family of Sir Andrew Ker of Greenhead, and was later governor to Greenhead's son at the University of Edinburgh. His memoirs suggest that the eminent presbyterian John Livingstone persuaded him to become a minister. He joined the family of Sir Hugh Campbell of Calder as chaplain in 1663, though he was forced by the local bishop to leave about September 1664. On 23 November the same year he married Marion Fairlie (1639-1722) ['see 'Veitch, Marion] of the family of Braid, with whom he had five sons and five daughters. 
In 1666 Veitch joined the presbyterian Pentland rising and was sent by the rebels to Edinburgh to seek the advice of Sir James Stewart of Goodtrees. He was captured but later freed, after which he fled as an outlaw to England, where he adopted his mother's name, being known as William or George Johnston. For some time he was chaplain to the wife of the mayor of Newcastle, and, after preaching both in London and in other places in the north of England, he was in 1671 ordained minister of a meeting-house at Fallowlees in Northumberland, where his wife and sons William and Samuel Vetch joined him. He afterwards preached at Hanham Hall in the parish of Rothbury, also in Northumberland; four years later he removed to Stanton Hall in the parish of Longhorsley. 
On 16 January 1679 Veitch was arrested and, having been suspended on 22 February before the committee of public affairs in Edinburgh, was imprisoned on the Bass Rock. However, on 17 July he was set at liberty (possibly at the intercession of Sir James Dalrymple of Stair and the first earl of Shaftesbury, among others) and returned to Northumberland. When in 1681 Archibald Campbell, earl of Argyll, escaped from prison, Veitch not only sheltered him in his house, but also used his own experience as a fugitive to conduct the earl safely to London. Two years later Veitch had to make his own escape to the United Provinces, but during the Monmouth rising of 1685 he was sent to Northumberland to foment an outbreak there. The failure of Argyll's parallel uprising in Scotland put an end to the project, and after remaining for some time in hiding under various names, Veitch became minister of a meeting-house at Beverley, Yorkshire, where he remained for six or seven months. 
After the declarations of indulgence of James VII and II, Veitch returned to Scotland and was called to the parish of Whittonhall, Morebattle, in the presbytery of Kelso, where he was admitted in April 1688. He was translated successively in 1690 to Peebles and in 1694 to Dumfries, and was a member of the general assembly of the Church of Scotland from 1690 to 1692. He published four sermons in the 1690s and two tracts against Catholicism in 1718 and 1720. He demitted his charge on 19 May 1715, and died, probably at Dumfries, on 8 May 1722; his wife died a day later. He was buried at Dumfries parish church. Several of his children had predeceased him, including William, who had died during the ill-fated Darien expedition in 1699. Samuel (1668-1732) became the first governor of Nova Scotia. 


@@@@@


doc= 28175


Veitch, William (1794-1885), classical scholar, son of a miller and farmer, was born at Spittal-on-Rule in the parish of Bedrule, Roxburghshire. He received his elementary education at Jedburgh, and studied for the church at Edinburgh University, where Edward Irving and Thomas Carlyle were among his contemporaries. He became a licentiate of the Church of Scotland, and preached occasionally before the secession of 1843, afterwards devoting himself to research and tuition. He failed to gain the Edinburgh Greek chair in 1852, when John Stuart Blackie was preferred. He continued to read with advanced classical pupils, and to advise and assist scholarly writers. In 1866 he received the honorary degree of LLD from Edinburgh University. Fond of sport, and a skilled raconteur, he died a bachelor at 7 North West Circus Place, Edinburgh on 8 July 1885, and was buried in the Dean cemetery of the city. 
Veitch is chiefly remembered for his 'Greek Verbs, Irregular and Defective', an important work which was revised and expanded several times after its publication in 1848. In it Veitch listed the forms of irregular verbs found in literary texts, but the work's value was limited by the lack of evidence from inscriptions, and his researches were completed before the discovery of most papyri. He also edited various Greek and Latin texts and wrote numerous reviews. His lexicographical expertise was often called upon for the preparation and revision of classical dictionaries and other works of reference, including a new edition of Liddell and Scott's Greek lexicon. 


@@@@@


doc= 28176


Veley, Margaret (1843-1887), novelist and poet, was born on 12 May 1843 at Braintree, Essex, the second daughter of Augustus Charles Veley, a solicitor of Swiss extraction, and his wife, Sophia, daughter of Thomas Ludbey, rector of Cranham. Her father's practice was mainly occupied with the ecclesiastical business of the district. Veley was educated at home, with the exception of one term spent at Queen's College, Tufnell Park, London. She was proficient in French and well read in French literature. In contrast to the conservatism of her family, she developed quite liberal political and religious views, leaving a post as a Sunday school teacher when a new clergyman, to whose views she was opposed, was hired. 
Veley began writing both prose and verse early, though she published nothing until 1870. Her first poem, 'Michaelmas Daisies', appeared in 'The Spectator' in April of that year, and in September she published a short story, 'Milly's First Love', in 'Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine'. In 1872 she began her first and best-known novel, 'For Percival', a story of 'womanly self-sacrifice' (Blain, Clements & Grundy, 'Feminist comp.', 1111) which appeared as a serial in the 'Cornhill Magazine' (September-December 1878), then under the editorship of Leslie Stephen. It was immediately published in book form and was well received. Written in a clear and pointed style, it shows a strong sense of humour and keen perception of character. 
The deaths of two of Veley's married sisters in 1877 and 1885 and of her father in 1879 strongly affected her later writings. In 1880 she moved to London. The stories 'Mrs. Austin' and 'Damocles' appeared serially in the 'Cornhill Magazine' in 1880 and 1882 respectively. 'Mitchelhurst Place' appeared serially in 'Macmillan's Magazine' in 1884. A two-volume edition was printed that year, and an edition in one volume in 1885. 'A Garden of Memories' ran through the 'English Illustrated Magazine' from July to September 1886 and was published in two volumes in 1887. 
Veley died, unmarried, at her home at 45 Matheson Road, West Kensington, London, on 7 December 1887 after a short illness. She was buried on 10 December in Braintree cemetery. A posthumous volume of her poems, 'A Marriage of Shadows and other Poems', published in 1888, contained a biographical preface by Leslie Stephen. 


