@@@@@


doc= 28177


Velley, Thomas (bap. 1748, d. 1806), botanist, baptized on 1 June 1748 at Chipping Ongar, Essex, was the son of the Revd Thomas Velley of that town and his wife, Jane. He matriculated from St John's College, Oxford, on 19 March 1766, and graduated BCL in 1772 and DCL in 1787. On 6 October 1785 he married Jane Hammond: they had five children. He served in the Oxford militia, ranked as major in 1781 and lieutenant-colonel in 1799, retiring in 1802. 
Velley lived for many years at Portland Place, Bath, taking no part in legal affairs, but devoting himself to botany, especially to the study of algae. He collected in Essex, the Isle of Wight, and along the south coast. He was the friend and correspondent of Sir James Edward Smith, Dawson Turner, John Stackhouse, Sir Thomas Gery Cullum, Sir William Watson, and Richard Relhan, and became a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1792. Velley's botanical works were 'Coloured figures of marine plants found on the southern coast of England, illustrated with descriptions' (1795), with five coloured plates, and three papers. 
Returning from London to Bath on 6 June 1806, Velley jumped from a runaway stagecoach at Reading, fell, and hit his head violently on the ground. He died, without regaining consciousness, on 8 June, and was buried in the church of St Mary the Virgin, Reading, five days later. His extensive and annotated herbarium, illustrated by numerous dissections and microscopic drawings of grasses and other flowering plants, and especially of algae, was offered by his widow to the Linnean Society in 1809. When it declined, the collection was purchased by William Roscoe for the Liverpool Botanic Garden. Sir James Edward Smith in 1798 gave the name 'Velleia' to an Australasian genus of flowering plants in Velley's honour. 


@@@@@


doc= 28178


Venables, Edmund (1819-1895), Church of England clergyman and antiquary, born at 17 Queenhithe, London, on 5 July 1819, was the third son of William Venables (died 1840), a papermaker and stationer and alderman of London, who was lord mayor in 1826 and MP for London in 1831-2. His mother, Ann Ruth Fromow, was of Huguenot descent. Venables was educated at Merchant Taylors' School, London, from July 1830, and became the captain of the school. In 1838 he matriculated from Pembroke College, Cambridge, where he was Stuart's exhibitioner and scholar in 1839. In 1842 he graduated BA, being third wrangler and fifth in the second class in the classical tripos. In 1845 he proceeded MA, and he was admitted 'ad eundem' at Oxford on 17 December 1856. While an undergraduate he developed an interest in antiquarian studies and shared in the foundation of the Cambridge Camden Society. In 1845 he became a member of the Royal Archaeological Institute and contributed many papers to its journal. 
Venables was ordained by the bishop of Chichester in 1844 as curate to Archdeacon Julius Hare (1795-1855), rector of Herstmonceux in Sussex; he remained there until 1853. In 1846 he was ordained priest by the bishop of Norwich. On 8 September 1847 he married at St Michael's Church, Highgate, Caroline Mary Tebbs, the daughter of Henry Tebbs of Southwood Hall, Highgate, a proctor of Doctors' Commons. They had one son and six daughters. From 1853 to 1855 Venables was curate at Bonchurch in the Isle of Wight; for some years after, he continued to live there, tutoring pupils. With the assistance of some local naturalists he compiled a guide to the island, which was published in 1860. Drawing mainly from the contents of this volume, he also published a shorter work entitled 'A Guide to the Undercliff of the Isle of Wight' (1867). 
Venables was appointed by Bishop John Jackson as his examining chaplain at Lincoln, and continued in that position when his diocesan was translated to London. In 1865 he was appointed prebendary of Carlton with Thurlby in Lincoln Cathedral, and in 1867 precentor and canon-residentiary. From that time Venables identified himself completely with Lincoln, haunting the minster and its library, and revelling in the antiquarian charm of the city, which inspired many occasional papers. An essay by Venables on Lincoln Cathedral was included in 1893 in a volume of 'Our English Minsters', and printed separately in 1898. He contributed an essay on 'The architecture of the cathedrals of England considered historically' to J. S. Howson's 'Essays on Cathedrals' (1872); and he undertook, though he did not live to finish, a volume on the 'Episcopal Palaces of England'. This was published in 1895, with accounts of seven of the palaces being by Venables. He also edited the fourth edition of Murray's 'Handbook for Wiltshire, Dorsetshire, and Somersetshire' in 1882 and published an 'Historical Sketch of Bere Regis, Dorset' in the same year. 
Venables also edited theological and devotional works. In 1864 he translated Karl Wieseler's 'Chronological Synopsis of the Four Gospels', which was included in 1877 in Bohn's 'Theological Library', and he edited in 1869 a translation by his brother G. H. Venables of Bleek's 'Introduction to the Old Testament', reproduced in 1875 in Bohn's 'Ecclesiastical Library'. For the Clarendon Press series he edited in 1879 Bunyan's 'Pilgrim's Progress' and 'Grace Abounding'; his life of John Bunyan appeared in 1888 in the 'Great Writers' series, and in 1883 he edited Lancelot Andrewes's 'Private Devotions'. He also contributed to William Smith's 'Dictionary of the Bible' (1860-65), Smith's 'Dictionary of Christian Antiquities' (1875-80), Smith's 'Dictionary of Christian Biography' (1877-87), the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', Kitto's 'A Cyclopaedia of Biblical Literature', and to the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. He was also a frequent writer for the 'Saturday Review', 'The Athenaeum', 'The Guardian', and 'Good Words'. 
Venables died of influenza at the precentory, Lincoln, on 5 March 1895. His wife, who was suffering from the same illness, died the following day. They were buried on 9 March in the same grave in the cloisters of Lincoln Cathedral. Two of their daughters survived them. 


@@@@@


doc= 28179


Venables, Edward Frederick (1815-1858), indigo planter and volunteer soldier, was born on 5 May 1815, the third son of Lazarus Jones Venables (1772-1856), barrister, of Liverpool and Woodhill, Shropshire, and his wife, Alice, daughter of Thomas Jolley of Liverpool. He early went to India as an indigo planter. He married in 1851 Eliza Power, daughter of R. H. Kinchant of Park Hall, Oswestry, Shropshire; they had no children. Venables, two elder brothers having died, inherited from his father in 1856 the family estates near Oswestry. 
At the time of the outbreak of the Indian mutiny Venables was settled near Azamgarh in the North-Western Provinces. After the rising of the 17th native infantry on 3 June 1857 he left Azamgarh for Ghazipur. Some planters and clerks had been left behind, and Venables and another planter, M. P. Dunn -- 'two men cast in the heroic type' (Malleson, 'The Indian Mutiny of 1857', 184) -- determined to rescue them. No help was provided by the commissioner of the division, and when they set out on 16 June they had only a few Indian mounted constables, given them by A. Ross, the magistrate at Ghazipur. To these, however, Venables was able to add some of the tenants on his own estates at Dohrighat and a few refugees from surrounding villages. Having obtained the assistance of Ali Bakh, a collector, from within the town, Venables compelled the 13th irregular cavalry to abandon Azamgarh and reoccupied it. On 10 July he took the offensive against the mutineers with seventy-five mounted constables, an old gun, and a loyal Sepoy regiment. He stormed the police station and released his friends. When, however, on 16 July he attacked the Rajputs of the Palwar clan at Koilsa, he was deserted by his Sepoys and had to re-enter Azamgarh. Two days later reinforcements reached him, but most of them he sent to Ghazipur. On 20 July he marched out again with the rest, and, though compelled to retire before superior forces, the retreat, in which Venables himself led the cavalry, was so masterly that the rebels very soon retired from before Azamgarh. But on 29 July, under orders from Commissioner Tucker, it was once more evacuated, Venables retiring a second time to Ghazipur. But Azamgarh having been in August occupied by the Nepalese allies, Venables again took part in an advance on it. On 19 September, when the rebels were surprised at Mandori, he, though only a volunteer, commanded the cavalry, was first up to the first gun taken, and killed three men with his own hand. The mutineers then offered 500 rupees for his head. 
Venables next rode as a volunteer with General Sir Thomas Harte Franks in his march from eastern Oudh to Lucknow, and rendered outstanding service. In the early spring of 1858 he had retired to Allahabad in broken health and spirits, and was looking forward to a return to England, when Lord Canning persuaded him to again volunteer his services at Azamgarh. His judgement and local knowledge were of great value to Lord Mark Kerr and Sir E. Lugard. With the former Venables re-entered Azamgarh on 6 April. While engaged in the pursuit of Koor Singh after his defeat by Lugard on 15 April he was mortally wounded, and he died four days later, on 19 April. 
When, the following June, the Calcutta chamber of commerce met to consider a memorial to Venables, Lord Canning, the governor-general, wrote commending his intrepidity, energy, and calm temper, and his 'thoroughly just appreciation of the people and circumstances with which he had to deal'. He was considered one of the heroes of the mutiny. His younger brother became heir to his estates. 


@@@@@


doc= 28180


Venables, George Stovin (1810-1888), barrister and journalist, born on 18 June 1810 at Kirkethorpe, Yorkshire, was the second son of Richard Venables of Llysdinam Hall, Brecknockshire, archdeacon of Carmarthen and for twenty-five years chairman of the Radnorshire quarter sessions. George's mother was Sophia, daughter of George Lister of Girsby, Lincolnshire. He was educated at Charterhouse School at the same time as William Makepeace Thackeray, whose nose he is alleged to have broken in a fight. He proceeded to Jesus College, Cambridge, and in 1831 won the chancellor's medal for English verse, the subject being the 'North-West Passage'. He graduated BA in 1832 and MA in 1835, was elected a fellow of Jesus College (1835-68), and acted as tutor from 1835 to 1838. 
Venables was called to the bar by the Inner Temple in June 1836, and joined the Oxford circuit, but eventually devoted himself to parliamentary practice, being made a queen's counsel in 1863. Simultaneously he pursued an anonymous career in journalism, setting the highest standards for journalism as a vehicle for political thought and for publishing faithful reports of public life. On 1 November 1855 he wrote the leading article in the first issue of the 'Saturday Review' and continued to make regular weekly contributions to the paper for more than thirty years. From 1857 onwards he also compiled, for at least twenty-five consecutive years, the summary of events published in 'The Times' on the last day of every year. He also contributed to the 'Literary Review', the 'Victoria Regia', and 'Macmillan's Magazine'. The only work published in his own name was his memoir of his closest friend, Henry Lushington, which was printed as a preface to Lushington's 'Italian War' (1859). He had also printed privately in 1848, in conjunction with Henry Lushington, a volume of poems entitled 'Joint Compositions'. Venables retired from legal practice with a considerable fortune in 1882 and became the high sheriff of Radnor in 1884. He died on 6 October 1888 at his home, 67 Curzon Street, Mayfair, London. 
The impression made by Venables upon many of the most distinguished of his contemporaries was that he was almost unequalled in the extraordinary force and charm of his character. As an advocate he displayed the most remarkable memory and powers of expression. He was considered a close friend by many leading figures of the day, such as Thackeray, Lord Tennyson, and Sir James Fitzjames Stephen. A year before his death a number of his friends, including Fitzjames Stephen, erected a window as a memorial of Venables and his two brothers, the Revd Richard Venables of Llysdinam Hall and Joseph Henry Venables (1813-1866), barrister, in the church at Llysdinam, which he had built and endowed. It was inscribed 'Conditori hujus ecclesiae amicissimi quidam'. Thackeray is alleged to have founded the character of George Warrington in 'Pendennis' partly upon Venables. Tennyson accepted from Venables a line in 'The Princess' ('If that hypothesis of theirs be sound'); the poem is dedicated to Henry Lushington. On hearing of his friend's death, Fitzjames Stephen wrote an article of warm appreciation on Venables in the 'Saturday Review'. 


@@@@@


doc= 28181


Venables, Robert (1612/13-1687), parliamentarian army officer, was the son of Robert Venables, gentleman, of Antrobus, Cheshire, and Ellen, daughter of Richard Simcox of Rudheath, Cheshire. His father could trace his ancestry back to the Norman conquest, but he was the head of the cadet branch of the Venables, while his mother's father and brother were on the cusp of the gentry and yeomanry, regularly serving as grand jurymen at assizes and quarter sessions. 
When the civil war broke out in 1642 Venables volunteered for service and was commissioned a captain in the parliamentarian army being assembled in Cheshire by Sir William Brereton. He was reported to have been captured at an untidy skirmish at Westhoughton, Lancashire, but was soon released and served in his own county and in Lancashire throughout the first civil war, as captain and then lieutenant-colonel of the regiment of Robert Duckenfield and then of Brereton himself. In 1644 he distinguished himself in the defence of Nantwich and he was seriously wounded at the siege of Chester; but by the spring of 1645 he was governor of Tarvin, the town that acted as headquarters for the siege operations at Chester, just 5 miles away. The letter books of Sir William Brereton reveal him as a key member of the council of war that planned that siege, and one of Brereton's main allies in the feuds within the Cheshire committees and between Brereton and his fellow generals in neighbouring counties. He was one of the signatories of the articles under which Chester finally surrendered on 1 February 1646, and he was one of those whom Brereton recommended to parliament for appointment as governor of this strategically vital town. Instead he was put in charge of a force that was sent to reduce the remaining royalist garrisons in north Wales. 
Venables remained in arms in 1647 and 1648 but was also active as a civil commissioner, and spent much time trying in vain to secure payment of arrears of $2113. In summer 1647 mutineers in Nantwich imprisoned members of the county committee and held them to ransom for their arrears, and he borrowed another $232 to end the crisis. A year later he was still awaiting compensation. Late in 1648 he was called up to army headquarters in London, and on 15 December, still a lieutenant-colonel, he was put in charge of a committee of lower-ranking officers charged with finding 'the best ways and grounds for the speedy bringing the king to justice' ('Clarke', 2.132). 
In April 1649 Venables was commissioned a full colonel and ordered to raise a fresh regiment for Ireland. The names of his junior officers and NCOs suggest that he raised it in Cheshire. He crossed to Dublin in July, ahead of the main contingent of Cromwell's army of conquest, and joined Major-General Michael Jones (himself commander at the siege of Chester for several months in 1645) in time to take part in the crushing defeat of the king's lord lieutenant, the marquess of Ormond, at Rathmines on 5 August. He and his regiment then joined Cromwell and he was given the great responsibility of leading them to storm the breach at Drogheda after the first wave had been driven back with heavy casualties. It was also Venables's pikemen who prevented the drawbridge across the river that ran through the town from being raised and who made possible the massacre of the garrison on the north side of the town. 
After the capture of Drogheda, Cromwell divided his army and sent Venables with three full regiments north to join up with the brutalized Sir Charles Coote for a ruthless reimposition of protestant control of Ulster. He moved steadily north, summoning and taking the surrender of Dundalk, Newry, Carlingford, and Belfast before relieving Coote in Derry. He then defeated Colonel Mark Trevor in a stiff engagement at Dromore. Cromwell was full of praise for his northern commander in a series of letters to Westminster. 
In 1650 Venables and Coote continued the process of securing Ulster. They joined forces in June to crush the army of Ulster, commanded (following the death of Owen Roe O'Neill) by Bishop Heber McMahon of Clogher, at the battle of Scariffhollis (21 June; near Letterkenny in co. Donegal), putting 3000 men to the sword and summarily executing many prisoners. By the summer only Charlemont in the whole of Ulster lay in Catholic hands, and after a failed assault in which 800 English were killed, Coote and Venables accepted its surrender on terms (14 August). But securing all the towns and crushing the armies did not bring peace. Venables now became all too literally bogged down in a guerrilla war against 'tories' in north Connaught and south-west Ulster that was to last for another two years, though he was also involved in the campaigns that led to the defeat of the final formal army of Catholics -- that of the earl of Clanricarde in Connaught. 
By 1653 Ireland was pacified. Venables had fought a hard war, and had condoned, if he had not himself ordered, atrocities against those who had surrendered to mercy (that is, on conditions which left their lives at the mercy and discretion of the victors). He had shown courage, resolution, and grit. He had also shown forbearance. Being in a subsidiary theatre, his men had been poorly paid, poorly supplied, and -- at least, once Cromwell had returned to Britain -- poorly recognized. He was later to write an account of his service in Ulster, 'for all which,' he sourly added, 'I never received further reward than a letter of thanks' ('Narrative', 3). 
Venables spent his last months in Ireland in bitter dispute with resettled presbyterian ministers who were trying to reimpose a strict confessional church on the model of their Scottish homeland. At one point he threatened to transplant them to Munster. Little is known of his own religion, other than that he was ascetically protestant and almost certainly a Congregationalist. He was also very active in drawing up the regulations for putting the severe 'Act of Settlement' into effect in 1653. He lobbied hard on his own behalf and that of his men for satisfaction of arrears, and in December 1651 he received land to the value of $1223 in part settlement of his own. But many of those who fought with him remained unsatisfied and in May 1654 he returned from Ireland to lobby on their behalf. 
Venables's arrival coincided with the secret decision of the council of state to mount a surprise attack on the Spanish West Indies, and in August he was privily asked by Cromwell to command the military expedition (he agreed, though he was not formally commissioned until December). For twelve years he had been toughened by war and had become a fearless and resilient soldier. Cromwell admired what he had achieved in the bleak winter of relentless rain when they were both in Ireland. It was a big promotion to put him in charge of what was intended to be the first stage of a fundamental assault on the Spanish islands and mainland colonies in and around the Caribbean. In a few short weeks he was to bring ruin and ignominy on himself. He had just married (in June 1654) for a second time in mysterious circumstances. (His first wife was Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Rudyard of Rudyard, Staffordshire, gentleman, but the date of their marriage and her death are not known.) His second wife, Elizabeth ('c'.1614-1689), widow of Thomas Lee of Darnhall, Cheshire, and daughter of Samuel Aldersey of Chester, later said that it was a marriage based on duty and in fulfilment of a promise rashly entered into ('my engagement to him was before his going to Ireland; what it was is best known to himself And if he be willing as myself to bury it in silence, it shall never be repeated'; Townshend, 24). It was a loveless match with someone who disliked his politics, disdained his religion, and disapproved of his manners. She escorted him to the Indies, but asserted that 'the success was very ill, for the work of God was not like to be done by the Devil's instruments. A wicked army it was, and sent out without arms or provisions' (ibid., 28). Venables himself claimed that his intentions were honourable: he had attempted 'to promote the gospel and serve the country' ('Narrative', 7). Perhaps his first error had been to take his new wife with him. 
The council in its wisdom decided to share authority over the campaign between a general (Venables) and an admiral (William Penn) who had to make decisions with the advice and consent of three civilians with extensive knowledge of the Caribbean (this was the first real mistake). This group, with other veteran merchants from the area, planned the expedition. They put together an army of 1000 veterans and 8000 'volunteer' soldiers (this was the second mistake). They ordered the wrong food and forgot to take anything for storing water -- this on a tropical campaign (the third mistake). They had thirty-eight sound vessels to convey them and to take on any Spanish naval vessels they encountered (this was not a mistake). The commanders were given a free choice of target and considered Hispaniola (Dominica), St John's Island (Puerto Rico), or the area to the south of the Orinoco. Once they reached the Bahamas and took on extra supplies and 2000 extra troops, they decided on Hispaniola. It was intrinsically a good choice for it was fertile and well placed to launch further expeditions. 
They sailed in the last fortnight of December in two squadrons, and arrived four weeks later in Barbados. They refreshed themselves, planned their expedition for two months and then sailed for Hispaniola, arriving on 13 April. By this time Venables and Penn were barely on speaking terms, and full of so much mutual mistrust that Venables seems genuinely to have suspected that Penn would offload him and his men and depart, leaving them marooned. There were bitter disputes about the division of supplies and inadequate contingency plans for Penn to come to Venables's assistance if he got into trouble. 
The weather was foul: torrential tropical rain that ruined the gunpowder, caused the biscuits to rot, and made the rivers unfordable. Over-confident planning and under-confident soldiers proved a fatal combination. Having telegraphed their intentions to the Spaniards, they lost the element of surprise. After landing with 8000 men 40 miles from San Domingo they marched disconsolately through inhospitable wooded terrain and were twice ambushed by the Spanish (18 and 25 April). Venables lost about a third of his men and, bitterly complaining of their cowardice, got Penn to take him and the remainder off, though not without some delay. Very much as a means of saving face and seeking a compensatory triumph, Venables ordered Penn to take him to Jamaica, a less developed and economically (as it seemed) less promising island. Here he quickly gained a pyrrhic victory. He landed on 10 May and took the surrender of the capital on 17 May, but not before much of the garrison and many of the inhabitants had taken to the hills. Venables was faced with the prospect of a guerrilla campaign as stubborn as that fought by the tories in Ireland. He began the thankless task of rooting them out, but fell ill with a tropical fever. 
Penn, fearing the consequences of this failure, abandoned Venables, and sailed for home with half the fleet on 25 June, determined to get his side of the story in first. On discovering this, Venables set off in hot pursuit in a vessel called the 'Marston Moor', but he failed to overtake Penn. He arrived in Portsmouth on 9 September 1655 'almost a skeleton, and so weak he could neither stand nor ride' ('Portland MSS', 2.97). This did not spare him (or Penn) a spell in the Tower of London as a wrathful council and a distraught Cromwell (brooding on why God had deserted him in this great cause in which he had invested much hope) pondered whom to hold responsible. On 30 October Venables was released from prison but relieved of all his military commands. He retreated to Cheshire, far from the complaints of Cromwell if not those of Mrs Venables. He was effectively in disgrace for the rest of the protectorate. 
Although some royalist sources later claimed that in his bitterness at his treatment Venables turned towards supporting a Restoration, there is little evidence of it. Although he lived close to the epicentre of support for Sir George Booth's pro-Stuart rebellion in August 1659 he took no part. On the other hand, when George Monck marched south in January he named Venables governor of Chester. Sir Edward Hyde sounded out loyalist gentry in Cheshire about whether it was safe to leave him in post once the king returned. He had heard good things of his political loyalty, but was troubled by his reputation for Independency in religion. So Venables was replaced. 
Venables lived out the rest of his life in provincial obscurity. He bought a house at Wincham in Cheshire, less draughty and with more modern amenities than the rambling house at Antrobus where he had lived hitherto. He held no office and though he was questioned in early 1664 about possible involvement in the Farnley Wood Plot which was led by ex-Cromwellian soldiers, he was exonerated. He may have sheltered a fugitive (William Veitch) after the Pentland rising in 1667, and he seems to have remained a nonconformist in religion, but he was no political activist. He published a quietist tract -- 'The Experienced Angler, or, Angling Improved' -- in 1662, with an epistle by Isaak Walton. It ran through five editions in his lifetime. 
Venables's was a life of frustration. He served loyally in the civil war in England, and tenaciously in Ireland from 1649 to 1654. But he never received the recognition he deserved and he had to spend the years of peace seeking compensation for what he was owed. He was over-promoted and under-supported in a high-profile fiasco in the Caribbean that cost him his reputation. He had to live out his life as a disgraced man with a sharp-tongued wife who disapproved of all he stood for. 'There hath some cross passages fallen out betwixt me and [General Venables]', she wrote, 'upon which I have resolved never to proceed farther, but continue as I was' (Townshend, 24). Even the marriages he arranged for his son and daughter turned out badly: 'to relate the cross and unhandsome passages that fell out in these marriages are not only too tedious to relate but would be a grief to those that do yet survive', Elizabeth wrote (ibid., 28). But one senses that he never heard the end of it and that death did not come too soon to him; he died at Wincham in his seventy-fifth year, and was buried in July 1687. 


@@@@@


doc= 28182


Francesco Vendramini (1780-1856), engraver and architect, and the brother of Giovanni, was born in Bassano and appears to have followed Giovanni to London. It is not known if he married, but his daughter, Julia Frances Vendramini, was baptized at St Paul's, Covent Garden, in 1803. He accompanied his brother to St Petersburg, where in 1808 he became a member of the Academy of Fine Arts. In 1824 he returned to Bassano, intending to settle there. After only fifteen days, however, he moved to Florence, where he lived for eleven years and engraved many plates. He was offered a post in Rome as engraver to the pontificate, but returned to Russia to live and worked as an architect until his death, on 2 February 1856. Francesco too worked in stipple, in the style of Bartolozzi, and in line-engraving. His works include a number of portraits of contemporary Russian personalities, in particular 'Alexander I', after St Aubin (1819). In Bassano he produced portraits of living illustrious Italians and reproduced prints after Reni, Maratti, Ribera, and Titian, whose 'Death of Peter Martyr' is described as his finest and best-known print. At the time of his death he held the status of professor in St Petersburg. Among joint printing collaborations with his brother is the portrait of 'Kurakin' (Prince Aleksandr Borisovich), after Barowikowski. 


@@@@@


doc= 28183


Vendramini, Giovanni (1769-1839), engraver and architect, was born at Roncade, near Bassano, then under Venetian rule. In Bassano he studied architecture with Antonio Gaidon, but preferred engraving, particularly stipple, which he practised in the studio of Antonio Suntach. Vendramini was invited to London by Luigi Schiavonetti (1765-1810), who was also from Bassano and for whom Vendramini worked for three years. They were among the many 'distinguished young men' who paid 'high premiums' to follow Francesco Bartolozzi (1725-1815) to Britain to learn the secret of stipple-engraving (Baily, 28). As one of Bartolozzi's ablest pupils, Vendramini succeeded to his master's workshop and house at North End in Fulham when Bartolozzi left for Lisbon in 1802. Among Vendramini's earliest and most renowned works are the five plates he engraved for the set of thirteen 'Cries of London', after Francis Wheatley (1747-1801), between 1793 and 1797. Published by Colnaghi & Co., this series was supervised by Schiavonetti. Vendramini subsequently took over Schiavonetti's engraving business at 12 Michaels Street, Brompton. Other early stipple works include 'St John the Baptist', after Raphael, and 'The Power of Love', after Pellegrini. 
In February 1802, by a marriage licence dated 5 February, Vendramini married a British woman of Portuguese origin, Lucy de Faria, with whom he had two daughters. Between 1802 and 1805 he produced a number of large-scale engravings after the panoramic paintings by Sir Robert Kerr Porter, among them 'The Storming of Seringapatam', 'The Passage of the Alps by the Russians under Suvarrow', and 'The Death of Sir Ralph Abercromby', which were published by John P. Thompson. During this same period he engraved Porter's 'Twenty-Six Illustrations to Anacreon', published on 4 June 1805. On the back of this success, in 1805 Vendramini went to St Petersburg and later to Moscow, where he worked for Tsar Alexander I for two years. Among his profitable commissions produced there was the engraved portrait 'Catherine, Empress of Russia' and his only known colour aquatint, 'The Conflagration of Moscow, Sept 14 1812'. So successful was his work in Russia that Vendramini was unable to leave the country without the help of the ambassador for Naples and Duke Sarcopkiolo, who enabled him to cross the border as a diplomatic courier. After his return to Britain he concentrated on producing faithful large stipple plates of Italian old masters, notably 'Leda', after Leonardo da Vinci, 'The Vision of St Catherine', after Paul Veronese, 'St Sebastian', after Spagnoletto, 'The Raising of Lazarus', after Sebastiano del Piombo (now in the National Gallery), and a 'Deposition', after Donatello. He also produced several prints after Cipriani ('Amorini') and H. Singleton (Pomfret's 'Love Triumphant over Reason'). Of contemporary interest was his set of sixteen portraits of European leaders who visited London between 1814 and 1815, which were published by him at 14 Brompton Row. Among the more notable portraits he is known to have engraved are 'Miss Maria Theresa Decamp as Urania', after P. Jean (1802), 'William Wilberforce', after H. Edridge (1809), 'Sir Peter Francis Bourgeois', after Sir W. Beechey (1811), and 'Joseph Nollekens', after F. Abbot (1816); these and others of his works are in the collections of the Victoria and Albert Museum and the British Museum. Vendramini died, a widower, of 'disease of the brain' at his house at 91 Quadrant, Regent Street, London, on 8 February 1839. 




@@@@@


doc= 28184


Venn, Henry (1725-1797), Church of England clergyman, was born at Barnes, Surrey, on 2 March 1725, the third son of Richard Venn (1691-1739), rector of St Antholin's, Watling Street, London, who was descended from an unbroken succession of clergymen from the time of the Reformation, and Maria Anna Isabella Margaretta Beatrix (died 1762), daughter of John Ashton. After being educated at several private schools he entered St John's College, Cambridge, in June 1742, but in September he moved to Jesus College, having obtained a Rustat scholarship there. He graduated BA in 1745 and proceeded MA in 1749. In 1747 he was appointed by William Battie to one of the university scholarships that Battie had just founded. Venn was a noted university cricketer, but after playing in a match between Surrey and All England he gave away his bat, apparently because he was to be ordained and did not want to hear, 'Well played, Parson!' (Venn, 'Life', 70-71). He was ordained deacon in June 1747 and priest in June 1749, having been elected to a fellowship at Queens' College on 30 March of that year. He also began his ministerial career in 1749 and for a short time combined his college duties with officiating at Barton, Cambridgeshire, Wadenhoe, Northamptonshire, Little Hedingham, Essex, and other local places. He ceased to reside at Cambridge in 1750 and went as curate to Adam Langley, who held the livings of St Matthew, Friday Street, London, and West Horsley, Surrey. He served at St Matthew's during part of the summer and the rest of the year at West Horsley. 
At West Horsley, Venn's family prayers were attended by about forty poor neighbours, some of whom he instructed in his home; and the number of communicants increased from twelve to sixty. The local clergy considered him an enthusiast and Methodist, but he continued to hold the strong high-church beliefs of his father, as contained in 'The Whole Duty of Man'. At the same time his ministry there gave him time for reading, and he began to doubt the outlook of this book. He was now influenced by another book, William Law's 'A Serious Call to a Devout and Holy Life', and he sought to practise its moral and spiritual precepts. 
In 1754 Venn became curate of Clapham and was elected lecturer at two London churches -- St Alban, Wood Street, and St Swithin London Stone, Cannon Street. The number of sermons required from him led him to learn to preach without reading from a manuscript, and he preached extempore or from short notes for the rest of his life. He had to relinquish his fellowship at Cambridge in 1757, when he married Eling, daughter of Thomas Bishop, minister of the Tower Church, Ipswich. They had one son, John, and four daughters, of whom the eldest, Eling, married Charles Elliott and was the mother of Edward Bishop Elliott and Henry Venn Elliott. 
Clapham was already becoming an evangelical centre, and there Venn came under the influence of John Thornton (1720-1790), the banker, who bought the advowson of Clapham, and other early Methodists such as George Whitefield and the countess of Huntingdon. He became closely attached also to John Wesley himself -- too closely, thought Samuel Walker (1740-1761) -- until about 1758, when he was 'brought to believe for himself' (Sidney, 435). A severe illness in 1756 kept him from work for eight months, but gave him more time for self-examination and consideration upon this matter. During that time he began to write his devotional book 'The Complete Duty of Man', which was finally published in 1763. As its title indicates, it was connected with 'The Whole Duty of Man'. Venn wished to remedy what he considered were the defects of that book and set out the moral duties required by the evangelical approach. It was a popular book, and twenty editions had been sold by the early years of the next century. 
Venn published also in 1760 a sermon on 'The Duty of a Parish Priest and the Incomparable Pleasure of a Life Devoted to the Care of Souls', which expressed his attachment to the authority and responsibility of the Anglican ministry. He was determined to remain within the Church of England, and among his objections to the Methodists, he wrote in 1763, was that they 'made the ground of their Assurance an inward fleeting instead of the faithfulness of Jehovah, the sensation of a fluctuating heart instead of the unchangeable promises of God' (G. G. Cragg, 'Grimshaw of Haworth', 1947, 71). 
In 1759 William Legge, second earl of Dartmouth (1731-1801), who had been converted by Lady Huntingdon, induced Sir John Ramsden, the patron, to appoint Venn as vicar of Huddersfield. In accepting this post he suffered a financial loss. His annual stipend there was only $100, which he found inadequate, even though Lord Dartmouth and John Thornton made further contributions to it. While not yet a factory town, Huddersfield's long-established textile industry was now already expanding sufficiently to make it a large village. The parish covered a wide area inhabited by some 1400 families scattered about the countryside in outlying hamlets and farms. John Wesley went there in October 1757 and wrote, 'A wilder people I never saw in England' ('Journal of... John Wesley', 4.210). 
Venn found them 'utterly ignorant of the redemption that is in Jesus Christ' (Venn, 'Life', 25), but he gained them by preaching, praying, visiting, and welcoming enquirers in his vicarage. On Sundays at Huddersfield large crowds, many from a distance, soon filled the church to hear his sermons. He sought not only to teach them but also to train them as worshippers and communicants and to understand the prayer book. He twice delivered sermons explaining it, conducted courses of preparation before holy communion, introduced hymn-singing into the service, and catechized the younger members of the congregation. During weekdays he engaged also in open-air preaching and held services in private houses in the hamlets. In a letter written in 1762 to Lady Huntingdon he stated that during that year, apart from Sunday work, he 'generally preached eight or ten sermons in the week in distant parts of the parish' (Ryle). In addition to his parochial activities he accepted invitations from Lady Huntingdon, John Fletcher, and others to preach in various parts of England and south Wales. 
Venn's last years at Huddersfield were hard for him. His financial difficulties increased. The upkeep of his family, travelling in his parish and elsewhere, and entertaining the many people who visited him were expensive. The death of his wife in 1767 saddened him and left him in the sole charge of five young children. His intense labours exhausted him and began to affect his health. He showed signs of consumption and was able to preach only once a fortnight, and even then the exertion incapacitated him for several days. In 1771 he was offered the living of Yelling, Huntingdonshire, which he accepted regretfully, saying, 'Nothing would have prevailed upon me to leave Huddersfield if my lungs had not received an irreparable injury' (Elliott-Binns, 323). 
In July 1771 Venn married a widow, Catherine Smith (died 1792), daughter of James Ascough, vicar of Highworth, Wiltshire. At the small village of Yelling he started with a congregation of twenty or thirty, but as his health recovered he achieved a like success there and generally went each year to preach for a few weeks in London. And, since Yelling was only 12 miles from Cambridge, he was visited by many of the younger members of the university, among whom were Charles Simeon, William Faris, Thomas Robinson, and Joseph Jowett. He exerted a strong personal influence upon them and also upon others with whom he engaged in an extensive correspondence. So his importance at Huddersfield, where he gained the first large place outside London for evangelicalism and became known as a preacher and writer, was succeeded by his effect at Yelling upon men who became prominent leaders of the movement in the country. After twenty years at Yelling, Venn's health collapsed. In the autumn of 1791 he engaged a permanent curate for the parish and after that seldom officiated in his church or elsewhere, but continued his conversation and writing. Early in 1797 he left Yelling and went to Clapham, where his son John was now rector. He died at Clapham on 24 June 1797 and was buried in the old churchyard. 
Like most evangelicals, Venn was a moderate Calvinist. He wrote in 1775, 'Though the doctrines of Grace are clear to me, I am still no friend to High Calvinism' (Venn, 'Life', 32). After his ordination he adopted a strict manner of life and rarely went to mixed parties, but he was always genial and happy, with, a vicar of Brighton remarked, 'a cheerful, open countenance' (Elliott-Binns, 131). He was a lively and effective preacher. One of his Huddersfield congregation recalled, 'When he got warm with his subject, he looked as if he would jump out of his pulpit. He made many weep' (Ryle, 167). And he was an attractive, sympathetic conversationalist, always ready to assist and advise those who came to him, whether from farm or university. 
His son 
Venn was rector of Clapham from 1792 until his death, and was appointed by the trustees set up under the will of John Thornton. It was during his incumbency that the influential Clapham Sect developed, and its members followed him as their pastor and spiritual guide. In 1799 he set up the Society for Bettering the Condition and Improving the Comforts of the Poor, which consisted of thirty members, who over tea every month in their houses arranged for visitors to distribute aid in the parish and in 1800 undertook a universal vaccination there. He upheld a strict way of life. In 1796 the inns in the parish had to abolish their skittle-grounds and cease all gaming in their premises; and he wrote about his children, 'With respect to parties, they never go to any where cards and dancing are introduced, neither do they learn to dance' (Hennell, 158). His parishioners' campaign against the slave trade and other religious and philanthropic causes gained his support. A founder and the first chairman of the Church Missionary Society in 1799, he asserted that it was to be conducted 'on the Church principle, not the High Church principle' (Cornish, 47). He shared in the dislike felt by many towards evangelicals at this time. When Hannah More was taken to Clapham in the carriage of Beilby Porteus, bishop of London, with whom she was staying, the coachman was told to put her down at the Bull's Head tavern instead of the rectory. 
Venn's earnestness and spiritual fervour found expression in his eloquent and persuasive preaching. In addition, he displayed a cultivated intellect, a composed judgement, and a practical outlook. These qualities enabled him to exert a powerful influence upon his wealthy, notable congregation. He died at Clapham on 1 July 1813. His second wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 28185


Venn, Henry (1796-1873), missionary society administrator, was born at Clapham, Surrey, on 10 February 1796, the fifth of eight children of John Venn (1759-1813), rector of Clapham and a founder of the Church Missionary Society (CMS) ['see under 'Venn, Henry], and his first wife, Catherine (died 1803), daughter of William King, a merchant. He had one surviving brother, John, and five sisters, one of whom, Jane Catherine, married Sir James Stephen. His grandfather was Henry Venn (1725-1797). He was brought up in the milieu of evangelical philanthropy and strong family interaction which characterized the leading evangelical Anglicans of the 'Clapham Sect'. He was taught by his father and, for a year, by Professor Farish of Cambridge, prior to entering Queens' College, Cambridge, in 1814. He graduated in 1818 as nineteenth wrangler. In 1819 he was elected fellow, and he was ordained deacon and priest in the following year. After a curacy in St Dunstan-in-the-West, London (1821-4), he returned to Queens' College and taught as a tutor; he also served as university proctor. He then became incumbent of Drypool, Hull (1827-34), and of St John's Holloway, Islington, London (1834-46). While at Drypool, on 21 January 1829 he married Martha Sykes (died 1840), daughter of Nicholas Sykes of Swanland, a wealthy Hull businessman. They had two sons (John Venn and Henry) and one daughter (Henrietta). 
In 1841 Venn became honorary clerical secretary (part-time) of the CMS. He remained in this position until 1872 and became full-time secretary in 1846. In this central position in the leading evangelical Anglican missionary society, Venn's past experience and personal gifts blended in a remarkable way: he had had a missionary interest since his childhood; he had a good, analytical mind; he mixed easily with men of affairs; and he was a shrewd judge of people. Moreover, he was an excellent committee man, always master of his brief but prepared to compromise; and he was an excellent organizer and an assiduous correspondent. Above all he was a pragmatic thinker who sought to establish how best the gospel could be preached, and -- an increasing preoccupation -- how a native church could be established. 
The CMS in 1841 was at a low ebb. Financially it faced a severe crisis. Its voluntary and evangelical character meant that it had been regarded with some suspicion by the ecclesiastical establishment. Venn, as a member of its committee, had already been a principal figure in establishing and justifying an accommodation with the Church of England hierarchy, which formally recognized bishops' rights in relation to the licensing of missionaries and thus paved the way for episcopal recognition of the CMS. As secretary, while retaining a vigorous commitment to voluntary missionary societies, Venn succeeded in moving the CMS to a position of greater acceptability within the Church of England, so that by 1870 virtually all the episcopal bench were vice-presidents of the society. The CMS finances, recruitment, and morale also improved. Venn's greatest contribution, however, was in mission strategy. 
The CMS supported the extension of the episcopate in New Zealand in 1841, but Venn was extremely frustrated by Bishop Selwyn's reluctance to ordain Maori on the grounds that they were insufficiently educated. Bishop Samuel Wilberforce and others pressed strongly for an increase in the episcopate overseas. Venn resisted the appointment of English 'missionary bishops' as a general principle because he feared that, in a context where the laity was not strong, an autocratic, authoritarian episcopal style would rapidly develop, making it impossible to appoint a 'native' bishop. This debate prompted him to think deeply about the shape of the church in newly missionized countries and it is with this thinking that he is most associated. 
Together with his American collaborator Rufus Anderson (1796-1880), Venn began to identify the 'three selfs' principle (Shenk, 'Henry Venn', 31): that churches should be self-governing, self-supporting, and self-propagating -- the true objective for the emerging churches. The originality of the principle can be exaggerated. Great missionaries such as the Serampore trio (William Carey, Joshua Marshman, and William Ward) and Alexander Duff had given considerable thought to the issues involved. The philanthropic, abolitionist context was one, moreover, where radical policies which had a high confidence in indigenous capacity were readily accepted. Where Venn and Anderson were ahead of their contemporaries was in their capacity to enunciate their thinking with a power and logical clarity that nobody else could match. 
So far as England was concerned, Venn's grasp of missionary issues was unrivalled. He kept in close touch with missionaries, ecclesiastical leaders, politicians, and statesmen. He assiduously sought to establish what missionary principles the 'Bible', church history, and contemporary experience provided. By 1851, however, he was speaking of the need for missionaries to work themselves out of a job -- 'the euthanasia of a mission' (Williams, 4-5), and the central importance of indigenous (rather than missionary) pastors who should be close to the culture of their congregations. In the 1860s he became convinced that the dependence system of converts relying on the missionary was the great enemy to be resisted. He advocated structures which would facilitate the emergence of pastoral, governmental, and financial independence, and he stressed the importance of native churches reflecting their own cultures, both institutionally and liturgically. He also expected that these churches would become ecumenical and break from the denominational divisions of the missionary churches. 
Venn was the architect of the elevation of his great friend Samuel Crowther ('c'.1806-1891), a former slave, to the episcopate in west Africa in 1864. He was disappointed that the missionaries effectively put themselves outside Crowther's episcopal control and came to the conclusion that 'the European element in a native church' was 'the great snare and hindrance to its growth' (Williams, 34). Missionaries, he argued, constantly underestimated the capacity of their converts. Consequently the only way forward was a significant measure of separation of the indigenous church from the church of soldiers, settlers, and missionaries. In his conviction that the emerging native church might have a large degree of independence and its own episcopate alongside the existing structures of the Church of England in the same area, he was moving to a more radical and controversial position than many contemporary Anglicans were prepared to countenance. 
Although he was not an accomplished speaker and though he did not write systematically and for a wide general public, Venn had an authority within the CMS and, in lesser measure, within the Church of England, which made him an immensely influential missionary statesman both in his own day and subsequently. His papers, though mainly for internal CMS use, were brought together in his 'Memoir' (1880) and ensured that his influence was perpetuated. It is indicative of his catholicity that the one major book Venn wrote was a study of the sixteenth-century Jesuit missionary Francis Xavier. It was not a success: few Victorian evangelicals wanted to read about counter-Reformation heroes. 
Venn nevertheless brought ecclesiological issues to the centre of the agenda. He took other cultures seriously and he was confident that indigenous figures could lead in commerce and politics, as well as in church life. He constantly opposed missionary paternalism. He was consequently (and remains) much admired and revered by those indigenous Christians who shared his vision of self-government. Indeed, distinguished twentieth-century Nigerian historians regarded him as the ideological originator of Nigerian nationalism. Many significant later missiologists (G. Warneck and R. Allen for example) owed much to him. He served, as a recognized and respected evangelical Anglican leader, on two royal commissions -- one on clerical subscription, in 1864, and the other on ritualism, in 1867. 
Venn has been much criticized -- for driving too sharp a wedge between church and mission; for moving too quickly to independence in areas such as Sierra Leone; for making self-support too central a condition for self-government; for being too 'church-centric' in his analysis; for being insufficiently sympathetic to the problems of the missionaries; and for not travelling outside Europe. It is not possible, however, to gainsay his immense impact. In his private life, Venn had sufficient wealth to live in moderate comfort. During his time with the CMS he lived first in north London, at Highgate and then in Highbury (1848-60), and he finally moved to East Sheen, Mortlake, Surrey, where he died, following a stroke, on 13 January 1873. He was buried in Mortlake cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 28186


Venn, John (bap. 1586, d. 1650), parliamentarian activist and regicide, was baptized at Lydiard St Lawrence in Somerset on 8 April 1586, the second son of Simon Venn, of yeoman stock, and his wife, Maud Lawrence. He was bound apprentice to the Merchant Taylors' Company in 1602, gained his freedom in 1610, and entered the livery in 1621. He became an assistant of the company in 1638, and warden in 1641-3, but was to be excused service as master in 1648 because of his commitments as an MP. In 1619 at Chelsea, Middlesex, Venn married Mary (died 1625), daughter of Henry Wood, a London merchant, with whom he had a son. His second marriage, by licence dated 13 February 1626, at West Ham, Essex, was to Margaret ('b'. 1594), daughter of Geoffrey Langley of Colchester, Essex, widow of John Elliot and of John Scarborough (salter and haberdasher of London respectively); they had a son and a daughter. Five other children from the two marriages died in infancy. 
From at least 1621 Venn had a silk shop in Bread Street and was busy establishing himself as a substantial trader in wool and silk with the west of England and Ireland. Like several future leading parliamentarians he also developed an interest in America without, in his case, ever becoming actively involved in colonial trade. He was one of the original members of the Massachusetts Bay Company, joining its governing body in 1629 and attending its meetings in England, and he was still holding company stock in 1644. He corresponded with John Winthrop in Massachusetts and had apparently considered emigrating himself. Although far from being the impoverished merchant of later royalist propaganda, he was not a member of the City's mercantile elite, only managing third rank in his ward in the 1640 listing of citizens according to their wealth. 
Venn made an early impact in the civic arena. Having become a member of the Honourable Artillery Company in 1614, he gained prominence in City politics for the first time in 1631 when he was an unsuccessful anti-establishment candidate in a disputed artillery company election for the position of captain-leader. Nevertheless in subsequent years further promotion in the company followed -- from an assistant in 1632 to captain-sergeant-major in 1636 and deputy president under Alderman Thomas Soames in 1639. Around the same time Venn was securing officer rank in the London trained bands; he was a captain in 1616 and by 1642 had become a lieutenant-colonel in the Yellow regiment under Sir John Wollaston. His early military interests and experience stood him in good stead during the war years of the 1640s. In 1631 Venn was chosen as churchwarden of All Hallows, Bread Street, a London parish renowned for its puritanism, and throughout the 1630s he and his second wife regularly attended puritan religious meetings, where they made the close acquaintance of the zealous divine Christopher Love. From at least 1638 Venn was also a leading member of common council, serving during the next four years on seven committees including two terms on the highly influential City lands committee. 
Exceptionally active in radical politics in the early 1640s, Venn apparently enjoyed close links with William Fiennes, Viscount Saye and Sele. He also developed a highly effective political partnership with Isaac Penington, a fellow City militant, which gave them considerable powers of co-ordination and direction over radical action in the capital, and he seems to have had close links with the Scottish commissioners sent to London. Venn was a key figure in the organization of the London petition to the king of September 1640, calling for a parliament and outlining grievances, and in spring 1641 he was at the forefront of the City campaign for the trial and execution of the earl of Strafford. His popularity at this time was such that when Matthew Cradock (one of the London MPs) died Venn replaced him at a by-election on 1 June and thereby joined Penington in the Commons. He was to prove a most active MP, being nominated to 300 committees during his time in parliament. The campaign for godly reformation of the Church also drew his enthusiastic support. In October 1641, for example, he gave his support in the Commons to parish zealots in St Giles Cripplegate who had denounced their curate and one of the churchwardens for blocking the implementation of reforms sanctioned by the Commons. He presented a petition of London ministers on 20 December opposing the use of prayers that ran counter to their consciences and calling for the setting up of a national synod to initiate reform. Venn was later to lead the zealots in his own parish of All Hallows, Bread Street, in their endeavour to gain the presbyterian Lazarus Seaman as their minister, and he was reported to have joined Penington in a Commons attack on the rector of St Matthew's Friday Street, designed to help restore the puritan dissident Henry Burton to the living. 
In the turbulent closing weeks of 1641 Venn found himself in the political spotlight. This period opened with a reminder of the limits of his influence among his fellow citizens when he failed to dissuade common council from entertaining the king on his return from Scotland. Yet Venn soon attracted from two fellow MPs the not entirely unfounded accusation that he, and possibly Penington too, had been guilty of orchestrating mass demonstrations outside parliament, aimed at intimidating MPs, during the debate on the grand remonstrance. In addition he had something of a following among London apprentices. Again, like Penington, Venn acted as an intermediary and informant between the City and parliament -- most notably during the change of control over the London militia. Venn was also active in the campaign of July 1642 to remove the royalist Sir Richard Gurney from the mayoralty, thus clearing the way for Penington's promotion to that office. Both men later shared with two other citizens the distinction of being identified as traitors by the king for their role in disaffecting London from him. 
Venn became a leading supporter of parliament's war effort. He helped to raise subscriptions of money, plate, and horse and provide the capital with gunpowder. On the outbreak of hostilities he became a colonel of foot in parliament's army and fought at Worcester on 23 September 1642. Appointed governor of Windsor Castle on the following 28 October, he successfully withstood an early attack by Prince Rupert and remained a constant threat to the royalists. Christopher Love, who had been appointed chaplain to Venn's regiment, joined Venn and his family in Windsor where he continued to exercise a strong influence over them. Venn also ensured that St George's Chapel was subjected to a godly purge. Removed from the governorship in June 1645 under the self-denying ordinance, he returned to London to continue his support for the war effort and became a prominent member of the army committee. 
Despite his admiration for the presbyterian Love, Venn became a leading London Independent and, after the attempted presbyterian counter-revolution of 1647, he was appointed to the Independent-dominated London militia committee of September 1647. After the second civil war he was appointed to the high court of justice for the king's trial and was present at all but two of its sittings; he signed the death warrant ['see also 'Regicides]. He was a busy committeeman in the Rump Parliament with army and financial matters claiming much of his attention. Venn's sudden and unexpected death during the night of 27-28 June 1650 gave rise to groundless rumours of suicide. His widow, Margaret, was the main beneficiary of his will, proved on 1 July, in which he left property in London, Somerset, and three other counties, and a debt of $4000 still due to him for his expenses at Windsor and a further $140 owed by the trustees for bishops' lands. Not long after his death his widow married Thomas Weld, an Independent divine. After the Restoration Venn's estates were said to have been forfeited for regicide. A diary kept by his daughter Anne (or Hannah) Venn was published posthumously in 1658 while his son Thomas wrote 'Military and maritine ['sic'] discipline' in 1672 and later became mayor of Bridgwater. 




@@@@@


doc= 28187


John Venn (bap. 1647, d. 1687), Church of England clergyman, was the son of Venn's cousin Simon Venn of Lydiard St Lawrence, and his wife, Jane. Baptized at Combe Florey, Somerset, on 17 August 1647, he matriculated at Balliol College, Oxford, on 10 May 1662, graduated BA in 1666, and proceeded MA in 1669; he was created BD and DD in 1685. He married Catherine Lowe, sister of Sir Edward Lowe, one of the masters in chancery. A fellow of Balliol, Venn was master of the college from 1678 to 1687 and vice-chancellor of the university in 1686-7. He also enjoyed clerical livings in Lincolnshire and Oxfordshire and, unlike his namesake, was a fervent upholder of church orthodoxy. He died on 8 October 1687 and was buried in Lydiard St Lawrence where he left an estate in his will, which was proved on 4 May 1688. 


@@@@@


doc= 28188


John Venn (1759-1813), Church of England clergyman, was born at Clapham on 9 March 1759 during his father's curacy there. He entered Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, in October 1777, graduated BA in 1781, and proceeded MA in 1784. He was ordained deacon on 22 September 1782 and priest on 26 March 1783, as a curate to his father. He was rector of Little Dunham, Norfolk, from 1783 to 1792, and was the first rector to reside in the parish for seventy-five years. He founded a clerical society, the members of which met twice a year at his rectory to discuss common concerns. He married at Trinity Church, Hull, on 22 October 1789 Catherine, daughter of William King, merchant of Hull; she died on 15 April 1803. They had two surviving sons -- Henry Venn (1796-1873) and John, for many years vicar of St Peter's, Hereford -- and also five daughters, of whom Jane Catherine, the second, married James (afterwards Sir James) Stephen and was mother of Sir James Fitzjames Stephen and of Sir Leslie Stephen. He married secondly Frances, daughter of John Turton of Clapham, in August 1812. 


@@@@@


doc= 28189


Venn, Richard (1691-1739), Church of England clergyman and religious controversialist, the eldest and only surviving son of Dennis Venn (died 1695), vicar of Holbeton, Devon, and his second wife, Patience Gay (died 1712), was born at Holbeton on 7 January 1691. The family had a strong clerical tradition and his grandfather, the vicar of Otterton, had been one of the most prominent west country sufferers for his loyalty to the crown during the civil war. As a result of an injury suffered in childhood Venn could walk only with pain and difficulty, but his intrepid spirit and intellectual abilities remained unimpaired. After attending school at Modbury he went on to Blundell's in Tiverton -- a contemporary here was Bampfylde Moore Carew -- and thence, in 1709, to Cambridge, where he took up a closed scholarship at Sidney Sussex, graduating BA in 1713 and proceeding MA in 1716. 
Venn moved to London and was ordained deacon in 1716 and priest in 1717; he became curate at St Giles Cripplegate, where the rector, Dr Thomas Bennet, was a noted high-churchman. In 1725 he became rector of St Antholin's, Watling Street, retaining a sinecure appointment worth $130 p.a. at St Giles's. He was also a preacher at Paul's Cross. His attitude towards the Hanoverian succession was ambiguous. He was not a nonjuror, but his tract 'King George's Title Asserted' (1715), written in an attempt to persuade Thomas Baker to take the oaths, was argued without conviction. In 1716 he married Maria Anna Isabella Margaretta Beatrix (died 1762), a god-daughter of Queen Mary of Modena and daughter of John Ashton (d. 1691), the Jacobite executed for his part in the Preston plot in 1691. With her came several Stuart relics, which remained in the Venn family for generations, including a snuffbox made from a fragment of the Boscobel oak, a piece of the garter sash worn by King Charles I at his execution, and a picture of King James III. They had eight children, of whom four died in infancy or childhood. One son, Edward (1717-80), attended St John's College, Cambridge, and practised medicine at Ipswich; another was the evangelical minister Henry Venn (1725-1797). Venn was a stern father, of whom family tradition related that 'the system of Solomon he preferred to that of Rousseau' (J. Venn, 53), but he was also fair and affectionate, blessing his children at the end of every day. 
Venn was an influential figure. He formed close friendships with Bishop Edmund Gibson and with the high tory MP John Barnard, lord mayor of London in 1737, and he was a prominent member of a metropolitan circle of high-church clergy that included William Berriman and Henry Stebbing. A consistent opponent of the dissenters, whom he equated with the rebellious sectarians of the 1640s, he resisted proposals to repeal the 'Corporation and Test Acts' and wept when the 'Mortmain Act' was passed in 1736. He attacked Daniel Neal's 'History of the Puritans' (1732-8); led the successful campaign to prevent the latitudinarian Thomas Rundle from becoming bishop of Gloucester in 1734; called Conyers Middleton an 'apostate priest'; and was the first London clergyman to refuse his pulpit to George Whitefield, the Methodist, in 1737. 
Venn died in London from smallpox on 16 February 1739, and was buried at St Antholin's. During his later years his views found frequent expression in the high-church 'Weekly Miscellany', edited by William Webster. His last published work, an anti-Methodist letter, appeared in that journal less than a week before his death. This and other letters, together with an extensive selection of his miscellaneous writings, was published by his widow under the title 'Tracts and Sermons' (1740). 


@@@@@


doc= 28190


Vennar, Richard (bap. 1564, d. 1615), author, was baptized on 25 January 1564 at the church of St Edmund, Salisbury, the second son of John Vennard ('c'.1520-1589), merchant (probably a mercer), and his wife, whose surname may have been Harris. Others called him Vennar and his name is so spelt in his autobiography, 'An Apology' (1614). According to Vennar, Bishop Jewell baptized him in the presence of the earls of Bedford and Pembroke. He was educated by Adam Hill in Salisbury, then went to Balliol College, Oxford, as a fellow-commoner for two years, after which his father sent him with an Italian guide, a serving man, and a page to the courts of Henri III in Paris and Maximilian II in Vienna and home again through Germany. He 'forth-with' admitted himself to Lincoln's Inn, where he maintained 'sixe men, with horses sutable' (Vennar, 'Apology', 5-6). But since Henri set up his court in September 1574 and Maximilian died in October 1576, Vennar would have made his journey when he was ten to twelve years old, having already spent two years at Oxford. Moreover, he went to Barnard's Inn first, then on 10 June 1581 to Lincoln's Inn, where six years later he acquired special admission. He was there for twenty-six years without being called to the bar or practising law. 
Vennar's father complained about his son's wasting money and gave him $300 on condition that he demand no more. But when first his older brother died in 1588 and then his father in 1589, Vennar sued his brother's widow, Mary, in the Star Chamber for his father's estate. She soon married a lawyer in Lincoln's Inn, Richard Low, and they defeated Vennar, who in 1599 compounded for $150, though he thought he should have had thousands. This lawsuit sent Vennar to prison at least twice, for allegedly stealing documents and for debt, and therefore, Vennar thought, destroyed his reputation and his life. He also went to prison for a fraud in 1590-91, of which he was found innocent. 
In 1600 Vennar made the first of three attempts to rehabilitate himself. He went to Scotland and found favour with James VI, but on his return was accused of disloyalty and spent more time in prison. He next tried unsuccessfully to be called to the bar and then took up a literary career. In 1601 and 1602 he produced a pious, protestant work in prose and verse, 'The Right Way to Heaven'; a poem called 'England's Joy', on Lord Mountjoy's great victory at Kinsale; a much revised edition of 'The Right Way'; and a play (now lost) also called 'England's Joy', which he said was to raise money for a return to Scotland. Later he wrote a (lost) broadside against papists and 'The True Testimony of a Faithful Subject' (1605), a thanksgiving for the discovery of the Gunpowder Plot that includes part of 'The Right Way'. 
Vennar was and is mainly known for his attempt to mount his play. In a broadside, 'Plot of the Play Called 'England's Joy'' (1602), he announced its performance at the Swan Playhouse on 6 November 1602. It was to consist of nine spectacular scenes acted, as report had it, by gentlemen and gentlewomen. According to Vennar spectators paid 12's'. each and the actors were 'men of good birth, Schollers by profession' -- not, apparently, women. Vennar duly appeared on stage and delivered six lines of the prologue, but then bailiffs arrested him for debt and effectually 'spoke an Epilogue insteed'. Although he pocketed 'much mony', the authorities did not indict him (Vennar, 'Apology', 24-7). 
A rather different story was soon current and has remained so. John Chamberlain explained it to Dudley Carleton on 19 November: Vennar 'gave out bills of a famous play on satterday was sevenight on the Banckeside, to be acted only by certain gentlemen and gentlewomen of account, the price at comming in was two shillings or eighteen pence at least and when he had gotten most part of the money into his hands, he wold have shewed them a fayre payre of heeles, but he was not so nimble to get up on horsebacke, but that he was faine to forsake that course, and betake himself to the water, where he was pursued and taken and brought before the L: Cheife Justice [Sir John Popham], who wold make nothing of that but a iest and merriment, and bounde him over in five pound to appeare at the sessions: in the meane time the common people... revenged themselves upon the hangings curtaines chaires stooles walles and whatsoever came in theyre way very outragiously and made a great spoyle (TNA: PRO, SP 12/285, fol. 149'v'.)' Thereafter Vennar himself was derisively called England's Joy. The play was finally mounted by William Fennor in the spring of 1615. 
Vennar was imprisoned at least three more times: for wronging lawyers at the Inner Temple, of which he was found guiltless and recompensed; for fraud while trying to raise money in 1606 to finance a masque, of which he was also found guiltless but remained in prison because he could not raise sureties for good behaviour; and for debt in 1614. During this last imprisonment, which was in the Wood Street compter, he wrote his 'Apology' and died. He was buried at St Michael, Wood Street, on 13 October 1615, aged fifty-one. According to Fennor in 1616, Vennar had objected to fees demanded in the compter and been thrown into the black hole, where 'lying without a bedde, hee caught such an extreame cold in his legges, that it was not long before he departed this life' (W. Fennor, 'Compter's Commonwealth', 1617, 62-4). 
In 1588 Vennar had a wife, Elizabeth (who apparently had recusant connections), and for two weeks in 1590 a son, Richard. He was estranged from his wife and 'children' in 1596 (TNA: PRO, SP 12/256, fol. 134) and was single and childless in 1614. His actions and their results made his claims to social distinction ridiculous, but his verse, usually in the six-line stanza of 'Venus and Adonis', is respectable in the manner of Daniel and Drayton, if often overblown, and his prose in the 'Apology' is lively. 


@@@@@


doc= 28191


Venner, Thomas (1608/9-1661), Fifth Monarchist, was probably born in Littleham, Devon. By 1633 he had moved to London, where he worked as a cooper and became a member of the Coopers' Company, probably in that year. Aged twenty-eight, he testified with the separatists Praisegod Barebone and Stephen More before the high court of admiralty in January 1637 regarding a shipment of wine to Virginia. He subsequently emigrated to Salem, Massachusetts, where he was admitted to its church on 25 February 1638 and became a freeman of the town the following month. A juryman in 1638 and 1640, he served as constable beginning in August 1642. Dissatisfied with life in Salem, he organized some of the settlers to move to Providence Island in the West Indies, but this endeavour apparently collapsed. Venner sold the 40 acres allocated to him in Salem and moved to Boston by 1644. With him were his wife, Alice (died 1692), and son, Thomas ['see below'], baptized at Salem in May 1641; he and Alice would have two more children in Boston, Hannah ('b'. February 1645) and Samuel ('b'. February 1650). Venner became a member of the artillery company in 1645, and in October 1648 he organized the coopers of Boston and Charlestown into a trading company. 
Some time following the return of Venner and his family to London in October 1651, he embraced Fifth Monarchist tenets. By 1655 he was employed as a master cooper in the Tower, but he was arrested in June and dismissed for allegedly discussing Cromwell's assassination and plotting to blow up the Tower. The government did not take him very seriously, for he was free by winter, when he participated in meetings with other Fifth Monarchists, including John Portman and Arthur Squibb, and republicans such as John Okey and the naval officer John Lawson. Henry Vane's 'A Healing Question' was the starting point for their discussions about possible joint political action, but they failed to achieve substantive agreement. Okey, Lawson, Portman, and others were arrested in the summer, and officials were searching for Venner. If he was detained, it was only briefly, for in early August he was holding meetings of his Fifth Monarchist congregation at Swan Alley, Coleman Street, London; copies of 'Englands Remembrancers', urging the godly to elect proponents of the Good Old Cause to parliament, were distributed. Apparently the members of the church, some of whom had been lured from John Rogers's congregation, were primarily young men and apprentices. During the winter of 1656-7 Venner planned an insurrection, organizing five groups of twenty-five members each, with only one person in each cell knowing details about the other units. Venner and Portman discussed possible co-operation, but Rogers, Thomas Harrison, and John Carew were opposed, while Christopher Feake and Livewell Chapman were apparently not approached. Venner's people obtained maps, telescopes, horses, weapons, and armour, and his son-in-law, William Medley, drafted a manifesto, 'A Standard Set Up'. It proclaimed the saints' intention to establish theocratic government featuring a sanhedrin and a governing council, each elected by members of gathered churches, and biblically based laws. Land tenures would be reformed and copyhold abolished. The Vennerites intended to confiscate their enemies' property, depositing some of it in a public treasury to support God's work and distributing the rest equally among themselves. Proposed legal reforms, including a hierarchy of courts, beginning with monthly ones in market towns, were aimed at ending law as an instrument of social oppression; judges, like all other officials, would be chosen by the saints alone. The rebels intended to rendezvous at Mile End Green and then march into East Anglia, where they expected many recruits to join them. Venner asked his female followers to distribute copies of the manifesto. The rebels' standard depicted a red lion and the motto 'Who shall rouse him up?' As they assembled on 9 April, government troops arrested approximately twenty of them and seized weapons and 500 copies of the manifesto. Taken before Cromwell, Venner and his supporters refused to doff their hats and impolitely referred to the lord protector as 'thou'. Although Venner was not tried, he was incarcerated in the Tower until at least February 1659. 
By December 1660, when Venner visited Exeter, he was again conspiring, now against the restored monarchy. On Sunday 6 January 1661 he called his followers to arms, urging them not to sheath their swords until the monarchy had been destroyed. Their new manifesto, 'A Door of Hope', called for an international crusade, financed by expropriated property, to defeat France, Spain, the Catholic states in Germany, and the papacy, and for a godly society free of poverty, taxation, primogeniture, and capital punishment for theft. With ensigns emblazoned 'The Lord God and Gideon' and the battle cry 'King Jesus, and the [regicides'] heads upon the gates', some fifty zealots, including at least one armed woman, rebelled. After temporarily seizing St Paul's, the Vennerites sparred with trained bands before retreating to Kenwood, where troops forced a further withdrawal to Aldersgate. Another rebel band repulsed two files of guards near Bishopsgate. After evading capture at Kenwood on Monday night, the rebels fought in a skirmish early on Wednesday morning near Leadenhall Street. Failing to apprehend the lord mayor or liberate prisoners from the compter, they were routed by the life guards in Wood Street. Venner himself had killed at least three of the approximately twenty loyalists who died, but the Vennerites suffered comparable losses, and Venner himself sustained nineteen wounds. Arraigned at the Old Bailey on the 17th, he initially refused to plead, instead launching into a discourse on the Fifth Monarchy. After finally pleading not guilty, he admitted having participated in the insurrection, but not as leader, for that had been Jesus's role. As Venner prepared to be hanged, drawn, and quartered before his meeting-house on 19 January 1661, he remained defiant, claiming to have acted 'according to the best light I had, and according to the best understanding that the Scripture will afford' ('Last Speech', 4). By 21 January thirteen of his compatriots had been executed, and for good measure the government demolished his meeting-house. If the revolt was pathetic and desperate, as some historians have suggested, it was also a manifestation of Venner's fierce conviction that Christ's people, their triumph assured, were literally to take the field against the forces of Antichrist. Resolute in his faith, Venner was a misguided millenarian zealot. 
Venner's elder son, 


@@@@@


doc= 28192


Venner, Tobias (1577-1660), physician and medical writer, was born near North Petherton, Somerset. Details of his early life and family are obscure, but at the age of eighteen he became an undergraduate at St Alban's Hall, Oxford, where he graduated BA on 1 February 1599. Venner then returned to Somerset and in 1601 married Agnes Jeffrye (died 1634) at Bridgwater, having established himself as a medical practitioner in the area; they had a daughter and three sons. The girl died while still young and was buried at North Petherton in 1618. 
By the time he obtained his BM and DM degrees in 1613, Venner was already visiting Bath between spring and autumn when the annual influx of the sick provided a lucrative trade for visiting physicians. Bath's hot mineral springs enjoyed a reputation for the successful treatment of skin problems, paralytic disorders, and painful conditions. The spa was popular with people from all ranks of society but bathing was confined to just three months of the year, so avoiding the hottest and coldest seasons, which were considered dangerous, though Venner challenged the wisdom of this statement in his publication 'The Bathes of Bathe' (1620). Several earlier writers had published books about bathing which featured Bath but Venner was the first to write exclusively about the city's spa. His book undoubtedly helped to promote his image as a balneological specialist and encouraged visitors to consult a trained medical practitioner rather than one of the many quacks and charlatans who pervaded the city. 

'The Bathes of Bathe' accompanied the initial part of another work by Venner on the preservation of health, entitled 'Via recta ad vitam longam', the final part of which he completed two years later. The book followed a traditional format, and discussed how the six 'non-naturals' (environment, diet, sleep, exercise, excretion, and the passions of the mind) affected the balance of the four humours (blood, phlegm, yellow bile, and black bile). Venner advocated the consumption of bran to prevent constipation, and regular cleaning of the teeth to prevent tooth decay and bad breath. He cautioned against drinking water conveyed through lead piping. He also published 'A Briefe... Treatise Concerning the Taking of the Fume of Tobacco' (1621). Although he personally disliked its 'detestable savour' and deplored its immoderate recreational use, he recommended tobacco-smoking as a means of improving digestion and countering the malign effects of cold, misty weather and contagious air. 
By 1630 the improvements which had been carried out to the bathing facilities at Bath were attracting even more patients and doctors. Venner was by then well established in the city, where he leased property near what was known as the Hot Bath. He continued his links with Bridgwater and rented land at Rhode, a small hamlet to the west of the town. His books were selling well and his three sons had graduated in medicine from Oxford University. However, within the space of three years Venner's wife and eldest son both died. His second wife, Mary Parker, also predeceased him, in 1646. 
At the age of seventy-five, Venner was appointed physician to the Scudamore charity. This was a fund set up by Viscount John Scudamore in memory of his wife to provide free medical advice to poor strangers arriving in Bath and also to patients admitted to Bellot's Hospital, which had been founded in 1609 expressly to provide accommodation near the Hot Bath. 
A contemporary biographer wrote rather disparagingly that whereas some men had guts in their brains, Dr Venner's brains were in his guts. Venner's writings suggest that he was a man of moderate habits and piety, so it was not surprising that during the Commonwealth period he espoused the puritan cause. His longevity certainly served to prove the efficacy of his regimen: he died at Bath on 27 March 1660 in his eighty-third year. He was buried in Bath Abbey, where for many years a monument, which is mentioned in Pepys's diary, commemorated his beneficence. He survived all his children; no Venners were mentioned in his will and he left no property, only money and a few named items which were bequeathed to various members of the Parker family, to which he was related through his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 28193


Venning, John (1776-1858), prison reformer and philanthropist, was born at Totnes, Devon, on 20 May 1776, the son of Walter Venning, a merchant, and Mary Ann, his wife. He attended Totnes grammar school and, at the age of fourteen, followed his elder brother William to work for Jackson & Co., a London banking house with interests in Russia. In 1793 he was sent to St Petersburg by the firm; six years later he was joined there by his younger brother Walter Venning (1781-1821). John Venning married Julia, the daughter of James Meybohm, a wealthy member of the large German merchant community in St Petersburg, on 13 September 1805. 
Venning rapidly established himself in the expatriate merchant community in St Petersburg, meeting Tsar Alexander I in 1808 and becoming a familiar figure in polite Russian society. In 1807 Walter Venning returned to England; he came back to Russia in 1817 a committed evangelical and prison reformer. Shortly after, John Venning himself was converted, and he abandoned his social life of theatres and balls. Like other evangelicals, he cultivated an intense personal devotion to Christ, holding that all were sinners saved only through Christ's redemption. Committed to active charitable intervention for the salvation of all God's children, he took Walter's cue in embracing the work of the Society for the Improvement of Prison Discipline, which had been established in England in 1815. This society modelled its work on that of John Howard (1726-1790), the prison reformer, and campaigned for regulated prisons which provided education and instruction in the Christian faith, and reformed rather than brutalized prisoners. John Venning committed himself to reforming Russian prisons and to forwarding the work of the British and Foreign Bible Society, which had set up a Russian Bible Society in 1813, aiming to make vernacular 'Bibles' available to every family in the empire. This agenda brought him close to Alexander I, whose mystical and ultra-conservative Christian spirituality had also led the tsar to an involvement with English Quakers, Methodists, and Baptists, as well as German Lutheran pietists. The tsar aimed to create a transformed society, impermeable to revolution and based on the word of God, education, and philanthropy. 
Alexander was a frequent visitor to the Venning brothers, who in 1819 set up a Prison Discipline Society in St Petersburg. After Walter's death in 1821, John continued their work, revealing to the tsar the appalling conditions in Russian prisons. Emphasizing their extreme filth, the abuse of women, the lack of any medical or spiritual care, and the prevalence of disease, corruption, vice, overcrowding, and misery, Venning presented the prisons as hell come to earth. He was particularly horrified by the condition of the so-called 'exiles' sent to Siberian mines in chain-gangs. Venning reported directly to Alexander through Prince Galitzin and pressed for Howardian reforms, including the introduction of such health measures as exercise and basic hygiene, and the suppression of vices such as gambling, alcoholism, and promiscuity. He also suggested the adoption of work programmes in shoemaking, tailoring, and other trades, and, above all, he called for religious conversion based on distribution of 'Bibles' and 'Bible' teaching. Venning believed that crime stemmed from universal sinfulness: Satan's power flourishing in foul neglected neighbourhoods, fuelled by extravagance, addiction, and atheistic sedition. At the heart of his message was the imperative of trust in God and redemption through Christ. 
Venning was given unlimited access to the prisons of Russia and carefully cultivated the support of leading Russians: indeed, during this period it was 'de rigueur' for aspiring Russians to be seen to be engaged in philanthropic ventures. In 1821 he visited England and went to Newgate Prison with Elizabeth Fry, also getting to know the rest of the Gurney, Fry, and Hoare Quaker banking interests with whom Walter had worked closely. During this trip he established a Prison Discipline Society in Prussia and visited prisons in France before returning to St Petersburg in 1822. 
Administration was very poor in Russia, and Venning frequently found the orders of the tsar were ignored because they had not been transmitted down. Moreover, he was often abused and menaced by officials whose profits and pleasures were threatened by reform; charges of peculation were trumped up against him in 1828 and dismissed without trial. Gradually the reforms which he sought began to be introduced in the great cities. However, by the mid-1820s Alexander's belief in philanthropic Western methods of securing reform was being undermined by the Russian Orthodox church and other deeply reactionary forces in Russia, which saw them as harbingers of foreign influence and liberalism. Obscurantist policies had already set in when Alexander I died in late 1825 and although his successor, Nicholas I, agreed to be patron of the St Petersburg Prison Discipline Society, he drastically reduced the field of activity of the Russian Bible Society. In May 1830 Venning and his wife returned to England and on medical advice remained there. His work of prison reform and 'Bible' distribution was continued in Russia by the German doctor Frederich Haas of Moscow. 
Venning also worked to secure the release of debtors from Russian prisons, but his philanthropy was wider than 'Bible' distribution and prison reform. In November 1824, for example, he played a major role in setting up two houses of refuge after the terrible St Petersburg flood, and he secured funding from the imperial family to replace these with a permanent house with a hospital and work programme. In 1828 Venning persuaded the dowager empress to grant $40,000 to set up an enlightened lunatic asylum 5 miles from St Petersburg. Here he worked as governor to establish a regime based on the moral management system pioneered at The Retreat in York, and centred on the dignified treatment of inmates, exercise, kindness, good food, prayer, and scriptural instruction. In addition he and Walter were part of a committee which established two Lancaster schools, triggered by the visit to Alexander I of the Quakers William Allen and Stephen Grellet in 1818. The schools were paid for by the imperial family and other benefactors; one operated for poor Russian boys, the other for poor expatriate children. The one for Russians suffered from the government reaction against Lancaster schools in the mid-1820s, although it had been founded specifically to teach scripture, in direct challenge to Russian schools which, to the alarm of the authorities, were teaching French liberal philosophy. 
On their return to England the Vennings settled at Surrey House, Surrey Street, Norwich (near the Gurneys of Earlham), and John became a significant figure in the Norwich City Mission. Although actual denomination meant far less to Venning than a vital personal relationship with Christ, he and his wife were Congregationalists, attending a church in Prince's Street, Norwich, from 1831 to 1858. After suffering acute abdominal pains for some time, he died at his home on 11 April 1858, leaving his wife and a son and daughter. John Venning was remembered as a kindly, hospitable, and cheerful man, warm-hearted in his beliefs, who had acted out his gratitude for and delight in Christ's redemption of the world in a strange and at times savage environment of autocratic policy making, immense human suffering, and intense distrust from Europhobic elements of the Russian state. 


@@@@@


doc= 28194


Venning, Ralph (c.1622-1674), clergyman and ejected minister, was born in Devon, the son of Francis Venning and his wife, Joan. As a youth he became the first convert of George Hughes (1603/4-1667), vicar of Tavistock, whom Venning later recalled as 'gentle to me as a nurse which cherisheth her children' ('Mysteries and Revelations', preface). He was educated at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where he entered as a sizar on 1 April 1643 and graduated BA in 1646. Continuing at Emmanuel, the following year he issued the two first of many publications, 'Orthodox Paradoxes', and 'Mysteries and Revelations', an explanation of scriptural names, allusions, and metaphors, dedicated to Captain Francis West, lieutenant of the Tower of London, from whom Venning had received 'many favours'. On 16 February 1648 he was appointed chaplain at the Tower, but returned to Cambridge to proceed MA in 1650. He subsequently held a lectureship at St Olave's, Southwark, where he earned fame as a preacher and continued to publish sermons and devotional works such as 'The New Command Renewed' (1650) and 'Canaans Flowings' (1653). 
During the protectorate Venning was one of those employed to examine candidates for chaplaincies in the navy. From 1654 he preached sermons at St Paul's before successive mayors of London. He was made an assistant to the Surrey commission of triers and ejectors on 29 September 1657 and lecturer at St Mary Magdalen, Milk Street, on 26 November 1658. On 14 December 1659 Richard Baxter advised an anxious John Greenborough that Venning was one of those 'godly orthodox men' who, despite their congregational principles and possible lack of ordination, 'you may thanke God you have such to heare' (Keeble and Nuttall, 1.421). In January 1661 he signed the congregational and Baptist 'Renunciation and Declaration' against Thomas Venner. By a licence of 8 January 1661, which gave his parish as St Botolph without Bishopsgate, he married Hannah, widow of John Cope of London. 
Venning was ejected under the 'Act of Uniformity' in 1662; he was reported to be preaching unofficially in Southwark in 1663 and at the Wild Man, Cannon Street, the following year. At Southwark, Calamy recorded, Venning was 'a most importunate and prevalent pleader for the poor' who succeeded in raising 'some hundreds of pounds for them' each year (Calamy, 'Abridgement', 2.22-3). Sermons preached there many years earlier appeared in his 'Sin, the Plague of Plagues' (1669). Under the declaration of indulgence Venning took out a licence in St Clement Eastcheap on 30 April 1672. Earlier he had become the co-pastor with Robert Bragge (1627-1704) of the Independent congregation at Pewterers' Hall, Fenchurch Street, and this charge he held until his death. 
It seems that Venning and his wife had remained childless but that he had continued to hope that she might conceive. In an astoundingly laconic will, dated 8 January 1674, 'being in good health', he disposed in one short paragraph of much money. There were legacies amounting to $240 for various relations, $50 'to Christ's hospital for the blew coat children', $30 for poor ministers, and $10 for 'my honoured Mother Johan' and for his stepdaughter Hannah Cope; most of the rest went to his wife, then aged about forty, with one proviso: 'if I leave a child I give it $1000'. Less than two months later, while preaching at Joyners' Hall on Sunday afternoon, 1 March 1674, he was taken ill. He died on 10 March, aged about fifty-two, and was buried in Bunhill Fields; the funeral sermon was preached by his colleague Robert Bragge. 'The Dead yet Speaking' (1674), 'Venning's Remains, or, Christ's School' (1675), and 'Mr Vennings Alarm to Unconverted Sinners' (1675) were the first of many posthumous editions of his works; some were still being reprinted even in the late nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 28195


Venning, Walter (1781-1821), philanthropist, was born at Totnes, Devon, on 15 November 1781, the youngest of three sons born to his father, Walter, a local merchant, and his wife, Mary Ann. He followed his two brothers to Totnes grammar school and thence to Jackson & Co., a London banking house with interests in St Petersburg, Russia. In 1799 he joined his brother John Venning (1776-1858) at the St Petersburg branch of the company and remained there until 1807, when he returned to London. In 1810 he experienced an evangelical conversion, the impact of which was deepened by his mother's death in 1811. On 6 September 1811 he joined the Independents. He never married. 
In 1815 the Gurney, Hoare, and Fry evangelical Quaker banking interests coalesced to form the London-based Society for the Improvement of Prison Discipline; Walter Venning became intensely involved with this society, which was established to implement the prison reformer John Howard's recommendations following his revelations of appalling conditions prevailing in prisons throughout Europe. He had argued that prisons should be rigorously supervised by the public authorities and administered according to proper health practices, with the provision of work, exercise, pastoral care, and aftercare, and appropriate classification of all prisoners. 
Walter Venning returned to St Petersburg in 1817, where he influenced the conversion of his brother John. It was a propitious time for his mission: Tsar Alexander I was deeply committed to a mystical vision of vernacular scripture and Western-style philanthropy underpinning an ultra-conservative Christian society. This emphasis on the living word of God led him to support the British and Foreign Bible Society in its crusade to make the vernacular 'Bible' available to every family in Russia. Indeed, at this time it was 'de rigueur' for any aspiring Russian politician or aristocrat to be seen to be engaged in such work. 
In 1817 Walter Venning was introduced by Revd John Paterson of the Bible Society to the Russian court and this led to a meeting with Prince Galitzin, one of Alexander's most influential ministers. Walter Venning was allowed to visit the prisons of St Petersburg and to report directly to Alexander. In 1818 he was invited to report on the prisons of Moscow; his report was translated into Russian by Princess Meshchersky. In this widely read document he depicted the prisons as grossly neglected and abusive environments: corruptly administered, full of dirt, violence, and drunkenness, they housed prisoners dying of preventable disease without any programmes of spiritual or moral reform or training for release. In the spring of 1819 the tsar agreed to the establishment of a Prison Discipline Society in St Petersburg, comprising Russians and British and other expatriates. On 5 May 1819 he visited the Venning brothers and showed much interest in the design of a model prison, based on John Howard's plans but adapted to the Russian climate. At the same time Walter Venning was working with Princess Meshchersky to introduce Ladies' Visiting Committees to women prisoners in St Petersburg, in imitation of Elizabeth Fry's work. Some success was achieved in transforming places of terror and abuse into sober and ordered establishments offering employment and religious instruction. 
Venning was also concerned with the Russian Bible Society and the Lancaster schools movement, which was introducing the monitorial teaching system in Russia. In 1818 the Quakers William Allen and Stephen Grellet visited Alexander, whom they had met in England four years earlier, and they criticized Russian Lancaster schools for teaching French philosophical writings and other secular texts which they viewed as seditious. Venning played a major role in setting up two Lancaster schools for scriptural and moral education in St Petersburg, one for poor Russian boys and one for expatriates, to ensure a proper religious and moral basis to this kind of education. 
Just before these schools opened Walter Venning died at his brother John's home in St Petersburg on 10 January 1821 of typhoid, probably contracted while visiting prisoners. He was buried at the city's English chapel and a bronze monument erected in his memory. He was remembered for his intense enthusiasm for evangelical Christianity and prison reform. He had committed his life to the belief that the rich and powerful would find the true Christ in stewardship of the dispossessed, the poor, and the lost; by their good works they would create a truly Christian society united in charity, obligation, gratitude, and obedience. His work was continued by his brother John. 


@@@@@


doc= 28196


Vennor, Henry George (1840-1884), geologist and meteorologist, was born on 30 December 1840 in Montreal, Lower Canada, the son of Henry Vennor, hardware merchant, and his wife, Marion Paterson. He was educated at Philips School and the high school in Montreal before enrolling at McGill University in the late 1850s. There Vennor studied civil engineering, geology, mineralogy, and zoology under professors including Sir John William Dawson and Thomas Sterry Hunt, while simultaneously taking chemistry at the Montreal Medical College. After graduating with honours in 1860, he spent five years in the employ of the mercantile firm of Frothingham and Workman. 
From an early age it became evident that Vennor possessed the aptitude and interests to be a naturalist. While still a schoolboy, he had assembled a collection of local reptiles (mostly snakes), preserved in alcohol and displayed at a provincial exhibition; it eventually became the property of McGill University. Part of his leisure time was devoted also at this time to studying the weather and amassing large collections of the birds and fossils of Montreal Island. By 1865 he had several papers on the ornithology of Canada published in the 'Canadian Naturalist' and the 'British American Magazine'. This was followed, in 1876, by the appearance of his book 'Our Birds of Prey, or, The Eagles, Hawks, and Owls of Canada'. 
Five years after graduating from college, Vennor embarked on a career in geology, working under Sir William Edmond Logan, director of the geological survey of Canada, on a survey of Manitoulin Island in Lake Huron. During this time his zeal as an amateur naturalist drove him to gather, in his free time, a collection of the birds he encountered, a collection subsequently donated to Queen's College, Kingston. In 1866 Vennor became a permanent staff member of the survey and began to develop detailed topographical maps of south-eastern Ontario and Pontiac county, Quebec. It was there that he conducted the majority of his field work during his years with the survey. In 1867 he published a ground-breaking paper on the stratigraphy of the Precambrian Shield in the Hastings county area in the 'Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society of London' (23/1, 256-7); he was elected a fellow of the society in 1870. While mapping the geographical distributions of the Laurentian Mountains, he began to record in detail the economically significant mineral and metal deposits in the region. In the process, he discovered Precambrian gold in a mine in Hastings county in 1866. Initially he down-played the importance of this find, but it nevertheless led to a brief gold rush in the region. 
Throughout his career Vennor actively promoted the interests of local mining operators and he was instrumental in directing their attention to the phosphate deposits in Ottawa county as early as 1872, a mining industry which boomed during the 1880s and remained profitable long thereafter. He continued to work for the geological survey on projects that traced the Precambrian formations of the Laurentian Mountains; he reported his findings in seven reports for the geological survey of Canada. Partly because these reports were never published, he came into conflict with Alfred Richard Cecil Selwyn, who was the survey's director from 1869 to 1895. The two men quarrelled frequently over working conditions and the preferential advancement of a younger generation of geologists, such as George Mercer Dawson, over the more experienced members of the survey. Vennor continued, meanwhile, to focus his efforts on promoting the economic development of local minerals until, in 1881, he was 'dismissed for using his position to traffic in phosphate lands in the Ottawa valley' (Zaslow, 136). He subsequently opened a consulting office in Montreal. 
Over the years, Vennor developed a personal interest in meteorology. Interested in weather forecasting, he compiled and compared data on weather patterns and believed that he had detected a 'law of recurrences' which allowed for a degree of predictability. After successfully forecasting Montreal's excessively mild Christmas and new year's day in 1875, he decided to begin publishing 'Vennor's Almanac' annually from 1877. This venture was so successful in terms of distribution and critical acclaim that by 1881 he not only issued a separate American edition, but he also published 'Vennor's Weather Bulletin' monthly throughout 1882 and part of 1883. Vennor died in Montreal on 8 June 1884 and was buried two days later. Walter Smith, who continued to publish the almanac after Vennor's death, claimed in the 1885 edition that Vennor was survived by a wife and three children, but no mention of them is made in any contemporary obituaries. 


@@@@@


doc= 28197


Ventris, Sir Peyton (1645-1691), judge and politician, was born in November 1645, the first surviving son of Edward Ventris (died 1649) of the manor of Granhams in Great Shelford, Cambridgeshire, and of Mary, daughter of Sir John Brewse of Little Wenham, Suffolk, where Ventris was born. His father, a barrister of the Middle Temple, took no part in the civil war though he did profit from it, as he purchased his manor in 1646 from a compounding royalist. He died in 1649, leaving the bulk of his property to his eldest son, Peyton. 
Ventris entered Jesus College, Cambridge, on 4 July 1660 and proceeded, without taking a degree, to the Middle Temple on 3 February 1664. He was called to the bar on 2 June 1671 and kept a chamber in Fleet Street above the Great Gate of the Middle Temple. Ventris enjoyed little success as a pleader. Having begun noting cases while a student, he now turned to reporting for his livelihood. The result was two volumes of reports, principally of arguments in king's bench and common pleas, published posthumously in 1696 and in many editions thereafter owing to their reputation for clarity, comprehensiveness, and accuracy. 
Ventris married Margaret, the daughter and coheir of Henry Whiting, a shipowner of Coggeshall, Essex, and of Ipswich. They had five sons and one daughter. Ventris established his family in St Nicholas's parish, Ipswich, where in 1681 he became the town clerk and one of three counsel to the corporation. In July 1684 he lost these offices when his name was omitted from the town's new charter, perhaps owing to accusations that he had countenanced conventicles and because he had defended dissenters in king's bench. Despite apparent royal disfavour, Ventris was made a justice of the peace for Suffolk in 1685. His fortunes improved further when he inherited extensive properties from his father-in-law in 1687. 
Ventris came to prominence only after the revolution of 1688. He was chosen to one of Ipswich's seats in the Convention Parliament in January 1689, where he reportedly voted against declaring the throne vacant by virtue of James II's departure from England. In his only recorded parliamentary speech Ventris defended the hereditary royal revenue. Ventris, along with other more prominent lawyers, took the oath as a serjeant-at-law on 2 May 1689. Two days later the king made him a justice of common pleas; a knighthood followed on 31 October 1689. 
Like other justices, Ventris was often asked to comment on legal cases heard in the House of Lords and on proposed legislation that would affect the operation of the law. But Ventris's recorded statements, both in court and in parliament, were few and brief compared to those of the more prominent jurists with whom he served. After a long illness Ventris died on 6 April 1691 at his house in Ipswich and was buried in the chancel of St Nicholas's Church, survived by his wife, his mother, five sons, and a daughter. Why Ventris, who had done little to distinguish himself professionally, had been advanced to the bench remains unclear, though his 'Reports' endure as among the most important written during the Restoration. 


@@@@@


doc= 28198


John Verbruggen (1670?-1708), also said to have appeared under the name Alexander early in his career, is first recorded in United Company records in 1688. After his marriage in 1694 he appeared exclusively under his own name, playing such characters as Ambrosio in D'Urfey's 'Don Quixote' (1694) and Loveless in Cibber's 'Love's Last Shift' (1697). At Lincoln's Inn Fields (where he held a share) his repertory ranged from Wilmore in Aphra Behn's 'The Rover' to Oroonoko in Southerne's 'Oroonoko' and Edgar in 'King Lear'. Described by Aston as tall, well-built, but 'a little In-kneed, which gave him a shambling Gate, which was a Carelessness, and became him', the actor, a rival to both George Powell and Thomas Betterton, was described as being a 'rough diamond', untrained but natural, and able to 'touch tenderly the finer feelings, as well as excite the wilder emotions of the heart' (Doran, 1.61). Verbruggen was buried on 12 March 1708 at St Martin-in-the-Fields. 


@@@@@


doc= 28199


Verbruggen, Susanna (bap. 1666, d. 1703), actress, was baptized on 29 July 1666 at St Giles Cripplegate, London, the daughter of Thomas Percival (died 1693?), a minor actor-manager in the Duke's and United Company, and his wife, Anne Terry. Her first recorded appearance is as Winifred in Thomas D'Urfey's 'Sir Barnaby Whig', for the King's Company at Drury Lane Theatre in the summer of 1681. In a letter dated 1684 Dryden already refers to her as 'a Comedian', a title that remained appropriate for the United Company actress who played mostly comic roles in more than sixty new plays between 1681 and 1703. As early as 1686 she had progressed not only to playing Nell, the leading role in Thomas Jevon's 'The Devil of a Wife', but also to delivering the epilogue -- an indication of her rising appeal and importance as an actress. 
On 22 June 1686, at St James's, Duke's Place, Aldgate, Susanna Percival married the actor and playwright William Mountfort (c.1664-1692); they had at least four children, although only two -- Susanna and Mary -- reached adulthood. As Mrs Mountfort, Susanna continued to gain recognition for her comic acting as well as her ability to play breeches parts: 'a more adroit pretty Fellow than is usually seen upon the Stage' (Cibber, 166). The dedicatory epistle to 'Sir Anthony Love' (1690), the play containing what was arguably her most notable breeches role, praises not only her acting skills, but suggests that Thomas Southerne wrote the role of Sir Anthony specifically for the actress: 'as I made every Line for her, she has mended every Word for me; and by a Gaiety and Air, particular to her Action, turn'd every thing into the Genius of the Character' ('Works of Thomas Southerne', 1.14-20). 
The opportunity afforded by Susanna's marriage to Mountfort was capitalized on in their appearances as a 'gay couple', a productive union which ended when Mountfort was murdered on 9 or 10 December 1692 by Captain Richard Hill, aided by Lord Mohun (who was found not guilty of murder in 1693). Following her husband's death Mrs Mountfort continued to act in comedies, creating, among others, the notable character of the old maid, Lady Susan Malepart, in 'The Maid's Last Prayer' (1693), a 'Youthful Virgin of five and forty, with a selling Rump, bow Leggs, a shining Face, and colly'd Eyebrows... sure she's an Original' ('Works of Thomas Southerne', 1.70-72). 
On 31 January 1694 Mrs Mountfort married John Verbruggen ['see below'], a promising young actor, at St Clement Danes and some time afterwards moved to the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields. As Mrs Verbruggen she became one of London's best comic actresses, earning, in the year she got married, 50's'. a week. Her last recorded roles, in 1703, were Hillaria in Thomas Baker's 'Tunbridge Wells' and Whimsey in Richard Estcourt's 'The Fair Example', the latter on 10 April. According to an account written by Thomas Davies, Mrs Verbruggen died in childbirth later that year. She was buried at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 2 September 1703 and the child, Lewis Vanbrugen, was buried the following October. Another child, John George Verbruggen, the son of John and Susanna, was baptized at St Clement Danes on 23 November 1708, although no birth record has been traced (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'). 
Susanna Verbruggen, a contemporary of Mrs Bracegirdle, appears not only to have carved out her own niche during her career but, according to one recent critic, to have influenced the repertory of the time through a willingness and ability to play, in addition to the charming heroines, 'ugly, foolish and low-life characters' (Howe, 84). As Cibber remarks, 'she was so fond of Humour, in what low Part soever to be found, that she would make no scruple of defacing her fair Form to come heartily into it' (Cibber, 165-7). Although no portrait has been traced, Tony Aston offers a flattering image of her as 'the most pleasant creature that ever appeared... she was a fine, fair Woman, plump, full-featured; her Face of a fine, smooth Oval, full of beautiful, well-dispos'd Moles on it, and on her Neck and Breast' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA'). Her diverse roles, variously described as the coquette, the stale virgin, the hoyden, the minx, the bawd, and the comic grotesque, give some idea of the humorous stock characters conjured ably by the actress, suggesting that both her popularity and Cibber's praise were not undeserved: 'Mistress of more variety of Humour than I ever knew in any one Woman Actress. This variety, too, was attended with an equal Vivacity, which made her excellent in Characters extremely different.... Nothing, tho' ever so barren, if within the Bounds of Nature, could be flat in her Hands. She gave many heightening Touches to Characters but coldly written, and often made an Author vain of his Work that in it self had but little Merit. (Cibber, 165-7)' 



@@@@@


doc= 28200


Verdon, Bertram de (d. 1192), judge and administrator, was the son of Norman de Verdon and Luceline, daughter of Geoffrey of Clinton, chamberlain to Henry I. He is mentioned as adhering to Henry II against his rebel sons in 1173. In 1175 and the three following years he was regularly present as a baron at the sittings of the 'curia regis', and from 1175 to 1179, and probably later, served as itinerant justice in eight counties. In 1170 he accounted as sheriff of Warwickshire and Leicestershire, in succession to William Basset and presumably benefiting from the removal of the sheriffs at Easter 1170. He continued as sheriff until 1184 (Pipe rolls, 30 Henry II, 43). In March 1177 he was sent with others of the king's counsellors by Henry to Fernando II, king of Leon, to negotiate and announce his intention of making a pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela. 
Verdon accompanied John to Ireland in 1185 and remained as his seneschal of Ireland after John's return to England in the same year. Gerald of Wales mentions staying with him in Dublin and his house remained a well-known landmark in Dublin throughout the middle ages. He was also appointed custodian of the castle of Drogheda following Hugh de Lacy's death in 1186. While in Ireland John granted him lands equivalent to the baronies of Upper and Lower Dundalk in the modern co. Louth, although the earliest surviving record of this grant comes from the years 1189-91. He established a manor at the site now known as Castletown, west of the present town of Dundalk, with a parish church dedicated to St John the Baptist. He, or possibly his son Nicholas, founded a house for the Crutched Friars dedicated to St Leonard at Seatown in Dundalk itself. He left Ireland before the end of 1189. 
Verdon continued in the service of Richard I, witnessing charters at Canterbury on 1 December 1189 and at Westminster in January 1190, and accompanied Richard to the Holy Land. He was surety for Richard's peace with Tancred of Sicily in November 1190 and witnessed a charter at Messina on 23 January 1191. He arrived in Palestine in June 1191, and on 21 August was left with Stephen de Longchamp in charge of Acre and the queens of England and Sicily, and the daughter of the emperor of Cyprus, while Richard proceeded towards Jerusalem. Verdon died the following year (1192) at Jaffa. Among other religious benefactions he founded in 1176 the Cistercian abbey of Croxden in Staffordshire, where his chief lands were. 
Verdon's first wife was Maud, daughter of Robert de Ferrers, earl of Derby (died 1159), with whom he had no children. He and his second wife, Rohese, had six sons of whom two, Thomas and Nicholas, succeeded in turn to his estates. His one daughter, Lesceline, married Hugh de Lacy, later earl of Ulster (d. 1242). Nicholas's only daughter and heir, Rohese, married Theobald Butler, and was grandmother of Theobald de Verdon. 


@@@@@


doc= 28201


Verdon, Theobald de, first Lord Verdon (1248?-1309), baron, was the youngest surviving son and heir of Sir John de Verdon, who had holdings in Buckinghamshire, Leicestershire, Wiltshire, Warwickshire, and Staffordshire, and of Margaret, daughter of Gilbert de Lacy (died 1230), and granddaughter and coheir of Walter de Lacy (d. 1241), lord of Meath in Ireland, Weobley, Herefordshire, and Ewyas Lacy, Shropshire. Theobald's two elder brothers, Nicholas and John, were killed in Ireland in 1271, when Theobald was said to have been twenty-three years old, so that when his father died in 1274, he inherited a substantial estate stretching from the marches of Wales to Ireland. As a result of his inheritance, over the next thirty years, Verdon divided his time between England and Ireland and gradually became embroiled in the politics of these turbulent regions. 
John de Verdon had strong ties to the crown, fighting for the royalists during the barons' wars, serving on behalf of the Lord Edward in 1261-3, going on crusade with Edward in 1270-72, and serving again in Ireland on his return, when his son Theobald acted as his attorney in England. After his father died, Theobald de Verdon continued this tradition of royal service. He was in Ireland after 1275 and was summoned to serve in Wales in 1277, 1282, and again in 1283. Verdon's men helped to transport victuals from Ireland to Wales to provision the royal army there in 1282. Verdon garnered some royal favours in these years. At his request, Nicholas de Netterville, his household knight in Ireland, was excused from royal administrative service in 1284. In that same year Verdon was granted special permission to receive his Irishmen into the king's peace, and also obtained the right to hold markets on a number of his Irish manors. 
Verdon was summoned to parliament in 1275 and again in 1283, to discuss the capture of Dafydd ap Gruffudd. In 1290 he was among the magnates who granted an aid for the marriage of the king's daughter, and he was summoned regularly to parliament after 1295. In 1291 he and several other Irish lords graciously granted Edward a fifteenth of their moveables and of those of their men in Ireland. 
Despite his loyal service Verdon later encountered problems with Edward I, beginning in Ireland. Henry III had seized Walter de Lacy's liberty of Meath, and some of those liberties had been restored to the coparceners of Lacy's estate, Geoffrey de Geneville and John de Verdon, Theobald's father. Geneville's liberties were more extensive than those assigned to John, and an inquest in 1266 stated that the Lord Edward would lose at least 400 marks a year if John's liberty was held as freely as Geneville's. When Verdon complained about his loss in 1279, another inquest was conducted upholding the earlier verdict, after which Edward seized all of Theobald's liberties in Meath. 
At about that time Verdon was engaged in a long-running dispute with Llanthony Priory in the Welsh marches. The prior, who held a virgate of land of him, was summoned to Verdon's court to answer for a trespass. When the prior did not appear, Verdon's men seized cattle and other goods belonging to the prior, and refused to release them when the prior asked. The prior then brought a plea of trespass against Verdon accusing his men of a variety of misdeeds, including assault and homicide. Edward I intervened and ordered Verdon and his men not to vex the prior. But when the sheriff of Hereford and his men went to Verdon's court at Ewyas Lacy to investigate the matter, they were assaulted by Verdon's steward and a crowd of Welshmen, numbering 600 according to the aggrieved sheriff. The abbot of Combe similarly brought a plea of trespass in 1290 against Verdon, who in 1291 was swept up in the war between the earls of Gloucester and Hereford. In January 1291, along with other lords from the Anglo-Welsh marches, Verdon was summoned to testify about the conflict before royal justices. In March he duly appeared, and like the other lords refused to testify, claiming that the king's demand violated their liberties and the custom of the march. He similarly refused to allow his men to be impanelled as jurors. 
Edward seized Verdon's lands to compel him to answer for his trespasses against Llanthony and his disobedience of royal orders. Having recovered his lands, in October 1291 he came before the king and council at Abergavenny, at the same time that the earls of Gloucester and Hereford were arraigned. Like them, Verdon was found guilty, and was ordered to appear before the king and council in parliament in January 1292 for judgment. Edward was at first harsh. Verdon was committed to gaol, and forever disinherited of his liberty of Ewyas Lacy. Yet Edward relented. On account of the good services that Verdon and his ancestors had performed for the king, and because Verdon had voluntarily confessed and submitted himself to judgment, Edward declared that his liberty would be restored to his heirs after his death, and that he would have to pay a fine of 500 marks. Ewyas Lacy was taken into royal custody on 19 February, but then restored to Verdon the following June. 
Despite this punishment Verdon continued to come into conflict with his neighbours. In 1299 the prior of Llanthony once again complained about Verdon and his subjects in Ewyas, asserting that they were harassing the prior's men. Two years later Verdon's followers were similarly accused of committing trespasses against Sir John Hastings, so that the king had to warn him to amend his ways or be prepared to accept the remedy. 
Although only in his forties, there are signs that Verdon may have been growing infirm during the 1290s. In 1295 he was summoned to parliament and ordered to help the justiciar of Ireland raise men to fight in Scotland. That same year he granted his eldest son, John, lands out of his patrimony without royal permission, and was fined accordingly. When in 1297 he was ordered to come to the king with horses and arms to fight in Gascony, he wrote back that he could not attend because of his infirmity, and because John, whom he had wanted to serve in his place, had died. Edward did not like the excuse and replied that he recalled that Verdon's second son, another Theobald, appeared fit, and so should be sent to serve in his father's place. Verdon stayed in Ireland in 1297 and 1298, and was discharged from service against the Scots in 1299. In March 1300 the Irish besieged him in Roch Castle. When the king summoned him for military service again in 1301, he stipulated that Verdon could send his son in his place if he was disabled by illness. He would then have been about fifty-three years old. Nevertheless, he attended the parliament at Lincoln in 1301, where he was one of the witnesses to the letter of the barons to the pope, and continued to be summoned for royal service in Scotland until his death in 1309. 
Verdon married Margery, who brought land in Bisley, Gloucestershire, to the marriage. They had several sons: John, who died in Ireland in 1297; Theobald, who inherited his father's estate; and their younger brothers, Robert, Nicholas, and Michael. In April 1302 Verdon arranged a marriage between the younger Theobald and Matilda, daughter of Edmund (I) de Mortimer, in which both families promised lands in Ireland to the couple. They were married at Wigmore on 27 July. Theobald de Verdon the elder died at Alton, Staffordshire, the head of his patrimony, on 24 August 1309, when he was about sixty-one years old. He was buried with great honour among his ancestors in Croxden Abbey on 13 October. 
The younger 


@@@@@


doc= 28202


Theobald de Verdon, first Lord Verdon (1278-1316), baron, born on 8 September 1278, served in Scotland on a number of occasions, including the Falkirk campaign of 1298, and was summoned regularly to parliament from 1299, being thereby considered to have become Lord Verdon in his own right. He was probably on friendly terms with Thomas of Lancaster, who in 1312 attended the funeral of Verdon's first wife. On 30 April 1313 he was made justiciar of Ireland, an appointment probably made at least in part in response to the revolt against the Irish government of Verdon's own brothers in 1312-13. But he did not take up office until 18 June 1314, and was replaced on 27 February 1315. Following the death of his wife Matilda in 1312, Verdon married, on 4 February 1316, Elizabeth de Clare (1294/5-1360), sister of Gilbert de Clare, earl of Gloucester (d. 1314), and widow of John de Burgh, until his death in 1313 heir to the earldom of Ulster. It was alleged that Verdon had abducted Elizabeth from Bristol Castle, but he claimed before the council that she had come out to meet him, and that they had been betrothed in Ireland. Verdon died at Alton on 27 July 1316, and was buried in Croxden Abbey. He left no male heir, but had three daughters from his first marriage, and a posthumous daughter from his second. The Verdon estates were accordingly partitioned among these coheiresses and their husbands: Joan, who married first John Montagu and second Thomas Furnival; Elizabeth, who married Sir Bartholomew Burghersh (d. 1355); Margery, who married first William Blount, second Sir Mark Hose, and third Sir John Crophill; and Isabella, who married Henry Ferrers, Lord Ferrers of Groby (d. 1343) ['see under 'Ferrers family (per. c.1240-1445)]. 


@@@@@


doc= 28203


Vere, Aubrey (II) de (d. 1141), administrator, was the son and successor of Aubrey (I) de Vere and Beatrice, his wife. While the family was from Ver, south of Coutances in Normandy, there is no evidence that Aubrey senior or his descendants held lands either there or in Brittany, with which they retained ties. The elder Aubrey was most probably the younger son of a Norman lord who prospered in England after the conquest, becoming a royal chamberlain. Probably born in the early 1080s, Aubrey junior married Alice (died 1163?), daughter of Gilbert de Clare, before 1107. He was to become one of the most prominent royal administrators of the later years of the reign of Henry I and the early years of Stephen. It is likely that Aubrey (II) began his administrative career as royal chamberlain, possibly inheriting that office from his father when the latter died 'c'.1112. By 1121 he was sheriff of Essex, and, later in that decade, of London and Middlesex. The extent of the king's confidence in de Vere is evident in his appointment as joint sheriff, with Richard Basset, to the custody of eleven counties in 1129-30. This unprecedented situation was probably part of an effort to collect arrears and to adjust the shrieval farms. While the king had levied one fine of 550 marks and four war-horses against him for having allowed a prisoner to escape, and another of at least 100 marks for permission to resign the shrievalty of Essex and Hertfordshire, these fines had gone largely uncollected -- another sign of royal favour. In 1133 Henry I bestowed the hereditary office of master chamberlain of England on de Vere; the office was to remain in the de Vere family until 1703. Although his royal service was primarily confined to England, he was at least twice with Henry I in Normandy. 
When Aubrey de Vere's son William de Vere asserted that his father was 'justiciar of all England', and privy to important royal secrets, he seems to have meant that his father had travelled extensively as a justice, rather than that he had been chief justiciar of the realm. William of Malmesbury describes him as 'causidicus' -- a pleader or advocate -- and skilled in the law. De Vere may have served as an itinerant justice under Henry I; he certainly did so in Stephen's reign. He had accepted Stephen's rule by Easter 1136, and when the king was summoned before an ecclesiastical council after his arrest of Roger of Salisbury and other bishops in 1139, he sent de Vere as his advocate. Aubrey de Vere was killed in a London riot on 15 May 1141, perhaps while supporting his son-in-law Geoffrey de Mandeville, first earl of Essex (d. 1144). 
Aubrey de Vere had at least nine children with Alice, who survived him for twenty-two years; as a widow she retired to St Osyth's Priory. They had five sons: Aubrey (III) de Vere, his successor; Robert, who held a small Northamptonshire fief in 1166; Geoffrey, who served as sheriff of Shropshire from 1165 to 1170; William, who held the prebend of Nesden in St Paul's, London, before becoming a canon of St Osyth's Priory, Essex, and then bishop of Hereford (1186-98), and who wrote a life of St Osgyth; and Gilbert, prior of the order of the hospital of St John of Jerusalem in England (1195-7). Two of their four daughters became countesses: Rohese (Rohese de Beauchamp ['see under 'Beauchamp, de, family]) married successively Geoffrey de Mandeville, first earl of Essex, and Payn de Beauchamp of Bedford ['see under 'Beauchamp, de, family]; and Juliana, divorced by Hugh (I) Bigod, earl of Norfolk, married Walchelin Maminot of West Greenwich. Alice married Robert of Essex, then Roger fitz Richard of Warkworth; their fourth daughter was wife to Roger of Raimes. 
De Vere inherited the barony of Castle Hedingham, with twenty-nine manors located mostly in the eastern counties. Like many Normans of the second generation in England, he expanded his patrimony, but did so primarily by acquiring mesne tenancies. He founded a Benedictine cell of St Melaine, Rennes, at Hatfield Broadoak, Essex, 'c'.1135, and patronized his father's foundation, also Benedictine, of Earls Colne Priory, Essex. He also began construction of a stone keep at Hedingham, Essex, modelled upon the royal keep at Rochester. It survives relatively intact. His family was to prove one of the longest lasting in the history of the English aristocracy. His eldest son was made earl of Oxford in the year of Aubrey (II)'s death, and although its descent was several times transmitted through collaterals, and twice interrupted by forfeitures, the title nevertheless passed to no fewer than nineteen successive descendants, until the twentieth earl, also Aubrey de Vere, died without a male heir in 1703. 


@@@@@


doc= 28204


Vere, Aubrey (III) de, count of Guines and earl of Oxford (d. 1194), magnate, was the son of Aubrey (II) de Vere (d. 1141), royal chamberlain, and Alice (died 1163?), daughter of Gilbert de Clare, and sister of Gilbert fitz Gilbert de Clare, earl of Pembroke. Among his eight siblings was William de Vere, who became bishop of Hereford in 1186. By the time of his father's death Aubrey (III) was already politically prominent. His career was remarkable for the accumulation of large numbers of estates throughout England. In 1139 he had acquired the comital title by marrying Beatrice, the heir to her grandfather, Manasses, count of Guines in the Pas-de-Calais (who enjoyed a moiety of the lordship of Folkestone and estates in the honour of Boulogne in Suffolk). He defected to the Empress Matilda in the aftermath of the capture of Stephen at Lincoln in February 1141. In May 1141 Count Aubrey succeeded his father, who had died in a riot in London. It would seem that he was briefly reconciled to the king after Stephen's release in September 1141, for there is a reference to the king's confirmation of the lands he had from his father. In 1141 the empress had offered him for his adherence the earldom of Cambridge, or, if that was not satisfactory, a choice of four other titles: he chose Oxford. She added to these grants the castle of Colchester. At this time Earl Aubrey was closely associated with his brother-in-law, Geoffrey de Mandeville, earl of Essex, and was arrested with him in 1143, having to surrender the castle of Canfield to secure his release. He was a character of some importance in East Anglia during the latter years of Stephen's reign. There seems every reason to believe (in view of the number of appearances in his charters) that Earl Aubrey acted as an auxiliary of Geoffrey de Mandeville, until the latter's death in 1144. If so, he would have spent a period in opposition to the king. But it is equally likely that after Mandeville's death, Earl Aubrey would have returned to neutrality; something that his close family connection with the loyalist Clares would have made easy to accomplish. Between 1144 and 1146 he was divorced from his wife, thus losing his connection with Guines. When he remarried he was clearly in King Stephen's obedience once more, for the king and queen contributed the manor of Ickleton, Cambridgeshire, to the marriage portion of the new countess, Euphemia, who had died by late 1153, and who was said on later evidence to have been the daughter of William de Cantilupe. The countess on her deathbed made a grant for the late queen's soul and that of her son, which was confirmed by the king. 
In 1153 Earl Aubrey was with Stephen's army at the siege of Wallingford, and he attested the treaty of Westminster, which established the succession, in November 1153. With the accession of Henry II in 1154 Earl Aubrey was able to make good his claim to his comital rights in Oxfordshire, where the new king conceded him the third penny of the profits of justice in a charter of January 1156, and also allowed him succession to the chamberlainship of the exchequer which the earl's father had held. The castle of Colchester, however, was not confirmed to him. The earl attested royal charters until 1160, but thereafter disappears from the Plantagenet court for a time. He was active however on the king's behalf during the wars of 1173-4, joining the royalist army which defeated the earl of Leicester's invasion in Suffolk. He attended the king in England several times before Henry II's death in 1189, and was at the first coronation of King Richard in September of that year. 
Earl Aubrey's later career was notable for the notorious divorce proceedings he took to rid himself of his third wife, Agnes of Essex (b. 1151, d. in or after 1206), daughter of Henry of Essex, the royal constable, whom he married early in 1163 (when she was twelve) inopportunely just before her father's disgrace and ruin. Earl Aubrey pursued his case to Rome, where it was ultimately settled in Agnes's favour in 1171 or 1172. The earl had in the meantime kept his wife under close guard in one of his castles, refusing her leave to go out even to hear mass and refusing to acknowledge her as countess of Oxford. There does seem to have been a reconciliation between the pair ultimately: Countess Agnes attested several of his later charters and consented to an alienation of a rent from her marriage portion to Colne Priory; also all the earl's four sons were born from his marriage with Agnes (including the youngest, named Henry after his disgraced grandfather). Earl Aubrey died, probably in his late seventies, possibly even his early eighties, on 26 December 1194, and was buried at Colne Priory in Essex, being survived by Countess Agnes. He left four sons: his heir, Earl Aubrey (IV) de Vere, Ralph (who died before his elder brother), Robert de Vere, who later succeeded to the earldom, and the Henry already mentioned. The chronicle of Lambert of Ardres calls him (perhaps as a pun on his surname) Aubrey Aper ('the Boar'). This is doubtless the source of the de Vere family's livery badge, a boar's head, found on their seals as early as the later thirteenth century. Later tradition calls him Aubrey the Grim from a mistranscription of 'aper' as Asper. 
Earl Aubrey's significance in the politics of the anarchy and the early Angevin monarchy is by no means small: his volatility and attachment to the Mandeville earls made Essex unstable in the 1140s and threatened the king's control of London. The remarkable thing is that he was able to achieve so much on so narrow a landed base. The 'carta' of his honour of Hedingham reveals in 1166 a barony of merely 291/4 and 1/8 fees held in chief, and his earldom of Oxford brought no assets other than the annual third penny. The answer to this puzzle would seem to be the enormous wealth accumulated by his father as a leading royal justice. Through this, and through political favours, he followed his father's own work in accumulating a great demesne estate in Essex and Suffolk from many sources, the mechanics of which may be partly glimpsed through notes of the lost archive once at Hedingham. This tells of substantial conveyances from at least a dozen individuals, including the duke of Brittany, the earl of Hertford, the bishop of Ely, and the abbot of Bury St Edmunds. Earl Aubrey continued to patronize in lavish style his father's foundation of Colne Priory, and, in addition, confirmed gifts to his father's other foundation of Hatfield Regis. He also made modest grants to the nuns of Hedingham, whose house he perhaps founded. 


@@@@@


doc= 28205


Vere, Aubrey de, tenth earl of Oxford (1338x40-1400), magnate, was the third son of John de Vere, the seventh earl (1312-1360), and his wife, Maud (died 1366), one of the four daughters and coheirs of Giles, Lord Badlesmere (died 1338). Aubrey de Vere had married Alice (died 11 May 1400), daughter of the Essex landowner John, Lord Fitzwalter (died 1361), by 1386. On 13 July 1360 Aubrey's mother had granted her son the stewardship of the royal forest of Havering, Essex, for life, and after her death he received her jointure in Sawston, Cambridgeshire, and Calverton, Buckinghamshire, which his father had entailed on him. De Vere sought a career in the service of Edward, the Black Prince, with whom he was in Aquitaine in July 1366. Presumably as a consequence of good service to the prince in the Castilian campaign of 1367, he was knighted, and then in October he was retained by Prince Edward for life with the handsome annuity of $66 13's'. 4died, later increased to $100. He was acting as the prince's secretary in September 1371. That month his surviving elder brother, Thomas, earl of Oxford, died, leaving a son, Robert de Vere, aged nine, as his heir. On 22 July 1375 the Black Prince appointed de Vere constable of Wallingford Castle, Berkshire, and steward both of its honour and that of St Valery. De Vere's annuities were confirmed after the prince's death by the latter's son Richard, first as prince of Wales and afterwards as king. 
Highly regarded by Richard's mother, Princess Joan, de Vere was among those servants of her husband (with a number of whom he had close personal links) who were to be at the heart of government in the early years of Richard II's minority. His later prominence had been foreshadowed at the end of Edward III's reign, when in 1377 Princess Joan sent him, with two other mediators, to try to compose the quarrel between her brother-in-law John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, and the citizens of London (the mission had little success), and he was also appointed to a mission to negotiate with the French crown. De Vere was appointed to the continual council which was set up to govern the realm in the parliament of 1378, and which functioned from November 1378 to January 1380: he put in 113 days' attendance. By January 1381 he was chamberlain of the household (an office hereditary to the earls of Oxford), and in March was appointed on a commission to negotiate Richard's marriage to Anne of Bohemia. During the peasants' revolt, de Vere was one of those who were in the Tower of London with the king when the rebels seized the city, and he bore the king's sword when Richard went to negotiate with them at Mile End. 
De Vere did not exploit his chamberlainship to augment his estates, apparently preferring to see his nephew Robert, heir to the poorly endowed earldom, ascend in royal favour. Indeed, he may have engineered Robert's admission to the royal household. De Vere seems rather to have chosen to concentrate on maintaining the family interest in its main regional sphere, Essex, by securing firm control of royal offices and demesne estates there. On 1 February 1378 he received a grant of the constableship of Hadleigh Castle, in return for the surrender of his earlier Wallingford grant. On 25 June 1379 he received the keepership for life of three royal Essex parks (Rayleigh, Thunderly, and Hadleigh), notwithstanding grants of them to other royal servants, and, on 8 January 1380 he was granted the keeping of Rochford hundred. On 30 November 1381 he was licensed to stay in Hadleigh Castle for life with his household. He was well placed to protect his interests even against the weight of the house of Lancaster. During the peasants' revolt, and again in May 1382, his tenants at Stony Stratford, Buckinghamshire, attacked the men of Henry, earl of Derby, at Passenham, but Henry's attempt to gain redress from the king failed. On 4 October 1383 de Vere headed an embassy to negotiate with the French crown, and in 1385 he participated in Richard II's Scottish expedition, with a modest retinue of forty. 
In 1387-8 the defeat by the lords appellant of de Vere's nephew, Robert, by now duke of Ireland, Robert's flight abroad, and his subsequent conviction for treason in the Merciless Parliament of 1388, constituted a grave family set-back. De Vere was compelled to give up the chamberlainship, and in January 1388 was expelled from the royal household. However, he was respected by the lords appellant: he was allowed to keep all his royal grants, and was consulted by their leader, the duke of Gloucester, on how to respond to a diplomatic initiative from the duke of Burgundy. When Robert de Vere died in exile in 1392, Richard was able in the 1393 parliament to restore to Aubrey, as his nephew's heir, the forfeited title and estates of the earldom. However, Oxford vainly petitioned in the parliaments of 1394 and January 1397 for the restoration of the chamberlainship, which the king had granted in 1390 to his half-brother John Holland, earl of Huntingdon. The highly partisan Commons in the parliament of 1399 alleged that Oxford had abandoned his hereditary right because of Richard's menaces. 
Richard may therefore have regarded Oxford as unimportant, insufficiently supportive in 1387-8, and too closely connected with his opponents. The earl was on good terms with his wife's nephew Walter, Lord Fitzwalter, a friend of the duke of Gloucester, while on 3 August 1394 he was among the nobles who went surety for the earl of Arundel, who had highly offended the king. In 1399, however, the Commons alleged that Oxford's health and ability had grievously declined in the past few years. Henry refused their petition to restore the chamberlainship to him, after its surrender by Huntingdon. Oxford's expectation of his own demise is reflected in the indenture that he made with his feoffees, dated 1 November 1399, laying down the disposition of his properties in the case of Alice's surviving him, and during the minority of his son and heir, Richard de Vere, later eleventh earl of Oxford. His own experience as a younger son was reflected in the careful provision for the sustenance of his younger son John, for his education 'in the schools', and entail. In January 1400 Huntingdon (to whose daughter Oxford had married his son Richard) sought refuge at Hadleigh Castle, after the failure of the 'Epiphany plot' to topple Henry IV; Oxford and his wife were there. The search was so intense that Huntingdon soon had to leave, to be caught and killed shortly afterwards. Oxford himself died less than two months later, on 23 April, probably at Hadleigh, and is likely to have been interred in the family's burial place, Earls Colne Priory, Essex. 


@@@@@


doc= 28206


Vere, Aubrey de, twentieth earl of Oxford (1627-1703), nobleman, was born in London on 28 February 1627, the oldest son of Robert de Vere, the nineteenth earl ('b'. after 1575, died 1632), and his wife, Beatrice 
(or Bauck; died 1653/1657)
, daughter of Sjerck van Hemmema, of Nufen, Friesland. His father, a descendant of John de Vere, fifteenth earl of Oxford, was accepted as nineteenth earl after a long debate in the House of Lords in April 1626. He possessed an inadequate estate in England and after securing his title returned to the Low Countries, where he had already made a career as a soldier in the Dutch army. On 7 August 1632 he was killed in the trenches before Maastricht, leaving his title, and very little else, to his five-year-old son. 
Although Oxford had been born in London he was raised with his mother's family in Friesland. In 1638 he was granted $10 per annum in part-payment for his earldom's creation money, but his continuing poverty resulted in the appointment, in July 1641, of a committee of the House of Lords to consider his estate. His role in the first civil war is unclear; after the Restoration he claimed to have led a 'regiment of scholars' from Oxford for the king, but there is no hard evidence to prove this. By 1644 he was in the Low Countries serving as sergeant-major in Colonel Knightley's regiment in the Dutch service. On 10 December 1646 he was promoted colonel, commanding in Knightley's stead, a position he held until the treaty of Westphalia. Despite his continental duties, however, he did find time to visit the city of his birth. On 18 June 1647 he eased his financial difficulties by marrying, at St Martin-in-the-Fields, the ten-year-old Anne Bayning (1637-1659), daughter and coheir of Paul, second Viscount Bayning of Sudbury. Her considerable fortune must have helped sustain Oxford as he embarked upon his career as a royalist conspirator. He was still in London in April 1651 when he challenged Lieutenant-Colonel Robert Sidney to a duel, which was prevented by the intervention of his friends. 
Oxford's estate was sequestered in 1651 and on 20 June 1654 he was gaoled in the Tower, suspected of conspiring against the protector. In September 1656 he was considered for the post of general of the royalist forces in England in connection with a planned uprising: 'the Earl of Oxford appears to be a very fitting person as being free from any former engagement' (Ogle and others, 3.167). He spent much of the rest of the interregnum in or near London, where, under his royalist codename, Mr Waller, he worked for the king and feuded with his fellow conspirators. While committed to the exiled king, he found it difficult to work harmoniously with many of his agents, particularly John, Lord Mordaunt. On 15 August 1659 he was again committed to the Tower, this time suspected of complicity in Sir George Booth's rising. His wife, who accompanied him, died there on 14 September, and he was released on 29 September. 
Oxford remained in London in the confused months preceding the Restoration, and in early spring 1660 was prominent in the agitation among the so-called 'new lords' -- those who had never sat in the house during the civil wars -- for their places in the chamber. He ultimately took his seat on 27 April and on 3 May was one of six peers nominated by the house to attend Charles II with an invitation to return to England. At the Restoration he was rewarded for his services. He was made knight of the Garter in May 1660 (and formally invested in April 1661), and bore the curtana at the king's coronation in April 1661, as well as at every subsequent coronation until his death. The king appointed him lord lieutenant of Essex, an office he held from August 1660 until February 1688 and again from October 1688 until 1703. As lord lieutenant he played a significant role in marshalling the militia of the home counties against the threat of Dutch invasion in 1667. In addition to his lieutenancy the king gave him command of the King's regiment of horse, or, as it was commonly known while he was its colonel, the Oxford Blues. As colonel of the Blues he participated in the suppression of Venner's rising in January 1661, and in 1678 the king promoted him lieutenant-general of horse and foot. 
Charles II's favours bolstered Oxford's anaemic fortune; the king granted him several offices which provided the earl enough revenue to support -- at times precariously -- his title. He was a commissioner of claims at the coronation, and warden of the New Forest in 1667-8. More significantly he was chief justice in eyre of the forest south of Trent from June 1660 to January 1673. The office was, according to Roger North, of small use and great expense to the crown, but Charles II granted the place 'purely to gratify the Earl of Oxford who was one that ever wanted Royal boons' (North, 1.58). Oxford surrendered the office to the duke of Monmouth in 1673, in return for a gift of $5000 and an annuity of $2000. He was also the high steward of Colchester. 
Evidently Oxford did not use the profits of office to cultivate civility. He lived riotously on the Piazza at Covent Garden in the 1660s. On one occasion in 1663 a brawl erupted among his guests, and was quelled only after the arrival of troops dispatched by the duke of Albemarle. One January morning in 1665 Samuel Pepys visited Oxford's house on business, and wrote 'his lordship was in bed at past ten o'clock: and Lord help us, so rude a dirty family I never saw in my life' (Pepys, 6.3). Some contemporaries were scandalized by Oxford's sham marriage to the well-known actress Hester Davenport (1642-1717), who bore him a son, Aubrey (1664-1708), who later claimed, falsely, to be earl of Oxford. On 1 January 1673 he contracted a genuine marriage with Diana Kirke (died 1719), daughter of George Kirke, groom of the bedchamber. 
Through most of the 1660s and 1670s Oxford was a reliable supporter of the court. The king named him to the privy council in January 1670 and he protested against the passage of the 'Test Act' in 1677. In 1678 he was made a gentleman of the bedchamber. He was dropped from the council in April 1679 during Shaftesbury's brief lord presidency, but returned following the earl's dismissal. In July 1680 he served as ambassador-extraordinary to Louis XIV, who was then touring near Calais. In 1684 he was one of Danby's sureties when the former lord treasurer was released from the Tower. 
Oxford's position under James II was an ambivalent one. He supported James's accession, but lost his place in the bedchamber. In February 1688 he refused to push for the repeal of the penal laws and 'Test Act' in his lieutenancy, defying the king's direct command. His example was important; Sir John Reresby wrote 'My lord of Oxford, the first earl of the realm (but low in his fortune)... tould the King plainly he could not persuade that to others which he was avers to in his own concience' ('Memoirs of Sir John Reresby', 487). The consequence of this stance was his dismissal from his lieutenancy, regiment, and high stewardship of Colchester. James's desperate attempts to fend off the prince of Orange's invasion in late 1688 resulted in Oxford's restoration to the lieutenancy in October (replacing the ineffectual Catholic Lord Petre), and to his regiment in December. On 17 November he would not sign a petition calling for a free parliament, but by 8 December he had joined the prince, representing him at a meeting with the king's supporters at Hungerford. 
Oxford's adroit change of sides secured William III's favour, and he continued in his places after the revolution. He served as lieutenant-general in the army and was present at the battle of the Boyne in 1690. In the House of Lords he generally allied himself with the whigs; in 1693 he attacked the tory secretary, Nottingham, over the bungled attack upon Brest, and defended the impeached whig Lord Somers in 1701. He served as speaker of the house from August 1700 to September 1701. By 1693 it was rumoured that he would give up command of his regiment 'on account of his great age' (Luttrell, 3.6) but he nevertheless continued in command for another decade. 
After William III's death Oxford was reappointed to the privy council and, for the last time, bore the sword at a coronation -- Queen Anne's in April 1702. He died at his house in Downing Street on 12 March 1703, aged seventy-six, and was buried in Westminster Abbey ten days later. His only surviving legitimate child was a daughter -- Diana, duchess of St Albans -- and so with him ended the de Vere earldom of Oxford, a title which stretched back to the reign of King Stephen. 


@@@@@


doc= 28207


Vere, Sir Charles Broke (1779-1843), army officer, born on 21 February 1779, was the second son of Philip Bowes Broke (1749-1801) of Nacton, Suffolk, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1822), daughter and eventual heir of the Revd Charles Beaumont of Witnesham, Suffolk. Rear-Admiral Sir Philip Bowes Vere Broke was his brother, whom he followed at Ipswich School. Charles was commissioned ensign in the 5th foot on 23 June 1796; lieutenant on 7 December, and captain on 21 February 1799. He served with the 5th in the expedition to the Netherlands in that year. He was at the Royal Military College from 1799 to 1803. In 1805, while on his way to join Lord Cathcart's expedition to the Elbe, he was wrecked on the Dutch coast, and made prisoner. He was soon released, and served in the force sent to South America under Craufurd in 1807. In the disastrous attack on Buenos Aires he was employed as assistant quartermaster-general. On 4 February 1808 he obtained a majority in the 5th. 
After a short time on the staff in Ireland, Vere went to the Peninsula in 1809, and was appointed assistant quartermaster-general to the 4th division. He was present with it at Busaco, Albuera, Ciudad Rodrigo, Badajoz, and Salamanca; at Badajoz he was severely wounded while leading the men of the division to the breach in the Trinidad bastion. He was made brevet lieutenant-colonel on 27 April 1812. He had been removed from his regiment and made a permanent assistant quartermaster-general on 7 February 1811. During the campaigns of 1813-14 he was employed on the headquarters staff. He not only attended to the routine business but also drafted operation orders. He was present at Vitoria, the Pyrenees, Nivelle, Nive, Orthez, and Toulouse. He received the gold cross with five clasps, and was made KCB in January 1815. In the 1815 campaign he was at first attached to Hill's corps, and Hill in his report of 20 June expressed his particular thanks to him; when Sir William Howe de Lancey was killed in the battle of Waterloo, Wellington chose Broke, though he was not the senior, to perform the duty of quartermaster-general. Broke fulfilled this role during the latter half of the battle, and on the march to Paris, and he was afterwards deputy quartermaster-general in the army of occupation. He received the Russian order of Vladimir (second class) and the Netherlands order of Wilhelm (second class). He was placed on half pay on 4 July 1823, and was promoted colonel on 27 May 1825, when, on Wellington's recommendation, he was appointed aide-de-camp to the king. He held this post until 10 January 1837, when he became major-general. In 1822 he had taken the additional name of Vere. A Conservative, in 1832 he contested East Suffolk without success, but he was returned second on the poll in 1835, and unopposed in 1837, while he again defeated the whig candidate in 1841. He published a pamphlet, 'The Danger of Opening the Ports to Foreign Corn at a Fixed Duty Considered' (1834). He died at Bath on 1 April 1843, and was buried at Nacton. 


@@@@@


doc= 28208


Vere, Edward de, seventeenth earl of Oxford (1550-1604), courtier and poet, was born on 12 April 1550, probably at Castle Hedingham, Essex, the only son of John de Vere, sixteenth earl of Oxford (1516-1562), and his second wife, Margery, daughter of Sir John Golding and half-sister of Arthur Golding, the translator of Ovid. Until his father's death he was known as Lord Bulbeck. 
Bulbeck matriculated as an impubes (immature) fellow-commoner of Queens' College, Cambridge, in November 1558, remaining for one academic year. He seems thereafter to have been tutored in the household of Sir Thomas Smith by Thomas Fowle. Upon his father's death on 3 August 1562 he succeeded to the earldom of Oxford and other hereditary dignities, including the ceremonial office of lord great chamberlain. His half-sister Katherine, daughter of his father's first wife, Dorothy, second daughter of Ralph Neville, fourth earl of Westmorland, challenged his legitimacy, claiming irregularities in their father's marriage to Margery Golding; Oxford was successfully defended by Arthur Golding, then his receiver. As a royal ward he came under the guardianship of William Cecil, master of the court of wards. Cecil drew up orders for his exercises and for his studies, which were put in the hands of Lawrence Nowell, dean of Lichfield: he learned French, Latin, penmanship, and dancing. An early taste for literature is evidenced in his purchases of books by Chaucer, Plutarch (in French), Cicero, and Plato (probably in Latin). 
Oxford accompanied the queen on progress to Cambridge in August 1564, and to Oxford in September 1566. Like others in the queen's retinue he was granted an unearned MA on each occasion. In July 1567, while practising the art of fencing with a Westminster tailor in the garden of Cecil House, he killed an unarmed and possibly inebriated undercook, Thomas Brincknell of Westminster. A coroner's jury which was openly influenced by Cecil, and which included Ralph Holinshed, spared Oxford, with the grotesque finding that Brincknell had committed suicide by 'running upon a point of a fence-sword of the said earl' (Murdin, 2.764). Oxford thus learned that he could commit no outrage which Cecil would not forgive and do his best to forget. On 24 October 1569, in the first of some eighty surviving letters and memoranda in English, and in his own hand, he begged Cecil to procure him some military duty. Though he desired a posting to the continent, he was sent to Scotland under the command of Thomas Radcliffe, third earl of Sussex, in or about April 1570. Upon coming of age on 12 April 1571 he took his seat in the House of Lords; in May he engaged in the tilt, tourney, and barrier in the queen's presence at Westminster. In August he was appointed to attend the French envoy, Paul de Foix, who travelled to England to discuss the queen's projected marriage to the duc d'Anjou. About the same time he declared an interest in Cecil's eldest daughter, Anne ['see 'Vere, Anne de, countess of Oxford], then fourteen, and received the queen's consent to a marriage. Cecil -- now Lord Burghley -- explained to the earl of Rutland, evidently a disappointed rival, that he 'found in the earl more understanding than any stranger to him would think' ('Rutland MSS', 1.95). The wedding, celebrated on 19 December 1571, was attended by the queen. 
The marriage was a disaster. By March 1572 Oxford remonstrated with Burghley over the prosecution of Thomas Howard, fourth duke of Norfolk, and was suspected of arranging an abortive plot to rescue Norfolk from the Tower. On 22 September he entreated Burghley to procure him naval employment, but had to settle for life at court, where he openly flirted with the queen. 'My Lord of Oxford', wrote Gilbert Talbot to his father, the earl of Shrewsbury, on 11 May 1573: 'is lately grown into great credit; for the queen's Majesty delighteth more in his personage, and his dancing and valiantness, than any other. I think Sussex doth back him all that he can; if it were not for his fickle head, he would pass any of them shortly. (Lodge, 2.100-01)' Talbot knew his man. Early in July 1574 Oxford departed without licence for Flanders, the refuge of northern English Catholic nobility. Enraged, the queen dispatched gentlemen pensioners, led by Thomas Bedingfield, to fetch him back. Having dutifully returned by the end of the month, in August Oxford and Burghley waited on the queen at Bristol with an apology. Conciliatory, she agreed to allow Oxford to travel abroad with licence. He left early in February 1575 and visited Paris and Strasbourg before making his way to Venice by April. Over the next year he visited Padua, Siena, and Milan, among other cities, finally decamping from Venice on 6 March 1576. He carried with him to Paris and Calais luxurious articles of dress and toilet, a Venetian choirboy named Orazio Cogno, and memories of a Venetian courtesan named Virginia Padoana. Waylaid by pirates on crossing the channel, Oxford was bereft of many of his souvenirs, finally landing at Dover on 20 April and returning to London by river-wherry to avoid meeting Anne -- who in the interim had borne a daughter, Elizabeth -- at Gravesend. The distraught Burghley declared that Oxford had been 'enticed by certain lewd persons to be a stranger to his wife' (Murdin, 2.778), apparently unable to conceive that his son-in-law preferred the company of the choirboy, whom he kept in his London lodgings for eleven months, giving rise to suspicions of pederasty. Oxford made himself fashionable by sporting imported embroidered gloves, sweet-bags, perfumed leather jerkins, and costly washes or perfumes, and ingratiated himself with the queen by presenting her with perfumed gloves trimmed with tufts or roses of coloured silk. 
Oxford's eccentricities and irregularities of temper grew with his years. From 1577 to December 1580 he and his intimate friends Henry Howard and Charles Arundel flirted with Catholicism and sedition, amusing themselves at Oxford's table, while Oxford derided the queen, particularly her singing voice. Oxford nevertheless accompanied Elizabeth to Saffron Walden and Audley End in July 1578. Gabriel Harvey paid the earl conventional compliments in one of three dedications prefaced to the third book of his memorial volume, 'Gratulationes Valdenses'. About the same time Harvey composed a satire of Oxford as an Italianated Englishman under the title 'Speculum Tuscanismi', describing him as clad in 'a little apish hatte, cowched fast to the pate, like an oyster', and in French cambric ruffs; as 'delicate in speach, queynte in araye: conceited in all poyntes... a passing singular odde man' (Spenser, sig. E2). Nash's charge that the earl caused his libeller to be imprisoned in the Fleet prison is not independently verifiable, and was denied by Harvey. In August 1579 Oxford insulted Sir Philip Sidney in the tennis court at Greenwich, calling him a 'puppy'. Sources differ on who initiated the ensuing written challenge, but the queen interposed on the earl's behalf, forbidding a duel and ordering Sidney to defer to Oxford's superior rank. Unwilling to bear the humiliation, Sidney retired from court. Oxford is reported to have plotted Sidney's murder. 
On 16 December 1580 Oxford denounced Howard and Arundel to the queen as Catholic sympathizers. Hoist with his own petard, Oxford spent a few days in the Tower himself, but soon regained his freedom and won the prize in a tilt on 22 January 1581. On 23 March, however, the Yorkshire beauty and queen's maid of honour Anne Vavasour, who had been Oxford's mistress since 1579, gave birth to a son, whereupon he found himself back in the Tower. He recovered his freedom in June, and in December was reconciled with his wife. 
Domestic tranquillity was shattered again in March 1582, when Oxford fought a duel with Anne Vavasour's uncle Sir Thomas Knyvet. Both men were wounded, the earl more dangerously. Their quarrel continued on and off for a year, with deaths and injuries among retainers on both sides. In May 1583, at Ralegh's instigation, the queen and Oxford achieved a 'modus vivendi'. In August 1585 he sailed with John Norris to the Netherlands; a letter from Burghley informing Oxford that he was to have command of the horse failed to reach him before his sudden return to England on 21 October in a fit of 'humour'. Still in the queen's graces, but impoverished, he petitioned her for a $1000 annuity, which she granted in 1586. In October of that year he became commissioner for the trial of Mary, queen of Scots, taking part in the proceedings at Fotheringhay and in the Star Chamber at Westminster. In 1588, during the Armada battle, Oxford volunteered for service at Tilbury but refused Leicester's request that he serve as governor of Harwich, thinking the position beneath him. When Oxford took his complaint to the queen, Leicester wrote to Walsingham: 'I am glad I am rid of my Lord Oxford, seeing he refuseth this and I pray you let me not be pressed any more for him what suit so ever he make' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/214(1), fols. 2-3). To cover the earl's dereliction of duty Burghley, in a propaganda pamphlet issued the same year, refashioned Oxford, along with other non-combatant noblemen, into national heroes. 
Since 1569 Oxford had received votes for the Order of the Garter approximately proportional to the esteem in which he was held by the queen. After 1588 he received no more votes while she lived. He nevertheless performed the duties of a peer in the trials of Philip Howard, earl of Arundel, in 1589, and Essex in 1601. After Anne died of a fever in 1588, Oxford married again about January 1592. His second wife was Elizabeth, daughter and heir of Thomas Trentham of Rocester Priory, Staffordshire; she secured the lineage by giving birth to a son, Henry de Vere (1593-1625), the future eighteenth earl. Moving from London, first to Stoke Newington and thence to Hackney, Oxford devoted his declining years to the endless pursuit of supplementary income, petitioning for the monopoly on fruit, oils, and wool; for the gauging of beer; for the pre-emption of tin in Cornwall and Devon (1595-9); for the governorship of Jersey; and for the presidency of Wales. His numerous letters to Burghley and to Robert Cecil reflect his endless disappointments. Bitter to the end, he plotted against the royal succession by a Scot. His signature is notably absent from the proclamation of 24 March 1603 and its first printed impression, though it was added to the second impression. At James I's coronation on 25 July Oxford secured fees due to the office of lord great chamberlain; his annuity was subsequently extended. Perhaps succumbing to the consequences of the high-risk behaviour of his youth, and following a decade of complaints about his health, he died on 24 June 1604 and was buried on 6 July in the churchyard of St Augustine, Hackney, without a memorial tomb. 
Oxford was notorious in his own time for his effeminate dress, for his irregular life, and for squandering virtually his entire patrimony on personal extravagance. Exemplary was his purchase in 1580 of Fisher's Folly, so named because it had bankrupted its original builder, the London alderman Jasper Fisher. Unable to sustain the expense of maintaining the house, Oxford was forced to sell in 1588. Eternally short of funds, he did not scruple to burden lesser men with his debts. About 1591 the poet Thomas Churchyard hired lodgings for the earl at the house of Mrs Julian Penn, giving his own bond in lieu of cash. When Oxford neglected to pay the rent, Churchyard, in fear of arrest, sought sanctuary. 
Oxford's first wife, Anne, died at the queen's palace at Greenwich on 5 June 1588, and was buried in state at Westminster Abbey on 25 June. Numerous elegies are preserved in the British Library (Lansdowne MS 104, fols. 195-214; Cotton MS Julius F. 10, fols. 112-115'v', 132). Though she was well educated and is even said by Sturmius to have spoken Latin, the four epitaphs written after her son died at birth in May 1583, and attributed to Anne by John Southern in his 'Pandora' of 1584, were in fact translations (doubtless by Southern himself) from the French poetry of Desportes. Anne's other children were: Elizabeth, born 2 July 1575, who married William Stanley, earl of Derby, at Greenwich on 26 January 1594 and died at Richmond on 10 March 1627; Bridget, born 6 April 1584, who married Francis, Lord Norris (afterwards earl of Berkshire) in May or June 1599; Frances, who died and was buried at Edmonton on 12 September 1587; and Susan, born 26 May 1587, who married Philip Herbert, earl of Montgomery, and died in 1628 or 1629. Oxford's second wife, Elizabeth, was buried at Hackney on 3 January 1613. The illegitimate son of the earl and Anne Vavasour, Edward Vere, distinguished himself as a soldier and died on 18 August 1629. 
Oxford evinced a genuine interest in music, and wrote verse of much lyric beauty. Puttenham, and Meres in Puttenham's footsteps, reckoned him among 'the best for comedy' in his day but, although Oxford was a patron of a company of players from 1580 to 1602, no specimen of his dramatic compositions survives. Sixteen lyrical poems have been authenticated as his work, along with four more doubtful pieces. Most of his poems first appeared in poetical anthologies signed E. O., or E. of O. Amateurish verses 'To the reader', marred by heavy alliteration, together with a pompous letter from the earl to the translator, were prefixed to Bedingfield's translation of Cardanus's 'Comfort' (1576), 'published by commandment of the right honourable the Earl of Oxenford'. These verses and an accompanying letter were composed about 1 January 1572, when Oxford was twenty-one. Seven poems, generally more successful, appeared in the 'Paradise of Dainty Devices' (1576), and three more in 'England's Parnassus' (1600); two of the latter, 'Doth sorrow fret thy soul?' and 'What plague is greater than the grief of mind?', together with 'Faction that ever dwells', appeared in the appendix to the publisher Newman's surreptitious edition of Sidney's 'Astrophel and Stella' (1591). Others are found in 'The Phoenix Nest' (1593) and in 'England's Helicon' of 1600 ('The Shepherd's Commendation of his Nymph'). The earl is noticed in John Bodenham's 'Belvedere, or, The Garden of the Muses' (1600). His most attractive poem, a dialogue between the poet and Desire, was first printed imperfectly in Puttenham's 'Art of Poesy' (1589), and then more correctly in Breton's 'Bower of Delights' (1597). A few others have been recovered by modern editors from the Rawlinson manuscripts in the Bodleian Library. The surviving poems go some way towards validating the opinion of William Webbe that among the courtier-poets in the early years of Elizabeth, 'in the rare devises of poetry, [Oxford] may challenge to him selfe the tytle of the most excellent among the rest' (Webbe, sig. C3'v'). 
Some twenty-eight printed books were dedicated to Oxford between 1564 and 1599. Among the more important were 'Euphues and his England' (1580), the work of his then servant John Lyly, and 'Hekatompathia, or, Passionate Centurie of Love' (1582), dedicated to Oxford by Thomas Watson with the report that the earl had perused the collection before publication; and Edmund Spenser addressed a sonnet to him (among many other worthies) in the closing pages of his 'Faerie Queene' (1590). Books of smaller account include two translations by Arthur Golding (1564, 1571); four translations by his sometime servant Anthony Munday (1579, 1580, 1588, 1595); 'The English Secretarie' by Angel Day (1586); and two songbooks by John Farmer (1591, 1599). Claims by literary and historical amateurs, beginning with J. Thomas Looney in 1920 and embraced by Oxford's otherwise worthy biographer B. M. Ward, that Oxford wrote the poems and plays attributed by contemporaries to William Shakespeare, are without merit. 


@@@@@


doc= 28209


Vere, Sir Francis (1560/61-1609), army officer and diplomat, was the second son of Geoffrey Vere ('c'.1525-1572?) and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1615), daughter of Richard Harkyns (or Hardekyn) of Colchester, Essex. He was born in 1560 or early in 1561, at either Crepping Hall or Crustwick: both properties in Essex, owned by his father, who was the fourth son of John de Vere, fifteenth earl of Oxford ['see under 'Vere, John de, sixteenth earl of Oxford]. Thus Francis was close kin of the holders of the premier earldom in England -- something he never forgot and which he used to his advantage. 
Little is known of Vere's early life. His connection to the de Vere earls of Oxford was of use to him early, for John de Vere, the sixteenth earl, left a legacy of $20 to him while he was still an infant. As befitted descendants of one of the foremost generals in the Wars of the Roses, Francis, his elder brother, John, and both his younger brothers, Robert and Horace Vere, all received training in the art of war from a young gentlemen of puritan persuasion with some military experience, William Browne, who seems to have been a retainer of the family -- perhaps of the senior branch rather than of Geoffrey Vere, who was not wealthy. Thus from an early stage the brothers were intended for, or at least had an interest in, military careers and, in the event, all served as soldiers (Browne, who was later knighted, served alongside the Veres in the Netherlands.) 
In his late teens Francis Vere travelled through Europe, as did many young English gentlemen in this era. The English ambassador in Paris reported that 'two young Veres', clients of the earl of Oxford, were in France in July and September 1577, hoping to fight in the country's sixth war of religion since 1562, but with the royal (Catholic) army ('CSP for.', 12.14, 192). The two were probably John and Francis (the latter then about seventeen) who were of course connected to Oxford. Moreover the chief royal general was the duke of Guise and in later life Francis recalled that he was in Paris 'when I was very young' where 'I was for a time with the Duke of Guise... [but] was called thence by her Majesty's command and made to know the error of that course' ('Salisbury MSS', 17.494). Presumably the two young Veres were simply seeking actual military experience, but in later life none of the brothers would have contemplated serving a Catholic prince against protestants: indeed Horace was strongly Calvinist. Not much later Francis travelled to eastern Europe. In a letter of 1589 Sir Francis Aleyn described Vere (whom he called 'my brother') to his friend Anthony Bacon as 'he that made the voyage with me into Polonia' (LPL, MS 657, fol. 247), a trip attributed by Vere's early twentieth-century biographer Markham to 'about 1580' (Markham, 26). 
Vere's biographers all agree that he had little or no military experience and none in the Netherlands before joining the royal army sent by Elizabeth to aid the Dutch republic in 1585. In fact he served in the Netherlands in 1581 and 1582. The Dutch at this time had some 3000 English soldiers in their employ -- mercenaries, but also motivated by confessional zeal to aid their fellow protestants against the Spanish. Vere was a gentleman volunteer in the company of horse led by the famous Welsh professional soldier Roger Williams, whose lieutenant was John Vere: Williams later boasted that Francis's first service was 'under his charge', and both brothers are listed in Williams's muster roll of August 1582 (TNA: PRO, SP 78/24, fol. 132'r'; 'CSP for.', 'May-December 1582', 260). Francis Vere helped to suppress a potential mutiny against the general of the English in Dutch employ, John Norris. Vere and other gentlemen rankers rallied to their general with 'dagger drawn' and cowed the soldiers, who had gone unpaid for some time ('CSP for.', 'May-December 1582', 258; Stowe, 805). 
Thus Vere had a good deal of military experience, including an education in what contemporaries called the 'most fit school and nursery to nourish soldiers' of the time (Motley, 1382) -- the Dutch revolt against Spain. The English army in the Netherlands, moulded by Vere in the 1590s, would in turn come to be regarded itself as a finishing school for soldiers. 
In December 1585 Francis Vere, still only twenty-five, joined the English army of Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, in the Netherlands. Late in February 1586 he joined the company of lancers commanded by his cousin, Peregrine Bertie, Baron Willoughby d'Eresby (which was in the states general's pay, so Vere was still in a sense a mercenary). Willoughby's troopers, including Vere, distinguished themselves in several actions against the Spanish in summer and autumn 1586 and in November of that year Vere received his first independent command, as captain of a company of foot in the royal army -- the first time he was in the pay of his own nation. 
Vere's company was originally in the garrison of Bergen-op-Zoom, commanded by Willoughby, but in summer 1587 was moved to Sluys, which from 8 June to 4 August 1587 was besieged by the duke of Parma, Spain's commander-in-chief and a 'new Alexander' according to contemporaries. Sluys eventually fell, despite great efforts to relieve it by Leicester, but under Vere's old commander, Williams, the garrison fought heroically before it was obliged to accept terms. Vere, twice wounded, made his reputation among both friend and foe by his gallantry. As Williams later recalled, Vere ('marked for the red mandilion' that he habitually wore) 'stood alwaies in the head of the armed men at the assaults'; and, being 'requested to retire' because of his wounds, 'answered, he had rather be kild ten times at a breach, than once in a house' ('The Works of Sir Roger Williams', ed. J. X. Evans, 1972, 48). 
Leicester's failure to relieve Sluys, combined with various misjudgements in his administration, led to his resignation and replacement in December 1587 by Willoughby. Vere was back in Bergen, which by autumn 1588 was Parma's new target. The Spanish hoped to wipe out the stain of the Armada's defeat. Instead the city's (mostly English) garrison inflicted on the new Alexander his first defeat. Vere was wounded again and distinguished himself in command of the partly detached forts that commanded Bergen's access to the sea; he was one of three officers singled out in Willoughby's dispatches to Elizabeth for bravery, and was knighted. 
Vere was now given leave and returned home with a letter of introduction from Willoughby to Lord Burghley, Elizabeth's chief minister. Vere was already acquainted with Sir Francis Walsingham and Robert Devereux, earl of Essex, prominent counsellor and courtier, respectively. In short order he won the esteem of Burghley who in turn introduced him to Elizabeth; her impression of the young paladin was evidently also favourable. In February 1589, after spending the winter at his family home, Francis returned to the Netherlands, accompanied by his brother Robert. 
The trip to England made Vere personally known to the greatest figures in the realm, allowing Willoughby, on Vere's return, to appoint him sergeant-major-general -- effectively second in command of all English forces in the Netherlands. (Confusingly Vere was paid from 3 December 1588, but it seems clear he was not appointed until after his return to the Netherlands.) This was a remarkable achievement for a man still not quite thirty who had yet to exercise an independent command in the field, and who for all his connections was a mere younger son of a country gentleman. There was no doubt that Vere was valiant and honourable, the two most important qualities for a sixteenth-century general; and during the siege of Bergen he showed he was, in addition, 'a prudent adviser... a cautious commander and a resourceful contriver of stratagems' (Markham, 132-3). Even so, the appointment was still something of a gamble. 
Vere's rapid rise owed much to Willoughby's patronage, but there were also strategic and political dimensions to his appointment. Willoughby had already asked to be relieved of command in the Netherlands for personal reasons and his sergeant-major-general would most likely replace him. He and Leicester had directed the Anglo-Dutch armies, but from 1589 England prosecuted the war against Spain by sending armies to France and even the Iberian peninsula. The numbers of English troops in the Netherlands dropped and did not reach the heights of the late 1580s again until the dawn of the seventeenth century. Those troops' commander-in-chief would thus be subordinate to the Dutch, rather than setting the operational agenda, and so did not have to be a peer. Furthermore Leicester and Willoughby had each exercised considerable political power, but often neither wisely nor well -- Leicester, in particular, had affronted the queen by his vice-regal pretensions. The English army in the United Provinces was a potential power-base. Elizabeth and her ministers wanted as its commander a man who could not abuse his position. As long as he had the necessary basic military credentials, then modest domestic wealth and status might make him an attractive candidate for high military office, rather than otherwise. 
In spring 1589 Willoughby duly retired to England; from May, Vere was formally in command of all English troops in the Netherlands, except those in the garrisons of the cautionary towns of Flushing and Brill (Dutch, but in English hands for the duration of hostilities) which remained under their respective governors. However, Vere kept the rank of sergeant-major-general: he was not appointed to the office of lieutenant-general, held by Leicester and Willoughby. If this reflected the fact that he was a commoner, not a peer, it also reflected the wish of the crown to keep control of its general across the narrow seas. Vere never forgot this, but would still be able to use his primacy in military affairs to achieve a social eminence that transcended his relatively modest origins. 
From August 1589 Vere was in sole charge of the English army of assistance in the Dutch republic. His appointment was a surprise to the Dutch -- understandably so. However, Vere soon showed that he could exercise tact and discretion in dealing with England's allies, while he endeared himself to them by his energy and daring. He led from the front, but showed great ability from the very start of his command. 
In October 1589 Vere led 900 English foot to join a small Dutch army in Gelderland (in the eastern Netherlands) under the province's stadholder, Count Adolf von Nieuwenaar. When the count was killed shortly after Vere's arrival the states of Gelderland, remarkably, asked Vere to take command. He won a victory in the field over a small Spanish army (in which his horse was killed and he was again wounded) before returning to the main part of the republic and going into winter quarters around Utrecht. He had attracted the attention of Maurice of Nassau, stadholder of the Netherlands and Zealand and captain-general of the United Provinces. In March 1590 Vere led a 600-strong English contingent (including his recently arrived brother Horace as well as Robert Vere) in the army under Maurice that stormed Breda. That summer Vere operated with a detached force in initial moves against Nijmegen and then in October he accompanied Maurice on a raid on Dunkirk in which Vere was again wounded. 
Also wounded with him was Count van Solms, who had participated in the defence of Bergen. Both men were in Maurice's trusted inner circle of commanders, along with another veteran of Bergen, Marcelis Bacx; Count van Hohenlohe (who had been captain-general in the 1580s); Floris van Brederode; Daniel de Hertaing, seigneur de Marquette; and Maurice's cousin, William Louis of Nassau, stadholder of Friesland. If not quite the 'diadochi' of Alexander the Great, they were still a remarkably talented group of soldiers. Each year in the 1590s Maurice went on campaign, each year reducing another great Spanish stronghold; each year it was these men who were chosen to accompany the prince. That Vere was one of this elite says much about him and about the trust placed in him at this time by Maurice and the states general. As a Dutch chronicler wrote, Vere was 'a stout and gallant man, greatly favoured by the States above any other foreigner' (''een cloeck dapper man, den Landen boven alle andere vreemde seer aenghenaem''; Orlers, 79). 
1591 saw sweeping success for Maurice and the Dutch army. In May Vere's men put into practice a clever ruse (probably planned by Maurice, though Vere later claimed the credit) by which the city of Zutphen was taken without a siege. The army then moved on to Deventer, which four years earlier had been betrayed to Parma by an English Catholic governor. Maurice now retook it very swiftly, largely owing to the courage of his English troops (though Vere, again, later took to himself and his troops more credit than they were probably due). Maurice then moved on against the important city of Nijmegen. Investing such a fortress was a complex operation; siege lines covered many miles. Vere was given a detached command and handled it well; so effectively was Nijmegen blockaded that in the end no assault was necessary. Sir Francis was one of five officers singled out by the Dutch for praise at the end of 1591's operations. 
The summers of the next two years witnessed less frenetic campaigning, but diplomacy was inevitably a major part of Vere's duties as commander of an expeditionary force in a foreign country. There was much scope for disagreement between the United Provinces and England over the English troops' conditions of service. Equally Elizabeth used the Netherlands as a strategic reserve of experienced troops to serve elsewhere. Sir John Norris, for example, commanded an English army in Brittany from 1591 to 1594, while Essex led an expedition to Normandy in 1592: both drew on English troops from the Netherlands. In addition Elizabeth had her own preferences for strategy in the Netherlands, but her priorities were not always those of the states general. The burden of arranging for the transfers of men and of requesting naval support from the states, and of cajoling the Dutch into the action recommended by Elizabeth, fell mostly on Sir Thomas Bodley, the English ambassador, but the English commander-in-chief was necessarily a party to such negotiations. Vere handled himself well and learned from Bodley's successes (and mistakes). 
Meanwhile Vere was wounded when leading the English troops in the storm of Steenwijk in 1592, and ably seconded Maurice at the siege of St Geertruidenberg in 1593. It fell before the end of the summer and Vere was able to go home, where in the parliamentary elections of 1593 he was returned as MP for Leominster. He owed his election to the earl of Essex, who as part of a plan to monopolize the patronage of English military officers, 'cultivated Sir Francis Vere' (Hammer, 218). This was welcomed by Vere, who increasingly looked to the earl for patronage. 
Vere did nothing of note in this parliament and it was his only real attempt to enter the English domestic political arena. He did not lack political skills, as his increasing involvement in diplomatic negotiations with the Dutch revealed. However, he lacked a power-base in England and generally was content to concentrate on military affairs; then, too, he was a significant player in Dutch affairs. How far he was valued by his allies was made clear during this visit home in late summer 1593, when the states general offered him a pension, on top of his salary from the English government. Unusually, Elizabeth permitted Vere to accept it, and in replying to the states general declared she, like they, knew Vere 'for a gentleman very well accomplished in all the virtues and perfections, as much civil as military' ('nous le cognoissons pour gentilhome si bien accomply en toutes vertus et perfections, tant civiles, qu'appertenantes a la guerre'; Nationaal Archief, liassen Engeland 5882-II, no. 291). 
It is unsurprising, therefore, that the states now turned to Vere in an attempt to get more English troops. Maurice was planning in 1594 to reduce the great Spanish fortress of Groningen, key to the eastern Netherlands, which would inevitably be a lengthy and complex campaign, requiring a large army. Maurice wanted Elizabeth to enhance the English field army in the Netherlands, but the already considerable financial burden of England's multi-front war with Spain made Elizabeth reluctant to raise more troops. In autumn 1593, therefore, the states general contracted with Vere to raise a new, separate, English regiment of ten companies, at the states general's expense and to be paid by them, but commanded by Vere, who was empowered to choose all the officers. The desire to increase his authority and no doubt the desire to strike strong blows against the enemy led Vere to accept this commission, which was parallel to his queen's commission. He was once again, in some senses, a mercenary. 
By March 1594 the companies of Vere's mercenary regiment were arriving in the Netherlands; they were quickly deployed to the campaign against Groningen. The siege, in which Vere was wounded again, lasted well into the summer, but on 15 July Maurice and William Louis, who commanded in the east for the states general, made a triumphal entry into the city. That autumn Vere operated in the north-east of France, whose king, Henri IV, was also at war with Spain: Vere led a Dutch contingent to aid the French. In the following year, 1595, Maurice contented himself with more modest operations, but had the worse of manoeuvrings against the Spanish, in the course of which the rival armies' cavalry clashed. In this action Robert Vere was killed. Evidence differs as to the circumstances, but one account indicates that he was murdered after being taken prisoner. This is not unlikely, for only a few weeks later Vere took a small Spanish fort and had half the defenders killed in cold blood. It was in some ways uncharacteristic and perhaps best explained as an act of revenge, but it does reveal the ruthlessness of which Vere was quite capable. 
Now, however, Vere was recalled to national service. Essex had been given permission to lead an assault on Spain itself -- a grand strategy of which Vere approved and which he may have helped Essex to formulate. Bodley had retired and it was Vere who obtained the support of the states general for the expedition, which he then joined with a thousand veterans. Essex was lord general and Vere lord marshal and lieutenant-general of the army accompanying the fleet, of which the rear-admiral was Sir Walter Ralegh. Ralegh was more important at court and claimed precedence over Vere, but Sir Francis would have none of it: 'there passed some wourdes' between the two, so hot that some feared it would ruin the venture (LPL, MS 657, fol. 5'v'). Essex eventually patched up the quarrel and, in the eventual storm and sack of Cadiz, Vere won considerable distinction -- plus nearly $4000 worth of booty. 
By January 1597 Vere was back in the Netherlands: his later claim that he spent the winter at court must be due to a lapse of memory or to the inchoate state of his memoirs. On 24 January 1597 Vere was instrumental in the complete rout of the Spanish army in the battle of Turnhout, in which his horse was killed under him again. Both at the time and in his 'Commentaries' Vere took most of the credit, resulting in a bitter dispute with Sir Robert Sidney, governor of Flushing, who also fought well. In fact the credit was probably due equally to Hohenlohe, Solms, Vere, and Bacx, who all showed great initiative and tactical skill and 'were greatly honoured' by the Dutch (Orlers, 117). It was the first battlefield victory over Spanish troops for nearly twenty years. 
That summer Essex led an expedition to the Azores: Vere accompanied him, again as lord marshal. This venture ended in disappointment, largely because of Essex's mistakes -- these included his treatment of Vere. The earl appointed his friend Lord Mountjoy as lieutenant-general, an office Sir Francis had expected, since he had executed it so capably at Cadiz. Vere could do little but accept his patron's decision, but injured pride and frustration at the mishandling of the expedition led him to turn decisively against Essex. On his return he also metaphorically crossed swords again with Sidney and Ralegh over military issues. Vere's increasing unwillingness to defer to anyone reflected his confidence in his own abilities and experience. 
It also no doubt reflected Vere's own increasing security. The longer he held his position in the Netherlands, the more indispensable he became. Both English and Dutch governments had become accustomed to working with Sir Francis. This was manifested when in 1598 England and the United Provinces renegotiated the arrangements by which the war against Spain was prosecuted. A new treaty, most satisfactory to Elizabeth, was signed in London on 16 August 1598 -- but it resulted from hard bargaining conducted by the new English ambassador in the Hague, George Gilpin, and by Sir Francis Vere, who was accredited as special envoy to the states general and had conducted negotiations throughout June. Vere's reward came in the autumn, when he was made governor of the cautionary town of Brill -- filling the vacancy left by the death of Lord Burgh, despite the hopes of lords Cromwell and Grey de Wilton, who lobbied hard for the post, and the opposition of Essex. Vere's good opinion of himself was shared by the queen and her new chief minister, Sir Robert Cecil. 
The major provision of the treaty in 1598 was that all English field companies be put into the pay and under the command of the states general from January 1599. The cautionary garrisons were excluded and Elizabeth reserved ultimate authority over the rest, but almost all the English troops in the Netherlands were once again under Dutch control. As soon as the treaty went into effect in January 1599 Vere's sergeant-major-general's commission from Elizabeth was matched by one from the states general, making him 'generael over alle de compaignien Engelschen' and giving him the full burden ('last') and power ('macht') 'over die Engelsche Capiteynen, Officieren & soldaten' in Dutch pay (Nationaal Archief, archief van de staten-generaal, no. 12270, fol. 169; Nationaal Archief, Oldenbarnevelt archief, no. 2977). Vere was the only foreign general in the states' army and commanded all English troops in the Netherlands, save in Flushing, with a power that was almost absolute. However, his main paymaster was henceforth the Dutch republic, which was increasingly seeking to integrate all its foreign troops into a centralized military structure. Sir Francis Vere -- basking in his new status -- may not have foreseen it, but trouble lay ahead. 
For the moment, however, Vere was still irreplaceable. He was the only man able to fulfil two functions: first he could command the English troops in the field effectively while being trusted by both sides to do justice to their own military priorities; second he was able both to convince the states to redeploy those troops to suit Elizabeth's strategic priorities and to persuade her to give additional assistance when the Dutch needed it. Vere was even a popular figure at home. In October 1599 a stage version of the battle of Turnhout attracted good audiences: the actor playing Vere was identifiable by his (false) beard and distinctive clothing, as one eyewitness affirmed -- clearly Vere was now a public personality. 
It was in these years indeed that Vere won his greatest fame. In summer 1600 he commanded one of the three divisions of the army with which Maurice made a daring amphibious invasion of Flanders. Outmanoeuvred by the Spanish under Archduke Albert of Austria, the Dutch army was brought to battle near Nieuwpoort on 2 July 1600. The result was the most celebrated battle of the Eighty Years' War between Spain and the Netherlands and a great victory for Maurice. It has been analysed many times and it seems clear that, again, Vere claimed more credit than he was due in his 'Commentaries'. Maurice, in particular, is made to appear indecisive, and readers could easily conclude that Vere was chiefly responsible for the victory. Indeed while his dispatches at the time were taken by some Englishmen to show 'that the Ennemy was overthrowen by the Valor of the English, and the good Direction of Sir Francis Vere', others commented on the self-congratulatory note of Vere's 'letters to the counsaile'. The well-informed John Chamberlain wrote sardonically that these gave a 'relation... so partiall, as yf no man had strooke stroke but the English, and among the English no man almost but Sir Francis Vere.' Yet even Chamberlain did not doubt that Vere had played a great part. Indeed Elizabeth received letters from the Dutch government 'in commendation of our nation, but especially of his great service that day', and 'attributing the Victory to his good Order and Direction'; she herself declared Vere to be the worthiest captain of her time (Sydney and others, 2.204; 'Letters of John Chamberlain', 1.102). In fact Vere commanded the advance guard which made a skilful fighting withdrawal, and then, together with Maurice, led the counter-attack that swept the Spanish from the field in disarray. He was wounded in three places and again had his horse shot underneath him. He did not win the battle himself, but what he did was most praiseworthy. 
Vere's heroic defence of Ostend followed in 1601. The siege of Ostend (one of the greatest of the century) from July 1601 to September 1604 is referred to in 'Hamlet' and in the 'Atheists Tragedie' of the Jacobean dramatist Cyril Tourneur, who himself served there. But for Vere's determined initial resistance the city would have fallen much earlier. The Dutch had advance warning of Spanish plans and deliberately shipped Vere into the city with 1500 extra troops, mostly English. He took command on 9 July 1601, four days after the town was invested by the archduke. Vere ensured that the port remained accessible to friendly shipping and was himself transported out by sea that summer, after being shot in the head. He returned in September and continued to conduct a vigorous defence, but against overwhelming odds. By the beginning of December Vere's garrison had lost 40 per cent of its strength and a storm at sea had disrupted a Dutch fleet with reinforcements and supplies. He opened negotiations for a surrender, deliberately aimed at buying time; the fleet sailed in, Vere cancelled his negotiations, and the archduke was left 'growling and furious' (Motley, 3.86). 
This is one of the more controversial episodes in Vere's career; at the time and later he was criticized, first by those who thought that the negotiations were meant seriously and that the withdrawal of the capitulation offer was only fortuitous; and second by those who felt he had acted dishonourably. His 'anti-parley' was defended in a pamphlet, possibly authored by Tourneur ('Extremities Urging the Lord General Sir F. Veare to Offer the Late Anti-parle with the Archduke Albertus', 1602). In fact, such negotiations, aimed simply at spinning out time, were common in seventeenth-century warfare; and there is no doubt that the whole thing was a ruse, since the garrison council of war agreed to Vere's suggestion before the anti-parley was initiated. The ploy saved the city and was lauded by the garrison's officers, English, Dutch, and French -- no more need be said. 
On 7 January 1602 Albert unleashed his greatest assault yet, one designed to storm the entire fortress, rather than merely particular outworks. Vere himself briefly fought hand-to-hand in the breach to repel the main Spanish assault and the garrison held firm. Then, as the enemy retreated, Vere ordered the western sluice of the city to be opened and the retreat was turned into a disaster. A lull inevitably followed as the archduke endeavoured to make good his losses, and in March Vere was withdrawn, as the new campaign season would shortly start and his services were wanted in the field. He made a short trip home where he convinced Elizabeth to raise more troops for service in the Netherlands, then returned as commander of a division of over 7000 Englishmen in Maurice's army. Vere was at the height of his fame and success. 
In consequence of his unique place in Anglo-Dutch relations, his diplomatic skill, his prowess in combat, and his popularity Vere had unique authority, greater than that of any other mercenaries in Dutch pay. For example, Vere controlled 'the apointing of all Captens' in the English forces (Sydney and others, 2.206). He was also able in these years effectively to thumb his nose at the English hierarchy (save for the queen and Cecil). Lord Grey and the earl of Northumberland fought at Nieuwpoort and Ostend respectively; both objected to having to serve under their social inferior. However, despite frequent complaints at Elizabeth's court, Grey was consistently obliged to defer to Vere; and Northumberland only avoided that fate by a precipitate return to England. In April 1602, during Vere's visit home following his triumph at Ostend, Northumberland challenged him to a duel. He received the dismissive reply that Vere 'thought it not reasonable to satisfie him after the manner he did require and therefore he would not doe it' (CUL, Add. MS 9276, fol. 6'r')! Northumberland was, in any case, required by the queen to withdraw his challenge. It is unsurprising that Vere also defied the wishes of Essex, consciously choosing to ignore the earl's attempts to advance his clients in the English army; Vere told him to his face that 'the command of the [English] nation [in the Netherlands] belonged to me' (Arber, 137), leaving Essex 'much offended with Sir Francis Vere' ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 1.68). 
Increasingly, however, Vere's exercise of power was perceived as arbitrary. In 1603, for example, he was warned about the rumour that he had deliberately blocked the promotion of 'all Cornish men' because of a quarrel with a west-country captain, William Lower (BL, Add. MS 32464, p. 62). It was not only the envious Ralegh, Sidney, Grey, and Northumberland who resented Sir Francis; even two of his lieutenant-colonels, Sir Henry Docwra and Sir Callisthenes Brooke, fell out with him. When Vere's behaviour aroused 'a general discontentment' (Markham, 307), he took increasingly high-handed methods to maintain order, bullying at least one malcontent captain and winking at a brutal assault on another by his latest lieutenant-colonel, Sir John Ogle. Vere's high-handedness to his own countrymen weakened his position for it made him more dependent on the goodwill of the Dutch, which was becoming less and less unconditional. 
In the early to mid-1590s Maurice of Nassau initiated his celebrated military reforms which eventually helped the Dutch to win their independence. As a result by 1598 the army was both very proficient and under standardized and centralized authority. The autonomy of the republic's English troops, which owed much to Vere's unique position, went against this trend. From 1599 the Dutch expected the English troops, now in their pay, to be as subordinate to central authority as the many other mercenary contingents in their employ. 
In 1601 attempts by Maurice to remove some English troops from Vere's command led to 'Hart burning between Sir Francis and his Excellency' (Sydney and others, 2.228). Between July and October 1602 Vere was almost incommunicado during a prolonged convalescence following a head wound while on campaign with Maurice. During this time George Gilpin, the experienced English ambassador in the Netherlands, died and was not immediately replaced. Vere believed that Maurice used his and Gilpin's absence to increase his authority over the English contingent: an English captain noted that Vere was 'nothing well pleased with... [Maurice's] dealings by him' ('Salisbury MSS', 12.307). 
However, at this stage (1602) the Dutch were still keen to stay on good terms with Vere, taking pains, for example, to ensure his pay was more up to date than that of most of his compatriots: thus in April 1603 he was paid 2600 guilders of his personal salary and perquisites which were in arrears, even though his accounts had not yet been finalized (Nationaal Archief, archief van de staten-generaal, no. 12503, fol. 368'r'). Evidently his services were still valued and his employers would have hoped that he could be induced to adapt to their wishes. However, Vere was then in dispute with the states general through much of the winter of 1602-3 over the terms of his and his soldiers' employment; and his old teacher Browne, now lieutenant-governor of Flushing, reported that he was on poor terms with Maurice of Nassau. Vere was showing no signs of being willing to make the adjustments that the Dutch required. However, in his favour was the fact that he was still the favoured generalissimo of the head of state of the republic's major ally. 
On 24 March 1603 Elizabeth died. Her successor, James of Scotland, had peace with Spain as his prime foreign policy objective. Maurice and the states had a golden opportunity to subjugate fully their English employees and made moves to limit further Vere's authority. They focused attention on Vere's judicial powers which were wholly exceptional: by 1603 all troops in the Dutch army were subject to the jurisdiction of the high court of military justice. Vere and his supporters, believing that 'the title of general was merely a show if he had to exercise its power without being able to administer justice' (Nationaal Archief, Oldenbarnevelt archief, no. 2971, fol. 2'r'), were determined to resist what Vere regarded as an intolerable encroachment on his authority. 
As part of his strategy Vere returned home to win the support of the new king. He had already obtained the continuation of his governorship of Brill by letters patent of 16 April 1603. Vere had promptly proclaimed the Scottish king as king of England and he got on well with James I. Encouraged, Vere decided to bring his dispute with the Dutch to a head. At the end of 1603 he threatened to resign unless his authority over the English troops was confirmed on his terms. He evidently believed that, with the king's support secured, he was still irreplaceable. So confident was he that he made his bid while still in England. Courtiers wrote on his behalf to perceived allies within the Netherlands, and early in 1604 the new English ambassador, Sir Ralph Winwood, presented a strongly worded remonstrance to the council of state in support of Vere's requests. The stakes were high: as one English veteran turned diplomat observed, Vere was in effect seeking no less than 'absolute command of the English troops in Holland' ('CSP dom.', '1603-10', 68). 
Unfortunately for Vere by the time his proposals came before the republic's council of state, it would have heard of how 'the Spanish Ambassador [had been] publicqly feasted by the king on St Stephen's day' ('Journal of Levinus Munck', 249). It was obvious that James intended to make peace; his government's influence in Dutch military affairs, albeit still considerable, was inevitably reduced. In addition, the resentment Vere had aroused among the English officers in the Netherlands meant that the Dutch did not have to worry about disorder within their elite corps if they came to a parting of the ways. Consequently Vere's demands were refused. Having declared that if they were not met then his office of colonel-general of the English infantry would be 'nudum et inutile nomen' ('an empty and useless title'; Nationaal Archief, Oldenbarnevelt archief, no. 2971 fol. 1'v'), Vere was left with no choice but to resign and by April 1604 he had done so. In retrospect this was probably Maurice's intention from the start of his attempts to reduce Vere's judicial powers in 1603. 
Vere was still governor of Brill; he could have remained there, but, badly wounded in body in 1600, 1601, and 1602, and now wounded in pride, he returned to England, where he was welcomed at court. On both sides of the North Sea there was a readiness to pretend that Vere's resignation was due to ill health, which saved blushes all round. However, Vere did not retire; rather (in the language of industrial relations), he had suffered constructive dismissal. 
In 1605 the Dutch republic was left reeling by a great Spanish offensive which, it was obvious, would be renewed the following year. In December Vere returned to Brill (which had been governed by a deputy); he did so not simply to resume his governorship, but in the belief (shared by other observers) that the dire straits of the Dutch might compel them to restore his commission. 
Maurice and other Dutch officials dropped hints of sympathy for their former general, but it cost them nothing to express regret at 'the clause in the treaty [of London] inhibiting the Governors of the cautionary townes to have command in these warres' (BL, Stowe MS 168, fol. 345'v'). Clemont Edmondes, who had carried Vere's dispatches from Nieuwpoort, reflected the reality when he wrote in March 1606 of 'the jelowsie which the house of Nassau hath of Sir Francis Vere of whom Counte Maurice speaketh much good but geveth litle furtherance' (BL, Stowe MS, fol. 356'v'). Ogle and Sir Horace Vere supported Sir Francis's return, but bitter opposition from leading English officers, such as Sir Edward Cecil, who was 'malcontent' at the prospect of having to resume a 'servile ranck' ('De L'Isle and Dudley MSS', 3.257), provided a good excuse for Maurice to reject Vere without causing unpleasantness among his friends at the English court or in the Dutch army. 
In the end, in 1606, the states general awarded a pension of 3000 guilders (some $300) per annum to Francis Vere; thus bought off, he returned to England, never to lead men in battle again. 
In June 1606 Vere was appointed governor of Portsmouth, with subsidiary grants of other offices in that vicinity. It is notable that though England's coastal fortresses were generally run down in the years of peace that followed the treaty of London, 'enormous sums' were still spent on the defences of Portsmouth, the garrison and fortifications of which were 'still in reasonably good condition' on Vere's death (R. Stewart, 'The English Ordnance Office, 1585-1625: a Case Study in Bureaucracy', 1996, 119). It is a tribute to the prestige and influence of Sir Francis that he was able to buck the trend of James's pacifist policy in this way. 
In later life love found the semi-retired soldier. On 26 October 1607 Vere married Elizabeth, daughter of John Dent, a citizen of London, and his second wife, Alice Grant. Elizabeth was only sixteen; Sir Francis was perhaps three times her age. However, the couple seem to have been happy enough in the short time that remained to them (and it is notable that the same month Horace Vere married a lady sixteen years his junior). 
On 28 August 1609, without warning, Vere died. He left no will (a contemporary reported that he left his $300 annuity to the earl of Oxford, but it had been specified in the grant that it should go to Oxford on his death) and a commission for the administration of his property was issued to his widow on 30 August 1609. Their only child had predeceased him. Vere was buried in Westminster Abbey the day after his death, and a magnificent memorial was constructed in the chapel of St John. Modelled on the tomb of Engelbert of Nassau at Breda, it was an appropriate memorial to an Englishman who was among the internationally best known of his time. 
The cause of Vere's relatively early death is unknown. However, early in 1605 Ambassador Winwood had observed of Vere's life in semi-retirement that it made 'his lyfe... unprofitible to the world, and perhaps, as unpleasing to himself' (BL, Stowe MS 168, fol. 345). Thus, a fellow soldier's speculation that Vere died 'because he had nothing to do' may not be far off the truth (J. M. Shuttleworth, ed., 'The Life of Lord Herbert of Cherbury', 1976, 72). However, Vere had also suffered so many wounds that his body may simply have been prematurely worn out. 
At some point after 1604 Vere recorded his memoirs of several campaigns; these were published in 1657 as his 'Commentaries'. To this surviving text Vere's posthumous editor, William Dillingham, a Cambridge academic, added narratives of Nieuwpoort and the parley at Ostend by Sir John Ogle, written some years earlier; and extracts from some of the publications of Henry Hexham, Vere's page at Ostend and, by the 1630s, a noted writer on military subjects. The resultant work is not only a key source for Vere's life, but one of the major sources for the history of England and the Netherlands in this period. 
The 'Commentaries' show Vere in a positive light and have been disparaged by some historians as a partisan publication. Other scholars stress that they were not published until forty-eight years after his death and then at the instigation of an antiquary; they assert that Vere wrote a private work intended to aid the military education of future English officers. The great military historian C. H. Firth noted that 'the object of the 'Commentaries' was not autobiographical': they were 'designed to be communicated to a few other soldiers' (Arber, xvii), and Vere's biographer argued similarly (Markham). 
However, there was a flourishing manuscript culture in seventeenth-century England: tracts circulated widely even if unpublished. Ogle had read a copy -- but so had Cyril Tourneur, more professional writer than soldier (Arber, 162). The copy of Vere's writings that Dillingham originally saw was in the possession of the distinguished parliamentarian general Philip Skippon, who at the start of his career had served under the Veres, and the other copies he found were in the possession of Sir Francis Vere's great-nephews, grandchildren of Sir Horace: but of these, while Thomas, Lord Fairfax, was also a soldier, the earls of Clare and Westmorland were not. In short, the 'Commentaries' are Vere's version of events for his family, friends, and a circle of admiring veterans, but he would have known the extent to which manuscripts circulated and were copied. Given his grievance over his treatment by Maurice, Vere surely wrote with half an eye on a wider public than simply his own friends and extended family, even if he never intended publication. Moreover, the work may have been left incomplete only by his death; it may be that he intended an autobiography modelled on the 'Commentaires' of the distinguished French soldier Blaise de Monluc, of which Vere would certainly have been aware, rather than military reflections based on the example of Caesar's 'Commentaries'. 
In any event there is clearly a self-congratulatory aspect to Vere's writings. Even Ogle, Vere's trusted lieutenant, felt that his own role at Nieuwpoort had been understated by his former commander (Arber, 162). As noted above, John Chamberlain thought that Vere's Nieuwpoort dispatches were self-serving. Vere's original editor commented that Horace Vere's services were 'so eminent and considerable that they might easily have furnished another Commentary; had not his own exceeding modesty proved a stepmother to his deserved praises' -- which suggests that he felt Sir Francis lacked modesty (ibid., 87). Vere's style in his 'Commentaries' attracted opprobrious comment by Samuel Johnson and the great antiquary Thomas Birch, on the grounds that he tried to take the credit for all the actions he described (Markham, 359'n'.). Into the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, historians simply accepted Vere's descriptions of events and lauded him accordingly, but historians writing from a Dutch perspective found Vere's tone distasteful; modern historians of the Netherlands have also questioned the accuracy of how he depicted his relationship with Maurice and his contribution to Dutch strategy (for example, van Deursen, 8; Borman, 'passim'). 
In spite of these caveats Vere was an eyewitness of the events he describes for some of which he is a unique source, and he wrote clearly. No one at the time, English or Dutch, questioned his bravery or tactical ability and he was still trusted by Maurice until very late, as even Dutch historians accept (such as van Deursen, 9). Properly used, the 'Commentaries' are an excellent historical source, but given the bias that has been identified in the author, they need to be read carefully, they must always be compared with other accounts of events where possible, and where sources differ Vere's verdict on events should not be accepted simply on his say so. In short, the 'Commentaries' should be treated like any seventeenth-century memoir, and neither privileged nor suspected unduly. 
Vere was notable for his calculated rashness. His bravery at Sluys, Nieuwpoort, and Ostend and his frequent wounds all pay tribute to a valour that was remarkable even in an era when courage in combat was common. As we have seen, he was very quick to quarrel when he felt his interests or honour threatened. In this he was no worse than most of his fellow officers and better than some. However, this combativeness may have had a similar cause to Vere's desire, of which we have seen repeated examples, to be given all or most of the credit for actions in which he participated, even when not truly or wholly warranted. His palpable preoccupation with recognition, when his achievements would undoubtedly have brought him great praise in any case, surely hints at a more profound anxiety. Rather than 'inordinate self-esteem' (Motley, 4.69), it is possible that Vere had just the opposite problem. For most of his time in the Netherlands he was notorious for 'his melancholic disposition' and though a year after he was obliged to retire Browne noted -- in surprise -- that 'he love[d] company and mirth' ('De L'Isle and Dudley MSS', 3.257), for much of his life something plainly gnawed deep down in Francis Vere's soul. 
None the less Vere commanded great devotion. Clemont Edmondes dedicated his best-selling translation of Caesar's 'Commentaries' in 1600 to Vere, and Tourneur published an elegy lamenting his death. Hexham and Ogle remembered their old chief with affection and respect in their writings. Even his rival Edward Cecil, in a tactical treatise written in the 1620s, reminisced that 'The whole Army both reverenced him and stood in awe of him' (Dalton, 1.57). Not only former soldiers praised Vere: both the Dutch historian Isaac Dorislaus, holder of the first chair of history at Cambridge, and Thomas May, translator of Lucan and historian of the Long Parliament, viewed his victory at Nieuwpoort as comparable to those of the ancient Romans: there was no higher compliment in Renaissance Europe, where the Nassaus read ancient Roman authors when seeking tactical inspiration. Nor was such praise surprising. Vere was not just a victorious commander: he was also a man of humanistic sympathies. At the sack of Faro in 1596 he saved the library of the distinguished Spanish scholar Osorius and later deposited it in the Oxford University library, which had been refounded by his old colleague Bodley. Vere keenly supported Bodley's attempt to create a resource centre for protestant learning at Oxford: he was one of the first donors in 1598, and followed his $100 present then with regular donations in the following ten years, as well as further gifts of books in 1602, 1607, and 1609, including 'China books' (provenance unknown) ('Letters of Sir Thomas Bodley', 168). 
Vere became famous in Elizabethan England's great war against Spain, and was the mentor for a generation of English soldiers, many of whom went on to command in the civil wars of the 1640s. Today he is probably the best-known English military (as opposed to naval) commander of the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries, largely thanks to his 'Commentaries', and to a florid nineteenth-century biography, 'The Fighting Veres', by the eccentric Victorian admiral-turned-writer Sir Clements Markham. The existence of the 'Commentaries', a first-person narrative written in robust style, guaranteed the attention of future generations to its author. Vere was greatly praised by early nineteenth-century writers of military history, who took him as a standard example of a sixteenth-century general; one declared that of the English soldiers of Elizabeth's era 'there was none whose exploits more justly entitle him to the admiration of posterity than Sir Francis de Vere' (G. R. Gleig, 'Lives of the most Eminent British Military Commanders', 3 vols., 1831-2, 1.124-5). A strong attack on him in the 1870s by the great American historian of the Dutch revolt John Lothrop Motley only added to Vere's renown, since Motley's pro-Dutch bias ensured that his negative assessments were not simply accepted. In 1888 Motley was in turn vigorously criticized by Markham in 'The Fighting Veres', the book that established its subject's fame. Nominally a double biography of Francis and his younger brother Horace, whose military career later matched his brother's, it devoted less than a third to Horace. Only in the last quarter of the twentieth century has there been sustained analysis by academic historians of English involvement in the Netherlands in the late Tudor and early Stuart periods. It has not produced any work on Vere (albeit Wernham's narrative histories of the Anglo-Spanish war are informative) other than a PhD thesis (Borman); but this focuses on his career as commander-in-chief of the royal English army in the Dutch republic between 1589 and 1603, is not a biography, and has not been published. So Vere, though relatively well known, has never been the subject of a full biography; most narratives of his life do not take into account recent scholarship on the period; and interested readers with normal library resources will be able to discover little more about him. 
What verdict, then, can be reached on his career? Dutch historians highlight his ability at light infantry warfare (for example, Schulten and Schulten, 75), and his fighting withdrawal at Nieuwpoort was masterfully done, but he was also a good cavalry general, as he showed at Turnhout. His fighting qualities made him, according to Ogle, admittedly a devoted supporter, 'the fittest instrument... that [the Dutch] can advise of if they mean to make an active war' ('Salisbury MSS', 16.306). However, Vere also demonstrated mastery of siege warfare, which was what Maurice valued him for throughout the 1590s. In addition he reorganized the English army in the 1590s, showing a talent for administration. Thus Motley's claim that though 'an efficient colonel, [Vere] was not a general to be relied upon in great affairs either in council or in the field' (Motley, 4.69) does not do justice to his all-round abilities. 
On the other hand it is going too far to claim him as one of England's 'great captains'. Motley's claim contained a kernel of truth and was presumably based on the verdict of William Louis of Nassau that Vere (whom he knew well) was 'een goed kolonel' but needed further schooling before he could play the part of a general (van Deursen, 8n.). In virtually all the great actions in which he won distinction Vere was a subordinate. Maurice often accepted his advice (or so Vere claimed, though modern historians are more sceptical), and was often semi-detached from the main army, but Sir Francis never exercised a truly independent command (in contrast to Sir Horace) and even if Maurice took his advice every time Vere claimed, it was still the prince who had to make the decisions and bear the responsibility. All in all, Vere's talents were those of an excellent corps commander and/or a staff officer, rather than of an army commander. This judgement is of course anachronistic and approximate, but it offers a guide to where Sir Francis Vere should stand in the pantheon of English military greats. If this assessment is not as high as he (or some historians) would have liked, he was still a very able soldier and diplomat. 
Vere is best summed up by contemporaries. In the words of a seventeenth-century biographer, 'though he were an honourable slip of that ancient tree of nobility [the earls of Oxford]... yet he brought more glory to the name of Vere, than he took of blood from the family.... He was amongst the Queen's swordmen, inferior to none, but superior to many. (Naunton, 295-6)' Cecil elsewhere declared: 'Hee was the verie Dyall of the whole Army by whome wee knew when we should fight or not' (Dalton). It is an epitaph Sir Francis Vere might have chosen. 


@@@@@


doc= 28210


Vere, Henry de, eighteenth earl of Oxford (1593-1625), nobleman and soldier, was the only surviving son of Edward de Vere, seventeenth earl of Oxford (1550-1604), and his second wife, Elizabeth Trentham (died 1612/13). He was born on 24 February 1593 at Stoke Newington, Middlesex, and inherited his title on 24 June 1604. He was admitted to the Middle Temple in November 1604, and awarded an MA degree at Oxford on 30 August 1605 during a royal visit there. It seems unlikely that the earl absorbed much learning at either place, however, preferring what his mother described in 1611 as 'evil courses'. His financial situation was from the beginning precarious; in 1604 King James granted him a $200 pension, and in 1609 his mother, as his guardian, sought a parliamentary bill that would have allowed him to sell part of his estate. 
While he was at least occasionally at court -- serving as esquire to Prince Charles on his creation as duke of York in 1605, and becoming knight of the Bath at Prince Henry's assumption of the principality of Wales in 1610 -- Oxford preferred what some described as 'debauchery' away from Whitehall. In 1611 the king granted him the keepership of Havering Park, although James worried that he would not preserve the game there. Conflict with his mother, who described him as 'younge and nott able to advise himself' (BL, Add. MS 29549, fol. 31), bedevilled his youth, but her death in December 1612 or early January 1613 increased his income and allowed him to embark upon an extended tour of Europe. He remained overseas for over five years, first in the Spanish Netherlands, then France (he was in Paris in 1614), and finally, Venice. In Venice, with the king's approval, Oxford offered to raise 6000 men for the republic's service -- an offer the senate declined. While in Venice he was unwarily drawn into a dispute at home. Lady Hatton attempted to derail the planned match of her daughter, Frances Coke, to Sir John Villiers, brother of James's favourite Buckingham, by claiming a pre-contract with Oxford. The king insisted upon the Villiers marriage, and the ploy failed. 'He [Oxford] sends word he will come over and see what he must do, but it is doubtful whether her fair face and the large fortune offered will induce him to risk losing the favour of the King' ('CSP dom.', '1611-18', 482). 
Oxford returned to England in October 1618, served in Queen Anne's funeral in May 1619, and in the same month took up his office as hereditary lord great chamberlain. But the European war beckoned, and was more attractive to the earl than a court now dominated by Buckingham. In June 1620 he joined his kinsman Sir Horace Vere as a captain in Vere's regiment. His 250 men were raised, the Venetian ambassador claimed, at Oxford's own expense -- although given his poverty this seems a dubious assertion. After only a few months' service he left the Palatinate just before word arrived of the catastrophic defeat of Frederick's army at White Mountain, outside Prague. He landed in England on 11 November. 
As a peer with firsthand experience of the war (limited though it was), Oxford was named by James to the council of war which in January and February 1621 considered how to rescue the elector palatine's fortunes. In the first session of the parliament of 1621, armed with two proxies and a feeling that his services were undervalued, he aligned himself with the so-called 'noble patriots' opposed to a Spanish match. Oxford spoke rashly about the match, and in July was gaoled for a short time in the Tower. The king suggested that he absent himself from parliament's second session, and then made sure of his absence by appointing him to command a fleet patrolling the English Channel in December. Oxford served at sea until March 1622, but was removed from command following another imbroglio with Buckingham. This time he unwisely intervened in the marriage of another Villiers brother, Christopher, to Elizabeth Norreys. He 'hoped the time would come when justice would be free, and not pass only through Buckingham's hands' ('CSP dom.', '1619-23', 328). For this Oxford once again went to the Tower. This time James was incensed and directed the attorney-general to prepare a Star Chamber prosecution. Held a close prisoner for twenty months, repeated efforts to gain Oxford's release failed due to the king's intransigence. Finally, on 30 December 1623, he was freed, thanks to the good offices of Prince Charles and Buckingham, hoping to smooth the waters before the upcoming parliamentary session. The duke further ingratiated himself with Oxford by supporting his planned match with Lady Diana (1596-1654), daughter of William Cecil, second earl of Exeter. Lady Diana's beauty was matched by her $30,000 fortune, and the two were married as soon as Oxford was released, on 1 January 1624. Now reconciled -- at least outwardly -- to the royal favourite, in May 1624 Oxford took command of a regiment in the elector palatine's service in the Low Countries. There, in late May, he received a slight wound in his left arm in action before Terheiden. The injury evidently became infected, for he died of a fever at The Hague between 2 and 9 June 1625 NS. He was buried in Westminster Abbey on 15 July 1625. He left no children, and was succeeded by his second cousin Robert de Vere, nineteenth earl of Oxford. 


@@@@@


doc= 28211


Vere, Horace, Baron Vere of Tilbury (1565-1635), army officer, was the youngest of four sons of Geoffrey Vere ('c'.1525-1572?) of Crepping Hall, Wakes Colne, Essex, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1615), daughter of Richard Harkyns (or Hardekyn) of Colchester. Geoffrey was the fourth son of John de Vere, fifteenth earl of Oxford ['see under 'Vere, John de, sixteenth earl of Oxford], so Horace was close kin of the premier earl of England, a title to which for a time he would even be heir presumptive. Most contemporary English sources (and all modern historians) give his name as Horace, but some English and all Dutch memoirs and manuscripts of the period give Horatio. His elder brother Sir Francis Vere was also a celebrated military commander. 
Little is known of Horace Vere's early life. He and his elder brothers Robert and Francis were trained as boys in the military arts by William Browne (later knighted) and by the early 1580s Francis was fighting for the protestant cause in the Netherlands. He continued in service there after England joined the Dutch in war against Spain in 1585, and in February 1589 he was joined by Robert. In the following year Robert visited their widowed mother and returned with the youngest brother, now aged twenty-five (leaving Elizabeth Vere in the care of the eldest brother, John). What Horace had done up to this point is unknown. 
In 1591, despite his inexperience, Vere was appointed lieutenant of his brother Francis's own company of foot. By June 1594, after the English troops had suffered heavy casualties, including at least three captains, while besieging Groningen, Sir Francis wrote to Lord Burghley, Elizabeth's chief minister, that 'My youngest brother for his experiences and trial made of his sufficiency shows himself very capable of the charge' (Markham, 194). Horace was duly promoted captain. Evidently he distinguished himself in this capacity, for in 1596 he was made lieutenant-colonel of Sir John Wingfield's regiment of foot in the army sent to attack Cadiz under the command of the earl of Essex. When Wingfield was slain in battle Horace took command of the 750-strong regiment and was knighted by Essex for his good service. 
On his return Vere passed from Elizabeth's employ into the Dutch army. To supplement the forces in the queen's pay the states general of the United Provinces had commissioned Sir Francis in 1594 to raise an extra regiment of English troops as mercenaries. Late in 1596 Sir 'Oratius' became the senior captain of the regiment (TNA: PRO, SP 84/54, fol. 107'r'). He spent the rest of his career in the service of the Dutch republic. This did not exclude also serving his sovereign but his primary paymaster henceforth would always be the United Provinces. 
In 1599 all the English troops in the Netherlands, save for the garrisons of the 'cautionary towns' of Flushing and Brill, were transferred into Dutch pay. Sir Horace Vere distinguished himself in the bitter fighting around Bommel, in which a Spanish offensive was blunted and then driven back. In the celebrated battle of Nieuwpoort (2 July 1600), in which the English troops played a major part, Horace distinguished himself. He gathered six companies of English troops, with which he saved the Dutch artillery (which played an important part in the victory) before launching a charge that helped break up the Spanish momentum, allowing Sir Francis Vere and Prince Maurice, captain-general of the United Provinces, to launch a general counter-attack and sweep the Spanish to defeat. Sir Francis's narrative of the battle in his military memoirs does not do justice to his brother's role ('The 'Commentaries'', 158-65). Sir John Ogle, a loyal lieutenant to both, implies that Sir Francis gave an imperfect account of Nieuwpoort because he could not be aware of all that had gone on, being caught up in the action. Surely, however, by the time Sir Francis wrote his memoir, he must have had an idea of what his own brother, at least, had done. He preferred to emphasize his own part in this famous battle at the expense not only of Sir Edward Cecil (another English officer with whom he had quarrelled bitterly by the time of writing), but even of his brother. A better idea of Horace's role can be gained from the Dutch chronicler Orlers (Orlers, 1610, edn, 157). 
The famous victory at Nieuwpoort was followed by the equally famous siege of Ostend. Vere alarmed Elizabeth in September 1600 when he wrote to her, warning of the city's vulnerability, and she ensured that its garrison was reinforced, mostly by English soldiers, before the siege commenced in July 1601. Eventually it lasted more than three years and the city became known as 'the New Troy' in consequence. The defence was originally commanded by Sir Francis Vere, ably seconded by his brother. In the massive Spanish assault of 7 January 1602 Sir Horace had charge of '12 weak companies' holding the vitally important post known as Sand Hill; it was here that the brunt of the Spanish assault would fall and Sir Horace was 'hurt in the leg, with a splinter', a potentially serious wound which he and his leg survived intact ('The 'Commentaries'', 176, 183). In March 1602 both Veres were rotated out of Ostend with many of their troops and given a chance to rest. Sir Horace was given his elder brother's dispatches to carry to the new king, James VI and I, in April 1603. 
James promptly made peace with Spain. He maintained English control over the cautionary towns and still permitted the Dutch republic to recruit English, Welsh, and Scottish troops, but England was no longer an ally of the United Provinces. This undermined Sir Francis Vere's position and he was obliged to resign his post as 'generaal der infanterie' in 1604. At first no one replaced him. Sir Edward Cecil, grandson of Lord Burghley and nephew of the secretary of state, Sir Robert Cecil (later earl of Salisbury), was impatient with Sir Francis's supremacy and had already intrigued against his general. Consequently, initially the four English colonels, Henry Sutton, Cecil, Ogle, and Sir Horace, each answered only to the captain-general (Maurice) and the council of state. It was only after more than a year, during which Ogle could observe that 'Sir Horace Vere presses hard', that, on 3 May 1605, Horace was appointed 'Generael over alle d'Engelsche compaignien' ('Salisbury MSS', 17.156). His authority, even then, was more limited than his brother's: he would only 'superintend' the other colonels in the field, rather than having any administrative jurisdiction; this limitation on his authority was largely due to Cecil's refusal to be commanded by Vere ('De L'Isle and Dudley MSS', 3.153-4; 'Salisbury MSS', 17.156-7). 
However, Sir Horace Vere showed himself to be at least his brother's equal. In autumn 1604 he was commended by the states general for his distinguished conduct in the successful siege of Sluys. A year later he saved Maurice and the Dutch army at the battle of Mulheim (9 October 1605). The Dutch cavalry were commanded by Maurice's younger brother and heir, Prince Frederick Henry of Nassau, who had served with Vere at Sluys. Unfortunately his force was routed, throwing the entire states' army into danger. A retreat was necessary but there was 'every prospect of the movement being converted into a complete rout' (Markham, 376), unless time could be gained for Maurice to rally his troops. Vere now conceived and executed a bold plan, crossing the Ruhr with picked English companies and holding the passage of the river until Maurice had rallied the army, which then withdrew in good order. The Spanish general, the celebrated Spinola, 'declared that Sir Horace Vere had saved the army of the States' (ibid., 377). 
As he defied the Spanish at the river crossing Vere must have truly seemed a latterday Horatius to the hard-pressed Nassau brothers. In the following year his primacy in the field went beyond mere 'superintendence'. Each English colonel kept control of 'the disposing of the business of his owne regiment' (that is, of internal administration), but henceforth were obliged to 'receive their directions' (that is, in military operations) from Sir Horace ('De L'Isle and Dudley MSS', 3.283-4). 
Vere exercised his new powers in the field only during 1607, for 1608 was taken up largely by the negotiations which resulted in 1609 in the beginning of the Twelve Years' Truce between Spain and the Dutch republic. Following the campaign season of 1607 he returned to England in October for a double celebration: his brother, aged forty-seven, married a woman thirty years younger than himself; in November 1607 Sir Horace, at forty-two, wed Lady Mary Hoby (1581-1671) ['see 'Vere, Mary], aged twenty-six. The two had met the previous year when Horace was visiting home. The daughter of Sir John Tracy of Tuddington, Mary was the widow of William Hoby and had two small children. It was thus a convenient match for Mary, but Horace seems genuinely to have been in love. She followed him to the Netherlands (though not until July 1608) and in later life both clearly had great affection for each other. John Chamberlain's description of Sir Horace and his lady taking him sightseeing in the Netherlands in October 1608 is but one example of their ease in each other's company. 
In 1609 Sir Francis Vere died. He had still been governor of Brill, a very desirable post which was promptly sought by Thomas Howard, earl of Arundel, and by Sir Edward Cecil, whose father, the earl of Exeter, wrote to his brother and Edward's uncle, the earl of Salisbury. However, though this was not a Dutch office, Prince Maurice recommended Sir Horace Vere and did so strongly enough to ensure that he was duly appointed successor to his brother. Vere held the office until 1616, when the English government finally returned the cautionary towns of Brill and Flushing to Dutch control. He was granted an annual pension of $800 in lieu of the office's pay and perquisites, but in any case it did not affect his standing in the republic, which by this time was secure. 
Vere was on close terms with both Maurice and Frederick Henry of Nassau. His cordial relations with the former are particularly notable as personal differences between the prince and Sir Francis had been a major factor in the latter's enforced resignation. However, the younger Vere blamed Sir Edward Cecil for his brother's fate, rather than Maurice. Both Cecil and Sir Horace were colonels at the time; both rose to become generals in the Dutch service and were ennobled at home. However, they were at odds for many years, each seeking appointments at the other's expense and each endeavouring to prefer their own clients to commands over the other's. Despite Cecil's exalted connections in England Vere had the better of the rivalry, at least in the United Provinces. From 1610 he established himself in the affinity of Henry, prince of Wales, but his success was primarily due to his connection to the Nassaus. From at least 1606 Vere received preferential rates of pay and his clients generally had the best of the competition with Cecil's: one of them, Sir Edward Harwood, was even made a gentleman of Maurice's privy chamber. Moreover not only was Vere appointed governor of Brill in 1610, but he was preferred to the governorship of Utrecht in July 1618. This appointment came at the expense of Sir John Ogle who, during the Arminian troubles, sided with the opponents of Maurice. His replacement by Vere was thus doubly a gesture of trust. 
No doubt it owed much to Vere's actions at Mulheim, but it must also have been due to a personal relationship between the two men. When, in 1610, Maurice decided at the last minute to accompany the army which besieged Julich, Vere reported how 'his Excellencie hath desyred me to wayte uppon him which I wold not refewse' (Trim, 349). Clearly they got on well. 
Nevertheless Sir Horace carried less authority than had Sir Francis. The withdrawal of England from war against Spain in 1604 followed five years later by an armistice between Spain and the United Provinces naturally made the English troops in Dutch service less significant and this made it easier for their employers to reduce them to the same obedience to the republic as all its other soldiers. Vere himself reflected on the 'lymitations [with which] I... exersyse that command I have under the States', observing that the best way for an English or Welsh soldier to advance his career was to be 'knowen to the princypall persons that govern here' (Trim, 351). Indeed, his own successful career demonstrated this point. 
In 1620 the Palatinate, whose elector Frederick V's wife was Princess Elizabeth, daughter of James VI and I, faced invasion by Spanish troops, after Frederick's intervention in Bohemia. In May 1620 James finally responded to the appeals of his own subjects to intervene on his protestant son-in-law's behalf by permitting Count Dohna, the palatine envoy, to raise troops in England (but at his own expense). Consequently Dohna also chose the expedition's general. Sir Edward Cecil wanted the post and obtained the backing of the king's favourite, the duke of Buckingham. However, though Vere had not sought the command, Dohna chose him, much to Cecil's anger. Buckingham withdrew his support for the expedition, but such was the feeling for the protestant cause among the English gentry and nobility, and such was Vere's reputation, that there was no shortage of volunteers, including many from distinguished families: two of his captains were Robert Devereux, third earl of Essex, and Horace's own kinsman Henry de Vere, eighteenth earl of Oxford (whose impoverished inheritance had been relieved only by a generous legacy from Sir Francis Vere). However, owing to Dohna's financial difficulties, it was not until 22 July that Vere and a force of 2200 volunteers sailed for the Netherlands. The following month Spinola's, Spanish army invaded the Palatinate. 
Vere's force was reinforced in the Netherlands by men from the English regiments in Dutch pay and was accompanied into the Palatinate by a Dutch cavalry force under Frederick Henry. Vere outmanoeuvred Spinola and was able to effect a union with the army of the German protestant Evangelical Union, Frederick V's allies. That winter, however, the elector was utterly defeated at the battle of the White Mountain and, together with his 'winter queen', fled to his Nassau cousins in The Hague. In April 1621 the princes of the Evangelical Union broke up their army, agreeing to leave the Palatinate and the English army defending it to their fates. Vere carefully disposed the forces under his command to hold Mannheim, Heidelberg, and Frankenthal, key fortresses in the Lower Palatinate. Frankenthal was besieged in 1621, but was gallantly defended until Vere relieved the siege. 
However, that year the imperialist general Tilly completed the conquest of the Upper Palatinate, while Vere's troops were ill-paid and suffering from disease. Early in 1622 James sent $30,000 to help his son-in-law, but much of it was diverted to Ernst, Count Mansfeld. The latter had been Frederick's general in Bohemia and the elector joined his army for an offensive that began in April 1622. Frederick actually reached Mannheim, where Vere was in command, but Tilly twice defeated Mansfeld's army and by June Frederick had retreated to the Netherlands once more. By late summer an overwhelming imperialist and Spanish army had assembled and the writing was on the wall. Heidelberg was stormed on 16 September 1622. Two weeks later Vere was obliged to surrender Mannheim, but he was granted the honours of war and took his surviving troops back to the Netherlands. He then returned to England. 
Vere received an enthusiastic welcome. He was celebrated in verse by the dramatist and translator of Homer, George Chapman ('Pro Vero autumni lachrymae', 1622); Ben Jonson declared his deeds 'fit to be Sung by a Horace', hymning his 'fame... wonne/In th'eye of Europe, where thy deedes were done' ('Epigrammes', 91); later, Thomas May dedicated book seven of his translation of Lucan, which deals with the battle of Pharsalia, to Vere, whose military prowess made him seem comparable to Caesar. Meanwhile on 16 February 1623 he was appointed muster-master-general of the ordnance for life. 
All this was appropriate recognition. Given Vere's lack of support it was remarkable that he had held back the Catholic tide so long. To hold virtually all the Lower Palatinate against Spanish attacks in 1621 was an impressive feat and had Vere been given greater resources things might have turned out differently. 
Back in the Netherlands Maurice was in constantly poor health and the republic was militarily on the back foot. Vere quickly returned to the Netherlands and to active service. Breda, seat of the Nassau family, was closely besieged and in 1624-5 Vere was involved in the operations to relieve the siege. Hampered by Maurice's death on 23 April 1625, these failed; the city capitulated to Spinola. 
It was a dark moment for the Dutch republic and made the worse for Vere since his young cousin, the earl of Oxford, died of wounds sustained at Breda. However, Sir Horace had distinguished himself in the fighting, carrying out another fighting withdrawal: the most difficult operation in warfare. He received further honours at home. In 1624 he was made a member of the council of war; Cecil and Ogle were also appointed, but neither were any longer in Dutch service -- it was a signal honour for one who was a general in foreign pay. On 24 July 1625 Sir Horace was created Baron Vere of Tilbury (the title came from his estate in north-east Essex rather than from the Thames-side fort): appropriately the supporters granted to his arms carried shields, one with the arms of the Netherlands, the other with the arms of Zeeland. He and his wife bought an estate at Clapton, near Hackney, where, aged sixty, he may have hoped to retire with his five daughters. 
Frederick Henry, who on Maurice's death had succeeded him as stadholder and captain-general, wanted his old comrade in arms in service again and Vere would not refuse the call. Vere was on the republic's council of war which, in 1628, decided to begin a counter-offensive by campaigning against the great fortress city of 's-Hertogenbosch. In 1629 Vere commanded a large English contingent in the prince of Orange's army. It included, among a host of noble officers and gentlemen volunteers, Robert de Vere, nineteenth earl of Oxford; Vere's son-in-law, John Holles, Lord Haughton; Thomas Fairfax (whose grandfather, Thomas, first Lord Fairfax, had fought with Vere in the 1590s, whose great-uncle Sir Charles had been killed at Ostend, and two of whose uncles had been killed in the Palatinate); and lords Doncaster, Fielding, and Craven. It was a long siege -- Vere was rumoured to have been killed in June; a kinsman, Sir Edward Vere, was killed in August. Yet in September the city fell: the greatest Spanish defeat since the Armada. 
Vere was able to spend more of his time in England during the following two years, though he was in the Netherlands in the summers (the campaign season). In 1632 another major offensive was launched, this time against Maastricht. Vere was commander of the English brigade, and on this occasion Frederick Henry went so far as to give him the power to confer knighthood. In this siege Vere's nephew Sir Simon Harcourt was badly wounded, while two English colonels were mortally wounded, both close to Vere: Sir Edward Harwood and the earl of Oxford. However, even though an imperialist army was sent to bolster Spanish attempts to relieve the siege, the sacrifices of Vere's kin and loyal followers were not in vain. Maastricht surrendered in August, leaving Spanish power in disarray. 
Vere now entered virtual retirement. His only military duties were connected with the business of the ordnance office and he enjoyed the company of his family. By this time his three elder daughters had all been married. In 1626 Elizabeth had married John Holles, who later succeeded as second earl of Clare; and in 1627 Mary had married Sir Roger Townshend; on his death in 1638 she married Mildmay Fane, second earl of Westmorland. (Both daughters had been born in the Netherlands and had been the beneficiaries of a parliamentary act of naturalization in 1624.) In 1634 Catherine married Oliver St John, the eldest son of Sir John St John, first baronet, of Lydiard Tregoze, Wiltshire; after his death she married John Poulett, son and heir of John, Lord Poulett of Hinton St George. In 1635 Vere's fourth daughter, Anne ['see 'Fairfax, Anne], was betrothed to Thomas Fairfax. 
Family matters, therefore, were well in hand when on 2 May 1635 Vere went to dine at Whitehall with his friend Sir Henry Vane, ambassador to The Hague, then on a trip home. Sir Horace, in his seventieth year, had a stroke and died within two hours. He was buried with great pomp on 8 May 1635 in Westminster Abbey, by the side of his brother Sir Francis, where both still lie. 
Sir Horace Vere's will, dated 10 November 1634, was proved on 6 May 1635. It makes no mention of his daughters, but he had made a number of conveyances of his property the previous year and he left his remaining lands to Mary, 'my most loving wife', evidently trusting her to make appropriate dispositions for their children (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/168, fol. 7'v'). In 1637 Thomas Fairfax married Anne Vere; later, the Veres' youngest daughter, Dorothy, married John Wolstenholme of Stanmore, Middlesex. Mary Vere, Lady Vere of Tilbury, lived to be ninety, serving for a time as parliamentarian governor of Charles I's children Elizabeth and Henry, duke of Gloucester. 
The Veres have been classified among 'the well-known Puritan families' of pre-civil war England (Heal and Holmes, 366). Sir Horace himself was a patron and protector of puritan ministers: from 1611 to 1619 the puritan minister William Ames was in Vere's personal service, and in 1620 he was chaplain of Sir Horace's regiment in Dutch pay. (Later, Sir Edward Harwood, Vere's client, helped get Ames a university appointment.) Vere appointed as chaplain of his regiment for palatine service the puritan minister Dr John Burgess. 
Mary, Lady Vere's religious views were regarded by some contemporaries as 'of a Dutch complexion' ('DNB') and it was to this she owed parliament's favour after the civil wars. It was probably the case that Horace married her because her views agreed with his own, rather than that she picked presbyterianism up in the Netherlands. In 1608, in his absence, she made a donation to Sir Thomas Bodley's Calvinist intellectual project at Oxford University. His wife's strong views; his own family background; his friendship with the princes of Orange (known as defenders of the Reformed church in the Netherlands); his appointment as governor of Utrecht in place of Sir John Ogle, tainted with Arminian sympathies; and his own patronage of 'godly' ministers exiled from England -- all make it clear that Sir Horace was certainly a puritan and probably a presbyterian. 
That Vere could live happily in England under Charles I, despite his firm views in favour of military intervention on the continent, and his almost certain puritan sympathies, was probably partly due to an instinctive allegiance to his king, which a close personal tie to the princely house of Orange must have reinforced. However, in addition Horace Vere quite simply got on with people. For example, even after Sir Francis fell out with Sir Robert Sidney, Horace and Sidney remained friends. Contemporaries also remarked on the steady nature of Sir Horace's temperament, though this was heightened by the contrast with his more choleric brother. A near-contemporary writer recorded that 'it was true of him what is said of the Caspian Sea, that it doth never ebb nor flow, observing a constant tenor neither elated or depressed with success' (Fuller, 'Worthies', 1.514). Ben Jonson praised Vere for his '
Humanitie, and pietie, which are 

As noble in great chiefes, as they are rare. 

And best become the valiant man to weare, 

Who more should seeke mens reverence, then feare. 
('Epigrammes', 91)' Horace Vere's friendship with the notoriously prickly Maurice of Nassau, and his ability to stay on good terms with almost all the English officers in the Netherlands (notable as a group for their hot-headed quarrelsomeness), along with the praise he garnered from his opponents all point to his essential likeableness. 
Most early modern English military commanders before the duke of Marlborough (other than Oliver Cromwell) have been largely ignored, but this is truer of Horace Vere than most. He is rarely the subject of even short essays in specialist periodicals; he has less than a third of C. R. Markham's putative double biography of the Vere brothers; and in general works of military history or biography it is Francis who attracts attention, with Horace often not even mentioned. This reflects that Francis, the elder, came first, that he commanded in a period of greater success for his employers, and that he was a gifted self-publicist. However, the younger brother was certainly as able a soldier and arguably more influential in the long term. 
English troops commanded by Sir Francis Vere played a crucial part in the operations of the 1590s by which the future of the Dutch republic was secured, but the success of the great Dutch counter-offensive of that decade was really due to Maurice of Nassau and a group of highly proficient and professional officers of whom Sir Francis Vere, while a leading light, was only one. From about 1610 the senior officers serving the Nassaus, while still efficient, were mostly of a lesser calibre. Sir Francis Vere's record is thus partly made to look good by those around him, while the opposite is true of Sir Horace. In addition, he, unlike his brother, commanded an army in his own right. Francis commended himself to posterity by his apparently frank memoirs, which in fact serve to enhance the author's reputation at every point. Horace was a quieter, more modest man: Thomas Fuller observed that while he had 'as much valour' he had 'more meekness' than his elder brother (Fuller, 'Worthies', 1.514). Francis helped win the day at Nieuwpoort and ensured that everybody knew it; Horace saved the day at Mulheim, but did not boast of the fact. 
Moreover, Sir Horace Vere recognized that in the long term the English troops in Dutch employ could not be maintained as a separate force and, by keeping on good terms with first Maurice and then Frederick Henry, he ensured that a steady flow of Englishmen crossed the narrow seas and fought with the Dutch. England's insular inhabitants thus had an opportunity for valuable military experience, despite the long peace between 1604 and 1639; but they also had an escape valve for the stress resulting from their sovereign's refusal to intervene in the Thirty Years' War. Revisionist historians have not recognized that any unity in the English body politic in the 1620s and 1630s existed partly because many of those who were discontent with the Stuarts' religious and foreign policies had an opportunity to vent their frustrations. 
Indeed, as contemporaries recognized, Sir Horace Vere's army was a 'Nurcery of Souldierie' (Hexham, 'epistle dedicatory'). Sir Horace was the teacher and patron of a whole generation of soldiers. In the 1640s they comprised a high proportion of both the cavalier and roundhead officer corps. Generals who had served under Sir Horace included the earl of Essex, Sir Thomas Fairfax, Philip Skippon, Sir William Waller, Philip, Lord Wharton, Sir Jacob Astley, Sir Nicholas Byron, Sir Thomas Glemham, and Sir Ralph Hopton; but Vere's veterans could be found at all levels of the royalist and parliamentarian armies. Many former proteges of the even-tempered Sir Horace were moderate in their conduct of what Waller, writing to Hopton, famously termed a 'war without an enemy'. George Monck, who brought about the restoration of Charles II, was one of Vere's particular proteges. Monck's decision to renew legitimate monarchy, rather than become a military dictator, was doubtless the result of his own character; but this had been moulded by Vere's influence at an early stage. 
By his tactical astuteness, leadership, courtesy, courage, and magnanimity, and his influence on his contemporaries, Vere was a figure of genuine significance in seventeenth-century English and European history. He deserves to be more than just a footnote in history -- and to be remembered in his own right, not just as an addendum to his brother. 


@@@@@


doc= 28212


Vere, John de, seventh earl of Oxford (1312-1360), magnate and soldier, was the only son of Alfonso de Vere (died 1328) and his wife, Jane Foliot. Alfonso was the younger brother of Robert de Vere, sixth earl of Oxford, who died childless in 1331, and John thus succeeded to the earldom, and to the hereditary chamberlainship of England, in that year. In 1336 he married Maud, the second of the four daughters and coheir of Giles, Lord Badlesmere, of Badlesmere in Kent, who died in 1338. 
Most of John de Vere's adult life was spent in the service of Edward III on campaigns in France and Scotland. He formed a close connection with William Bohun, earl of Northampton, who was almost exactly the same age. The two were brothers-in-law: Northampton married Elizabeth, the third of Giles Badlesmere's four daughters; they campaigned together in France and Scotland, and were associated on various commissions in England. They died within nine months of one another in 1360. Oxford's military career began with the Scottish campaigns of the 1330s. In 1334-5 he served on the Roxburgh campaign, bringing a retinue of twenty-eight men-at-arms and twelve mounted archers. He then took part in the summer campaign of 1335, on this occasion as a member of the retinue of Earl Warenne. When a French invasion threatened in 1339 he was appointed keeper of the 'maritime lands' in Essex; in November he put to sea in the king's service, and in March 1340 he served in Flanders with the earl of Warwick. In February 1342 he took part in a tournament at Dunstable, and Murimuth identifies him as one of the 'young earls of the kingdom' ('Adae Murimuth continuatio chronicarum', 123) alongside Derby, Warwick, Northampton, Pembroke, and Suffolk, whom he contrasts with nobles such as Gloucester, Arundel, and Warenne who were absent from the tournament on account of their age and infirmity. 
In August 1342 Oxford set out on his first major campaign in France, serving in Brittany with the earl of Northampton, who had been appointed Edward III's lieutenant there. The expedition relieved Brest, and on 30 September put the forces of Charles de Blois to flight at Morlaix in a hard-fought battle. In the following year Oxford served with Northampton on the expedition sent to Scotland to relieve Lochmaben Castle, and in 1345 he again campaigned with Northampton in Brittany. A later tradition has it that on their return his ships were blown so far off course that he and his retinue were forced ashore on the coast of Connacht, where their goods were pillaged by the local people. However, he was at Quimperle in Brittany in January 1346, and it is possible that he and Northampton overwintered there. 
In the summer of 1346 John de Vere joined Edward III's expedition to Normandy. He and Northampton may have gone to Normandy straight from Brittany. According to Froissart, Oxford fought alongside Edward, the Black Prince, at the battle of Crecy on 26 August, and was one of the commanders who sent word to the king asking for reinforcements, as the division was hard-pressed by the French. Edward replied with his famous message 'Let the boy win his spurs' ('Chroniques', 3.183). Oxford then took part in the siege of Calais, but in 1348 he was said to be 'detained by severe sickness' ('CClR, 1346-1349', 598), and he did not campaign again until 1355, when he accompanied the Black Prince to Gascony. He then joined in the prince's famous raid into Languedoc, while early in the following year he is reported as campaigning in the area around Rocamadour in Quercy. 
In the autumn of 1356 the Black Prince's army moved north and encountered the French at Poitiers on 19 September. John de Vere and the earl of Warwick were in command of the vanguard. During the battle Oxford took a group of archers to attack the flank of the French cavalry and brought them down, preventing them from overrunning the main body of English archers. After the battle he returned to Bordeaux, but as the negotiations for peace with France became more difficult he was summoned to a council in London on 10 October 1359, and subsequently joined the king on the Rheims campaign of 1359-60. He died, probably during the raid into Burgundy, on 23 or 24 January 1360. His body was brought home to England and buried in the family burial place at Earls Colne Priory in Essex. 
Oxford had enjoyed an active military career, though none of the contemporary chroniclers suggests that he had exceptional prowess or that he acquired great fame on the battlefield. Indeed, Edward III did not reward him as generously as some of his other companions-in-arms. He never became a member of the Order of the Garter, unlike the earl of Northampton, and although he was permitted to re-enfeoff his estates so as to give his wife a substantial life interest in them, he enjoyed little royal patronage. In a sense, the de Veres were on the fringes of the titled nobility. Although their earldom was ancient, their inheritance, and thus their resources, were modest by comparison with their peers. The retinues he brought to his campaigns were small compared with those of his fellow earls. He managed to augment his inheritance with his wife's share of the Badlesmere inheritance, but this too was modest. Service in the king's wars was not obviously a source of reward or profit for Oxford; indeed, his wages were often assigned on the subsidy or paid in the form of grants of wool, and there is no evidence for a major building programme either at his main residence, Castle Hedingham in Essex, or at Earls Colne Priory, of which he was patron, even though the priory was damaged when the tower and crossing collapsed in 1356. In his will Oxford left only 100 marks for works at the priory. 
Oxford's widow died in 1366. They had four sons and two daughters. Their eldest son, John, married Elizabeth, daughter of Hugh Courtenay, earl of Devon, but he died 'c'.1350. Another son, Robert, is known to have died in his father's lifetime, but otherwise nothing is known about him. Both John and Robert were buried at Earls Colne Priory. Thomas de Vere, the elder surviving son, was born between 1336 and 1338, married Maud, daughter of Sir Ralph Ufford, and succeeded to the earldom on his father's death. Aubrey de Vere, the younger surviving son, was born about 1338-40 and became tenth earl in 1393 on the restoration of the earldom after the exile and forfeiture of Thomas's son, Robert de Vere, ninth earl of Oxford and duke of Ireland, Richard II's favourite. The elder daughter, Margaret, married first Henry, Lord Beaumont (died 1369), second Sir Nicholas Loveyn of Penshurst, Kent, (died 'c'.1375), and third John Devereux, Baron Devereux (d. 1393). John de Vere left 1000 marks in his will for the marriage portion of a second daughter, Matilda, but otherwise nothing is known of her. 
If the instructions in his will were implemented, Oxford was buried on the south side of the choir of the lady chapel of Earls Colne Priory. His widow asked to be buried in the priory 'near the body of my worshipful lord Earl deceased' (Benton, 263). The alabaster effigies on one of the tombs known to have been in the priory in 1653, and of which a drawing survives, have been identified as those of John de Vere and his wife, but they appear to have been destroyed in the early eighteenth century. None of the tombs subsequently removed to St Stephen's Chapel near Bures in Suffolk has been identified as that of John de Vere. 


@@@@@


doc= 28213


Vere, John de, twelfth earl of Oxford (1408-1462), magnate, was the elder son of Richard de Vere, eleventh earl of Oxford (1385-1417), and his second wife, Alice (died 1452), daughter of Sir Richard Sergeaux and widow of Guy de St Aubyn. He was born on 23 April 1408 at Castle Hedingham, the family seat in Essex. He inherited his title as a minor on his father's death in February 1417; custody of the heir and his estates was granted to Thomas Beaufort, duke of Exeter, who had established himself as the leading magnate in East Anglia during the previous decade. In 1425, still a minor, the earl married Elizabeth ('c'.1410-1473/4), daughter and heir of Sir John Howard. On the death of her grandfather in 1438, the couple took possession of her inheritance in Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, and Cambridgeshire. The marriage was contracted without the king's licence -- although Oxford was later to claim that it had been arranged by the advice of his guardian the duke of Exeter -- and the earl was fined $2000, a sum that he had difficulty paying. The earldom of Oxford was among the poorest of the comital titles; in 1437 de Vere claimed that his lands were worth only $500 per year, although he may have exaggerated his poverty somewhat. 
When Exeter died in 1426, custody of the Oxford estates was granted to the duke of Bedford. De Vere was granted livery of his inheritance on 4 July 1429. He had already been knighted, at the same time as the four-year-old king, in May 1426. During the 1430s and most of the 1440s, Oxford's political activity at a local level was concentrated in Essex, where the bulk of his estates lay. He was a regular member of the peace commission there from 1429, as well as serving on commissions to raise loans and levy taxes in the shire. He was also consistently appointed as a JP in Suffolk from 1438, and in Cambridgeshire from 1443; both were counties in which he held a number of manors. In February 1435 he secured a licence to travel to the Holy Land, but there is no evidence that he made the journey; certainly there was no significant interruption in his appointment to local commissions. 
Oxford also began to be involved in political, military, and diplomatic activities at a national level. In July 1436 he mustered his retinue at Sandwich for the expedition to relieve Calais from Burgundian siege. In June 1439, with Cardinal Beaufort and other envoys, he took part in the inconclusive negotiations with the French at Oye. Two years later he and his retinue accompanied the duke of York, the king's new lieutenant in France, to Normandy. In June 1450 the earl was among the nobles appointed to act against Cade's rebels. 
In the late 1440s Oxford became significantly involved for the first time in politics in Norfolk, where some of his wife's estates lay. He had been appointed a JP in the shire once in 1438, but it was only from 1448 that he became a regular member of the peace commission there. In 1450, after the fall from power of William de la Pole, duke of Suffolk, Oxford took a leading role -- together with John (VI) Mowbray, duke of Norfolk, and Sir John Fastolf -- in attempts to undermine the local power of Suffolk's servants, who had dominated the region during the 1440s. Initially these attempts seemed to make some headway. In August 1450, for example, Oxford and the duke of Norfolk were appointed to lead a general commission of oyer and terminer in Norfolk and Suffolk, before which several of Suffolk's leading supporters were indicted. However, by the spring of 1451 Suffolk's associates -- whose power in the region was wide-ranging and long-standing -- were successfully regrouping under the leadership of Thomas, Lord Scales, and the widowed duchess of Suffolk. Despite the best attempts of Oxford, who spent a substantial amount of time at his wife's manor of Winch in western Norfolk during this period, and of the duke of Norfolk, Suffolk's men were acquitted of most of the charges laid against them, and by 1452 leading members of Suffolk's affinity, such as Sir Thomas Tuddenham and John Heydon, were again being appointed to office in the region. 
It took some time for Oxford's allegiances to become clear as politics became increasingly divided and increasingly confused during the 1450s. He was a member of the protectorate council and was among the nobles appointed to the keeping of the seas in the spring of 1454, but does not seem to have had close associations either with the court or with the protector York at this point. Political division became armed confrontation at St Albans in May 1455, but neither Oxford nor the duke of Norfolk took part in the battle because they arrived a day too late. The earl does not seem to have established a decisive association with either camp until 1459, when he committed himself to the queen against York; in December of that year, and in the following April, he was appointed to lead anti-Yorkist commissions of array in Essex. By May 1460 his eldest son, Aubrey -- who had recently married Anne, daughter of Humphrey Stafford, duke of Buckingham -- was reported by one of the Paston correspondents to be 'great with the Queen'. 
The Yorkist victory at Northampton in July 1460 seems to have been followed by a period of illness -- whether real or tactical -- for Oxford; in November of that year he was exempted, 'in consideration of his infirmities', from appearing in person before the king or in council or parliament. If the earl was trying to maintain a low profile in the face of the new regime, it was an attempt that did not long survive the accession of Edward IV. In February 1462, with his son Aubrey and Sir Thomas Tuddenham, Oxford's former opponent in Norfolk and now a fellow Lancastrian loyalist, the earl was arrested on charges of high treason and committed to the Tower of London. He was tried before the constable of England, John Tiptoft, earl of Worcester, and condemned to death. On 26 February he was beheaded on Tower Hill, and was buried in the church of the Austin friars in London. It was a dramatic end to a career of which the most consistent feature had apparently been Oxford's unwillingness to take sides in the developing political conflict until the last possible moment. His son Aubrey had been executed six days earlier; the earl was therefore succeeded by his second son, John de Vere. 


@@@@@


doc= 28214


Vere, John de, thirteenth earl of Oxford (1442-1513), magnate, was the second but eldest surviving son of John de Vere, twelfth earl of Oxford (1408-1462), and Elizabeth ('c'.1410-1473/4), daughter and heir of Sir John Howard. He was born on 8 September 1442. 
Although his father and elder brother were convicted of treason and executed in February 1462, the new earl was treated in conciliatory fashion by Edward IV. Edward granted out few of the family's estates, leaving most in the keeping of de Vere administrators, and on 18 January 1464 Earl John had licence of entry on all his father's lands, a patrimony concentrated in East Anglia and in particular in north Essex and west Suffolk; what grantees there were were compensated by the king. In the parliament of 1464 Oxford secured the reversal of the attainder of Robert de Vere, duke of Ireland and earl of Oxford (died 1392), passed in 1388. (Later in life he sometimes used Robert de Vere's title of marquess of Dublin in addition to those of earl of Oxford, Viscount Bulbeck, and Lord Scales). At the coronation of Elizabeth Woodville on 26 May 1465 he was created knight of the Bath and served both as great chamberlain of England (substituting for the absent earl of Warwick) and as chamberlain to the queen. 
Yet Oxford's loyalty to the Yorkist regime had been by no means secured. In November 1468 he was imprisoned in the Tower of London and confessed to plotting with the Lancastrians. He was probably released before 7 January and was pardoned on 15 April 1469, but by early July he had joined George, duke of Clarence, and Richard Neville, earl of Warwick (the Kingmaker) in their opposition to the king, mobilizing his retinue for the Edgcote campaign. In the autumn, as Edward regained his freedom of action, his household men showed hostility to Oxford, and in the following spring, as Warwick and Clarence rebelled again, Oxford left England for the court in exile of Margaret of Anjou. He joined the Lancastrian leaders in their meetings with Warwick and Clarence in July, and in the invasion of England in September. He landed with Clarence, Warwick, and Jasper Tudor in Devon but moved to Essex to raise troops before marching to London, where he rejoined his allies on 8 October. On 13 October he bore the sword of state before the restored Henry VI in the procession to St Paul's for a ceremonial crown-wearing, and two days later he presided at the trial of John Tiptoft, earl of Worcester. He was one of the leading lords of the readeption regime. 
When Edward sought to invade in March 1471, Oxford prevented his landing in Norfolk, raised troops in East Anglia, and advanced to Newark. Confronted by Edward's superior forces he withdrew to Leicester, where his company was attacked and routed on 3 April. He joined Warwick at Coventry, counselled him against seeking compromise with Edward in the wake of Clarence's defection, and commanded the right wing at the battle of Barnet on 14 April. His men defeated those of Lord Hastings but fell to pillaging; when he did gather them together and return to the fight, it is reported that his badge of a mullet, or star with streams of light, was mistaken for Edward's sun in splendour and his men were shot at by their own side, causing them to cry treason and scatter. With his two brothers George and Thomas, William, Viscount Beaumont, and forty men, Oxford fled to Scotland, where he received a safe conduct on 28 April, and then to France. In the next two years he plotted with Archbishop Neville, mounted attacks on Calais, attempted a landing at St Osyth in Essex, and conducted a successful campaign of piracy from French and Scottish ports before seizing St Michael's Mount in Cornwall on 30 September 1473. There, with a force variously estimated by the chroniclers at 80 or 397 men, he was besieged, loosely at first by Sir Henry Bodrugan, then more vigorously by John Fortescue with 300 men and 4 ships. Wounded in the face by an arrow, offered pardon for his life, threatened with desertion by all but a handful of his followers, he finally surrendered on 15 February 1474, still accompanied by Beaumont and by his brothers. 
Although he was imprisoned at Hammes Castle in the Calais pale and attainted early in 1475, Oxford remained a threat to Edward. In 1477 an impostor claiming to be the earl caused trouble in Cambridgeshire and Huntingdonshire, and in 1478 Oxford himself managed to scale the walls of Hammes Castle and leap into the moat, though contemporaries were unsure whether this was an attempt at escape or at suicide. He was if anything more dangerous to Richard III, who ordered his transfer to England on 28 October 1484, too late to prevent his escape to join Henry Tudor in the company of his gaoler James Blount. Henry was reportedly delighted to secure the services of a Lancastrian partisan of such devotion and military experience. Oxford showed his mettle at once, returning to Hammes to relieve the garrison besieged there by Lord Dynham and bringing the soldiers back to augment Tudor's forces. At Bosworth he commanded Henry's vanguard and held his ground in fierce fighting in which John Howard, duke of Norfolk, leading Richard's vanguard, was killed. 
Oxford's triumphant return brought to an end a period of great trial for his wife, Margaret Neville. She was the sixth daughter of Richard Neville, earl of Salisbury, and Alice Montagu, daughter and heir of the last Montagu earl of Salisbury; as sister of Warwick the Kingmaker and Archbishop Neville she presumably encouraged her husband's alliance with them. Although the earl was not attainted in 1471, his estates were confiscated and granted to Richard, duke of Gloucester, leaving Margaret completely without income: she had no inherited land, no claim to a jointure while her husband lived, and no children with land of their own. Nor could she look to her brothers for help, when two, Richard and John, were dead and the third, Archbishop George Neville, in disgrace. When she emerged from sanctuary at St Martin's-le-Grand in London, where she had taken refuge after Barnet, her prospects were so bleak that they attracted the comment of Philippe de Commines, who reported that she became dependent on charity or on what she could earn by her needle. She received some money from her husband's distant relative and her near neighbour John, Lord Howard, but from the king she had nothing but two general pardons in 1475 and 1479 until he granted her an annuity of $100 during her husband's lifetime in 1482. Her sufferings did not, however, impair her vigour, to judge by her involvement in Henry VII's court or by a letter of May 1486 in which she urged Sir John Paston to cut off the escape of Viscount Lovell following his unsuccessful rebellion. Her husband's kindness to the widowed duchess of Norfolk and his co-operation over the restoration of the Howard estates by 1494 may perhaps reflect her gratitude for the Howards' kindness to her. She died between 20 November 1506 and 14 January 1507 and was buried at Colne Priory, Essex. 
In 1485 Oxford was immediately recognized as one of the great men of Henry VII's regime. This was evident at his arrival in London after Bosworth, when suitors flocked to petition him, and at the coronation, where he held the court of claims, having been recognized as hereditary lord great chamberlain, bore the king's train, and set the crown on Henry's head at the coronation banquet. He was appointed to significant offices: lord admiral (21 September 1485), chief steward of the duchy of Lancaster south of Trent, and constable of the Tower of London (both 22 September 1485). He was also granted various offices on the crown estates in Essex, Norfolk, and Suffolk. He rapidly assumed military and political leadership in East Anglia, as the Paston letters and the records of several boroughs and of the University of Cambridge show. Many of the leaders of gentry society in Essex, Suffolk, Norfolk, and Cambridgeshire were his annuitants or associates: for instance seven of the ten known knights of the shire for Suffolk between 1485 and 1504 were drawn from his circle. 
Oxford's power rested on a landed base combining his father's lands, his mother's lands, half the Scales lands to which he had a claim through his mother, some Mowbray estates forfeited by the Howards, and other grants from the king. In 1488-9 these brought him a net annual landed income of more than $1400, and by 1498-9 this had risen to more than $1600. From 1488 he also had custody of the lands of his old companion Beaumont, who had lost his reason but lived on in Oxford's care until 1507. After 1500 Oxford and his councillors took vigorous initiatives to offset declining revenues from some of these estates, a necessary step in view of the large expenses of his household, which were running at between $1400 and $1500 a year in 1498/9 and 1507. The success of his financial management is attested by the $2500 in ready money and goods to the value of nearly $4400 inventoried at his death. 
Oxford sat in Henry's council throughout the reign, though he was not one of the most regular attenders. By 1486 he was also a knight of the Garter. He was present at most major court occasions from the baptism of Prince Arthur in 1486, where he stood godfather, to the betrothal of Princess Mary and Charles of Habsburg in 1508. He commanded the vanguard at the battle of Stoke in 1487 and again on the invasion of France in 1492, led many troops to join Henry against the Yorkshire rebels in 1489, and began the assault on the Cornish rebels at Blackheath in 1497. He presided as lord high steward at the trial of Edward, earl of Warwick, on 21 November 1499. As lord admiral he does not seem to have been much concerned with the navy, but he did assert his rights over wrecks and king's fish. He regularly entertained Henry VII on his progresses, but Francis Bacon's story that on one of these occasions Henry imposed a vast fine upon him for gathering illegal retainers to welcome the king is probably apocryphal. Oxford lived mostly at Wivenhoe, Essex, which he had inherited from his mother, and at Castle Hedingham, Essex. At the latter he was building in brick by 1490, adding domes to the turrets of the twelfth-century keep and constructing a new great hall, several towers, a curtain wall, and a bridge across the moat. Of these only the bridge survives. Oxford's jousting helm also survives, in the Bargello Museum in Florence. He kept an outstanding chapel choir and commissioned Caxton's edition of 'The Four Sons of Aymon' in 1489. 
Oxford married his second wife, Elizabeth, daughter and coheir of Sir Richard Scrope and Eleanor Washbourne, between 28 November 1508 and 10 April 1509, following the death of her first husband, the earl's colleague Beaumont. Oxford made his testament in April 1509 as Henry VII lay dying, but survived four years into the new reign, keeping his offices and co-operating with the Howards who were rising to dominate East Anglian politics. He died at Castle Hedingham on 10 March 1513 and was buried on 24 April with his ancestors at Colne Priory, alongside his first wife in the lady chapel. Their tomb had been constructed as long before as 1488-9 by Henry Lorymere of London, marbler. Oxford's alabaster effigy was still in place in 1653 but had been destroyed by 1736. Elizabeth lived until 26 June 1537, remaining active at court, and was buried with Beaumont at Wivenhoe, where their brass remains. Oxford had no children by either marriage and was succeeded by John, the son of his brother Sir George de Vere. 


@@@@@


doc= 28215


John de Vere, fifteenth earl of Oxford (1482-1540), and his second wife, Elizabeth Trussell ('b'. 1496, died in or before 1527), daughter of Edward Trussell of Kibblestone, Staffordshire. He was born at Hedingham Castle, Essex, and educated privately. 


@@@@@


doc= 28216


Vere, John de, sixteenth earl of Oxford (1516-1562), magnate and rake, was the eldest of four sons (there were also four daughters) of 
The fifteenth earl of Oxford was the son of John de Vere and Alice Kilrington (alias Colbroke) and grandson of a younger son of Richard de Vere (died 1417), the eleventh earl; he succeeded his second cousin John de Vere, fourteenth earl (1499-1526), whose disorderly personal life Cardinal Wolsey had attempted to regulate, but which left him without legitimate issue. The cadet John had no heirs from his childhood marriage to Christian Foderingey ('b'. 'c'.1481, died in or before 1498), but paid the crown 2000 marks for the Trussell heiress and married her between 1507 and 1509. By 1509 de Vere was Henry VIII's esquire of the body; he was knighted serving him in France in 1513. He attended Henry at meetings with Francois I and Charles V in 1520. Wolsey's support helped him procure in 1526 a life grant of the great chamberlainship, which had descended in the senior line of his family, and he was made a knight of the Garter the following year. He signed the lords' petition against Wolsey on 1 December 1529. Associated with the divorce faction and by 1531 a royal councillor, Oxford bore the crown at Anne Boleyn's coronation, but later served on commissions trying her and her alleged lovers in 1536 and also the panels for the Courtenay conspiracy trials in 1538. Reputedly protestant, he was granted monastic lands in Essex worth $160 p.a. A Venetian report in 1531 asserted that he was 'a man of valour and authority... and it is his custom always to cavalcade with two hundred horse' ('CSP Venice', '1527-33', 295). The fifteenth earl died at Earls Colne, Essex, on 21 March 1540 and was buried at Castle Hedingham on 12 April. 
The sixteenth earl, who held the courtesy title Lord Bulbeck during his father's lifetime, lost any chance of succession to the great chamberlainship when Thomas Cromwell acquired it. He had joined his father in attending the king when he met Anne of Cleves at Blackheath in January 1540. He took part in Henry's Boulogne campaign of 1544 as captain of the rearguard, unusually bringing a contingent with firearms rather than horses. Oxford was one of the twelve chief mourners at Henry VIII's funeral, as later at Edward VI's. However, Stephen Gardiner complained that his players were disrupting the mourning a week after Henry's death. He was knighted at Edward VI's coronation. 
Meanwhile, the earl's private life had established a pattern of disorder (recalling the fourteenth earl's), to which testimonies were collected in 1585 when the legitimacy of his heir was impugned. On 2 July 1536 he married Dorothy Neville, daughter of Ralph Neville, fourth earl of Westmorland (1498-1549), and Katherine Stafford; a great wedding reception, shared with two Manners-Neville matches, followed, attended by Henry VIII. The marriage settlement was confirmed by statute: altogether the union was rather firmer than he later wished. Dorothy bore him a daughter, Katherine (1538-1600), but left him on 6 June 1546. Thomas Howard, third duke of Norfolk, who had married her maternal aunt, tried to persuade Dorothy to return, 'but she said she wold never goe home agayne amongst such a bad comanye as were about the Earle of Oxford at that tyme' (Hunt. L., MS EL 5870). It included the gambler John Lucas, master of requests, who was said to have won from Oxford 'the wardshipe of Mistress Roydon at dice' (Metcalfe, 235-6); perhaps also the company of players whose maintenance had been a family tradition since at least 1492. Oxford's 'unkynde dealinge' with Dorothy by 1546 ranged from maintaining as a mistress Anne, servant of his tenant at Tilbury Hall, to apparently marrying bigamously Joan Jockey (died 1585) of Earls Colne. 
Family as well as religious disputes may have underlain the altercation in the presence chamber at Westminster in 1552 when Henry Neville, Lord Bergavenny, struck Oxford, drawing blood. Dorothy's death on 6 January 1548 might have provided opportunity to reduce Oxford's entanglements. Presumably it was after this that, with others, Sir Thomas Darcy and Edmund, Lord Sheffield, husbands of Oxford's sisters Elizabeth and Anne, had violently attacked Joan Jockey and 'cutt her nose' (Hunt. L., MS EL 5870), possibly to brand her a whore. 
The incorrigible Oxford was already involved with Dorothy Fosser, his daughter Katherine's waiting woman. Darcy on 27 June 1547 informed Edward Seymour, duke of Somerset and protector, that the banns had twice been asked between them. Darcy, who suggested that Dorothy be replaced by the daughter of the local magnate Thomas, Lord Wentworth, also acted as Somerset's agent in having Dorothy physically removed and Oxford effectively treated as mentally incompetent. On 1 February 1548 Somerset induced the earl to promise Katherine to his younger son, Henry, enforced by the substantial bond of $6000. Somerset, who now had the great chamberlainship, also insisted on 'the clere extinction of his [Oxford's] pretenced clayme to the saide office' ('APC', '1547-50', 93). From 1 February Somerset had also forced Oxford to convey all of his lands to him by an indenture and levied fines later that month and in April. 
Oxford apparently again had banns asked for marriage to Dorothy Fosser, but suddenly abandoned this, compensating her with an annuity of $10. On 1 August 1548 he was married irregularly, without banns, to Margery Golding, daughter of John Golding of Belchamp St Paul, Essex, and half-sister of the translator Arthur Golding. With her he had the coveted male heir -- unfortunately of contestable legitimacy after Oxford's vagaries -- Edward de Vere, later seventeenth earl of Oxford (1550-1604), and a daughter, Mary (died 1624?), who married Peregrine Bertie, Lord Willoughby de Eresby. Oxford's marriage therefore appears to have been an attempt to escape Somerset's hold by producing a son, thus thwarting plans for Katherine to become the earl's sole heir. Eventually Katherine de Vere married Edward, Baron Windsor, and Henry Seymour married Jane Percy. 
Drawing up his will on 21 December 1552, Oxford not only affirmed the royal supremacy, but insisted that his salvation was 'not to be Justyfied by eny good deede that ever I did, for I knowledge that all the Deedes and workes that ever I wroght were they never so righteous, be but as filthynes in the sight of God' (BL, Stowe Charter MS 633). Oxford's protestantism probably encouraged him to sign the letters patent of 16 June 1553 nominating Jane Grey to succeed Edward VI. According to Robert Wingfield, he imprisoned Clement Tusser in Hedingham Castle for proclaiming Mary, but Tusser successfully canvassed the support of Oxford's 'menial servants'. 'The earl professed himself much moved by their words' and encouraged his 'hundred common servants remarkable for their stature and strength' to confine the pro-Grey 'gentlemen' of his household, including several of the Golding family (MacCulloch, 264). He planned to take his men to join Mary, but was directed to secure Ipswich instead. Ostensible compulsion was useful insurance for his change of sides, but Oxford's adherence to Mary did not necessarily inspire great trust, though it did get him the great chamberlainship back (from William Parr, marquess of Northampton). In 1555 Oxford was instructed to assist with the burning of heretics at Colchester and Manningtree, which apparently he did, but the next year his opposition to Spanish marriage plans led to vague suspicion of implication in Henry Dudley's plot. 
Oxford obtained from Elizabeth I confirmation of his great chamberlainship, which he claimed as his hereditary right, and also the lord lieutenancy of Essex. He sat to try Lord Wentworth -- a competitor for local influence -- for losing Calais. He entertained the Swedish prince John (wooing the queen for his brother) in September 1559 and Elizabeth herself in August 1561, having demonstrated his political reliability by his zeal first in 1560 against slanderers of the queen and then in spring 1561 against Sir Thomas Wharton and Sir Edward Waldegrave, Marian councillors and now frequenters of illegal masses. 
Oxford died at Hedingham Castle on 3 August 1562 and was apparently buried in the church there (although his will had specified Earls Colne) on 31 August. His widow, Margery, married Christopher (or Charles) Tyrell, died on 2 December 1568, and was buried with the earl. Public spirited though his will might appear, the sixteenth earl's rakish and violent private life, set in a rather old-fashioned, oversized, and disorderly household, limited his capacity for a wider role. Unlike his father, he was not considered privy council or Garter material. He did at least preserve his wealth and standing as a magnate, unlike his own son. 


@@@@@


doc= 28217


Vere, Robert de, third earl of Oxford (d. 1221), magnate, was the third surviving son of Aubrey (III) de Vere, the first earl (d. 1194), and of his third wife, Agnes of Essex (b. 1151, d. in or after 1206). Little is known of him before 1207. Before his father's death in 1194 he attested several charters to monastic houses founded by the de Vere family, but his name does not appear on any charters issued by his elder brother Aubrey (IV), the second earl, and rarely on those of others. Before Michaelmas 1207 Robert married Isabel de Bolebec, the aunt and namesake of Aubrey (IV)'s wife, who had died childless in either 1206 or 1207. The pipe roll of 1207 states that the first instalment of Isabel's fine for not being compelled to marry was in fact paid by her new husband, Robert de Vere. Isabel the niece had been the heir to the Bolebec estate, based upon Whitchurch in Buckinghamshire. Her own heirs were her two aunts, and Robert's marriage was clearly a de Vere strategy to retain control over at least half the Bolebec lands. It may also have recognized Robert as heir apparent to the earldom of Oxford. Despite two marriages Earl Aubrey failed to father a legitimate heir, and he was also predeceased by his next brother, Ralph. Robert and Isabel had one child, Hugh, later fourth earl of Oxford. 
Robert de Vere succeeded his brother in October 1214. King John charged him 1000 marks for his relief and a wardship, but may not have confirmed him in the earldom and hereditary master chamberlainship; de Vere attested a royal charter issued in London on 15 January 1215 without a title. Earl Aubrey had been numbered among King John's cronies, but Robert de Vere joined the rebellion against John, one of six known rebel leaders who were descendants of his grandparents Aubrey de Vere and Alice de Clare and part of a large group whose holdings were predominantly in the eastern counties. The relief was high for a baronage of moderate extent such as de Vere's, but his primary grievance may have been John's withholding of the earldom. He attended the assembly of barons at Stamford in April 1215, and was named by Roger of Wendover as one of the principal promoters of discontent. The king must have agreed; he ordered that de Vere's lands be seized in mid-May, along with the estates of several others on Wendover's list. While de Vere was among the rebels at Runnymede, his role in the negotiations for 'Magna Carta' is impossible to reconstruct. By 23 June the king had recognized him as earl of Oxford, for on that date the sheriff of Oxfordshire was ordered to pay Earl Robert the comital percentage of judicial fines from that county. The earl was one of the twenty-five barons elected to oversee the implementation of 'Magna Carta' ['see also 'Enforcers of Magna Carta]. The fact that he attested writs issued to implement their judgments could indicate that he was deeply involved in rebel counsels, but the wavering course of his allegiance in 1215 and the years immediately following could equally well show that he was principally moved by external pressures. He was excommunicated by Pope Innocent III, and in late March 1216 John captured Oxford's primary castle at Hedingham, Essex, after a three-day siege. The earl was granted safe conduct to seek the king's forgiveness, yet within months he had offered his homage to Prince Louis of France at Rochester. After John's death Earl Robert recovered his lands, and he formally made his peace with the new regime in October 1217. 
By 1220 the earl of Oxford was serving as an itinerant justice, and he presided in the 'curia regis' in 1221; political considerations may have lain behind his judicial employment, but he may also have become conversant with the common law in his capacity as a landowner and local magnate. He patronized the Essex houses of Hatfield Broadoak Priory and Tilty Abbey, Osney Abbey in Oxfordshire, and the hospitallers. When the earl died, shortly before 25 October 1221, he was buried in the Benedictine priory of Hatfield Broadoak, although Earls Colne Priory was the traditional burial place of the de Vere family. His effigy rests in the parish church at Hatfield, where it was moved after the dissolution. Its shield differs from those of all other de Veres in that the silver mullet in the first quarter was borne not on a field gules, but on one of France ancient. No account explains these anomalies. Countess Isabel obtained the guardianship of their son, who was a minor, and his estates, which she exercised for approximately ten years. She died on 3 February 1245 and was buried at the Dominican friary in Oxford. Earl Hugh died in December 1263. 


@@@@@


doc= 28218


Vere, Robert de, ninth earl of Oxford, marquess of Dublin, and duke of Ireland (1362-1392), courtier, was the son of Thomas de Vere, eighth earl of Oxford (1336x8-1371), and Maud de Vere (1345?-1413) ['see under 'Vere, Thomas de], daughter of Sir Ralph Ufford (d. 1346) and Matilda of Lancaster. 
Robert de Vere was born on 16 January 1362, and was only nine years old when he succeeded to the earldom on the death of his father. His wardship remained in the king's hands, and he was brought up in the royal household. In October 1371 his marriage was granted to Enguerrand (VII) de Coucy, earl of Bedford (c.1340-1397), and his wife, Isabella (1332-1379), Edward III's eldest daughter. The intention was that he should marry their younger daughter Philippa de Coucy [
The de Vere family could trace their tenure of the earldom of Oxford back to the time of Stephen, but they were probably the most impoverished of the English earls, with a small inheritance mainly in Essex, Suffolk, and south Cambridgeshire. Robert de Vere's marriage to the king's granddaughter substantially enhanced the family's status, though he and his wife could not count on receiving a share of her father's inheritance. When Coucy resigned his allegiance in 1377, his inheritance passed into the hands of Richard II; it was granted to his wife with reversion of part of it to de Vere and Philippa, and some of it was later assigned for their maintenance, but de Vere may well have been disappointed in his expectation of territorial aggrandizement from his marriage. This may be one reason why he subsequently repudiated her in favour of a member of the household of Richard's consort, Anne of Bohemia. 
By virtue of his upbringing in the royal household Robert de Vere was probably already known to the future Richard II. On St George's day (23 April) 1377, Richard (now prince of Wales) was knighted along with de Vere, his cousin Henry, earl of Derby, his uncle Thomas of Woodstock, and several other young nobles. De Vere, however, was soon to outstrip them all in favour and close friendship with the new king, who was five years his junior. It was alleged at the time of de Vere's downfall in 1388 that Sir Simon Burley (died 1388) had introduced him to the king and encouraged Richard to grant the earl sole title to the share of the Coucy lands which he and his wife held jointly if his wife predeceased him. However, the hostility to Burley exhibited by the king's opponents in 1388 may have inclined them to exaggerate his part in de Vere's rise at court; it is also possible that his uncle, Aubrey de Vere (d. 1400), who was acting chamberlain in the early years of Richard's reign and who, together with Burley, had substantial influence in the royal household, played a part in the earl's advancement. 
In the early years of Richard II's reign, while de Vere was still under age, his presence at court went unremarked: he was merely one of a group of young men around the king, none of whom yet seemed marked out for particular favour. From 1384 onwards, however, Robert de Vere emerged as the king's closest and most lavishly rewarded friend. He had his own chambers in the king's residences at Eltham and Langley, and he was the recipient of extensive patronage. His opponents believed that he used his influence over the king to enrich himself. He was granted, for example, the reversion of the Audley inheritance in south-west England and the shrievalty of Rutland for life. In 1385 the king gave him the castle and lordship of Queenborough in Kent: the wording of the grant concludes 'the curse of God and St Edward and the king on any who do or attempt aught against this grant' ('CPR', '1381-5', 542), and in July 1387 Richard appointed him chief justice of Chester. 
In December 1385 the king conferred on Robert de Vere the title marquess of Dublin, granting him palatine powers in Ireland, and probably in the same year he became a knight of the Garter. The de Vere family had disposed of its meagre interests in Ireland some twenty years earlier, and Robert himself had no links with or knowledge of the lordship, nor, it seemed, any serious intention of going there himself. The title of marquess aroused particular hostility among the lords. It had hitherto been unknown in England (it may have originated in central Europe), and it placed de Vere above all the earls in precedence; yet his rise owed everything to royal favour, and nothing to his own achievements. 
To cover the costs that he (or more probably his deputy) would incur in Ireland, de Vere was granted immediate use of the revenues from the Audley lands, and the ransom of Jean de Penthievre, son of Charles de Blois, claimant to the duchy of Brittany. Although de Vere himself never went to Ireland, his council concerned itself with Irish business, and in March 1386 he appointed Sir John Stanley (died 1414) his deputy there. Stanley eventually took an expedition to Ireland in August 1387. Richard, however, was determined to raise de Vere still higher in rank, and on 13 October 1386 his marquessate was revoked and he was created duke of Ireland, where his powers were enhanced so that the king retained only de Vere's liege homage for the lordship. The king's closest friend, who was the first holder of the title of duke from outside the inner circles of the royal family, was now equal in status to Richard II's uncles of Lancaster, York, and Gloucester, and Walsingham records how indignant the other nobles were at the further promotion of such a mediocrity. 
The nature of de Vere's influence over the king has provoked much speculation. There was certainly an emotional charge to the relationship, as there evidently was between de Vere and his second wife, but the English chroniclers find difficulty in explaining the hold he had over the king. Walsingham attributes it to magic spells cast by a friar in the royal household, and also hints at a sexual relationship. Although there are some similarities to the friendship between Edward II and Piers Gaveston, there is no evidence for a homosexual relationship between the two men, but the possibility of a formal compact of brotherhood, as has been suggested between Gaveston and Edward, should not be entirely ruled out. Froissart says that the king was so blinded by de Vere that 'if he had said black was white the king would not have gainsaid him' ('OEuvres', 12.239). Froissart also, however, suggests that de Vere had an attractive side to his personality, for at the time of his exile he describes him as having 'sensitivity, honour, fair speech and great generosity' ('Chroniques', 14.33). 
By 1387 de Vere had acquired the means to live in some opulence. After his downfall he was found to have had at Chester silver plate worth nearly $100 and other possessions worth over $300. Among these were a set of wall or bed hangings embroidered with butterflies, other embroidered hangings, four liveries for his minstrels, and six liveries each for his valets and grooms. 
Yet it was not just the favour shown to de Vere that aroused hostility, but also his own behaviour, especially his attempts to undermine the relationship between John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, and the king. De Vere may have had a hand in the episode at the Salisbury parliament in 1384 when a Carmelite friar accused Gaunt of treason. He denied any complicity in the affair, but the friar tried to implicate him, and it is perhaps significant that the friar had been saying mass before the king in de Vere's chamber immediately before he made the accusation. There is more reason to suppose that de Vere was implicated in the plot against Gaunt's life hatched in February 1385: Walsingham and the Monk of Evesham accuse the young men around the king of complicity in the plot, while the Monk of Westminster singles out de Vere and two other earls for specific mention. De Vere served with a substantial retinue on the king's expedition to Scotland in the summer of 1385, and Froissart says that his influence lay behind Richard's decision at Edinburgh to return home, rejecting Gaunt's advice to move further into Scotland. The Monk of Westminster, however, does not suggest that de Vere had any part in the decision. 
By 1386 Robert de Vere's standing with his fellow nobles was already low; what finally destroyed it was his repudiation of his wife in the following year and his marriage to 
Westminster suggests that de Vere 'grew to detest' his first wife, who can scarcely have been out of her teens when he decided to divorce her. He lobbied for a divorce at the papal curia, allegedly with perjured witnesses. Froissart maintains that he had no good reason to divorce her, but did so for frivolous reasons. Although the editors of the Dieulacres chronicle cast doubt on whether the divorce was granted, the Monk of Westminster records that it was annulled by papal bull in October 1389, and it is therefore probably safe to assume that it did indeed take place. It is not clear, however, whether Agnes was enthusiastic about de Vere's advances: two of his retainers were later accused of abducting her and taking her to Chester, where de Vere was residing in the summer of 1387. After de Vere's downfall various items belonging to Agnes and her servants were found at Chester. They included two new saddles 'pour damoiselles de Boeme', and one old saddle in Bohemian style (TNA: PRO, E 36/66). These are the last traces of her: she disappeared from public view as suddenly as she had arrived. 
Robert de Vere's marriage to Agnes Lancecrona, and the dishonouring of Edward III's granddaughter that it implied, was undoubtedly a major reason for the intensification of hostility to him in the summer and autumn of 1387. Walsingham suggests that the king supported de Vere's pursuit of Agnes Lancecrona, but that the king's uncles, especially Gloucester, were highly indignant at the affront to their niece. He goes on to say that Gloucester now looked for an opportunity to avenge the insult. For his part, the king came to rely on de Vere even more in these months, and the latter's appointment as justice of Chester was intended to ensure that the royal earldom, with its considerable military potential, was in safe hands. In November 1387 both the king and his opponents began to muster their forces. The duke of Gloucester and the earls of Arundel and Warwick (three of the future lords appellant) appeared in arms at Harringay in mid-November, and accused de Vere, along with four other associates of the king, of treason. De Vere meanwhile was raising an army in Cheshire, which set out to march south in mid-December. On 20 December 1387 de Vere's army was routed by the appellants at Radcot Bridge in Oxfordshire. De Vere himself escaped, but many of his followers were killed, and de Vere displayed little military skill. Indeed, one source reports that some of his troops deserted even before they encountered the appellant army, while Walsingham goes so far as to suggest that de Vere himself contemplated flight before the battle, and had to have his courage reinforced by his men. Ralph, Lord Basset, seems to have spoken for many when he remarked that 'I am not going to offer to have my head broken for the duke of Ireland' ('Knighton's Chronicle', 407). 
The appellants' victory at Radcot Bridge was decisive: by the end of December Richard had agreed that de Vere and other lords who had been close to the king should be tried for treason in the Merciless Parliament which opened in February 1388. De Vere, of course, was tried in his absence. He was accused, along with four other leading familiars of the king, of accroaching royal power, of benefiting improperly from royal patronage, of encouraging the king to resist the council imposed on him in the parliament of October 1386, and of manipulating the law for their own advantage. De Vere in particular was accused of separating England from Ireland by encouraging the king to grant him the lordship of Ireland without the assent of the community in either land, and of raising an army in Cheshire to destroy the duke of Gloucester and the other appellants. He was found guilty, and sentenced 'in absentia' to death and forfeiture of all his lands and titles. 
After the rout at Radcot Bridge de Vere escaped first of all to Bruges, and then to Dordrecht in Holland. The count of Holland, Albrecht of Bavaria, refused to countenance his presence in Dordrecht, and he moved on to Utrecht. In the late summer of 1389 he went to Paris, where he met his fellow exiles Michael de la Pole and Alexander Neville, the deposed archbishop of York (died 1392). De la Pole died while de Vere was in Paris, and Walsingham says that he left de Vere such goods as he had been able to save from forfeiture. His estranged wife's father, Enguerrand de Coucy, however, was influential at the French court and was determined to drive him out of France. De Vere asked Charles VI of France to intercede on his behalf with the duchess of Brabant, who according to Froissart gave him leave to reside in Louvain. His mother visited him in 1391, and in February of the following year Richard II suggested that he should be allowed to return to England. The council objected, however, and his death shortly afterwards removed a potentially difficult issue for Richard. De Vere died some time before 5 August 1392, probably at or near Louvain: Thomas Otterbourne records that he was killed by a wild boar while out hunting, but his story is not confirmed by any other contemporary source. 
Walsingham says that de Vere died in poverty and distress, but he had had some success during his exile in obtaining payment of instalments of the ransom of Jean de Penthievre. The dukes of Berri and Burgundy agreed that he should be paid 27,600 francs of the ransom in 1388, but it is uncertain how much he had actually received by the time of his death. He had no children, and in January 1393 his uncle, Aubrey de Vere, who was his heir, successfully petitioned for the entailed lands of the earldom of Oxford and the title of earl to be restored to him. 
Robert de Vere was buried at Louvain, but in September 1395 Richard II ordered that his body should be exhumed and brought to England for reburial at Earls Colne Priory, Essex, the family's burial place. Walsingham describes how, in a bizarre demonstration of his continued affection for his favourite, Richard had the coffin opened so that he could look upon de Vere's face and touch his fingers. De Vere's mother (though not, apparently, his estranged wife) and various bishops, abbots, and priors were present at the ceremony. None of the nobles came, however, 'because they had not yet digested the hatred they had for him' ('Trokelowe', 185). His tomb does not survive. 
After his exile, his first wife went to live with de Vere's mother, who according to Westminster had strongly disapproved of her son's affair with Agnes Lancecrona, and held Philippa 'more dear than if she had been her own daughter' ('Westminster Chronicle', 190-91). She was always known as the duchess of Ireland, despite her husband's forfeiture of the title, and Richard II ensured that she received an adequate maintenance. De Vere's mother farmed her exiled son's lands, and Philippa was granted an annuity of 100 marks from the revenues of these lands, rising to 300 marks after de Vere's death. In 1398 she was granted dower from her husband's estates. Early in Henry IV's reign she and her elder sister Mary agreed to divide their father's inheritance between them, with Philippa receiving the English and Mary the French lands. She was at court from time to time in Henry's reign, and accompanied Richard II's widow, Queen Isabella, to Calais on her way back to France in 1401. She died, in England, on 24 September 1411: it is not known where she is buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 28219


Vereker, Charles, second Viscount Gort (1768-1842), soldier and politician, was the second son of Thomas Vereker of Roxborough, co. Limerick, and his wife, Juliana, sister of John Prendergast Smyth, first Viscount Gort. He was descended from a family of Flemish extraction, long settled in co. Limerick. At the age of fourteen he entered the Royal Navy, and, serving as a midshipman, participated in the relief of Gibraltar in 1782. Vereker's gallantry on this occasion received the warm acknowledgement of his commander; but after a few years' service he retired from the navy and purchased a commission in the army. In 1790 Vereker was returned for the borough of Limerick to the Irish parliament in the interest of his uncle, whose heir he had become. He retained this position until the union in 1800, and in 1802 was elected unopposed for the same constituency to Westminster; he held this seat down to his succession to the peerage in 1817. 
He was twice married: first, on 7 November 1789, to Jane, widow of William Stamer of Carnelly, and daughter of Ralph Westropp of Attyflyn, who died on 19 February 1798; and, second, on 5 March 1810, to Elizabeth (died 1858), daughter of John Palliser of Derryluskan, co. Tipperary. He had children by both marriages, two sons and three daughters. 
In 1793 Vereker was appointed to the command of the Limerick militia, with the rank of lieutenant-colonel, and in that capacity he was in charge of the garrison at Sligo at the time of the French invasion during 1798. After his victory at Castlebar the French general, Humbert, desiring to join with the Ulster United Irishmen, marched on Sligo at the head of his whole force of 1600 men, accompanied by numerous Irish irregulars, and on the morning of 5 September he arrived at Colooney, a village within 5 miles of that town. Vereker, who had only 300 men at his disposal, had received orders not to risk an engagement, but believing that the French force at Colooney represented only a detachment of the main army, he marched out to meet it. After holding the enemy at bay for nearly two hours, Vereker retreated to Sligo with considerable casualties. He was himself severely wounded in the engagement. Humbert, conjecturing from Vereker's audacity that he was supported by the main body of the British army, diverted his march from Sligo. The significance of this clash was later exaggerated, but it did demonstrate that the Irish militia would not always run when under fire. For his services Vereker was voted the thanks of an Irish parliament anxious to assert its limited dependence on English forces; he also received a sword of honour from the city of Limerick. After considerable lobbying he was in 1803 awarded the privilege of adopting the motto 'Colooney', with a grant of supporters bearing the flag of the Limerick militia. 
Vereker was a vigorous opponent of the union, against which he voted: he declared in the Commons in 1799 that 'having defended his country with his blood, there was nothing in the gift of the crown that could tempt him to betray it by his vote'. Yet, while he occasionally opposed the government's Irish defence measures, at Westminster he proved susceptible to offers of patronage. In 1803 the chief secretary declared him 'a very troublesome man, who is full of vanity, but warm in his attachments' (HoP, 'Commons', 447). In 1807 he was appointed a commissioner of the Treasury for Ireland. He also held the honorary offices of constable of Limerick Castle and governor of Galway. He succeeded his uncle in the viscountcy of Gort on 23 May 1817, having failed in 1816 to extract an earldom by means of conduct the viceroy found 'shabby' (HoP, 'Commons', 448). He was elected an Irish representative peer in 1823. He acted in general with the tory party, yet despite being virulently anti-Catholic and the controlling patron of Limerick corporation, Gort voted for Catholic emancipation in 1829, and for the 'Irish Corporation Act'. He died at Dublin on 11 November 1842, and was succeeded by his eldest son, John Prendergast Vereker, third viscount. 


@@@@@


doc= 28220


Harmen Verelst (b. 1639x42, d. in or after 1691), was a portrait painter. His birth date is deduced from information that his father was said to be a bachelor in 1638 and his younger sister, Helena, was baptized in January 1643. A later date in the range seems preferable, however, because Harmen Verelst enrolled in the St Luke's Guild in the same year as his younger brother, Simon. He married Cicilia Fene, a Venetian, in 1667 in Amsterdam, and worked between Amsterdam and The Hague until about 1678. He then travelled to Rome via Ljubljana, after which he spent three years in Vienna. He moved together with his family to London in 1683, perhaps fleeing the Turkish siege of Vienna in that year. He and Cicilia had at least five children: Peter, Adriana, John, Richard, and Lewis. Lewis, who died young in 1704, left a will which provides most of our evidence about the family members. Weyerman claimed that Harmen and Cicilia also had a son called Cornelis and a daughter called Maria; Lewis's will mentions neither. Cornelis may not have existed at all, while Maria (1680-1744), a portraitist known as Mrs Verelst, presumably (from her title) married into the family. Harmen's death date is uncertain; Vertue maintained that he died about 1700 and was buried in St Andrew's, Holborn, but he does not appear in the burial registers of that church between 1691 and 1704. His latest surviving dated work was made in 1691; Vertue claimed to have seen a work made in 1693. 


@@@@@


doc= 28221


Verelst, Harry (1734-1785), administrator in India, was born on 11 February 1734 in Hadbury, Worcester, the fifth of seven children of Robert Verelst and his wife, Elizabeth. Harry Verelst was brought up by his uncle, William Verelst, a painter with influential connections, who managed to procure his nephew an appointment as writer on the East India Company's Bengal establishment. He arrived in Calcutta in 1749, then aged only fifteen. His first post of importance was his appointment in 1756 as chief of the company's factory at Lakshmipur. A few months later, after Siraj ud-Daula's attack on Calcutta, Verelst left his station for Falta, where the company's council had taken refuge. After the recapture of Calcutta, Verelst was again sent to Lakshmipur to resume his chiefship. On their way, Verelst and his party were imprisoned by Siraj ud-Daula's officers repudiating the treaty concluded between Clive and their master. Having spent two months in confinement, Verelst was released after the battle of Plassey. His chiefship at Lakshmipur was contested by William McGwire, who insisted on being appointed in Verelst's stead, supporting his demand with the company's order that only a member of the council should occupy that post. On finding his appointment overruled, Verelst returned to Calcutta. Soon after, in 1759, he was appointed to superintend the revenue collection in the Nadia district. He fulfilled this task to Clive's satisfaction and was sent to Burdwan with a similar mission later that year. In February 1760 he was called to Calcutta to take up his seat in the council. At the end of that year he was appointed to take charge of the company's affairs at Chittagong after the cession of that district to the East India Company by Mir Kasim. 
As a member of the council, Verelst opposed Governor Henry Vansittart in his decision to depose Mir Jafar in favour of Mir Kasim. He deeply mistrusted Vansittart, and judged the latter's policy as 'the works of darkness' (Verelst to John Carnac, 27 Nov 1761, BL OIOC, MS Eur. F/128/5g), inspired only by private interest. At Chittagong, Verelst was himself widely involved in private trade, including both inland trade (mainly in salt produced on the island of Sandwip) and seaborne country trade. For the latter purpose Verelst and his associates set up a wharf in nearby Bakarganj, from where a first schooner was launched in 1762. 
In 1765 Verelst returned from Chittagong to take up his seat in the select committee under Clive's second governorship. Clive had come to appreciate Verelst's considerable administrative abilities during his first government, and had declared in 1764 that Verelst was one of those on whom he relied to reassert order in the company's Bengal establishment. From 1765 to 1766 Verelst's talents were put to good use at Burdwan, and later at Midnapore, where he supervised and reformed the revenue collection. Verelst became a loyal supporter of Clive and from 1766 onwards repeatedly acted as governor during Clive's absence or indisposition, and finally succeeded to the latter's position in January 1767. 
As governor, Verelst firmly intended to pursue his predecessor's policy. But the authoritarian sway with which Clive had tried to suppress corruption and licentiousness among the Bengal company servants had made him many enemies. Fear and respect for Clive had kept them in abeyance until his departure, but Verelst did not inspire the same awe. Soon Verelst saw his policy and authority publicly attacked. Richard Smith, the commander of the company's Bengal army, sneered that Verelst thought 'Clive the greatest man that ever existed', and 'consequently all his systems infallible' (Smith to Robert Orme, 31 Aug 1768, BL OIOC, Orme MS 37). But Smith, a member of the select committee, was not the only man contesting Verelst's authority. William Bolts, a junior merchant who claimed to have been done great wrongs at the hands of Clive and Verelst, went to great lengths in publicly denouncing the supposed venality of their governments. His favourite target in Bengal was the governor himself. Back in Britain, in 1772, Verelst published his 'View of the Rise, Progress and Present State of the English Government in Bengal', defending his own and Clive's administrations, after a public attack was made on them by Bolts in his 'Considerations on India Affairs' earlier in the same year. 
Verelst was well aware of his meagre successes in imposing his authority on men who did not believe he had any. He never felt at ease in his elevated station and pressed his supporters at home to appoint his successor as soon as possible. As governor, he recognized the need for administrative reforms to put the company's government in Bengal on a more solid basis. On relinquishing his governorship, in December 1769, Verelst analysed the company's situation: 'The native government is now fallen, in the eye of the inhabitants, dependant on our own government... Our original constitution... must be enlarged in proportion, as our sphere of action is extended and our duty increased' (Verelst to John Cartier, 21 Dec 1769, BL OIOC, MS Eur. F/218/20). But he warned against an open avowal of sovereignty and advised that 'exteriors should be upheld as essentials' (ibid.), and that every order should carry the sanction of the native government. This staunch adherence to Clive's dual system, even when against his better judgement, is perhaps indicative of Verelst's incapacity to take decisive action where his intelligence clearly indicated that such was necessary. 
Verelst was convinced that the people of Bengal should be governed according to their own laws. Acknowledging that the company itself was the source of all power in Bengal, Verelst realized that a thorough 'knowledge of the laws and customs of the country' was the 'sine qua non' of the formulation of reforms to improve the administration of justice and thus to establish peace and order in Bengal. His scheme to send supervisors into the different parts of Bengal had, among other intentions, this object in view, and started a process of official information gathering on the country and the people the British were to rule for another 180 years. 
Verelst returned to Britain in 1770. In Bengal he had had two illegitimate daughters and an illegitimate son with Sophia Yeandle. At least one of those children was in England by 1778. On 20 May 1771 Verelst married Ann, the rich and attractive daughter of Josias Wordsworth of Wadworth. They had six daughters and four sons. Soon after his return to Britain, Verelst was harassed by litigation started before the courts at Westminster on the instigation of William Bolts. The cases of two Armenians, formerly agents of Bolts, who accused Verelst of having abused his authority as governor in procuring their imprisonment on false grounds, created a stir in London. The cases went against him and Verelst was required to pay $9700 in damages. Though the East India Company would eventually indemnify him for this sum, he was at that time already in dire financial straits. In 1772 Verelst estimated his fortune at $142,711. Much of his fortune, however, was still in Bengal, where deteriorating economic circumstances after the great famine of 1770 severely endangered its recovery. In England, Verelst had stretched his fortune too far in buying the Aston estate, near Sheffield, from Lord Holdernesse for $49,800. In 1775 John Knott, Verelst's private secretary, volunteered to return to Bengal to recover his own and his employer's effects. On the return journey to Britain overland Knott died in the desert, and all papers and effects he carried with him were lost. Verelst's finances never recovered and in 1785 he fled to the continent to escape his creditors. He died on 24 October 1785 at Boulogne, and was buried at Minster in the Isle of Thanet. 


@@@@@


doc= 28222


Verelst, Simon Pieterszoon (bap. 1644, d. 1710x17), painter, was baptized in The Hague on 21 September 1644. He was the second son of Adriana van Gesel (died before 1657) and Pieter Harmenszoon Verelst ('fl'. 1618-1668), originally from Dordrecht. Pieter had joined the painters' guild at The Hague in 1643: in 1663 Simon and his brother Harmen paid their first dues to the same guild. Simon was in London by 11 April 1669, when he met Pepys, who was entranced by one of his flower paintings ('a better picture I never saw in my whole life, and it is worth going twenty miles to see'; Pepys, 9.515). Early flower pieces by Verelst show that Pepys's praise was justified. De Lairesse singled him out as the finest flower painter of the seventeenth century, and Weyerman called him 'a painter in a thousand' (Weyerman, 248). Most of his best pictures, however, were made early in his career; the poor quality pigments he had to use in London did not improve his work. Nevertheless, he quickly established himself as the leading still-life specialist in London, and he also made portraits, with great financial (but middling artistic) success. He painted 'inter alia' the duke of Buckingham, the duchess of Norfolk, the duchess of Portsmouth, Charles II, Nell Gwyn (several times, clothed and nude), James II, and Mary of Modena. When he married Ann Pember at St Mary's, Marylebone, on 2 December 1684, he was said to be the best-paid artist in London. This success was ended in the following year by an attack of 'frenzy'. The story of Verelst's madness and the state of laughable self-conceit which supposedly preceded it is often repeated in the literature, but this suspiciously entertaining tale owes its existence solely to Weyerman, whose trustworthiness is usually doubted by art historians. The behaviour they describe would today be thought symptomatic of bipolar affective disorder (manic depression). Before he lost his senses completely, it is said that Verelst stopped sleeping, gave up work, and went on long solitary walks; he then, apparently, bought a velvet cape, varnished his hat and shoes, and started calling himself the God of Flowers and King of Portrait-painters. In this state, he went to the palace of Whitehall, demanding that the king of England should come to speak with the King of Painters. The idea of Verelst varnishing his hat and shoes was taken by Weyerman from Karel van Mander's life of Joos van Cleef, and the rest of the tale may reasonably be doubted. However, Verelst does seem to have gone mad; about 1685, according to his brother-in-law, one Mr Rothwell junior: 'he shutt the doore & drew his Sword & swore he would kill me -- I pulled off my Coate & I bid him not strike to hard -- and I must he said bring my wife to him to whip her and bring 4 Rods with me -- to whip my wife -- he has beene distracted -- he has run about the street in his shirt and cutt his feet -- I never dust goe neere Varelst since I have seen him but never was in a Roome with him. (minutes of the House of Lords, 5 Feb 1692)' The madness subsided but his days as a high-society portraitist were over. It seems that his marriage also ended: in 1692, when he appeared before the House of Lords as a witness in divorce proceedings between the duke and duchess of Norfolk, he was described as a bachelor. His testimony on that occasion was discounted, after Rothwell's evidence of his insanity. Weyerman claimed that his talents as a flower painter were also ruined by his madness. This is hard to assess, since no dated paintings are known between 1672 and 1709. One of the 1709 pictures is depressingly inept (ex Christies, London, 8 December 1995, lot 211) but another, a simple painting of a bunch of grapes (ex Christies, Amsterdam, 9 November 1998, lot 38), is worthy of his work in the 1670s. It seems, though, that Verelst's financial situation deteriorated; in 1692 he was 'lodged at Mr Cowell's, an Housekeeper' (minutes of the House of Lords) in Fleet Street, and about 1710, according to Weyerman, he was 'lodged, or rather chained in the galley, at a London art dealer named Lovejoy, resident in the Strand' (Weyerman, 250). Weyerman claimed that Verelst's work at this period was strikingly inept, with flowers grotesquely distorted in size and colouring, but this is probably an exaggeration. Another Dutchman, Allard de la Court, met the artist in June 1710, and wrote that he: 'asked me if I would like to see his art, [and said] that I would never have seen anything comparable in Holland or Italy, but when I saw the same it fell a long way short, it was badly painted. He nevertheless dared ask $100 for a small piece, a very bad flower piece. (Roever, 71)' This is not the only contemporary testimony to suggest that Verelst was deluded about the quality of his late work. Vertue was told by Pieter Casteels that: 'Simon Verelst dyd at his house in Suffolk street near the haymarkett. he showd a historical picture he had been painting 20 years over & over at several times wherein (he sayd) was to be seen Raphael, Titian, Rubens and Vandyke in their several manners. (Vertue, 'Note books', 1.42)' This passage of Vertue's notebooks was written in the second half of 1716 or the first half of 1717, so Verelst cannot have died in 1721, as is frequently claimed. The registers of St Martin-in-the-Fields and the parishes between Ludgate and Piccadilly do not appear to record his date of burial, unless he was the Simon Evret buried at St Martin's on 6 December 1713. 
Verelst's elder brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 28223


Verelst, William (bap. 1704, d. 1752), portrait painter, was baptized at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, on 17 January 1704. He was the fifth of eight children of John Verelst (c.1675-1734) ['see under 'Verelst, Simon Pieterszoon (bap. 1644, d. 1710x)], portraitist, and his wife, Anne. William Verelst was included in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' in the article on Simon Verelst under the name Willem Verelst and was erroneously described as the son of Cornelius Verelst. William presumably studied with his father; he was the executor of the latter's will, and his stylistic traits of clear profile, bright colour, and a slight gawkiness are close to his father's manner. Thieme and Becker identified him with the Guillaume Verelst who received payment for three paintings from members of the Rotterdam wine traders' guild in 1729. Signed works appear from 1732 onwards. His most ambitious painting is the 35 figure group portrait 'Representation of the audience given by the trustees for establishing the colony in Georgia in America, to Tomo Chachi Mico of Yamacran and his Indians on the 3rd day of July in the year of Our Lord 1734' (Winterthur Museum, Delaware). William's eldest brother, Herman ('bap'. 24 Jan 1693), was the accountant for the Georgia council, which probably explains why William was chosen as artist; although it seems noteworthy that John Verelst had painted portraits of four Native American chiefs who visited London in 1709. William Verelst's other work includes a few conversation pieces; 'The Gough Family' of 1741 (priv. coll.) has received praise, its lively expressions, fresh colour, and beautifully rendered draperies masking its awkward perspective and anatomy. Among his portraits of individuals, that of John Dean (NPG) is of anecdotal interest: Dean was the sole survivor of a much-publicized shipwreck. The portrait of a woman identified (incorrectly) by an inscription as Eleanor Mytton (Sothebys, 13 April 1994), dated 1738, shows him at his best; her personable dog and the striking blue of her silk dress make for a very lively effect. A portrait allegedly of Tobias Smollett, and said to be signed and dated 1756 (Kerslake, 254), has presumably had its date misread, since Verelst was buried in the parish of St Christopher-le-Stocks, London, on 20 October 1752. 


@@@@@


doc= 28224


Vergil, Polydore (c.1470-1555), historian, was probably born at Fermignano, near Urbino, where his father, Giorgio di Antonio, owned a dispensary. He was the youngest of four sons. He is generally accepted as having been born about 1470 on the grounds that he was ordained priest some time before 20 December 1496, and the canonical age for ordination was twenty-five. 
There was a tradition of scholarship in the Virgili family. A grandfather, Antonio Virgilio, described as 'most learned in medicine and astrology' (Hay, 1), taught in the University of Paris. An older brother, Giovanni-Matteo, was a student of the philosopher Pietro Pomponazzi and himself taught philosophy at Ferrara and Padua. An uncle, Teseo Pinni, a clergyman and lawyer, wrote a book on vagabonds, 'Speculum cerretanorum', which was mentioned by Erasmus in his 'Ecclesiastes' and published at Wittenberg in 1528 in an edition with a preface by Martin Luther. The family was armigerous: its arms, a laurel and two lizards, are discussed in Polydore's 'De inventoribus rerum', and a banner bearing them was recorded between 1540 and 1542 as hanging above the appropriate choir stall in Wells Cathedral, where he was archdeacon. 
Vergil studied at the University of Padua, and possibly, although this is less secure, at Bologna under Filippo Beroaldo the elder, the author of an 'Oratio proverbiorum'. In 1496 he published in Venice an enlarged edition of Niccolo Perotti's 'Cornucopiae', a work that in turn influenced his own first books, the 'Proverbiorum libellus' (Venice, 1498) and 'De inventoribus rerum' (Venice, 1499). The former, a collection of proverbs, was retitled 'Adagiorum liber' in later editions after a minor controversy over the primacy of each man's work arose between Vergil and Erasmus, whose own 'Adagia' were published two years later in 1500. Erasmus claimed to have published his 'Adagia' several years before hearing Vergil's name, and as late as 1533 he still claimed (incorrectly) that his collection had been published before the latter's. The two men probably first met after Erasmus's second trip to England in 1505. They had many friends in common, exchanged many letters, and Erasmus later wrote that they had once laughed at table over their former rivalry. It is indeed significant that the two men were never seriously estranged by the dispute over their collections of adages. Vergil's collection, which was also the subject of a charge of literary theft by a more obscure humanist, Ludovico Gorgeri, went through frequent printings down to the seventeenth century, but its popularity, though considerable, was nevertheless far exceeded by that of his second book, the 'De inventoribus rerum'. 
In its first edition of 1499 'De inventoribus rerum' consisted of three books. Each chapter was devoted to a question of origins -- the origin of the gods, the beginning of things, the creation of men, the origin of languages, down to the origins of prostitution, the printing press, and the first warm baths. Then in 1521 Vergil published an expanded version in eight books, in which the five new books treated principally religious questions. These additional books were already substantially complete by 1517, the date of their dedicatory letter. In his discussions of beginnings Vergil typically went through all the Latin and Greek authorities known to him, before proceeding to the earlier treatments of the relevant questions in the 'Old Testament'. At Urbino he had at his disposal one of Europe's most impressive collections of Greek and Latin texts, enabling him to make 'De inventoribus rerum' one of the new humanist encyclopaedias, a book which, like Raffaello Maffei's slightly later 'Commentarii urbani' (Rome, 1508), attempted to bring together the new learning made available by the efforts of Renaissance humanists. 
In 'De inventoribus rerum' Vergil's most frequently cited source is the 'Bible', followed by Josephus and Eusebius, but in his search for beginnings he ranged over a vast number of writers. In many instances he also drew on his own experiences and those of his contemporaries, as when he described marital and baptismal customs, or the bonfires of Umbria, or (in the later books) the way the English kissed in greeting one another and the brevity of English widowhood. In its Latin format the work went through more than thirty editions in Vergil's lifetime, and altogether there were more than 100 editions when the numerous vernacular translations are included. His discussion in the last five books of the practice of Christian religion in his own day follows a generally Erasmian line. He is critical of monks, attacks priestly celibacy, and criticizes the sale of indulgences at length. Martin Luther is mentioned twice, but not criticized. Consequently the book came in for searching scrutiny by the Catholic authorities, and in 1551, while its author was still alive, it was condemned by the Sorbonne. In 1564, when it was placed on the Trent index of prohibited books, it was said that the book had been 'expanded by the heretics' (Hay, 56 n.1); and an expurgated, approved version was published in Rome in 1576. An English 'translation' by Thomas Langley was published in 1546; however, this version omitted a full nine-tenths of the original text. An authoritative critical edition and translation was published by Brian Copenhaver in 2002; the translation by Beno Weiss and Louis Perez (1997) usefully distinguishes the passages suppressed by religious censors. 
Although Vergil wrote his first two books at Urbino, little is known about his education or employment there. The 'Proverbiorum libellus' was dedicated to Duke Guidobaldo da Montefeltro, 'De inventoribus rerum' to Lodovico Odasio, who had been the duke's tutor. On the evidence of these dedications and of his considerable use of the ducal library, it has been suggested that Vergil was in the service of Duke Guidobaldo. Indeed it seems possible that the duke personally commissioned the 'De inventoribus rerum'. The letters of a Venetian functionary in Ravenna, published in Sanudo's 'Diarii', mention a Polydore who was serving as secretary to Guidobaldo, a possible indicator of Vergil's position at Urbino; but since Sanudo dated these letters in 1503, when Vergil was already in England, his employment as ducal secretary cannot be regarded as certain. 
The circumstances in which Vergil left Urbino to enter the service of Pope Alexander VI are not known. He is first recorded as a papal employee in 1502, when he was selected by one of Alexander VI's intimates, Adriano Castellesi da Corneto, to represent his interests in England. Castellesi had been collector of Peter's pence since 1490, and Vergil was sent to England as his subcollector. A Venetian ambassador, writing in 1502, described Castellesi as a 'hard and sinister man... much favored by the pontiff' (Paschini, 59), while another contemporary, Raffaello Maffei, called him Alexander's 'vicar in all things' (ibid., 61). An accomplice in Cesare Borgia's infamous slaughter of his enemies at Senigallia in January 1503, Castellesi was made cardinal priest of San Grisogono the following May. Thus Vergil was working as an agent of the Borgias during their seizure of his native Urbino from the Montefeltro in 1502-3. 
When Vergil arrived as Castellesi's agent in England in 1502, he was received by Henry VII and 'ever after was entertained by him kindly', as he later wrote in the 'Anglica historia' (Hay, 4). Already the author of two books, it seems likely that he was treated as a celebrity in an England that was eager for things Italian. Certainly he became well known to learned Englishmen -- Erasmus listed Thomas More, Cuthbert Tunstall, Thomas Linacre, and William Latimer as among Vergil's English friends. Like More, Vergil belonged to Doctors' Commons, and he appears to have been on good terms with Colet's St Paul's School. One measure of Vergil's success in England is his accumulation of church benefices. In 1503 Sir Nicholas Griffin presented him to the living of Church Langton, Leicestershire; in 1507 he acquired prebends in Lincoln and Hereford cathedrals; in 1508 he became archdeacon of Wells and prebendary of Brent; in 1513 he was collated to the prebend of Oxgate in St Paul's. In 1504 he was charged with violating currency laws, but the case was regularly deferred until 1509, when he received a royal pardon. 
Through his employer Castellesi, Vergil may have played a role in furthering ties between England and the restored Montefeltro court at Urbino. English relations with Urbino dated from the bestowal of the Order of the Garter on Duke Federigo da Montefeltro by Edward IV in 1474. With the death of Alexander VI on 18 August 1503 (after dinner at Castellesi's villa), followed shortly afterwards by that of Pius III on 18 October, and then by the election of Giuliano della Rovere, a deadly enemy of the Borgias, as Pope Julius II, Cardinal Castellesi found himself in a politically exposed position, so much so that Duke Guidobaldo of Urbino was able to put pressure on the cardinal to propose him to Henry VII for membership of the Order of the Garter. The ostensible purpose of his designation was to secure the support of the Montefeltro, who were related to the della Rovere, for Henry's quest for a papal dispensation that would permit Prince Henry to marry Katherine of Aragon. Henry VII concurred with the proposal, and Guidobaldo received the Garter in 1504 in Rome. Two years later, Count Baldassare Castiglione travelled to England to stand as proxy for Guidobaldo at the latter's formal installation. Castiglione almost certainly met Vergil, indeed, he probably lodged with him in London; Elias Ashmole, writing in the late seventeenth century, recorded that Castiglione stayed with one 'Paulus de Gygeles, the Pope's Vice-Collector' (Cartwright, 1.180), most likely a garbling or misreading of Polidorus de Virgiliis, who was indeed the 'Vice-Collector'. Vergil's personal copy of the later printed edition of the oration Castiglione composed for this occasion survives in the Vatican Library. 
Vergil is best known today for his 'English History', the 'Anglica historia'. He had probably kept a journal and begun his research into English history soon after his arrival in 1502, but research for a full-scale history of England most likely began in 1506-7, encouraged by Henry VII. A first manuscript version of the 'Anglica historia', covering events to 1513, was completed in 1512-13 and is now preserved in the Vatican Library. This work was first published at Basel in 1534 by Johann Bebel, but in a version that only went down to 1509. This was followed by a much revised second edition of 1546, and by a third edition of 1555 that was again revised by the author and extended to 1538. True to the methods of the humanist historiography first developed by Leonardo Bruni in his early fifteenth-century 'History of the Florentine People', Vergil adopted a critical approach which required a comparison of the available sources before he constructed a single narrative of his own, one intended to be more accurate. In a further imitation of Bruni and the historians of antiquity, he composed speeches of his own that he put into the mouths of historical personages, with the inevitable result that his accounts of events often read quite differently from those found in contemporary chronicles, giving rise to the famous and unfounded allegations by his critics that he had burnt older sources in order to hide his errors. 
But although he frequently complained of a lack of documentation, Vergil was in fact able to compile an impressive array of sources. For his treatment of early Britain he used a wide array of classical authorities (for example Caesar, Tacitus, Pliny, and Strabo), many of which he probably consulted in the ducal library during a return visit to Urbino in 1514. For the post-Roman and later periods he relied especially on Gildas (whose 'De excidio et conquestu Brittaniae' he discovered and published in 1525), Bede (whom he greatly admired), William of Malmesbury, Henry of Huntingdon, William of Newburgh, Roger of Howden, and Matthew Paris. For the later middle ages he used Ranulf Higden's 'Polychronicon' and at least one version of the 'Brut', and he also drew extensively on Flavio Biondo, Bartolomeo Platina, Jean Froissart, Enguerrand de Monstrelet, and Robert Gaguin. He also used many documentary sources, including legal and heraldic material, along with the records of the office of collector of Peter's pence. A surviving letter to James IV of Scotland asks for the names and deeds of the Scottish kings. James refused to help, possibly because he thought Scottish history should be written by a Scot, but Gavin Douglas, bishop of Dunkeld, provided the requested information about 1522. An acute observer of his surroundings, Vergil also obtained a good deal of contemporary information from courtiers close to Henry VII. 
Vergil frequently showed a sophisticated critical intelligence in his researches, for instance in his investigation of the languages spoken in Britain. His destructive analysis of Geoffrey of Monmouth, and in particular his denial of the historicity of King Arthur, resulted in his being attacked by the antiquarian John Leland, who attempted to prove Arthur's existence in the 'Assertio inclytissimi Arturii regis Britanniae' (London, 1544). His ecclesiastical livings and prebends, his many friends in the English church, his work for the Peter's pence, and especially his Italian origins, also laid him open to attack from the more radical of the English reformers during the religious convulsions of the mid-sixteenth century. Although the protestant historian John Bale did not 'disprayse of his lernynge, (which I knowe to be verye excellent)', he still accused Vergil in 1544 of 'polutynge oure Englyshe chronycles most shamefullye with his Romishe lyes and other Italyshe beggerye' (Trimble, 38). Nearly a century later, in a Commons debate of 1628, when Vergil's history was cited as evidence that Cambridge was older than Oxford, the Oxonian Edward Littleton is said to have demanded, 'What have we to do with Polydore Vergil? One Vergil was a poet, the other a liar' (Woolf, 24). Yet notwithstanding these attacks, Vergil's treatment of the fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries, at least, remained authoritative down to the nineteenth century. From the wicked Richard III (largely echoed by Sir Thomas More, but all the more plausible in his villainy in Vergil's ostensibly impartial pages) down to the ambitious and arrogant Wolsey, 'Vergil's story has become part of the national myth' ('Anglica historia', xxxix). Surprisingly, the 'Anglica historia' still awaits a complete critical edition and modern translation, although the period down to 1485 is accessible in translations published by Henry Ellis (1844, 1846), while Denys Hay's fine edition covers the years 1485-1537. 
In 1508, while Vergil was just beginning work on the 'Anglica historia', Julius II deprived him of his subcollectorship of Peter's pence, conferring it instead on Pietro Griffo. Although Vergil's income from his benefices comfortably exceeded what he received as subcollector, he still made every effort to hold onto that office, and when Griffo arrived in England, Vergil refused to relinquish either the collectorship or its records and seals. Only after the pope sent a strong letter did Griffo obtain possession in 1509, but when he left England in 1512, Vergil took the office back, keeping it until 1515. In February 1514 Henry VIII wrote to Leo X to commend Vergil, who, he said, wished to visit his native land after twelve years' absence. Vergil duly travelled to Italy that year, visiting Rome first, where among other matters he discussed the issue of a cardinal's hat for Thomas Wolsey with his long-time patron, Cardinal Castellesi. He then proceeded to Urbino, where he paid a brother 600 florins to endow a chapel in the cathedral. 
In 1515 Vergil returned to London, only to find out that Henry VIII had begun to support Andreas Ammonius in a campaign to replace Castellesi as collector of Peter's pence. Ammonius, who had come to England about 1505, and had been Henry's Latin secretary since 1511, arranged to have Vergil's correspondence with Castellesi intercepted. Some letters critical of Wolsey were found, and their author was thrown into the Tower of London, where he remained from April until the end of 1515. For a while, his imprisonment became a 'cause celebre'. Leo X, Cardinal Giulio de' Medici, and the University of Oxford all petitioned the king to release him. But only after Wolsey had been made a cardinal in September, and then lord chancellor in December, was he released, probably at the new cardinal's instance. But his imprisonment made Vergil a confirmed enemy of Wolsey, and undoubtedly gave extra animus to the attack on the latter that Vergil published in the third edition of his 'Anglica historia'. Vergil also lost his subcollectorship, but he retained his ecclesiastical benefices. In 1516 Leo X and Castellesi summoned him to Rome, and afterwards he also visited Urbino again, before returning to England and his benefices before the end of 1517. After this crisis, and for the rest of his life, he managed to steer clear of political controversy. 
In 1524 Vergil wrote a commentary on the Lord's prayer, with a prefatory letter to John Fisher, which was published in a combined edition of the 'Proverbiorum libellus' and the 'De inventoribus rerum' of 1525. In the latter year he edited Gildas, collating a manuscript lent him by Cuthbert Tunstall with one of his own. A 'Dialogus de prodigiis' followed in 1526-7, with a dedication (of 1530) to Francesco Maria della Rovere. Erasmus attempted to have this work published by Froben of Basel, but it did not appear until 1531, printed by Bebel. Erasmus dedicated an edition of some of John Chrysostom's sermons to Vergil, who himself completed a translation of Chrysostom's 'Comparatio regis et monachi' in 1528; he published it in 1530. In June 1532 Vergil told Erasmus that he had been called back to Italy and that he was discussing the printing of the 'Anglica historia' with Bebel. On 6 June 1533 he received licence to travel overseas with six horses and six servants, although he was still in London in August of that year, when he wrote the dedication to the first printed edition of the 'Anglica historia'. He then travelled to the continent, stopping in Urbino to write his will, dated 1534, before returning to England that year. His last book, a collection of Latin 'Dialogi', was published by Isengrin in Basel in 1545, and in an Italian translation by Francesco Baldelli at Venice in 1550. 
Vergil stayed out of England's religious conflicts. Though his religious sympathies seem likely to have been conservative, he signed the articles of 1536 which effectively repudiated the pope's efforts to summon a general council, and in 1547 he subscribed the declaration for communion in both kinds. His ecclesiastical duties did not interfere with his literary activities or participation in London social life. He lived in a house in St Paul's Churchyard that was described in 1522 as consisting of a hall, a parlour, three chambers, and four beds. From 1546 he appears to have been preparing to return home to Italy, since he resigned the archdeaconry of Wells at the end of that year. In 1550 he was licensed to return to Urbino without forfeiting the revenues from his offices, but he probably did not leave England until 1553. He died at Urbino on 18 April 1555, and was buried in the chapel he had endowed in the cathedral. His house in Urbino, which he had bequeathed to his brothers Giovanni-Francesco and Girolamo, belongs today to the University of Urbino. 


@@@@@


doc= 28225


Vermigli, Pietro Martire (1499-1562), evangelical reformer, was born in Florence on 8 September 1499, the son of Stefano Vermigli ('c'.1456- 'c'.1528) and Maria Fumantina (died 1511). At his baptism he received the name Piero Mariano, possibly in honour of the contemporary Florentine preacher Fra Mariano Della Barba da Genazzano. 
Vermigli was the eldest of three surviving children; his sister Felicita Antonia and brother Antonio Lorenzo Romulo were born on 31 July 1501 and 30 April 1504 respectively. His father, a shoemaker, was sufficiently prosperous to leave 200 scudi to the poor of Santa Maria Nuova in his will. Vermigli received his early education from his mother, who taught him Latin, after which he attended a school for the children of the Florentine nobility run by Marcello Virgilio Adriano, a chancellor of the republic and friend of Niccolo Machiavelli. In 1514 -- apparently against his father's will -- he entered the monastery of San Bartolomeo at Fiesole, a house of the canons regular of St Augustine of the Lateran congregation. On completing his novitiate (probably in March 1518), he assumed the name Pietro Martire. Shortly afterwards he left Fiesole for Padua, where he attended the 'Studio' and was received into the monastery of San Giovanni di Verdara. It was there that he taught himself Greek and acquired the Aristotelian training on which he was to base much of his work as a theologian. He also had contacts with Pietro Bembo's humanist circle, whose members included Reginald Pole and Marcantonio Flaminio. 
Vermigli was ordained on 23 September 1525, and probably received his doctorate at about the same time. In April 1526 he was appointed a public preacher by the chapter-general of the Lateran congregation; he gave his first course of sermons in Brescia later that year. The next three years were spent preaching across northern and central Italy. Vermigli also lectured (on Homer as well as scripture) in the congregation's houses in Padua, Ravenna, Bologna, and Vercelli. In summer 1530 he took up the position of vicar to the monastery of San Giovanni in Monte in Bologna, where he began to study Hebrew with the assistance of a Jewish physician named Isaac. Three years later the chapter-general elected him abbot of Spoleto, an appointment which he held until May 1536. In Spoleto Vermigli enhanced his reputation by successfully restoring discipline to the convents of San Matteo and La Stella. His reward was to be elected abbot to the house of San Pietro ad Aram in Naples (April 1537). 
In Naples Vermigli came into contact with the Spanish exile Juan de Valdes, who introduced him to the writings of the protestant reformers. According to his earliest biographer, Josias Simler, Vermigli at this time read Martin Bucer's 'Enarrationes perpetuae in sacra quatuor evangelia' and 'Sacrorum psalmorum libri quinque', and Huldrych Zwingli's 'De providentia Dei' and 'De vera et falsa religione'. Under Valdes's tutelage Vermigli also embraced the key protestant tenet of justification by faith alone. The intellectual traffic was not all one-way: it has been suggested that Vermigli, for his part, was responsible for Valdes's adoption of a strict doctrine of predestination, derived ultimately from Gregorio di Rimini, whose works Vermigli had studied in Padua. 
Vermigli's drift away from Catholic orthodoxy soon attracted attention. When, during a series of public lectures on the first epistle to the 'Corinthians' delivered in late 1539, he failed to expound '1 Corinthians' 3: 9-17 along traditional lines -- as a proof-text for the doctrine of purgatory -- the Theatines denounced him to the Spanish viceroy, Pedro de Toledo, who forbade his further preaching. Vermigli was able to have the ban overturned only after appealing to Rome. 
The controversy did not check Vermigli's rise within the Lateran congregation, to which he was elected one of four visitors by a chapter-general in April 1540. The following year he was named prior of San Frediano at Lucca, a house in urgent need of reform. Vermigli responded to the challenge by converting San Frediano into a centre of biblical scholarship, aided by Paolo Lacizi, Celso Martinengo, and the former Jew Emmanuel Tremellius, who taught Latin, Greek, and Hebrew respectively. All three were later to convert to protestantism. Vermigli himself held public lectures on the Pauline epistles, winning a substantial following among the civic aristocracy. In recognition of his achievements, the chapter-general named him to a seven-strong disciplinary commission in May 1542. 
However, Vermigli's position was compromised by the activities of some of his more enthusiastic followers, notably Costantino da Carrara, prior of Santa Maria di Fregionaia, who questioned the authority of the pope and church councils, and Girolamo da Pluvio, vicar of San Agostino, who went so far as to celebrate the eucharist according to protestant rites. Under pressure from the curia, the senate of Lucca instituted a crackdown on heretical literature, which had been circulating freely in the city, and imprisoned da Pluvio. On hearing that a warrant had been issued for his own arrest, Vermigli, who had been finding it increasingly difficult to perform his religious duties in good conscience, decided that his only option was to seek sanctuary in protestant territory. On 12 August 1542 he left Lucca with three of his fellow canons, Lacizi, Teodosio Trebelli, and Giulio Santerenziano, who was to become his constant companion in exile. After conducting his first reformed Lord's supper (in Pisa), Vermigli fled via Florence, Ferrara, Verona, and Zurich to Basel. There he remained for some weeks in the hope of securing a teaching position at the university, but in mid-October he accepted an invitation to take up the chair of 'Old Testament' at Strasbourg, which had been left vacant by the death of Wolfgang Capito. 
In Strasbourg Vermigli formed a close association with Martin Bucer, the city's reformer, who taught alongside him at the college of St Thomas. His teaching duties consisted in the main of biblical exposition: between late 1542 and 1547 he lectured and presided over disputations on the minor prophets, 'Lamentations', 'Genesis', 'Exodus', and much of 'Leviticus', establishing himself in the first rank of continental reformed theologians. Unfortunately only the lectures on 'Lamentations' and 'Genesis' 1-42: 25 survive, although theses for disputation on the first three books of the 'Pentateuch' were later included in editions of Vermigli's 'Loci communes'. It was during this period that Vermigli perfected the method of biblical commentary that was to become his trademark: close textual exposition interspersed with so-called commonplaces (excursuses on specific doctrinal topics of relevance to the text under discussion). Although pre-eminently an academic theologian, Vermigli continued to take an active interest in the fate of the Reformation in Italy. One of his first acts in Strasbourg was to write to the evangelicals of Lucca setting out the reasons for his flight, and his first published work was an exposition of the apostles' creed in Italian ('Una semplice dichiaratione sopra gli XII articoli della fede christiana', 1544). 
Following the emperor Charles V's victory over the Schmalkaldic League at Muhlberg in April 1547 and the corresponding downturn of protestant fortunes in Germany, Vermigli's position in Strasbourg became precarious. However, in October he was invited to England by Thomas Cranmer, eager to attract continental protestant theologians to spearhead his drive for reform. Vermigli was accompanied to London by his fellow Italian Bernardino Ochino, who had received a similar invitation, and by the merchant John Abell. After spending the winter with Cranmer at Lambeth, he was appointed regius professor of divinity at Oxford, replacing Richard Smith (March 1548). There he undertook a major series of lectures on '1 Corinthians', in the course of which he condemned clerical celibacy and the doctrine of purgatory. The lectures proceeded smoothly until, commenting on '1 Corinthians' 10: 16-17, Vermigli challenged the Catholic understanding of the eucharist. Led by his predecessor Smith, conservative members of the university demanded that Vermigli defend his views in a disputation, which was eventually fixed for 4 May 1549. Before it could be held, however, Smith fled, first to St Andrews and then to Louvain, from where he issued tracts attacking Vermigli's teaching on justification and religious vows. When Vermigli insisted that the disputation go ahead, it was rescheduled for 28 May; Smith was replaced as spokesman for the Catholic party by William Tresham, a canon of Christ Church, William Chedsey, later president of Corpus Christi, and Morgan Phillips, principal of St Mary Hall. The outcome of the disputation, which took place over four days, was inconclusive, but it prompted Vermigli to publish the first systematic exposition of his eucharistic doctrine, the 'Tractatio de sacramento eucharistiae' (1549), which appeared in an English translation the following year. In this work Vermigli weighed the competing Catholic, Lutheran, and 'Zwinglian' interpretations against the evidence of scripture and the fathers, rejecting all three in favour of his own conception of the eucharist as the vehicle for spiritual union with Christ. The 'Corinthians' lectures that had given rise to the disputation in the first place were published by Christoph Froschauer in Zurich in 1551. 
In July 1549 Vermigli was forced as a result of local disturbances accompanying the western rebellion to leave Oxford and seek refuge with Cranmer at Lambeth. Two of his sermons denouncing the rebels formed the basis for an address given by Cranmer at St Paul's on 21 July (Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, MS 102). Vermigli also influenced Cranmer's eucharistic thought; the archbishop's 'Defence of the True and Catholic Doctrine of the Sacrament' (1550) makes considerable use of Theodoret, one of Vermigli's favourite church fathers, and of a manuscript of John Chrysostom's 'Ad Caesarium monachum' which Vermigli had brought with him from Italy. The remaining years of Edward VI's reign saw Vermigli closely involved in English church politics; his intervention on the side of the church leadership was probably instrumental in persuading John Hooper to drop his opposition to the wearing of vestments in February 1551, for example. Even more significant was Vermigli's contribution to the reform of the liturgy. In late 1550 he and Martin Bucer were asked to suggest revisions to the 1549 prayer book. Although Vermigli's 'annotations' on the book do not survive, the general tenor of the revised liturgy is in keeping with his understanding of the sacrament, which emphasized the eucharistic action rather than the elements of bread and wine. The second exhortation to communion that was added to the 1552 prayer book is actually a translation of Vermigli's 'Adhortatio ad coenam Domini mysticam'. Vermigli also participated in another of Cranmer's key projects, the reform of canon law. In October 1551 he was appointed to the commission of thirty-two scholars charged with this task, and over the winter of 1551-2 he helped produce the draft set of ecclesiastical laws later published by John Foxe as the 'Reformatio legum ecclesiasticarum'. The manuscript copy of this text in the British Library contains marginal annotations in Vermigli's hand (BL, Harley MS 426.C). His influence has also been detected in the forty-two articles of 1553, especially in article 17, on predestination. 
In Oxford, Vermigli began a course of lectures on 'Romans', published in 1558 as 'In epistolam ad Romanos commentarii'. The work contains lengthy commonplaces on justification and predestination, directed against the Catholic theologian Albert Pighius. However, he continued to encounter resistance in the religiously conservative university. On 20 January 1551 he was appointed first canon of Christ Church, but the local population reacted angrily when he attempted to bring his wife, Catherine Dammartin, a former nun from Metz whom he had married in 1545, into college. After the windows of his rooms, which looked out onto Fish Street, had been repeatedly smashed, Vermigli was forced to move to safer lodgings in the cloisters, where he built himself a study (demolished in March 1684). Following Mary's accession in July 1553, he was placed under house arrest, where he remained for six weeks until he was able to secure permission from the privy council to leave England. Once again he was received at Lambeth by Cranmer, who on 14 September advised him to flee to the continent. Some time after Vermigli's departure the body of his wife, who had died on 15 February 1553 and was buried in Christ Church Cathedral, was exhumed on the instructions of Cardinal Pole and placed on a dungheap. In 1558 the remains were reinterred in the cathedral, together with the relics of St Frithuswith. 
On 30 October 1553 Vermigli arrived back in Strasbourg, where the orthodox Lutheran party headed by Johann Marbach was now in the ascendant. In order that he might be allowed to resume teaching, Vermigli agreed to sign the Augsburg confession, but not the Wittenberg concord with its affirmation of the substantive presence of Christ in the eucharist. During his second Strasbourg period Vermigli lectured on the book of 'Judges' and Aristotle's 'Nicomachean Ethics', while Girolamo Zanchi, a former protege of his from San Frediano in Lucca, expounded the 'Physics'. Among those attending Vermigli's lectures were numerous English exiles, including the future bishop of Salisbury John Jewel, who later accompanied him to Zurich; it is likely that they were the intended audience for the discussion of political questions, such as the right of resistance to tyranny, which dominates his 'Judges' lectures. An English translation of part of those lectures was published as 'A Treatise of the Cohabitacyon of the Faithfull with the Unfaithfull' by W. Rihel in 1555. Vermigli's links with the Marian exiles also extended to the English church at Frankfurt, which in August 1554 asked him to arbitrate in disputes over the use of the second Edwardian prayer book and the validity of Lutheran baptism. 
In the face of increasing hostility from Marbach and the Strasbourg Lutherans, Vermigli accepted an invitation from Zurich to succeed Konrad Pellikan as professor of 'Old Testament' (July 1556). There he was able to renew his friendship with Ochino, now minister to Zurich's Italian church, of which Vermigli was elected an elder. Between August 1556 and his death Vermigli lectured on 1-2 'Samuel', '1 Kings' and '2 Kings' 1-11. His vigorous support for the doctrine of double predestination in these lectures brought him into conflict with his Erasmian colleague Theodore Bibliander, who defended the freedom of the will. The dispute was only settled by Bibliander's dismissal in February 1560, which some scholars have interpreted as a decisive moment in the theological transition of the Zurich church from Zwinglianism to Calvinism (Staedtke, 536). This was only one of several doctrinal controversies involving Vermigli during his final years. His continued interest in English affairs (evident also from his correspondence with John Jewel, Edmund Grindal, and Richard Cox, all bishops under Elizabeth, who repeatedly sought to entice him back to England) led him in 1559 to publish two polemical works against English Catholics: the 'Defensio doctrinae veteris et apostolicae de sacrosancto eucharistiae sacramento', a response to Stephen Gardiner's 'Confutatio cavillationum'; and the 'Defensio ad Riccardi Smythaei duos libellos de caelibatu'. The eucharistic tract, which was dedicated to Elizabeth I, runs to more than 800 pages and is widely regarded as the most comprehensive exposition of the reformed doctrine of the Lord's supper produced during this period. 
The eucharist was again the main point at issue when, in September and October 1561, Vermigli attended the colloquy of Poissy as the representative of the Zurich church. There he was conspicuous in his opposition to any agreement between French Catholics and protestants that would have meant compromising the reformed position on the Lord's supper. Another focus of Vermigli's activity was Poland, whose reformed church was split over the doctrine of the mediator proposed by the Mantuan exile Francesco Stancaro. The Zurich church's official refutation of Stancaro's errors, the 'Epistolae duae ad ecclesias polonicas' (1561) is sometimes attributed to Vermigli. Christology, with its implications for the doctrine of the eucharist, was also the theme of Vermigli's last published work, the 'Dialogus de utraque in Christo natura' (1561), a refutation of the doctrine of ubiquity championed by the Lutheran theologian Johannes Brenz. A second work against Brenz was planned, but before it could be brought to fruition Vermigli fell ill of fever, and died in Zurich on 12 November 1562; he was buried in the cloisters of the Zurich Grossmunster. He was survived by his second wife, Caterina Merenda of Brescia whom he had married on 9 May 1559 and who later married the Locarnese merchant Ludovico Ronco, and by a posthumous daughter, Maria, who married first another Locarnese exile, Bernardo Zanino, and second Georg Ulrich, minister in Thalwil. A portrait of Vermigli, dated 1560 and painted by the Zurich artist Hans Asper, hangs in the National Portrait Gallery. 
Before his death, Vermigli had published his Strasbourg lectures on 'Judges' ('In librum Judicum commentarii', 1561), but the task of editing his later works for publication fell mainly to the Zurich churchmen Josias Simler, Johannes Wolf, and Rudolf Gwalther. The lectures on the 'Ethics' ('In primum, secundum, et initium tertii libri ethicorum Aristotelis ad Nicomachum... commentarius') appeared in 1563, and were followed by the 'Preces sacrae ex psalmis Davidis desumptae' (1564), a collection of prayers dating from Vermigli's first Strasbourg period; the lectures on 1-2 'Samuel' ('In duos libros Samuelis... commentarii', 1564); the lectures on 1-2 'Kings' ('Melachim', 1566); the lectures on 'Genesis' ('In primum librum Mosis... commentarii', 1569); and the lectures on 'Lamentations' ('In Lamentationes... commentarium', 1629). In 1576 the French minister in London, Robert Masson, published the first edition of the 'Loci communes', extracted from Vermigli's published commentaries and arranged according to a scheme based on Calvin's 'Institutes'. Fourteen editions of the 'Loci', which subsequently included a selection of Vermigli's correspondence, sermons, and orations, appeared between 1576 and 1656. Vermigli's works appear to have been especially popular in England and in the English colonies in America. English translations of his commentaries on 'Romans' and 'Judges', the 'Loci', the 'Preces sacrae', and the exposition of the apostles' creed were published during the later sixteenth century, and his commonplace 'On wine and drunkenness' was included in the Elizabethan 'Book of Homilies'. Vermigli's reputation waned during the course of the seventeenth century, but he has recently become the focus of renewed scholarly interest, focusing on his achievements as an exegete and his contribution to the systematization of reformed doctrine in key areas such as predestination and, above all, the eucharist. 


@@@@@


doc= 28226


Vermuyden, Sir Cornelius (1590-1677), drainage engineer, was born at St Maartensdijk, on the island of Tholen, Zealand, in the Dutch republic, the son of Gillis Vermuyden and his wife, Sara, daughter of Cornelius Werckendet. The Vermuydens had lived in St Maartensdijk from the early fourteenth century, and Cornelius was brought up among drainage engineers. His mother came of a notable family in Zierikzee, capital of the neighbouring Isle of Schouwen, and her brother Lieven had been prominent in embanking, impoldering, and constructing the harbour of Zierikzee. 
In England a general drainage bill had been discussed in parliament in 1585 to no effect, but from the 1590s Dutchmen competed with Englishmen in plans to drain the largest area of fen in the kingdom -- the Great Level, around the Wash. The first scheme was devised by Humphrey Bradley, a Brabanter, in 1593; it was followed in 1606 by that of the so-called 'French contractors', Cornelius Verneuil (possibly French) and Cornelius Liens. Liens came from the same village as Vermuyden and the two families were related by marriage (the mother of Cornelius Liens was Phillipine, 'nee' Werckendet, great-aunt of Sara; later Cornelius Liens's brother, Joachim, married Cornelius Vermuyden's sister, Cornelia). Joachim Liens went to England in 1618 as a representative of the Dutch government, and he came close enough in court circles to be knighted by James I in 1619. When the king declared himself the undertaker of drainage in the Great Level in February 1621, it is probable that Liens had promised Dutch capital and expertise. 
Cornelius Vermuyden arrived in England in 1621, after employment as a tax collector in his home town, and much later (in 1642) he declared that he had come by invitation to drain the Great Level; he did not say who had issued the invitation. Thereafter James I was diverted from the fen project and no progress was made. Liens put another drainage proposal to the king in 1622, this time naming Cornelius Vermuyden as his fellow undertaker, but that plan too was rejected. Still unemployed, Vermuyden was in close contact with Dutchmen in London, and in 1622 he was asked by the Essex sewer commissioners to repair, at a cost of $2000, a breach in the Thames bank at Dagenham and Havering, caused by recent storms. The commissioners complained of unsatisfactory work in February 1623, but Vermuyden claimed that he had spent $3600 and that the commissioners had paid him nothing. 
At Rotherhithe on 6 November 1623 Vermuyden married Katherine, daughter of All-Saints Lapps (or Laps), a Dutch merchant in London. The Lapps were intermarried with the Croppenburghs, and Joos Croppenburgh was contracted in 1622 to drain flooded land in Erith, on the Kent bank of the Thames; he subsequently undertook land reclamation on Canvey Island, and in litigation in 1626 Vermuyden was named alongside Joos Croppenburgh in this work. 
Events imply enduring royal favour towards Vermuyden: in 1623 he was engaged by James I to drain land in Windsor Park. In Hatfield Chase on the Yorkshire-Lincolnshire border, where the crown was principal landowner, James I ordered a survey in 1622, and when the local gentry pronounced against drainage he invited comment from Vermuyden, who gave a favourable opinion. James's death in 1625 frustrated immediate action, but on 24 May 1626 Charles I signed an agreement for Vermuyden to drain Hatfield Chase, the money being promised, it is thought, by Vermuyden's Dutch associates. Sir Robert Heath, newly appointed attorney-general, was almost certainly an influential ally of Vermuyden. Work was ordered to proceed briskly, but the king undertook first to conclude agreements with the local landowners and commoners, a task that was imperfectly performed. 
Vermuyden brought workmen from the Netherlands, straightened river courses with artificial cuts, and towards the end of 1627 claimed the work complete. In July 1628 Vermuyden bought the manors of Hatfield Chase from the crown, and on 6 January 1629 he was knighted. The allotment of lands in payment began in 1628, but this unleashed complaints that land was inundated which had formerly been dry, and the commoners who had been granted their common rights for ever on the adjoining Isle of Axholme, on which Vermuyden's works encroached, put up bitter resistance. Violent clashes with the islanders and expensive litigation continued for years, but from 1630 Vermuyden disposed of his lands there and withdrew. Blame for the enduring problems was not laid entirely at Vermuyden's door; Charles I had failed to anticipate and investigate the legal problems. But other ventures now beckoned, notably the Great Level drainage project which sprang to life in 1630. Vermuyden offered his own plan, and was contracted on 1 September 1629 to drain the area. But the contract did not proceed, perhaps because of local opposition to a foreigner (though Vermuyden had been naturalized in 1624) or perhaps because he could not raise the necessary capital. Instead, Francis, fourth earl of Bedford, was named the undertaker, his interest arising out of his ownership of an estate at Thorney; even so, Vermuyden became formally committed to the project as an 'adventurer' and was made the director of the works, effectively being the undertaker. 
Completion of the drainage was promised within six years, and was so judged on 12 October 1637, Vermuyden having cut a new straight course for the Great Ouse River, called the Bedford River. The 95,000 acres in payment was about to be allotted to the adventurers when vigorous objections were made from all quarters. At this point Charles I announced himself as undertaker, and the investigating commission then pronounced the drainage incomplete and defective. In response Vermuyden put forward a fresh plan, entitled 'A Discourse Touching the Draining of the Great Fennes' (1638, published 1642), extending the original objectives. The Bedford scheme had aimed to make 'summer ground' -- land dry in summer -- whereas the new objective was to make dry 'winter ground'. The larger plan now extended over land in six counties. Civil war delayed further action until 1649, when an act for the draining of the Great Level was passed -- helped, it is thought, by the considerable influence of Oliver Cromwell. 
Proceedings from 29 May 1649 until 5 April 1656 can be followed in the volumes of proceedings of the Bedford Level Corporation. The proposal to make Vermuyden director was highly contentious; the adventurers consulted other drainers with different ideas, including a Dutchman, Jan Barents Westerdyke, while Vermuyden refused to submit to their supervision, no doubt fearing that their intervention at some point would cut his work short. They for their part could not permit expenditure beyond a certain limit. Finally Vermuyden reached an agreement with the adventurers on 24 January 1650, accepting the conditions he had rejected in June 1649. The new work proceeded, and the drainage of 170,000 acres north-west of the Bedford River, the North and Middle levels, was declared complete on 24 March 1651, and the whole Level was finished on 17 February 1653. The condition of the North and Middle levels continued to be satisfactory, and, when visiting in 1657, William Dugdale saw rapeseed, wheat, and vegetables growing on the allotments of some adventurers. He was also told that sometimes during the draining 11,000 men had been at work. The condition of the South Level did not satisfy, and it remained imperfectly drained into the nineteenth century. 
Vermuyden also dabbled in other ventures. In 1630 he bought Malvern Chase, where a scheme to grow madder was briefly introduced, but he had sold the estate by 1637. Also in 1630 he bought Sedgmoor, which required drainage. He acquired an interest in the Wirksworth lead mines, in Derbyshire, in 1631, when Sir Robert Heath took possession and made Vermuyden a partner responsible for drainage. Vermuyden was continually indebted because of it, but his new sough drained deeper than before, and much lead was recovered. The work involved his sons Cornelius and John more than himself, for he put an agent in charge; nevertheless, two-thirds of the Dovegang mine still belonged to Vermuyden at his death. In 1653 he proposed a treaty of perpetual friendship between England and the Netherlands in a document, preserved in the Thurloe papers (Thurloe, 'State papers', 2.125-6), which was probably submitted to Cromwell. The plan to drain Sedgmoor was put before parliament in 1655, but it was rejected in December 1656 when the tenants and freeholders refused consent. During the civil war Vermuyden's sympathies probably lay with parliament, since Cromwell was his friend, and Colonel Cornelius Vermuyden, who fought at Marston Moor, is believed to have been his eldest son. Altogether he had thirteen children, of whom twelve were born in fourteen years; some married into worthy gentry families. After 1655 Vermuyden was described as a merchant, engaged in 'exchange, rechange, and chevissance', but otherwise he fades from the record until his death. He was buried at St Margaret's, Westminster, London, on 15 October 1677. 
Vermuyden's writings convey the picture of an experienced, professional engineer. But contrary opinions on drainage strategies were inevitable, so he had many critics and opponents, and gathered a reputation for arrogance, ruthlessness, and obstinacy. A more balanced assessment results from weighing his sound decisions against mistakes and consequences that were unforeseeable; and although he was a complex figure, his significant role in the draining of the English fens cannot be disputed. 


@@@@@


doc= 28227


Verneuil, John (1582/3-1647), librarian, was born in Bordeaux, France, the son of Arnauld Verneuilh (died in or before 1585), a merchant, and Marguerite, 'nee' Forthon (died before 1611), daughter of Bernard Forthon and Valerie, 'nee' Peyronin. Both the Verneuilh and Forthon families were protestant. He was educated at the protestant academy at Montauban, receiving an MA before he left for England. On his arrival, he later explained, he had received a 'liberal maintenance' from Sir Thomas Leigh (died 1626) of Stoneleigh, Warwickshire, and had 'belonged' to his grandson Thomas Leigh (1594/5-1671), later second baronet ('Tract of the Sovereign Judge of Controversies', 1628, preface). Since Verneuil and the young Leigh matriculated from Magdalen College, Oxford, on the same day, 4 November 1608, when they were aged twenty-five and thirteen respectively, the probability is that Verneuil acted as under-tutor. He was admitted as a reader to the Bodleian Library on 31 January 1609. 
According to Anthony Wood, once at Oxford Verneuil was assisted by, among others, the authorities of Magdalen College, but he does not appear in the college accounts. He may also have taught Henry Carey, later second earl of Monmouth, who was a fellow-commoner of Exeter College from 1611, and who graduated BA in 1613. In dedicating to Carey his French translation of Lewis Bayly's 'Practise of Piety', Verneuil speaks of 'un conte du temps que j'ai soustrait & desrobe de votre service' ('an account of the time which I have taken and snatched from your service'; 'La pratique de piete'). Verneuil married Elizabeth Hill on 20 December 1612, in the church of St Peter-in-the-East, Oxford, and the baptisms, burials, and marriages of a number of their children appear in the parish registers. 
It is not clear when Verneuil became underkeeper of the Bodleian Library. A salary of $10 a year was paid to an unnamed officer from the resignation of Philip Price in 1613, but Verneuil is not mentioned in the library accounts until the year 1618/19, when he was paid for going to London to buy books. He made a number of such visits until the year 1631/2. The library's purchases were, no doubt, from the Stationers' Company's Latin stock shop in the grounds of Stationers' Hall. Later his and the librarian's visits became less frequent as the assiduity and efficiency of booksellers such as Henry Featherstone and Robert Martin increased. 
In addition to his tutorial and library duties, Verneuil published translations from and into French. In the first category are his 'Sermon Preached before the King's Majesty the 15th of June 1615' (1620) and 'A Tract of the Sovereign Judge of Controversies in Matters of Religion' (1628), translations respectively of works by Pierre du Moulin and John Cameron; in the second category is his 'La pratique de piete' (Geneva, 1625), Bayly's original having already run into fifteen editions in English, and 'La descouverte de la cautelle du coeur de l'homme' (Geneva, 1634) from the work by Daniel Dyke. 'La pratique de piete' was extremely successful, running to sixteen editions by 1700 and making a significant contribution to the sustenance of a common protestant culture in western Europe. Verneuil also published several supplements to the printed catalogues of the Bodleian Library. He returned to Bordeaux in 1624 to transfer his share in his maternal grandparents' property to his brother Pierre Verneuilh. His MA from Montauban was incorporated at Oxford on 13 December 1625. 
Elizabeth Verneuil died in 1634. Verneuil himself succumbed to illness in the winter of 1643-4 -- probably to plague in the overcrowded city of Oxford -- and the library accounts note that he was then too weak to climb the library stairs. He died at his house in the Eastgate in September 1647, and was buried in the church of St Peter-in-the-East on 30 September. No will survives, but an (undated) inventory reveals that his goods and chattels were worth approximately $12 (Oxfordshire County Archives, 89/4/22). Wood's judgement was that by his death 'our public library lost an honest and useful servant, and his children a good father' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.222). 


@@@@@


doc= 28228


Verney, Sir Edmund (1590-1642), courtier and politician, was born on 1 January 1590 in Drury Lane, London, the second son of Sir Edmund Verney (1535-1600), knight of Penley, Hertfordshire, and his third wife, Mary Blakeney (died 1642). Sir Edmund's first well-documented ancestor, Sir Ralph Verney, a mercer, had been appointed lord mayor of London in 1465. Later the Verneys became courtiers through marriage and political alliances and in keeping with this tradition Sir Edmund became knight marshal and standard bearer to Charles I. In preparation for his career he studied briefly at St Alban Hall, Oxford, in 1603-4, visited the French and Italian courts, and toured battlefields in the Low Countries. In 1611 he was knighted and sent to Madrid. He returned 'an accomplished gentleman' (F. Verney, 1.70) and joined his uncle Francis as a member of Prince Henry's household. After Henry's early death, Verney, barely twenty-three, was appointed a gentleman of the privy chamber in young Prince Charles's household -- a connection with the future king that engendered deep loyalty and caused later divisions within the Verney family. 
On 14 December 1612 Verney married Margaret Denton (1594-1641); they had ten children who survived infancy. He received a $2300 portion and four years' room and board in return for a $400 jointure. The socially prominent Dentons of Hillesden, Buckinghamshire, lived near Middle Claydon, which the Verneys had owned since the 1460s. However, the Claydon estate was leased to a tenant, and Margaret and her children lived at Hillesden while Verney was attending court. His career as a courtier did not produce the expected financial benefits. Never an astute businessman, in 1620 he agreed to pay almost $4000 to secure the surrender of the lease on Middle Claydon, although it had only fifteen years to run. Prince Charles promised to pay $1000 per year for four years, but appears to have made only one $1000 payment, in 1623. Verney regained Claydon but 'thereby', he 'became much in depte' (Bruce, 135). 
In 1622 Verney was made lieutenant of Whaddon Chase and in 1623 he followed Prince Charles and Buckingham to Madrid where they were negotiating a Spanish match. There Verney proved himself an ardent protestant by protecting a dying Englishman from a Catholic priest. In addition he helped Prince Charles to extricate himself from the Spanish alliance, by providing him with a jewel paved with ten diamonds which the prince used as a gift. On his return to England he was elected MP for Buckingham borough in 1624. In 1625 he was elected for New Romney, one of the Cinque Ports, on the nomination of the duke of Buckingham, and he sat for Aylesbury in 1629, and for Chipping Wycombe in 1640 in the Short and Long parliaments. 
When Charles became king Verney was appointed knight marshal for life with a $200 pension and responsibility to preserve order within 12 miles of the court. He and his deputies were to 'continually ride both in the day time and in the night, about our court' arresting anyone without proper credentials (Bruce, 115). He also had command of the Marshalsea prison and its profits. Throughout the 1630s he rode with the king on long journeys, which aggravated his sciatica and lameness, despite visits to Bath. In 1639 he delivered a message from the king to the Scottish army which led to a peace treaty. His court and political duties, however, required him mainly to be in London. Thus in 1634 he established himself in a great double house in Covent Garden Piazza with an annual rent of $160. 
Verney's expenses continued to exceed the income paid to him by Charles I and his attempts to make money from patents, investments, and grants of offices ended in failure. His ventures included patents for hackney coaches and inspecting tobacco, investing in drainage projects in the fens, and buying confiscated Irish estates. He paid $1000 to the court of wards to marry his eldest son, Ralph Verney (1613-1696), to an heiress, and in 1640 he lent the king another $1000. He hoped to provide for his family through a $400 annuity raised from the aulnage, a tax on sealing woollen yarn, but this proved disappointing. With only a life interest in his lands, he left Ralph saddled with debts: his younger sons and his unmarried daughters received only tiny annuities. 
Verney's financial problems took place in the context of growing political unrest in parliament and the court. His life illustrates how families became divided during the civil wars and how individuals had to make painful choices between duty to family, religion, and king. 'Indeed the world now account[s] it policy', wrote Verney's daughter Cary, 'for the father to be one side and the son on the other' ('Seventh Report', HMC, 440). Verney's younger sons, Henry, Edmund Verney (1616-1649), and Thomas, served in the royalist army, whose standard their father bore, but at the same time, both Sir Edmund and his eldest son were deeply committed protestants, who disliked Laudian practices and desired simplicity in worship. They sat together in parliament and wore their hair long, but they voted in opposition to Charles I's wishes. 'The opinion, I see of the great ones most at the court', wrote Henry to his brother Ralph, 'is that my father and you are all for the Parliament and not for the King' ('Seventh Report', HMC, 440). 
Verney admitted his predicament to a royalist friend: 'I do not like the quarrel, and do heartily wish that the King would yield and consent to what they desire, so that my conscience is only concerned in honour and in gratitude to follow my master. I have eaten his bread, and served him near thirty years, and will not do so base a thing as to forsake him; and choose rather to lose my life -- which I am sure to do -- to preserve and defend those things which are against my conscience to preserve and defend. (Gardiner, 1.5)' In explaining his motives he specified religious issues as the cause of his opposition to the king. 'I have no reverence for Bishops', he stated, 'for whom this quarrel subsists' (ibid., 1.5). 
When civil war came Ralph Verney sided with parliament while his father raised the royalist standard at Nottingham in August 1642 and died on 23 October on the battlefield at Edgehill. Later a family story arose of how the standard was found clutched in his severed hand, although the body was never recovered. It was reported that Verney killed two men with his own hands and 'would nither put on armes or buff cote the day of battell' (F. Verney, 2.119), which implied a desire to die. Although these family tales cannot be proved, Sir Edmund was consistently described as a man 'of great courage and... confessedly valiant' (ibid., 1.72). Contemporaries confirm that his regiment bore the brunt of the action at Edgehill. He stood his ground at the head of the army and died in the service of the king. His sombre face can be seen at Claydon House in portraits by Van Dyck and others. 


@@@@@


doc= 28229


Verney, Sir Edmund (1616-1649), royalist army officer, was the third son of Sir Edmund Verney (1590-1642) and his wife, Margaret Denton (1594-1641). Sir Ralph Verney (1613-1696) was his eldest brother; his younger brother Henry was a royalist colonel. Edmund was educated at a private school in Gloucester, at Winchester College (1634-5), and then at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, where he matriculated on 22 January 1636. At Oxford he learned little and got into debt and into disgrace with his puritan tutor, Henry Wilkinson. In 1637 he went briefly to study under Mr Crowther, rector of Newton Blossomville, Buckinghamshire, formerly his eldest brother's Oxford tutor, who found that he 'understands not the very first grounds of logicke, or other university learning' but that he was willing and capable (F. P. Verney and M. M. Verney, 1.164). 
Verney entered the army against the Scots as a volunteer in 1639 and joined his father in the royal army on the border. With the first money that he earned he paid off his Oxford creditors and, when the first bishops' war was over, he joined the army of the United Provinces in Flanders in Sir Thomas Culpepper's regiment. In winter quarters at Utrecht he studied Latin, French, and history seven or eight hours a day at the university. He had many disappointments about promotion, though Elizabeth, queen of Bohemia, did her best to help him. In 1640 he served again in the English army in the second bishops' war. 
Verney sided with the king in the civil war, and suffered heavily for his loyalty; his pay as well as that of his men was constantly in arrears; the grief of his father's death at Edgehill was embittered by the sorrow and indignation he felt that his eldest brother, Ralph, should support the parliament; his portion invested in the aulnage, the family cloth inspection venture, was practically forfeited; and he suffered most of all from the mistakes he witnessed daily in the conduct of his own leaders. 
Verney the professional soldier found service as an officer in Harcourt's regiment in the army sent from England to suppress the Irish rising in late 1641 and early 1642. In 1642-3 he served under the earl of Ormond in the savage wars against the confederates. 'The enemy runs from us wheresoever we meet them', he wrote, 'but if we chance to overtake them, we give no quarter, but all to the sword'. He sent the same report after the taking of Trim: 'after we put some four score men to the sword, but like valiant knights errant, gave quarter and liberty to all the women' (F. P. Verney and M. M. Verney, 2.135). He saw much action in Ireland, commanded at Rathcotty Castle, and was wounded at Rathconnel. 
In November 1643 Verney returned from Ireland as a major of foot in Richard Gibson's regiment of foot, part of the army released for service in England by the cessation. He became a colonel in August 1644. He was knighted in 1643, and made lieutenant-governor of Chester; he served during its two sieges, and was highly valued by Lord Byron and other commanders. After the surrender of Chester in 1646 Sir Edmund rejoined Ormond, to whom he had a personal loyalty, at Le Havre. Their portraits were painted in Paris by Egmont in 1648, as companion pictures. They returned to Ireland to take part in the last fierce struggle against Cromwell. Sir Edmund had been previously reconciled with his by now exiled brother. In the absence of a widow Ralph was to be the administrator of his dead younger brother's estate. 
Ormond committed the command of his own regiment to his friend Verney, when he sent the best of his army with Sir Arthur Aston to reinforce the defenders of Drogheda. Sir Edmund wrote from the city (9 September 1649) earnestly begging Ormond to fall on the enemy's camp to make a diversion. He survived the horrors of the assault on 11 September, but the few who had escaped were sought out and killed in cold blood. Among these was Verney, killed three days after the fall of the town, while he was 'walkinge with Crumwell by way of protection'. 'One Ropier who is brother to the Lord Ropier, caled him aside in a pretence to speake with him, being formerly of acquaintance, and insteade of some frendly office wch Sir Ed: might expect from him, he barberously rann him throw wth a tuck' (F. P. Verney and M. M. Verney, 2.344-5). 


@@@@@


doc= 28230


Verney, Sir Francis (1584-1615), pirate, was the elder son of Edmund Verney (1535-1600) of Penley, Hertfordshire, and Middle Claydon, Buckinghamshire, who was knighted in 1597 or 1598. Sir Edmund's first marriage had been childless and Francis's mother was his second wife, Audrey (1543-1588), daughter of William Gardner of Fulham and widow of Sir Peter Carew the younger. Shortly after her death Edmund Verney married Mary, daughter of William Blakeney of Sparham, Norfolk, and widow in turn of Geoffrey Turville of New Hall Park, Leicestershire, and William St Barbe of Ashington, Somerset. His father's remarriage had a radical effect on Francis Verney's future. It gave him a half-brother -- Edmund Verney (1590-1642), later famous as Charles I's standard-bearer slain at Edgehill -- and in 1597 or 1598 (39 Elizabeth) their father obtained an act of parliament to divide his estates almost equally between his two sons and protect his widow's life interest in his estates. His father's remarriage also gave Francis a wife: in June 1599 he was married to Ursula St Barbe (1585-1668), his stepmother's daughter from her second marriage. The children were fourteen and twelve respectively, only just above the minimum legal age for marriage. 
Verney matriculated at Trinity College, Oxford, aged fifteen, on 19 September 1600 and four years later, on 14 March 1604, he was knighted at the Tower of London. By then he was living in St Dunstan-in-the-West, London, where one of his servants was killed in a brawl. Verney was running up debts, and his uncle sought permission on his behalf from Robert Cecil to cut down timber to help pay off his creditors. However, when Francis himself made a similar request in March 1605 to 'fell certain timber growing upon his own land, which he might fell when he came to full age' his motive was not merely 'for the discharge of divers gentlemen that stood engaged' ('Salisbury MSS', 17.115). Rather he was directly challenging the provision made by his father for his stepmother and younger half-brother at his expense. Lady Verney immediately complained that Francis had used Cecil's permission as a warrant to intrude on her jointure, carrying off her wood and destroying the rabbit warrens which she had leased out. The following year Francis took his campaign to parliament and in March 1606 sought to get the act of '39 Elizabeth' overturned. The matter was quickly thrown out by the Commons: members could remember Sir Edmund's great efforts to get it passed and if it fell too many buyers' property rights would be at risk. Unhappily married and pursued by his creditors Francis Verney sold off his estates in the course of 1607 and 1608. During this period he journeyed to Jerusalem and back, where he acquired a pilgrim's staff inlaid with crosses. 
By the end of 1608 Verney had left England for good. By the autumn of 1609 he was at Tunis: on 19 November the Venetian ambassador in London reported that the Levant Company was arming its Mediterranean ships against corsairs, 'who have recently been joined by a certain Francis Verney, an Englishman of very noble blood who has gone through a fortune of four thousand crowns a year' ('CSP Venice', '1607-10', 386). A week later an Englishman in Madrid reported to a compatriot in Brussels that Verney had turned pirate. In May 1610 the Venetian ambassador reported again that some Venetian ships had been captured and their crew 'taken as slaves to Barbary'. Upon their release the sailors reported that Verney had lost some of his ships and that he was 'in great poverty and deeply in debt to the Turks' ('CSP Venice', '1607-10', 481). In December the ambassador wrote that Verney was working closely with the pirate John Ward, that both had converted to Islam (as Arabic sources confirm about the latter), and that they had recently captured two ships sailing from Lisbon to Italy. 
It is quite likely that Verney continued in his piracy until he was captured by a Sicilian galley. According to the Scottish traveller William Lithgow he was enslaved for two years, after which he was 'redeemed by an English Jesuit upon a promise of his conversion to the Christian faith' ('Rare Adventurs', 228). On 25 August 1615 Verney entered the hospital of St Mary of Pity in Messina, Sicily, but died ten days later on 6 September 1615. He was buried by Lithgow who bewailed 'sorrowfully the miserable mutability of fortune, who from so great a birth had given him so mean a fortune' (ibid.). John Watchin, an English merchant, brought home to England relics of Verney's life in the Mediterranean: the pilgrim's staff, a purple Turkish robe, a turban, two pairs of Turkish slippers, and an enamelled ring. These are still kept at Claydon House, where there is also a fine portrait of Verney as a fashionable Jacobean gentleman. His widow was married again in 1619, to William Clark of Hitcham, Buckinghamshire, this time directly against the wishes of the groom's father. The tradition of the Verney family -- the family of his half-brother Edmund -- remembered Francis as 'a great traveller' who 'fought several Duellos' (Verney, 'Memoirs', rev. edn, 1.48). 


@@@@@


doc= 28231


Verney, Sir Harry, second baronet (1801-1894), politician, was the son of General Sir Harry Calvert, first baronet (bap. 1763, d. 1826), whose 'Journals' he published in 1853, and his wife, Caroline (died 1806), daughter of Thomas Hammersley. He was born on 8 September 1801 and educated at Harrow School; he then went to the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, where he was one of the earliest cadets (1818-19). 
Calvert received his commission in the 31st foot, and was sent to Stuttgart at seventeen as attache to Sir Brook Taylor's mission, with introductions to the old king's daughters, the queen of Wurttemberg and the electress of Hesse-Homburg, who entertained him kindly, as did King John of Saxony at Dresden. While abroad he perfected his French and German, and studied Italian. On his return in 1820 he joined the 7th fusiliers at Londonderry; he served also with the 72nd and 52nd regiments, and then entered the Grenadier Guards, where he became adjutant. He acted for a time as Sir Herbert Taylor's private secretary at the Horse Guards. 
With the zeal to acquire knowledge which distinguished him throughout life, Calvert put himself to school again when he could obtain leave of absence from his military duties. In 1822 he studied with John Marriott (1780-1825), curate in charge of Broadclyst, to whom he became deeply attached; and while in Devon he laid the foundation of a lifelong friendship with Sir Thomas Acland and his family. 
In 1826, after the death of his father, Calvert succeeded to the title. On the death of his cousin Mrs Verney of Claydon House, Buckinghamshire, he assumed the surname Verney in place of Calvert, by royal licence dated 23 March 1827. He found himself owner of an estate heavily burdened and long neglected, at a period of agricultural distress and widespread discontent; giving up his hopes of distinction as a soldier, he prepared to learn the new duties he had assumed with the name of Verney. Before he could settle down as a country squire, however, his father's old friend, Lord William Cavendish Bentinck, was made governor-general of Bengal, and Verney accepted his offer to accompany him as military secretary; but, falling ill on the voyage out, he was left behind at Rio de Janeiro, and never rejoined his chief. He recovered his health by hunting with the Indians and riding wild horses on the pampas; he made a perilous journey across the snow-covered Andes, collected birds and insects, learned Spanish, and threw himself into the politics and wars of the small South American states, narrowly escaping death while helping to put down an insurrection at Santiago. At one time he took part in resisting some fresh claims of the papacy, which an Italian mission had been sent to assert. Years afterwards he was received at the Vatican by the once obscure young priest -- by that time the pope -- who had been employed in the mission, but Pius IX would allow no reference to the circumstances of their former meeting. After a year of romantic adventures, extending to Chile, Verney sailed round Cape Horn in the 'Volage', commanded by Michael Seymour, and returned to Claydon in 1829. 
In 1835 Verney married Eliza, daughter of Sir George Hope, one of Nelson's captains at Trafalgar; they had four sons and three daughters. At Claydon he proved himself a model landlord. He drained and reclaimed the land, built and repaired cottages, founded schools, planted trees, and, by taking a much more active share in poor-law work and county business than was usual at that time among country squires, raised the tone of quarter sessions, and helped to give greater regularity and publicity to the proceedings. He knew George Stephenson, acquainted himself with the working of the new system of railroads, and, with more foresight than his neighbours, he welcomed railways on his estate when other landowners were ordering their gamekeepers to warn off the surveyors, or to put an end to their operations by force. 
When cholera broke out among the duck breeders of Aylesbury in 1832 and panic spread through the town, Sir Harry rendered energetic and fearless service to the sick and dying; later in 1832 he was at Paris during a far more terrible outbreak of cholera, and visited the hospitals. After these experiences he worked arduously to collect funds for a county hospital, the establishment of which at Aylesbury he considered one of the happiest events of his life. During a part of these busy years (1831, 1832, and 1833) Verney was studying at Downing College, Cambridge; being older than the other undergraduates, he lived chiefly with the fellows and tutors, and enjoyed the friendship of Adam Sedgwick and William Whewell. 
On 10 December 1832 Verney was elected for Buckingham, for which he sat (with two short interruptions) for fifty-two years. A Liberal in politics, he was an ardent supporter of the abolition of the slave trade, and the repeal of the corn laws; he voted for factory legislation, the amendment of the criminal law, and the abolition of university tests, of Jewish disabilities, and of the paper duties; in later years he supported the disestablishment of the Irish church, the 'Elementary Education Act', the abolition of army purchase, and the successive measures for the extension of the franchise. He promoted the social reforms of Lord Shaftesbury, his old schoolfellow at Harrow and close friend; he was an active member of the Bible Society, the Church Missionary Society, and the Evangelical Alliance, and was able to render good service to the foreign protestant churches and pastors whom he loved to visit. In religious opinion he was of the old evangelical school, but his sympathies were broad. 
An early member of the Royal Geographical Society, Verney had a remarkable knowledge of geography and a keen interest in every fresh discovery; he attended the Brussels conference on Africa in 1876, when King Leopold gave him his portrait, and afterwards kept up the acquaintance by correspondence. Verney was one of the founders of the Royal Agricultural Society; he attended its jubilee in 1888, when he was welcomed by the prince of Wales as the 'father' of the society. Verney's own political jubilee was celebrated at Buckingham in 1883 but the borough was disfranchised in 1885; he was then made a privy councillor. 
Verney's first wife died in 1857. He at once married, in 1858, Frances Parthenope Nightingale (1819-1890) ['see 'Verney, Frances Parthenope], elder daughter of William Edward Nightingale and sister of Florence Nightingale. It was under Verney's roof at Claydon that Florence Nightingale spent many of her bedridden years. Verney, who remained an active horseman to the last, died at Claydon, aged ninety-two, on 12 February 1894. 


@@@@@


doc= 28232


Verney, John (1699-1741), judge, was born at Brasted in Kent on 23 October 1699, the fifth son of George Verney, twelfth Baron Willoughby de Broke (1661-1728), of Compton Verney, Warwickshire, and his wife, Margaret (died 1729), the daughter and heir of Sir John Heath (1614-1691) of Brasted, Kent. He matriculated at New College, Oxford, in 1714, but the need to provide for himself, being a younger son in an impoverished aristocratic family, led him towards a career in law, and accordingly the following year he was admitted a student at the Middle Temple. He received his call to the bar 'ex gratia' in 1721, and was soon seeking to improve his range of contacts and clients through entry into parliament. At the general election the next year he obtained a borough seat at Downton, Wiltshire, through the offices of his brother-in-law Anthony Duncombe (later first Baron Feversham). 
Following his family's politics Verney initially featured in the Commons as a tory, speaking against Sir Robert Walpole's ministry in January 1724. His tory connections were extended in significant new directions when on 16 September that year he married Abigail (died 1760), the only daughter of Edward Harley (the auditor) of Eywood, Herefordshire, whose brother had been Queen Anne's lord treasurer, Robert Harley, earl of Oxford. The marriage produced a son and a daughter. The political views of his in-laws, however, were not enough to prevent him from taking the vocationally more advantageous step of joining ranks with the government's whig supporters, a transition which he successfully accomplished by January 1726. Walpole, finding in him a quick and willing spokesman for the government, appointed him in November to a junior position on the Welsh bench as second justice on the Brecon circuit. 
Thus, still in his mid-twenties, Verney was widely regarded as a rising figure in his profession; one acquaintance, commenting at this time on his immense industry, wrote that he 'was so immersed in the law that it is impossible to get a word about anything else out of him' (BL, Add. MS 70400). In July 1727 he was made a king's counsel, and in the year following became a bencher at Lincoln's Inn. At the general election in the summer of 1727 he engaged in a tough campaign at Radnor, formerly an electoral stronghold of his Harley in-laws, and within his judicial province. Despite support from the duke of Chandos, who was steward of the local manors, he was defeated but was returned once more at Downton. He continued to cut a prominent figure on the government side in the Commons, though not always with aplomb; on one occasion he 'very ridiculously' exposed his ignorance of fiscal matters and was 'lashed' by the City MP Sir John Barnard ('Portland MSS', 8.458). In May 1729 he was included in a clutch of appointments to the royal household, accepting the post of attorney-general to Queen Caroline, which he held until her death in 1737. He resigned from the Welsh bench in May 1732 owing to ill health, but in December 1733 resumed his career by taking office as chief justice of Chester with a salary of $730. He chose not to stand again at the election the following year. 
Verney's strong public-spiritedness is indicated by the senior role he assumed during these years in such bodies as the commission for building new churches in London, Dr Radcliffe's trust, and the corporation for the sons of the clergy. Eager for further advancement, he lost no time in applying to Lord Chancellor Hardwicke for the mastership of the rolls upon the death of its aged incumbent, Sir Joseph Jekyll, on 19 August 1738, claiming that this had been the summit of his ambitions for some time. Verney was not Hardwicke's immediate choice, however, but when the post was turned down by the solicitor-general, John Strange, the appointment of Verney was decided before the month had closed. Formally taking office on 9 October, he was sworn of the privy council on 12 October. Within a few years, however, Verney's performance of his duties had become badly hindered by worsening attacks of gout, and prolonged absences from chancery proceedings compelled him early in 1741 to offer Hardwicke his resignation. He was re-elected to parliament for Downton at the May election as part of his plan to pursue a less arduous public career, but his death, 'universally regretted', occurred on 5 August before a successor at the rolls could be found. He was buried near his seat at Compton Verney, Warwickshire. His only son, John, succeeded his father's elder brother in 1752 as the fourteenth Baron Willoughby. Verney was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 28233


Verney, Sir Ralph, first baronet (1613-1696), landowner and politician, was born on 9 November 1613 at Hillesden, Buckinghamshire, the son of Sir Edmund Verney (1590-1642) and his wife, Margaret Denton (1594-1641). When Ralph was fifteen years old Sir Edmund paid $1000 to the court of wards to obtain a decree that permitted his son's marriage to Mary Blacknall (1616-1650), sole heir of John Blacknall, a wealthy Abingdon lawyer. Despite the protests of Mary's family, and the fact that at thirteen she was under legal age, she married Ralph on 31 May 1629. Attempts to get her to repudiate the marriage failed, and she brought the Verneys estates including Abingdon and Wasing in Berkshire and Preston Crowmarsh and Fifield in Oxfordshire. The couple lived apart until 1631, when Mary settled at the Verneys' Buckinghamshire seat at Middle Claydon. For two years Ralph spent college terms 20 miles away at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, where he formed ties with sons of important puritan families. He studied astronomy, arts, and Latin, but apparently not Greek, and spent 3-4 hours a day on logic and divinity with his tutor, John Crowther. 
The couple had only two surviving children, Edmund (1636-1688) and John Verney (1640-1717). After 1634 Verney's family lived part of each year in Covent Garden, London, with his father. Yet Verney always felt more natural giving country hospitality and he abhorred court compliment. He also became immersed in business affairs at an early age. He managed the Verneys' estates and finances and acted as trustee for friends. 
Verney had deep feelings about his family's importance, and saved every scrap of paper, founding perhaps the largest consecutive family correspondence for seventeenth-century England. His prudent, conscientious nature and attention to detail showed most clearly in his methodical preservation of his papers, which remain at Claydon House. An ardent bibliophile, he also amassed many books and pamphlets, especially religious tracts. He was deeply interested in the theology and practice of the Church of England, and his own faith was tinged with a puritanical piety expressed in strict outward observance. Thus he refused to hire a gardener until he discovered whether he was 'married or popish or phanatical or takes tobacco' (Verney MSS, Ralph Verney/John Verney, 14 July 1679, BL, M/636 [33]). 
In 1640 Verney represented Aylesbury in the Short and Long Parliaments, and was knighted in 1641. As he sat next to his father he secretly recorded his impressions, which may be read in 'Notes of Proceedings in the Long Parliament', published in 1845. As a young man with parliamentary sympathies, his position was difficult. His father was knight-marshal and standard bearer to Charles I, and he died at Edgehill in 1642 fighting for the king. Ralph Verney's younger brothers also served in the royalist army. At first he supported parliament, which caused grief to his family. However, he soon became disenchanted with political and religious radicalism, and in 1643 he refused to sign the solemn league and covenant, which pledged its signatories to religious reform and the removal of episcopacy. Moreover, the Verney estates were under financial strain, and Claydon House was located amid military positions. Rising taxes, decreasing rents, and the disruption of war combined to make his financial situation precarious. 
Verney withdrew from parliamentary work in the summer of 1643, and fled to France in November, using the alias Ralph Smith. Prior to his flight he obtained letters of protection from both parliament and the royalists, and placed his property in trust. In 1645 he was expelled from parliament for absenting himself from his duties. It was, he confessed, 'one of the greatest and most inexpressible afflictions that ever yet befel me, for which my soul shall mourn in secret' (Gardiner, 2.23). 
Verney's voluntary exile took him to Paris, Rouen, and then Blois. His decision to leave England was probably motivated by a combination of deep religious principles, loyalty to the traditional Church of England, his unstable finances, and the threat of sequestration. This indeed took place in October 1646, owing to a flawed trust deed. Sequestration was lifted only in 1648, when his wife, Mary, journeyed to England and lobbied friends in parliament. She died soon after her successful intervention, in May 1650. 
Verney returned to England in 1653, but he was briefly imprisoned as a royalist suspect in 1655 and was fined in 1656. He had inherited an estate worth about $2200 per annum, but he had debts of $7700, fixed expenses of $1470, and responsibility for nine brothers and sisters. Rebuilding the Verney estate became a lifelong obsession. To obtain needed cash he sold all but a tiny portion of his late wife's dower lands. But he doggedly kept his Claydon estate intact through frugal living and debt consolidation at low rates. He avoided the court, improved his estate, and cleared it of debts. 
After the Restoration Verney regained his county offices in the magistracy and lieutenancy and accepted a baronetcy in 1661. He did not re-enter parliament, however, until the 1680s -- representing Buckingham in 1681, 1685, and 1689. His later religious and political views were grounded in his desire for peace and moderation after a life marred by sectarian feuding. The books that he gave to his sons reflected the midstream of religious thought: Jeremy Taylor's 'The Rule and Exercises of Holy Living' (1658) and 'The Rule and Exercises of Holy Dying' (1663), and Allestree's 'The Whole Duty of Man' (1668). He also kept a stock of prayer books written by Dr Thomas Tenison to give as gifts to friends. He refused to take sides during the exclusion crisis, and only when the bishops and the church were threatened by James II did he finally back the revolution of 1688. Although he was a firm supporter of the crown he maintained a country independence and low-church sympathies. 
Verney's enemies called him a 'trimmer', yet his trimming grew out of strength not weakness, and he commanded immense local respect. During elections in the 1680s he refused to treat the Buckingham populace, but he later contributed to their town hall, a decision of consequence in securing a successful outcome in the fiercely contested 1685 election. In 1686 he was removed from the county bench, and in 1688 from the lieutenancy, after he refused all three questions put by James II's agents concerning the repeal of the penal laws and 'Test Act'. Yet in the Convention Parliament he voted for agreeing that the throne was not vacant, and subsequently appeared on several blacklists. In the 1690s he spent most of the year in Lincoln's Inn Fields, London. He died at Middle Claydon on 24 September 1696 aged eighty-two, leaving a healthy estate to his younger son, John, a London merchant, and was buried at Middle Claydon church. His family pride is reflected in the monument he erected at Claydon, with busts of his parents, his wife, and himself. 


@@@@@


doc= 28234


Verney, Ralph, second Earl Verney (1714-1791), politician, was born on 1 February 1714, the second son of Ralph Verney, first Earl Verney (1683-1752), landowner of Middle Claydon, Buckinghamshire, and his wife, Catherine (died 1748), daughter of Henry Paschall of Baddow Hall, Essex. He was educated at Brentford, Middlesex, from 1721 and entered the Middle Temple in 1729. He was admitted fellow-commoner of Christ's College, Cambridge, on 20 April 1733, and graduated MA in 1735. His elder brother, John (1711-1737), died on 3 June 1737, leaving a widow, Mary, 'nee' Nicholson (died 1789), with an unborn child. Ralph was therefore confirmed as heir to the family title and estates and styled Lord Fermanagh only when his sister-in-law gave birth to a daughter, Mary (1737-1810), on 21 October 1737. On 11 September 1740 he married Mary (1716-1791), daughter and coheir of Henry Herring, of Egham, Surrey, a London merchant and director of the Bank of England, but the couple were childless. As one of the largest landowners in Buckinghamshire, Verney inherited a substantial fortune, to which was added a wedding dowry in excess of $40,000. 'A man of great plainness' ('GM', 61/1, 1791, 383), he ultimately squandered this wealth through ruinous extravagance, injudicious business dealings, and an absurd generosity that also destroyed his parliamentary interest. 
Shortly after his father's death, on 4 October 1752, Verney embarked upon lavish improvements to Claydon House, designed to outshine the palace constructed at Stowe by his Buckinghamshire rivals, the Grenvilles, and thus make Claydon the political and cultural centre of the county. A new wing, with a suite of rococo rooms by Luke Lightfoot, was added, and work was begun on a domed rotunda and great ballroom, designed by Sir Thomas Robinson, but these were unfinished at Verney's death and were demolished in 1792. By 1770 Verney was laying out the gardens with trees and plants obtained from the Southern Netherlands. He also collected books, pictures, and works of art for Claydon and sought further fame as a patron of literature to add to the pleasure he derived from his election as FRS on 20 April 1758. In his heyday he cut a magnificent figure: 'Lavish in his personal expenses, and fond of show, he was one of the last of the English nobility who, to the splendour of a gorgeous equipage, attached musicians constantly attendant upon him, not only on state occasions but in his journeys and visits: a brace of tall negroes with silver French horns behind his coach and six, perpetually making a noise. (Lipscomb, 1.183-4)' Verney also spent profusely on politics. The first earl had built up a strong interest at Wendover and on 17 January 1753 Verney returned himself as MP for the borough, which he represented until 1761. He was a regular government supporter in the Commons and placed one seat at Wendover at the duke of Newcastle's disposal in both 1754 and 1761. In 1761 he used the second seat to bring in his cousin Major Verney Lovett (1705-1771). Meanwhile, he contested Great Bedwyn, Wiltshire, where he had been building up an interest since his purchase of the manor of Stock in 1752. However, he was soundly defeated by Lord Bruce's interest and came in instead for the Welsh borough of Carmarthen, where he paid $2000 to secure his return. 
Verney, disappointed by his failure to obtain any patronage from Newcastle, remained a government supporter after Newcastle's resignation in 1762. On 9 December he seconded the address on the peace preliminaries on behalf of the Bute ministry. On 9 April 1763, the day after Bute's resignation, he set out his credentials for a British peerage in a letter to Henry Fox: 'My fortune is above $10,000 per annum... my own personal attachment to Government has been sincere, constant, and uniform... and... I have expended very large sums in several elections without obtaining, or indeed asking to this time, any favour whatever' (Bute MSS). On 29 April 1763 he similarly approached Grenville: 'My whole life', he wrote, 'has shown how much I have been inclined to forward the business of the Crown' (Smith, 2.49-50). Though Verney was offered no assurances he remained loyal to Grenville's administration when it was being run hard in the Commons over general warrants. The solitary exception to this record was his speech in favour of repealing the cider excise on 31 January 1764. 
When Rockingham replaced Grenville at the Treasury in July 1765 he unexpectedly chose William Burke, a protege of Verney, as under-secretary of state to Henry Conway. Verney was also rewarded by his appointment as a privy councillor on 22 November 1765, an unusual distinction for one who held no office. He brought in Edmund Burke, William's relation, for Wendover on 23 December 1765. Meanwhile, Verney had been buying up the independent burgages at Great Bedwyn and even offered to buy out Lord Bruce. To retrieve control Bruce agreed to pay Verney 18,000 guineas and to bring in William Burke on 16 June 1766 for the existing vacancy. 
Verney followed Rockingham into opposition in 1766. After his long experience of unrequited political support, the marquess's act of recognition had given him a lasting sense of gratitude. On 18 August 1767 Edmund Burke confirmed to Rockingham that Verney's interest was 'always at the service of the cause' ('Correspondence', 1.322). For the next sixteen years Verney voted consistently with the party, although he almost never addressed the Commons. At the general election of 1768, when many of the Buckinghamshire country gentlemen signalled their unwillingness to accept the predominance of the Grenvilles, Verney was returned unopposed as one of the knights of the shire, a position he had long coveted. With Bruce's agreement William Burke was once more given one of the Great Bedwyn seats, while Verney again returned Edmund at Wendover. However, he unexpectedly lost control of the other seat through what Edmund later considered 'our own egregious neglects' (to Charles O'Hara, 9 Aug 1770, 'Correspondence', 2.148). Verney allowed his tenants to live rent free provided that they voted for his nominees, but he had reputedly become so easy-going about this arrangement that a secret understanding had been established by 'Mr. Atkins, a considerable lace manufacturer' (Oldfield, 1.40) in favour of Sir Robert Darling. Verney subsequently endeavoured to tighten up control at Wendover by ejecting voters from their houses and reinstating them only after extracting 'a promise of good behaviour in future' (Oldfield, 1.41). This allowed him to return his friend Joseph Bullock there unopposed in 1770 following Darling's death that year. 
Verney's financial affairs were now deteriorating, but the lavish expenditure on Claydon was only partly to blame. His speculative purchases of West Indian lands fell heavily in value, an enterprising venture for the manufacture of French cambrics at Winchelsea backfired, and the initial success of his shareholding in the Ranelagh Gardens on the Thames was not sustained. Far worse were his incautious personal transactions in East India stock and his utterly reckless sense of generosity to the Burkes that financed similar speculations by William. Disaster now struck. The first great crash in East India stock in 1769 turned envisaged fortunes into ruinous losses, which the Burkes could not make good to Verney, whose own risk taking cost him dear. Still more catastrophic were the speculations on the Amsterdam market in which Verney and William Burke ran up an accumulated liability of $47,000 that fell entirely on the earl. By the general election of 1774 Verney's circumstances had brought him to virtual political impotence. There was no realistic prospect of making arrangements for William Burke's continuation at Great Bedwyn, and he was obliged to ask Edmund to find another constituency to allow him to sell his seats at Wendover. Edmund, who successfully contested Bristol, readily understood. As he explained to Rockingham on 18 September 1774: 'He will, indeed he must, have those to stand for Wendover who can bear the charge which that borough is to him' ('Correspondence', 3.33). None the less, he lamented 'the necessity which drives him to abandon the distinguished courses of disinterestedness and friendship, that has hitherto actuated him' (ibid., 3.33). Meanwhile Verney was somewhat fortuitously returned again unopposed for Buckinghamshire because of the last minute withdrawal for financial reasons of Richard Lowndes, whom Temple had hoped to run alongside his nephew and heir George Grenville jun. Despite a deteriorating relationship with the Grenville party, both sides were content for another uncontested county election in 1780 when Verney and Thomas Grenville were both returned. Verney again sold both his seats at Wendover which were filled without opposition. 
The formation of the second Rockingham administration in March 1782 and the prominent appointments given to the Burkes temporarily gave Verney renewed hope. Yet nothing was done for Verney despite his loyal record over the preceding sixteen years. After Shelburne succeeded at the Treasury in July 1782 Verney distanced himself from Burke and signalled his support for the new minister. He then threw in his lot with the Fox-North coalition and voted for parliamentary reform on 7 May 1783 and for Fox's 'East India Bill' on 27 November 1783. These changing political allegiances were largely motivated by Verney's desperation to hold his seat in order to protect himself from his creditors. His situation was now so poor that in 1783 he had been forced to sue Edmund Burke in chancery for a $6000 loan made in 1769. In the absence of any bond Verney failed to establish his claim. It seems likely that his capital had been swallowed up in William Burke's financial collapse. He did hold $20,000 in bonds against William, but the true debt was far in excess of this figure. In addition, he had a claim against Richard Burke for about $19,000, while Edmund was also estimated to owe $11,000. However, despite his distress, Verney 'would never rack up his tenants in their rents' ('GM', 61/1, 1791, 383). 
At the 1784 general election Verney was narrowly defeated by a Pittite candidate and petitioned in vain. He also failed at Wendover, having temporarily lost control of the borough and, deprived of parliamentary immunity from debt, fled his creditors to France. Such was his personal popularity, nevertheless, that a Buckinghamshire Independent Club was formed to give him political support, of which a committee of trustees and lawyers dealt with his debts, Wendover being sold in 1788. 
At the general election of 1790 Verney, who had returned quietly from France, was elected for the county without opposition but at this moment of triumph the bailiffs were put in at Claydon, which they rapidly cleared. Local tradition states that a stable boy later found the septuagenarian earl wandering forlornly in the shuttered rooms of the empty, unfinished house. The boy fed and cared for his old master and concealed him for weeks in the house. Verney's confusion and gloom were exacerbated on 20 January 1791 when the countess died suddenly at their house in Curzon Street, Mayfair; she was buried at Middle Claydon on 4 February. Verney himself reportedly only eluded his creditors by escaping in his wife's hearse. The countess had borne her misfortunes 'with the greatest magnanimity, and readily parted with her money, and even her jewels, at times when Lord V. was pressed' ('GM', 61/1, 1791, 383). Verney survived her by only a few weeks. He died at Curzon Street on 31 March 1791 still owing $115,731 5's'. 8died He was buried in the family vault at Middle Claydon on 8 April. 
On his death Verney's titles became extinct. The family estates passed to his niece Mary, who on Pitt's recommendation was created Baroness Fermanagh of Ireland on 13 June 1792. Her uncle had held out for the full $20,000 plus interest owed to him by William Burke, but Richard Burke now agreed to pay her an immediate $5250 as composition with a vague agreement for a further $5000 four years later. This was unfulfilled and the baroness's lawyers unsuccessfully pursued William until his death in 1798. When she died unmarried on 15 November 1810 Lady Fermanagh bequeathed all her estates to her maternal half-sister Catherine 
('nee' Calvert, died 1820)
, directing her husband, the Revd Robert Wright (died 1827), to take the name and bear the arms of Verney. 


@@@@@


doc= 28235


Verney, Richard, eleventh Baron Willoughby de Broke (1622-1711), politician, was born on 28 January 1622 at Kingston, Warwickshire, the third of five children of Sir Greville Verney (1585/6-1642) and his wife, Katherine (1590/91-1657), daughter of Sir Robert Southwell and his wife, Elizabeth Howard, daughter of the first earl of Nottingham. Together with his younger brother George, he was admitted to Jesus College, Cambridge, on 30 March 1640. 
Verney and his family were neutral during the civil war, though with sufficient royalist sympathies to be assessed at $3500 by the committee for the advance of money. The Verneys were an old and wealthy Warwickshire family and though as a younger son Richard did not inherit much property at his father's death in 1642, he was able to purchase an estate at Allexton, Leicestershire, in 1652, which was valued at $1000 per annum in 1660. Shortly before this he married Mary Pretyman ('bap'. 1631, died 1663), daughter of the royalist Sir John Pretyman of Lodington, Leicestershire, and his wife, Elizabeth Turpin. After Mary's death Verney married Frances, daughter and heir of Thomas Dove of Upton, Northamptonshire. Some time in the 1670s he moved to Belton, Rutland, and, at the death of his great-nephew William, on 23 August 1683, he inherited the principal Verney family estate at Compton Verney, Warwickshire. 
With strong court support Verney was elected to parliament from Warwickshire in 1685, despite opposition from the whig Sir Richard Newdigate. He was knighted on 1 April 1685 after presenting a loyal address from his county to James II. He was 'discreetly absent' ('VCH Leicestershire', 2.120) in 1687 when the questions were presented regarding the repeal of the 'Test Act' and penal laws, and he was temporarily removed from office as a JP. Verney was elected from Warwickshire to the Convention Parliament and voted with the bulk of his fellow tories against declaring the throne vacant and making William and Mary king and queen. He was not returned to parliament in 1690. 
At the prompting of his son John, Verney petitioned the House of Lords on 11 December 1694 to be formally recognized as Baron Brooke, tracing his claim to an individual writ of summons to the Lords received in 1491 by his ancestor Sir Robert Willoughby. Several objections were raised against this claim, including that an individual writ of summons in the fifteenth century did not automatically create a peerage; that if it did, it could not descend through a female line, as Verney's claim did; and that, even if it could so descend, the claim was extinguished first when it fell into abeyance and even more when Willoughby's direct heir, Sir Fulke Greville (1554-1628), was created Baron Brooke of Beauchamps Court on 29 January 1621. The current Baron Brooke especially objected to Verney's claiming the barony of Brooke, which may have influenced the Lords to reject his petition. 
The following year Verney renewed his petition but this time, to appease Baron Brooke, claimed the title of Baron Willoughby de Broke. Despite the protest of some peers that the issue had already been decided the upper house voted to hear the case again. Verney's petition was approved on 13 February 1696 and he took his seat as Baron Willoughby de Broke on 27 February, at which time he signed the association in defence of William III. The pedigree submitted by Verney was published and the case became an important precedent for the inheritance of peerages. 
In the Lords, Willoughby de Broke was a solid though usually silent tory, opposing the Fenwick attainder bill, supporting bills against occasional conformity, and voting against the impeachment of Henry Sacheverell. He was more active in local affairs, including participating in election strategy meetings of Warwickshire tories. He served as justice of the peace in Warwickshire from 1660 to his death in 1711, as well as sheriff (1683-4) and deputy lord lieutenant (1686-7, 1689-1711) of that county and sheriff (1681-2) and deputy lord lieutenant (1682-8) of Rutland. He helped Sir William Dugdale in preparing his 'Antiquities of Warwickshire' by drawing some local maps and monuments. Both Dugdale and the Rutland historian James Wright praised Verney as 'a true lover of Antiquities' (Wright, 22). Verney died on the night of 28 July 1711 at Compton Verney and was buried in the chapel there. He was survived by his second wife. 
Verney's eldest son, John (1652-1707), was MP for Leicestershire in 1685 and again from 1695 to 1707, except for the last parliament of William III; his second son, George (1661-1728), became dean of Windsor and succeeded his father as Baron Willoughby de Broke. A third son, Thomas, a merchant, died in 1681 and a daughter, Mary, married Samuel Davenport of Calveley, Cheshire. From his second marriage Verney had a son, Richard, who died unmarried in 1698, and a daughter, Diana, who married Sir Charles Shuckburgh. 


@@@@@


doc= 28236


Augustus Henry Vernon, sixth Baron Vernon (1829-1883), was born at Rome on 1 February 1829. He was lieutenant and captain in the Scots Fusilier Guards but retired in 1851. On 7 June of that year he married Harriet Frances Maria (1827-1898), third daughter of Thomas William Anson, first earl of Lichfield, who bore him four sons and six daughters. On the death of his father in 1866 he succeeded to the title. He was a president of the Royal Agricultural Society and, as chairman of the French farmers' seed fund in 1871, took an active part in the relief of the French agriculturists who had suffered during the time of war. Though not an Italian scholar he shared in the family devotion to Dante, and the third, or album, volume of his father's edition of 'The Inferno' was issued under his care. He died at 17 Dover Street, London, on 1 May 1883, in his fifty-fifth year, and was buried at Sudbury four days later. He was succeeded by his son, George William Henry Venables Vernon, seventh Baron Vernon (1854-1898). 


@@@@@


doc= 28237


Vernon, Edward (1684-1757), naval officer, was born in Westminster on 12 November 1684, the second son of James Vernon (bap. 1646, d. 1727), later editor of the 'London Gazette', and Mary Buck (died 1715). James Vernon had been private secretary to the duke of Monmouth (1672-83) and after the revolution of 1688 he became under-secretary and later secretary of state (1697-1702) to William III. Between 1692 and 1700 Edward attended Westminster School, where he studied mathematics and astronomy and became proficient in Greek and Latin. 
On 10 May 1700 Vernon was entered as a volunteer in the 'Shrewsbury' under Captain Benjamin Hoskins. The 'Shrewsbury' was the flagship of Admiral Sir George Rooke, who took an Anglo-Dutch squadron to the sound to provide limited assistance to the Swedes in a dispute with Denmark. On 4 March 1701 Vernon moved to the 'Ipswich' and shortly afterwards to the 'Boyne', which formed part of the expeditionary force under Rooke and the duke of Ormond sent to capture Cadiz in 1702. In September 1702 Rooke appointed Vernon third lieutenant on the 'Lennox' and Vernon stayed with the 'Lennox' on a variety of convoy duties during 1703, including a visit to Smyrna with the Levant trade. 
On his return to England in March 1704 Vernon took up a commission as fifth lieutenant of Admiral Sir Cloudesley Shovell's flagship, the 'Barfleur', in which he sailed to the Mediterranean. Vernon remained with Shovell throughout 1704, and was with him on the 'Barfleur' at the battle of Malaga (13 August). He returned to England with Shovell, and when Shovell succeeded Rooke as admiral of the fleet Vernon stayed with him as fourth and then third lieutenant of Shovell's new flagship, the 'Britannia', in December 1704. Shovell returned to the Mediterranean in the summer of 1705 and Vernon was present at the capture of Barcelona (28 September). 
On 22 January 1706 Vernon was given his first command, the 'Dolphin', a small fifth rate of twenty-eight guns then at Sheerness under orders for the West Indies. Before Vernon could get her rigged and stored he was transferred to the 'Rye' (32 guns) on 2 February and sent with dispatches for Shovell and the Earl Rivers at Lisbon. They had sailed into the Mediterranean to join the allied force under the earl of Galway in Valencia before Vernon arrived. Vice-Admiral Sir George Byng was in command at Lisbon and Vernon was sent cruising down to Gibraltar. When Shovell returned to Lisbon and decided to take the fleet back into the Mediterranean to execute Marlborough's plan to attack Toulon, Vernon was left at Lisbon, but in May he joined the allied fleet at Alicante and sailed with it towards Toulon. On 30 June the 'Rye' was one of the ships ordered to assist the allied crossing of the River Var by bombarding the French positions on the west bank. On the following day Vernon was present at the landings intended to distract the French from the main crossing. He continued cruising and escort duties until the autumn, when he was ordered back to England. During the passage Shovell's flagship, the 'Association', and several other ships were lost off the Isles of Scilly. 
On 7 November 1707 Vernon was given command of the 'Jersey' (50 guns) at Woolwich, which he prepared for sea. In February 1708 the 'Jersey' sailed with Sir George Byng's squadron to the French coast to watch a large French force at Dunkirk, thought to be designed for an expedition to Scotland. In March Vernon was with the fleet that pursued the expeditionary force of Claude, comte de Forbin-Gardanne, to Scotland and, although he took no part in the battle, he helped secure the only prize of that affair, the French warship the 'Salisbury' (50 guns). After this action Vernon was sent south with some of the French prisoners. He was already under orders to proceed to Jamaica to reinforce Commodore Charles Wager's squadron and he was ordered to take as many supernumeraries as he could to reinforce Wager. Vernon arrived at Port Royal on 6 September 1708 and spent the next year with Wager's squadron, cruising. He observed the Spaniards' failure to challenge the British at sea. In October 1708 he had his first sight of Cartagena de las Indias, the great city of the 'galeones', the treasure ships, where Wager had won a spectacular, if not very profitable, victory back in May. 
In September 1709 Vernon sailed for England, and he delivered the 'Jersey' to the Deptford Dockyard officers on 17 December. Throughout the first half of 1710 he commanded the 'Jersey' on a range of duties in the channel and then went back to the West Indies, arriving at Port Royal in December. He remained on that station until March 1712, when he was ordered home again. For the next two years Vernon remained unemployed as the prospect of imminent peace and, possibly, his whig credentials militated against him. 
On 2 March 1715 Vernon was given command of the 'Assistance' (50 guns), a two-year-old ship then at Sheerness. After fitting and manning his ship in the spring he spent the summer on duties in the channel and the North Sea. By early 1716 he was the most senior captain in the downs and had command of that station in the absence of a flag officer. In July 1716 he was ordered to take the new British ambassador's equipage to Constantinople. The ambassador, Edward Wortley Montagu, was then at Vienna. He was to join Vernon at Leghorn for the final leg of the journey. The departing ambassador, Sir Robert Sutton, would return with Vernon from Constantinople. The voyage involved a number of diplomatic complexities regarding the status of British warships in Ottoman waters and a further difficulty was caused by the ministry taking the opportunity to carry the envoy from Tripoli back to Port Mahon. After a few diplomatic exchanges, partly arising from the fact that the envoy wanted to travel by land across France, Vernon finally sailed in late October. During a terrible storm in the straits the sea broke through the stern, drove in the bulkhead of the state room, and smashed all the windows. Three days later, on 6 March 1717, the envoy was finally put ashore at Port Mahon. Vernon sailed on to Genoa, where he learned that Wortley Montagu would go to Constantinople by land. While at Leghorn, concerting plans to proceed to the Dardanelles, Vernon also took up the matter of Venetian impressment of British sailors directly with the grand duke of Tuscany at Pisa. Vernon's progress to Constantinople went smoothly and by careful preparation he avoided potential diplomatic difficulty on his return journey through the straits. He landed Sutton at Toulon and sailed on to Cadiz, where once more he took up the matter of detaining British seamen with the local authorities, before returning to England in October. 
War with Spain broke out in December 1718, and Vernon's next commission, on 11 March 1719, was to the 'Mary' (60 guns), attached to the earl of Berkeley's squadron at Portsmouth. On 15 May Vernon was appointed commander-in-chief of his majesty's ships at Jamaica and he hoisted his broad pennant on 24 July. On 4 October 1719 he arrived at Port Royal. During the remainder of the year Vernon cruised around the north coast of Jamaica and the Windward passage, protecting the homeward-bound trade. In March 1720 Vernon cruised up to Havana, chasing Spanish ships. On 20 March he sighted three Spanish sail in line. Followed closely by the 'Ludlow Castle' he bore up to meet them. With a strong breeze and the weather gauge he found that he could not use his lower tier of guns effectively in his first pass and tacked to pass again to leeward, but in the battle the 'Ludlow Castle' lost her foretop mast and fell out to leeward. Vernon followed to protect her stern as the Spaniards prepared to attack. Vernon took in sail to meet them and this display induced the Spaniards to break off and make a course for Havana. The rest of his time at Jamaica was relatively uneventful and he sailed for England in June 1721. Throughout Vernon's time in the West Indies the Spaniards had not shown much appetite for a fight. 
In England Vernon stood for one of the parliamentary seats at Penryn, Cornwall, in the 1722 general election. The precise relationship between the Vernons and Penryn is unclear. His father, James, had stood for this small borough, and won the seat three times in 1695, 1705, and 1708. The chief political interest was held by Hugh Boscawen, first Viscount Falmouth, who was the government's main political manager in Cornwall. With this support Vernon was returned unopposed and in this parliament Vernon spoke and voted with the ministry. 
In April 1726 Vernon was appointed to command the new seventy-gun third rate, 'Grafton', in a squadron under Admiral Sir Charles Wager, sailing for the Baltic to counter a potential Russian threat to the peace there. He remained in command of the 'Grafton' when the squadron returned to Britain and in 1727 he was sent back to the Baltic with another squadron under Sir John Norris. On 19 June, at Copenhagen, news arrived of the death of George I. Vernon was relieved of his command and sent back to England with a loyal address from the fleet. 
At the general election Vernon was re-elected for Penryn, but his interventions, in committee and on the floor of the Commons, grew increasingly hostile to the ministry. In January 1729, during the debate on the address, Vernon made his famous, heated accusation that the death of Admiral Francis Hosier and the decimation of his fleet in the West Indies during 1726 could have been avoided had the ministry not ordered Hosier to blockade the Spanish treasure fleet. His experience of the Spaniards indicated that a blockade was unnecessary. Porto Bello, the staging post of Spanish silver from Panama to Havana, could have been taken easily with three hundred men. His strong views, passionate speech, and accusatory style became a feature of his parliamentary work. According to the earl of Egmont, Vernon was so passionate in his views about the French fortifications at Dunkirk that during the debate on 12 February 1730 'He brought up the Pope, the Devil, the Jesuits, the seamen, etc., so that the House had not patience to attend him, though he was not taken down. He quite lost his temper and made himself hoarse again' ('Egmont Diary', 1.43-4). In 1732 his inflammatory rhetoric earned him a rebuke from the speaker and an accusation from one of the targets of his criticism, Sir John Eyles, that he hid behind parliamentary privilege. 
On 15 July 1729 Vernon married Sarah (1699-1756), daughter of the prosperous Rochester brewer Thomas Best, which gave him opportunities in local Kent politics. His marriage, and the death of his father in January 1727, may have secured his financial position. He had purchased an estate at Nacton, near Ipswich in Suffolk. However, his political position at Penryn was looking increasingly fragile. His disillusion with Walpole's ministry and the replacement of Lord Falmouth as government election manager in Cornwall undermined his position. In the 1734 election he lost Penryn and was also defeated in his local borough, Ipswich. 
For the next few years Vernon played the role of a Suffolk country gentleman, but when in December 1738 war with Spain over the depredations of the 'garda costas' began to appear more likely, he approached Sir Charles Wager, the first lord of the Admiralty, for a command. His experience of the West Indies, his proven abilities in command, and the fact that no serving senior officer could be induced to take the appointment led to Vernon being promoted vice-admiral of the blue and given command of the West Indies squadron in July 1739. He sailed for Jamaica in July and arrived at Port Royal in October. He had a clear idea of how he wished to conduct operations there. Nineteen days after arriving at Port Royal he wrote to the secretary of state, the duke of Newcastle, about the prospect of capturing Spanish colonies. He knew Havana would be a great prize, but his best advice was to 'lay aside all thoughts of such expensive land expeditions as all the advantages may be better and cheaper procured by keeping a strong superiority at Sea in these seas' (Vernon to Newcastle, 31 Oct 1739, TNA: PRO, SP 42/85, fols. 29-30). Porto Bello, 'the only mart for all the Wealth of Peru to come to Europe' (ibid., fol. 31), was his objective and on 5 November 1739 he sailed to attack the little town. On 20 November he attacked the forts with his six warships and by the next day the town was in his hands. Vernon had left England as expectations of an easy victory against Spain were growing. War had been declared on 19 October and news of Vernon's victory arrived in March 1740 as a confirmation of public expectations. The rejoicing went far beyond the usual celebrations of victory. Vernon became a national hero almost overnight. Both houses of parliament voted their thanks and the City of London made him a freeman. Addresses of congratulations came to the king from across the country. His popular appeal was immense. Medals, pottery, road names, and public house signs bore the name Vernon or Porto Bello and his birthday became a day of celebration across the country. The ministry had already decided that a major expedition would be sent to the West Indies to bring Spain to peace by taking and holding some of her important colonies. The ministry hoped that Havana, the 'key to all America' (BL, Add. MS 32694, fol. 33), would be the objective, but left the final decision to the council of war under the joint command of Vernon and the army commander, Lord Cathcart. 
Vernon had destroyed the fortifications at Porto Bello, but otherwise left the town unharmed. It was now open to British traders. During March 1740 Vernon went to Cartagena de las Indias. He bombarded the city, but found it impossible to assault with his ships. He conceded to Newcastle that 3000 troops would have enabled him to capture the place and he would be prepared for the future, as he informed the secretary of state, 'I know now as much of the avenues to their harbours as they do themselves' (9 May 1740, TNA: PRO, SP 42/85, fol. 204). Vernon had also learned that the rolling seas and poor ground made the waters off Cartagena a dangerous anchorage. He sailed up to Porto Bello for repairs, then on to the little fortified port of Chagres. After two days the fort surrendered. It was destroyed and the town was left open to trade. While he was at Porto Bello news reached Vernon that the intended expedition was definitely coming out. 
Over the summer of 1740 Vernon's concerns grew. He was short of naval stores and seamen. News that Spanish and French squadrons were on their way to the West Indies was worrying. Although France was neutral, the behaviour of the French governor on St Domingue suggested to Vernon that France was bent on assisting the Spaniards. He decided to husband his forces at Port Royal, refusing to risk damage or to be drawn to leeward. Vernon's experience of the Caribbean and his concerns made him determined that the expeditionary force would serve as he intended. It would not go to Havana, but to Cartagena, which he believed the troops could rapidly take before they were reduced by disease. The city lay to windward of Jamaica so that they could return rapidly to the island if threatened by Spanish or French attacks. 
The expeditionary force arrived in January 1741. Cathcart had died on the voyage and the army of about 8500 British and American troops was commanded by Major-General Thomas Wentworth. The naval escort, commanded by Vice-Admiral Sir Chaloner Ogle, brought Vernon's squadron up to thirty-three ships of the line. Although this fleet made the Franco-Spanish threat less worrying, Vernon was saddled with another serious problem. The Caribbean provided barely enough seamen to replace losses on his small squadron. This vast fleet would soon be losing, through disease and desertion, seamen that could not be replaced. The army was the only adequate source of manpower. 
Although nominally equals in command, Wentworth deferred to Vernon's experience in the opening months of operations. He provided troops to help man the ships and concurred in the attack upon Cartagena. During the attack relations became strained as Vernon pressed Wentworth forward, making ill-considered accusations about inaction and incompetence within the army. When the army finally reached San Lazar, the final fortification before Cartagena, Vernon again urged Wentworth to press on and, contrary to the opinion of his council of war, Wentworth accepted Vernon's demand to assault the fort. The action on 10 April 1741 was a disaster. Both officers realized that a reduction of this last obstacle was impossible before disease, which was beginning to take a hold, reduced the army's capability. Vernon would not put his seamen ashore to suffer the same fate. The reports that were sent to London glossed over many of the issues raised by this operation, as the expeditionary force quietly returned to Jamaica. 
The next objective was to be Santiago on the southern coast of Cuba. Vernon knew that a direct attack from the sea was difficult and was determined to land the army to the east. Unfortunately he did not tell Wentworth and from the beginning of this attack relations between the two services deteriorated. As Vernon urged the army to push on through difficult terrain and manipulated the information he allowed Wentworth to have, he was also acutely aware of how the news of failure would be received in London. His dispatches to London had always been very full, and he started to enclose carefully selected items of his correspondence with Wentworth. The dispatches themselves began to contain complaints and criticisms of the general. Wentworth's correspondence was, by comparison, brief and sometimes ambiguous. It was not until much later that Wentworth's enclosures began to shed much light on the campaign. Vernon also asked his brother James to publish an account of Wentworth's incompetence, and in the summer of 1741 Captain Charles Knowles, a close colleague of Vernon, was sent home. Knowles was probably the author of a pamphlet, 'An Account of the Expedition to Cartagena', circulated in manuscript in London later that year, which was extremely hostile to the army. The campaign on Cuba ended in December 1741 with relations between the two services at an extremely low ebb. 
A final attempt was made to attack Panama with a reinforcement of 2000 troops that arrived. Vernon was unenthusiastic given the rumours of French squadrons going to the West Indies, but it was a favourite scheme of the governor of Jamaica, Edward Trelawney, and Wentworth was determined to do something significant with the reinforcements before they wasted with disease. Trelawney and Wentworth forced the operation on Vernon with the same disastrous effect as Vernon's earlier pressure had created. Vernon did not follow the agreed plan so news got through to the Spaniards to defend the inland passes. He refused to allow the transports to concentrate before appearing off the town. With the army spread out across the sea from Cartagena to Porto Bello, the operation was called off. The last weeks of the operation were spent with minor expeditions to the island of Roatan and to Georgia. By September the army had ceased to exist as a military force and the troops were largely split up on the warships. Vernon was, at last, effectively commander-in-chief, but on 23 September orders arrived to return to England. Vernon sailed on 19 October, arriving off St David's Head on 26 December 1742. 
Vernon found his public popularity largely intact. His success at Porto Bello, his exposure of the shortcomings of Walpole's foreign policy, coupled with his earlier stand against the ministry, ensured Vernon's rise as a symbol of liberty and patriotic whig opposition to what many saw as a corrupt and out-of-touch administration. In the 1741 general election he had been chosen for Penryn, Rochester, and Ipswich. He had also been put up at London, Westminster, and Portsmouth, but ministerial disquiet over such numerous nominations led to support being withheld in these seats. Vernon chose to sit for Ipswich, a seat which he held from then until his death. He had a half-hour audience with George II, during which he pressed the king on the need to keep a force superior to the enemy at sea. According to his brother James, 'the King bore the lecture pretty well', but Vernon found his reward was not what he might have hoped (BL, Add. MS 40794, fol. 28). Unlike Wentworth, who was dispatched to Flanders to command a division, Vernon found himself unemployed and passed over in promotion. Vernon's hostility was directed at the first lord, the earl of Winchilsea. During 1744 he published his correspondence relating to the expedition, together with the selected enclosures. He also published his correspondence with the secretary to the Admiralty, Thomas Corbett, concerning the poor design of British ships, which Vernon claimed was the responsibility of the surveyor of the navy, Sir Jacob Acworth. He continued to comment upon many naval matters in the Commons, in print, and in letters to the Admiralty. Indeed his public profile, his acknowledged experience, his outspoken 'country' stance, and his attempts, laced with his usual invective, to have a select committee inquire into Acworth's conduct, made him highly unpopular at the Admiralty at a time when it was struggling to contain the operational and political problems of the early months of open war with France. 
In December 1744 Winchilsea was replaced by the duke of Bedford as first lord of the Admiralty and on 23 April 1745 Vernon was promoted admiral of the white. Bedford had a high regard for Vernon's expertise and corresponded with him on the strategic situation in the West Indies and Europe. It was this habit of corresponding with such freedom that made Vernon both valuable and dangerous. His criticisms of the disposition of the western squadron during 1745 focused attention on a policy of concentration that George Anson put to such good effect during 1746-7. On 28 July 1745 Vernon was appointed to command the western squadron, but on 8 August he transferred to the downs, where the latest intelligence suggested French invasion forces were assembling to support the Jacobite rising in Scotland. He kept a close watch on the Flanders coast throughout the late summer and autumn of 1745, but became involved in a frustrating correspondence with the Admiralty over the size of his squadron and the limits of his command, which, in late November, became heated over the right to appoint warrant officers. The dispute rumbled on through December as Vernon made dispositions to resist a possible French invasion. Finally, on 26 December 1745, Vernon was ordered to hand over command to Vice-Admiral William Martin, who had travelled from Plymouth to join Vernon's squadron. 
By mid-March 1746 copies of Vernon's correspondence with the Admiralty during the previous year were in print under the titles 'Seasonable Advice from an Honest Sailor' and 'A Specimen of Naked Truth from a British Sailor'. When called before the Admiralty for a meeting under Bedford's chairmanship on 9 April he refused to confirm or deny that he was responsible for the publication of the correspondence, asserting that he had been badly treated and that the publication was a private matter on which he was not obliged to answer. Bedford laid the matter before the king, who ordered that Vernon be struck off the flag list on 11 April. 
Vernon remained politically active. He spoke on the naval officers' petition against making half-pay officers subject to martial law on 24 February 1749 and in the address of thanks in November of that year. He chaired the parliamentary committee on the herring fishery and helped to establish the Society of Free British Fishery. His great contribution was as an enthusiastic advocate for the maritime economy and defence. Throughout his pamphlets and speeches the major theme of an overwhelmingly powerful navy, based on good ship design, the humane encouragement of seamen to man the fleet, and the development of the maritime economy, is constantly repeated. His determined defence of liberty, country politics, and blue water strategy were a neat encapsulation of whig patriotism. His influence was based partly on his flamboyant style, but largely on the professional respect in which he was held. Until the fall of Louisbourg in the summer of 1745 Vernon had achieved the greatest maritime victories of the war. Although he never tried his ideas in battle he added to the signal commands in 1739 to create greater tactical flexibility in the line of battle. As a trenchant critic of naval officers who apparently failed in their duty he was in tune with current public concern, and he was not prepared to put long-standing friendship before a strict inquiry. On 10 April 1745 Vernon's vote to include Admiral Thomas Mathews in the Commons petition to George II to court-martial the admirals and six captains involved in the battle of Toulon was an important factor in his old friend's eventual disgrace. However, his political weight gradually diminished. His behaviour in 1745 was highly questionable. Anson eclipsed Vernon's achievements by his circumnavigation (1740-44) and the great victory off Finisterre in May 1747. Anson's political weight and professionalism dominated the later 1740s. In January 1748 Vernon published 'Original Letters to an Honest Sailor', being copies of several letters from political figures to him since 1739. It caused his enemies a little concern at first, but passed without serious repercussions. By 1756 Vernon had largely retired from public life. His three children had all died and his wife died on 9 May of that year. He died at Nacton on 30 October 1757 and was buried in St Martin's Church, Nacton, on 6 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 28238


Vernon, Sir Edward (1723-1794), naval officer, was born on 30 October 1723, the fourth son of Henry Vernon (1663-1732), a politician, of Hilton, Staffordshire, and Penelope (died 1726), daughter and coheir of Robert Phillips of Newton Regis, Warwickshire. Richard Vernon was Edward's younger brother and Admiral Edward Vernon (1684-1757) a distant relation. He entered the Royal Naval Academy at Portsmouth in November 1735, where he remained for three years and three months. He was then appointed a volunteer per order to the 'Portland', which had as its captain John Byng, whom he followed to the 'Sunderland', one of the fleet off Cadiz, and in the Mediterranean under Rear-Admiral Nicholas Haddock. 
In 1742 Vernon was in the 'Sutherland', still in the Mediterranean, and he passed his examination on 3 March 1743. On 4 April he was promoted lieutenant of the sloop 'Granada', and in June 1743 he was appointed to the 'Berwick', then commissioned by Captain Edward Hawke, with whom he went out to the Mediterranean and was present in the action off Toulon on 11 February 1744. He was promoted commander of the sloop 'Baltimore' on 5 December 1747, and captain of the 'Mermaid' on 3 April 1753. In May 1755 he was appointed to the 'Lyme' (20 guns) which was attached to the fleet in the Bay of Biscay during 1755-6, and in 1757 he was sent out to the Mediterranean with Admiral Henry Osborn. In November of the following year he was moved into the 'St Albans' (64 guns), one of the fleet with Admiral Edward Boscawen when he defeated and destroyed the French fleet on 18-19 August 1759. Between 1760 and 1762 he commanded the 'Revenge' under both Hawke and Boscawen in the Bay of Biscay. 
After peace in 1763 Vernon was for some time captain of the 'Kent', flagship of Vice-Admiral Thomas Pye at Plymouth. In 1770 he successively commanded the guardships 'Yarmouth' and 'Bellona' at Portsmouth, and from March 1771, the 'Barfleur', Admiral Pye's flagship. Vernon was knighted by George II during a review of the fleet in June 1773. He remained in the 'Barfleur' with Sir James Douglas until May 1775 when he was appointed to the 'Ramillies' as commodore and commander-in-chief at the Nore. In May 1776 he became commander-in-chief in the East Indies, and went out with his broad pennant in the 'Ripon' (60 guns) accompanied by only two small frigates and a corvette. When war with France broke out in 1778, Parker supposed his ships would come under attack from a superior French force. However, a similar sense of limited capability also curbed French action. An indecisive action off Pondicherry on 10 August led to the French squadron's retiring permanently to Mauritius. 
Vernon, who was promoted rear-admiral on 19 March 1779, returned to England early in 1781. He had no further service in the navy, but in the spring and summer of 1785 he attracted some notice by making a couple of balloon ascents from Tottenham Court Road, London, descending the first time at Horsham and the second at Colchester. Vernon became vice-admiral on 24 September 1787 and admiral on 12 April 1794; he died a few weeks later on 16 June 1794. After his death his arrears of pay were collected by his widow, Hannah, about whom no further details are known. 


@@@@@


doc= 28239


Vernon, Francis (bap. 1637, d. 1677), traveller and diplomat, was born in London near Charing Cross and was baptized at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 18 January 1637, the elder son of Francis Vernon (died 1647) and his wife, Anne (formerly Welby), daughter of George Smithes, a goldsmith in London; James Vernon (bap. 1646, d. 1727) was his younger brother. He attended Westminster School between 1649 and 1654 and matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 10 November 1654. He graduated BA on 28 January 1658 and proceeded MA on 17 July 1660. One of the leading scholars at Christ Church was the orientalist Edward Pococke, with whom Vernon later corresponded. It was probably Pococke who encouraged him to develop an interest in the Orient. After graduating Vernon spent several years on the move in Europe, and at one stage was captured by pirates. By March 1667 he was in Rome, an account of which he wrote for his mother. He was back in Oxford later in the year, when he composed a poem, printed with the title 'Oxonium poema', dealing with Oxford and its academic and student life. 
Doubtless because of his 'great knowledge in many sciences and languages' (Rigaud, 2.243), the government decided to send Vernon on a diplomatic mission. He was initially selected to go to Sweden with the earl of Carlisle, but the decision was altered and he was sent instead to Paris in March 1669 with the embassy of Ralph Montagu. He remained in France until March 1672, apart from two brief visits to England in 1670 and 1671. His diplomatic duties were limited, most political correspondence of the embassy being conducted by his colleague, William Perwich. Vernon's chief responsibility was to keep track of the movement of British visitors, report to London any noteworthy incidents in which they were involved (crime and court cases being the most common), and render to well-connected travellers such assistance as they might require. 
Vernon also made a point of mixing with scientists in Paris, and it is in this sphere that he was most prominent. He came to know members of the recently founded Academy of Sciences (1666), including Carcavy, Picard, Pecquet, Borelly, and Duhamel (who considered him a 'fort honneste homme, et tres capable'; 'Correspondence of Henry Oldenburg', 7.33); but he was especially close to Jean-Dominique (Giandomenico) Cassini and Christiaan Huygens. With the latter he had many conversations, and he visited Huygens when the scientist fell dangerously ill in 1670. Vernon passed news of the academy, and of these and other scientists, to Henry Oldenburg, secretary of the Royal Society. Oldenburg valued Vernon's letters, not least because the Academy of Sciences kept its proceedings secret and had no formal relations with other scientific bodies. Knowing that he would keep Oldenburg informed, Huygens, Cassini, and others spoke to Vernon about meetings of the academy, and thanks in no small measure to Vernon's intermediary services, Oldenburg and the Royal Society were kept up to date with developments within it. Vernon sent them progress reports on the building of the Paris Observatory, whose design caused much controversy among astronomers in the academy. He also took a close interest in Picard's project to deduce the size of the earth by obtaining an improved estimate of a degree of meridian. Vernon transmitted to Hooke, on Picard's behalf, questions on pendulums. When Picard's 'Mesure de la terre' came out in 1671 Vernon sent Oldenburg a long abstract of the book, which as yet was unavailable in London. Cassini regularly provided Vernon with the results of his observations, including his discovery of the star Japet in 1671. Cassini hoped to become a member of the Royal Society, an aspiration which Vernon brought to the attention of Oldenburg. In 1672 both Cassini and Vernon himself were elected. Other British scholars were in contact with Vernon. Pococke sent some of his works to the Sorbonne via Vernon, and the mathematician John Collins maintained a steady correspondence, paying tribute to his 'assistance and friendship... concern[ing] the advancement of learning and mathematics' (Rigaud, 1.139). Collins employed Vernon's good offices in arranging the purchase and transportation to England of mathematical and other scientific books published in France and Italy. 
The Paris embassy was Vernon's only diplomatic posting. His political masters seem to have concluded, and perhaps he himself agreed, that diplomacy was not his forte. He now planned an ambitious journey which reflected the influence of Pococke: back through France to Italy, down the Dalmatian coast to Smyrna, and thence to Persia. He left England in 1673, proceeding at a leisurely pace. By January 1676 he had reached Smyrna, from where he sent a description of his travels to Oldenburg, who published it in the 'Philosophical Transactions' (24 April 1676). From there he proceeded across Asia Minor to Persia, which he reached early in 1677. Here he met disaster. He apparently engaged in a quarrel with a group of Arabs at Esfahan and was killed; he was buried two days later. One can presume that, had he completed his journey, he would have written more accounts for the 'Philosophical Transactions', and perhaps would have composed a comprehensive history of his travels, for this was an age when travel literature was in vogue. His premature death means that we possess only hints of what might have been. 


@@@@@


doc= 28240


Vernon, Sir George (c.1578-1639), judge, was the son of Sir Thomas Vernon of Haslington, Cheshire, and his wife, Dorothy, daughter of William Egerton of Betteley. Admitted to the Inner Temple from Clement's Inn in 1594, Vernon was called to the bar in 1603 and to the bench in 1619, and as autumn reader in 1621 read on the 'Statute of Westminster II', c. 5, 'de advocationibus'. Created serjeant-at-law and knighted in 1627, Vernon served as baron of the exchequer from 1627 and justice of the common pleas from 1631 until his death in 1639. 
Vernon came from a wealthy and well-established Cheshire family. He married twice, first Alice, daughter of Sir George Booth, from whom he acquired Haslington Hall. His second marriage, to Sir George Corbet's daughter Jane, brought them a daughter, Muriel, who married Henry Vernon of Sudbury in Derbyshire. At the time of his death Vernon had built up extensive land holdings around Haslington and Church Coppenhall. Vernon's 'slandering' ('CSP dom.', '1627', 437) of the exchequer at Chester in litigation against Sir Randle Crew led to his imprisonment by Star Chamber about 1612. Vernon served in the parliament of 1626, where he was nominated to three committees examining acts to resolve oath taking and property issues. 
Under James I the sale of the coif by the king's ministers had become an 'open scandal' (Baker, 110), exacerbated, in the reign of Charles I, by the influence of the duke of Buckingham over judicial appointments. Vernon was created serjeant-at-law on 4 July 1627, with the public patronage of Sir Thomas Coventry and Sir Robert Heath, and baron of exchequer on 13 November. Sir Richard Hutton, who was concerned by the non-consultation of judges before Vernon's call, was unsure whether to believe if Vernon had, as 'generalment reported', paid up to $1500 to the countess of Denbigh for his promotion to the exchequer, but hoped he would 'prove un honest man' (CUL, Add. MS 6863, fols. 40'v'-41). Upon appointment to a judgeship in the court of common pleas on 8 May 1631, Vernon remarked that he had found the king's 'favor far above his deserts' ('Diary of Sir Richard Hutton', 86) -- but it appears that he took his legal duties seriously; Croke later described him as 'a man of great reading in Statute and Common Law, and of extraordinary memory' (Leach, 566). 
After his creation as serjeant Vernon challenged the integrity of the provincial council at Chester, and also at York. In 1627 attempts by Vernon to remove litigation between himself and Sir Randolph Crew from the determination of Roger Downes, vice-chamberlain of Chester, were rejected by fellow judges. In 1633 Vernon clashed with Sir Thomas Wentworth while presiding over the northern assizes, leading Wentworth to complain that the dignity of the council at York had been slighted, but Vernon continued to ride the northern circuit until the year of his death. 
Generally Vernon was a supporter of crown policy. As a judge he enforced the oath of allegiance, serving on the high commission in 1633. Offering brief opinion in 'Hampden's case' (1637-8) on grounds of poor health, Vernon supported the king's right to ship money 'notwithstanding any act of parliament', suggesting 'that a statute derogatory from the prerogative doth not bind the king; and the king may dispense with any law in cases of necessity' ('State trials', 3.1125) -- comments which drew his judicial reputation into obloquy. Vernon died on 16 or 17 December 1639, and was buried on 18 December in Temple Church. His death prevented his prosecution by parliament, but he was fined posthumously for his actions. 


@@@@@


doc= 28241


Vernon, George (1637/8-1720), Church of England clergyman, was born in Bunbury, Cheshire; his parents are unknown, but he was apparently unrelated to the great local dynasties of that name. His date of birth is derived from his age at matriculation and from his statement made in a deposition in 1670 that he was then thirty-two. He was admitted a servitor at Brasenose College, Oxford, matriculating in March 1654, aged sixteen, graduating BA in October 1657, and proceeding MA in July 1660. He took holy orders and became chaplain of All Souls, Oxford. In 1663 he was appointed rector of Sarsden in Oxfordshire. Subsequently Vernon was presented to the rectory of St Lawrence's at Bourton on the Water, Gloucestershire, a wealthy living of which he purchased the advowson, and to which his family continued to present until 1682. 
The parish had a troubled recent history: of Vernon's predecessors, Temple, its priest at the commencement of the civil war, 'had been involved in scandalous suits... and actively resisted sequestration', while his successor, Anthony Palmer, 'a prominent Congregationalist', was ejected at the Restoration ('VCH Gloucestershire', 6.46). Thereafter, Bourton was a prominent centre for dissenters, both Catholic and protestant: figures for 1667-76 suggest that the parish contained 'a higher proportion and a far higher number of Protestant dissenters than anywhere else in Stow deanery' and that 'half the papists were... gathered there'. A John Dunce, possibly the rector of Condicote during the interregnum, was preaching at Bourton in 1667 and was granted a licence for a meeting there in 1672; the lord of the manor, Charles Trinder, was a prominent Roman Catholic who housed chaplains of his faith (ibid., 6.47). These remarkable local circumstances probably best explain the beleaguered and often vituperative tone of the series of writings in defence of the theological and legal foundations of Anglican intolerance that followed Vernon's appointment. 
The first of these, the anonymous 'A Letter to a Friend Concerning some of Dr Owen's Principles and Practices' (1670) had its origins in a local debate, being Vernon's response to a friend's cordial invitation to read the writings of the dissenter John Owen. With the title-page taking its epigraphs from St Paul and the continental scourge of Independents, the heresiologist Salmasius, Vernon established from the outset a plangent tone. The first half of the pamphlet comprises a fierce attack on Owen's credentials, 'dilating upon the perjuries and perfidious as well as seditious practices of your friend' (p. 40), including his reneging on a succession of oaths, breaking faith with both Oliver and Richard Cromwell and, more predictably, Edward Hyde, earl of Clarendon, to whom he is alleged to have given a false assurance that he would not keep conventicles. Vernon's immediate grounds for writing are perhaps discovered in a passage elaborating on the reasons for considering Owen a continuing public menace, in which he claims his campaigns to persuade magistrates to relax their vigilance against dissenters had enjoyed some success. In the second half of the pamphlet Vernon denounces those beliefs and practices, supposedly endorsed in Owen's writings, 'that manifestly tend to the ruin of Religion and Government'; namely, 'if God's providence permits a mischief his will approves it'; that 'Saints [that is, dissenters] keep fast their holiness in their sinning'; concluding with a scornful attack on 'the modern way of pretending to, and praying, by the Spirit' (sig. A2'v'). In a postscript, addressed to Samuel Parker, the author of the controversial defence of Anglican monopoly 'Ecclesiastical Politie' (1670), Vernon championed the legal restrictions on dissenting preachers and teachers, professing firsthand knowledge of their recent seditious assemblies, reporting 'You cannot imagine how many of the 'Country-Coridons'... were preached out of 'Allegiance'', surmising luridly 'nothing was wanting but a 'Lambert' or 'Ludlow'' (p. 65). The pamphlet concludes with 'an Independent Catechism', a parody of the form chosen by Owen in his celebrated rejoinder to the Socinian Thomas Biddle, which, at its climax, professes regicidal republicanism as an article of faith. 
Vernon was answered in 'An Expostulatory Letter to the Author of the Late Slanderous Libel Against Dr O[wen]' (1671); a collaborative enterprise, its preface written by an anonymous well-wisher and correspondent of the dissenter, the main essay by Owen himself. The preface detected a well-worn strategy behind the 'ad hominem' attack: 'by... wounding, as you think, his Reputation, to render, as you hope, his Excellent and Learned Writings, the less useful to the great Ends of Christianity' (p. 2). It concluded with a personal rebuke to Vernon 'who make your pastime in most Companies where you come, to deride and scoff at your Reverend Diocesan hope, his Excellent and Learned Writings' (p. 12). Owen dismissed the 'whole discourse [as] a railing Accusation' (p. 16) and criticized Vernon's 'malicious wresting and false Applications of the passages he hath quoted' (p. 19). Shrewdly, Owen roundly denounced his detractor's rehearsal of his conduct during the interregnum as an offence against the king's wishes as published in the 'Act of Oblivion'. 
Vernon's next publication, 'Ataxiae obstaculum' (1678), was also born of local disputation, ''being an answer to certain queries, dispersed in some parts of' 'Gloucestershire''. These had been sent to a local clergyman several years before by Thomas Overbury, nephew to the poet, and a sympathizer with dissenters, whose plight the original paper addressed, seeking to demonstrate 'the unreasonableness, especially on Protestant Principles, of exercising Force and Compulsion in Religion' (Overbury, sig. A2'r'). The private correspondence apparently remained so until 1676, when Overbury heard of 'a weak and unashamed Parson's having taken them into the Pulpit with him', a provocative act, precipitating a vigorous debate, one consequence of which was that the paper's author found himself 'Prosecuted at the Assizes as Criminal' (ibid., sig. A2'r'). Vernon's preface is forthright in its endorsement of religious intolerance, declaring his aims to be 'first, to remove those false Pretences of Conscience... the 'Scape-Goat', to bear all Iniquities' and to come to 'the Defence of Magistrate's Power in matters of Religion' (Vernon, 'Ataxiae obstaculum', sig. A5'r'). Urging unity 'against the common Enemy of 'Protestantism'', Vernon reflected on the number of ''Jesuited'-Priests' who had escaped prosecution, concluding daringly with a contemptuous allusion to the king's earlier declaration of indulgence, observing that the 'vigorous execution of one Law, would do more good than a Million of 'Proclamations'' (ibid., sigs. A6'v', A6'r'). Vernon conceded that his answer to the queries had little originality, the defence of the established church's intolerance having been justified 'ex abundanti' by scholars, but pleaded some merit for his writings in its purpose of informing 'the private Christian' (ibid., sig. A2'v'). It was perhaps this professed aim that secured the imprimatur of William Jane, bishop of London. Overbury bolstered his reply by drawing on the writings of the Caroline divine William Chillingworth. He invited the reader to examine the caustic tone of Vernon's writing, reflecting 'how little he hath complyed with the Gentleman's desire, in returning a Candid and Christian Resolution to them' (Overbury, sig. C1'r'). He also recorded his astonishment that 'an Impudent Libeller should be Licens'd to reflect thus upon the Government' (ibid., sig. C3'r'). 
Vernon's next project was a life of Peter Heylin. In 1681 he was the principal contributor to an unsatisfactory account that appeared prefaced to the Laudian controversialist's collected works. In the following year he published 'The Life of the Learned and Reverend Dr Peter Heylyn' (1682), justifying its publication by presenting it as his original text before it had been marred by 'the indiscretion of some persons, and the forwardness and ostentation of others' (Vernon, 'To the reader'). One remarkable curiosity of its preface was the extraordinary accusation made against one of Heylin's sterner critics, the presbyterian divine Richard Baxter, alleging his participation in a civil war atrocity. Baxter, he claimed, having witnessed a soldier run through with his sword a wounded royalist on the battlefield, took 'the King's picture from his Neck; telling him... That he was a Popish Rogue and that was his Crucifix' (Vernon, 'To the reader'). Vernon further reported that Baxter had recently returned the image, and quoted the affidavit of the alleged victim of the assault. 
The controversy that ensued came, however, from an unexpected and embarrassing quarter: a fellow Anglican clergyman John Barnard, Heylin's son-in-law who, in 1683, published 'Theologo-historicus, or, The True Life of... Peter Heylin', in order, the title-page announced, 'to correct the Errors, supply the Defects, and confute the Calumnies of a late Writer'. In his compendious preface Barnard revealed the troubled history of Vernon's 'lame and imperfect' biography and his eventual unwilling collaboration in the version that had prefaced the 1681 collection at the request of its importunate publisher, by whom he was given 'carte blanche' to make whatever additions he judged fitting (Barnard, 3). In contrast to his own authorial partitioning of the revised papers, Barnard alleged Vernon's response was 'to fall upon them as a Lion rampant', injudiciously revising contributions until 'mangled and metamorphised' beyond recognition and passed off without due acknowledgement as though his own (ibid., 8, 10). The remainder of the preface comprises a severe critique of Vernon's work, which, with some justice, accuses him of padding out the work with copious extracts from his subject's writings. Barnard was equally censorious of the inclusion of biographical material he considered indecorous, singling out for particular odium Vernon's apologetic account of Heylin's clandestine marriage. According to Anthony Wood, Vernon circulated a manuscript defence, composed with one of the Heylins, which apportioned blame between the printer and Thomas Barlow, bishop of Norwich, in whose possession the manuscript had resided. It remained unpublished and so this unhappy episode brought an end to his literary pretensions. 
Vernon served the rest of his days as a parish priest. He died in his rectory in Bourton on the Water on 17 December 1720 and was buried at St Lawrence's Church. The succession of his eldest son, Richard (1674-1752), as rector inaugurated a series of family appointments to the living, which continued up until the eve of the nineteenth century. Richard was succeeded by William Vernon, a pluralist, who held the living until 1780, and 'after little more than a year a fourth member of the family, Edward, whose presentation, it was hinted, was simonaical, and whose learning, morals, and previous career were attacked, became rector' ('VCH Gloucestershire', 6.46). Vernon is commemorated by a monument on the north wall of the chancel, commissioned by his daughter Dorothy, inscribed to her parents (Vernon's wife was also called Dorothy, but nothing more is known of her) and two brothers, Richard and Charles (1679-1736), rector of St Paul's, Shadwell, in Middlesex. 


@@@@@


doc= 28242


Warren, George John, fifth Baron Vernon (1803-1866), literary editor, was born George John Venables Vernon at Stapleford Hall, Nottinghamshire, on 22 June 1803. He was the only son of George Charles Venables Vernon, fourth Baron Vernon (1779-1835), of Sudbury, Derbyshire, and Frances Maria (died 1837), only daughter of Admiral Sir John Borlase Warren (1753-1822). Sir Richard Vernon, speaker of the House of Commons in 1426, was an ancestor. He was educated at Eton College and, from 1822 to 1824, at Christ Church, Oxford. As a youth he was taken to Italy, and afterwards lived in Florence, where he studied the Italian language and history. On 30 October 1824 he married Isabella Caroline (1805-1853), daughter of Cuthbert Ellison of Hebburn, Durham; they had five children. 
Vernon entered public life in 1831 as MP for Derby. After the passing of the 1832 'Reform Bill', which he warmly supported, the county had two divisions, and he became member for the southern part. He continued in the House of Commons until 1835, when he was called to the House of Lords on the death of his father. In 1837 he exchanged his birth name, Venables Vernon, for that of Warren, in compliance with the will of Lady Warren Bulkeley, which bequeathed the estates of Poynton and Stockport to her niece Frances Maria, Vernon's mother, in 1826. His children born before 1837, however, retained their own name. 
Vernon was an expert rifle-shot, an energetic supporter of the volunteer movement, and in 1859 raised a company at Sudbury, where he erected a firing-range. His whole life, however, was devoted to Dante. With the advice and help of such friends and collaborators as Luigi Passerini, Sir Anthony Panizzi, and Pietro Fraticelli, he printed numerous texts, including 'L'Inferno, secondo il testo di B. Lombardi con ordine e schiarimento per uso dei forestieri di L. V.' (1841); 'Petri Allegherii super Dantis ipsius genitoris comoediam commentarium', edited by Vincenzio Nannucci (1845); 'Chiose sopra Dante, testo inedito, ora per la prima volta pubblicato' (1846), commonly known as 'Il falso Boccaccio'; 'Il Febusso e Breusso, poema ora per la prima volta pubblicato' (1847); 'Chiose alla Cantica dell' Inferno di Dante Allighieri attribuite a Jacopo suo figlio' (1848); and 'Comento alla cantica di Dante Allighieri di autore anonimo' (1848), reputedly the oldest commentary on the 'Inferno' in existence, probably written about 1328. 
Vernon's two most important works, however, were 'Le prime quattro edizioni della 'Divina commedia' letteralmente ristampate' (1858) and ''L'Inferno' di Dante Alighieri disposto in ordine grammaticale e corredato di brevi dichiarazioni da G. G. Warren, Lord Vernon' (1858-65). Only a limited number of copies were issued for private circulation, as neither was intended for sale. 'L'Inferno' was described by Henry Clark Barlow as a work 'which, for utility of purpose, comprehensiveness of design, and costly execution, has never been equalled in any country' (Barlow, 1). Some of the most distinguished artists and men of letters in Italy were occupied for twenty years in its preparation. It includes the text of the 'Inferno' with a grammatical 'ordo' and many notes and tables; the second volume is an encyclopaedia of history, geography, topography, and heraldry relating to Dante and Florence, with many unpublished documents; the third or album volume, which appeared after Lord Vernon's death, contains 112 original engravings of incidents in the 'Inferno', views of towns, castles, and other localities mentioned therein, and portraits, paintings, plans, and historical monuments illustrating the history of the fourteenth century. 
Warren Vernon was a 'socio corrispondente' of the Academia della Crusca from 1847 and a member of many other literary societies. His wife having died on 14 October 1853 he married, second, on 14 December 1859, his cousin Frances Maria Emma, only daughter of the Revd Brooke Boothby. Their only child, a son, died in infancy. In May 1865 Vernon was created cavaliere di San Maurizio e Lazzaro, in recognition of his labours on behalf of the national poet. The following year, after a long illness, he died at Sudbury Hall, Derbyshire, on 31 May; he was buried at Sudbury on 6 June. He had intended to print the famous Latin commentary Benvenuto da Imola delivered as public lectures at Bologna about 1375, but this was carried out by his second son, William Warren Vernon, in 1887, under the editorship of Sir J. P. Lacaita. A considerable Dante scholar in his own right, William Warren Vernon published a series of 'Readings of the 'Commedia'' from 1888 to 1900. 
Vernon's eldest son, 
The Vernon family's Dantesque endeavour was the last of the great whig politico-cultural projects typical of the Regency period. The fifth baron combined an eighteenth-century collector's interest in Dante with a nineteenth-century devotion to textual and historical scholarship. He also passed on a tradition of social responsibility; the sixth baron's work to relieve French farmers imitated his father's assistance to Lancashire and Cheshire during the cotton famine of 1862. 


@@@@@


doc= 28243


Vernon, James (bap. 1646, d. 1727), government official and politician, was baptized on 1 April 1646 at St Martin-in the-Fields, Westminster, the second son of Francis Vernon (died 1647), government official, of Covent Garden, Westminster, and his wife, Anne, daughter of George Smithies, goldsmith, of London, and widow of William Welby of Gedney, Lincolnshire. He was educated at Charterhouse School and, from 1662, Christ Church, Oxford, where he graduated BA in 1666 and MA in 1669. He soon came to the attention of Sir Joseph Williamson, under-secretary, and later secretary, of state, who employed Vernon as a collector of news and in March 1672 sent him on a secret mission into Flanders to interview the spy John Scott and to gather military, political, and naval intelligence. The same year, in June, Vernon went with Viscount Halifax as a secretary on the latter's mission to the French court. In 1672 Williamson also recommended Vernon as a private secretary to the earl of Sunderland, then at his ambassador's post in Paris. Sunderland was to thank Williamson 'in giving Mr Vernon leave to come to me, desiring very much to have one bred up under you and [in] whome you have a good opinion' (TNA: PRO, SP 78/135, fol. 57). In turn Vernon noted that 'my L[or]d... received me very kindly which I owe entirely to the good opinion you have pleased to create in him of me by your letters' (TNA: PRO, SP 78/135, fol. 76). 
In 1673 Vernon became private secretary to Charles II's eldest illegitimate son, James Scott, duke of Monmouth, and was given a pension of $300 a year. In 1675, by a licence of 6 April, he married Mary (died 1715), daughter of Sir John Buck, first baronet, of Hamby Grange, Lincolnshire. The couple lived in St Martin-in-the-Fields and had two sons and two daughters. Both sons followed their father in the service of the state: the elder, James, was a government official, and the younger, Edward Vernon (1684-1757), became an admiral. Vernon's wealth and position increased further with the death of his elder brother, Francis Vernon, in 1677, and in the same year he met Godfrey Kneller and became his patron. Kneller painted Vernon's portrait, and in return Vernon paid the rent on a house in Durham Yard for Kneller. In addition Vernon profitably introduced the artist to Monmouth. Kneller was grateful and noted that Vernon could 'introduce [me] to courtiers, for I take him for an honest and most charming gentleman, as all who know him say' (BL, Add. MS 4277, fol. 104). 
As Monmouth's secretary Vernon served with the duke in Scotland and Flanders and was given a seat in parliament as his client. His relationship with Monmouth was close; it was alleged that it was Vernon who erased the word 'natural' from Monmouth's patent for the post of commander-in-chief in 1674, which identified Monmouth as Charles II's 'natural son'. While in Flanders with the duke Vernon kept a journal of the campaign of 1678 which was meant to illuminate his patron's noble deeds. In the campaign against the Scottish covenanters in 1679 Vernon remained ever close to the duke and was later satirized as one of Monmouth's creatures and a possible evil counsellor. He sat for Cambridge University in the first parliament of 1679 and voted for the bill to exclude the duke of York from the succession. Vernon later became uncomfortable with Monmouth's politics, expressing the wish to Edmund Warcup that 'M[onmouth] would leave the party and return to [the] K[ing]' ('Journals of Edmund Warcup', 256). He did not, however, leave Monmouth's service until the duke went into exile for a second time in 1684. A warrant was issued for Vernon's arrest in June 1685 during Monmouth's rebellion. A whig 'collaborator' in 1688, he went over to William's service by late December. He donated $1500 to the new regime. 
Vernon was subsequently employed on the 'London Gazette' and then served as an under-secretary, or more correctly a private secretary, to the earl of Shrewsbury, secretary of state for the south, from February 1689 to June 1690. He then performed a similar task for Sir John Trenchard, and also served in Flanders as a collector of news from March 1693 to March 1694, until Shrewsbury's return to office from March 1694 until December 1697. In 1693 he was appointed a commissioner of prizes, a post he held until 1705. Vernon's work in the secretary's office was conscientious and professional. Although he was not an innovative bureaucrat, he was one of the new administrators who were engineering a revolution in government. Indeed it was probably he, rather than the increasingly absent Shrewsbury, who really ran affairs in the office. The lords justices appointed Vernon as their secretary during their meetings while William III was on campaign and Vernon was effectively acting as 'de facto' southern secretary during Shrewsbury's absence. He was prominent in the investigations into the assassination plot of 1696, ensuring the charges made by Fenwick against Godolphin, Shrewsbury, Marlborough, and Russell were placed under a suitable veil of obscurity. 
Shrewsbury's frequent moral and physical collapses and Sunderland's wrangling with the junto lords eventually led to the crisis of 1697 when, through Sunderland's influence, Vernon was, reluctantly he said, bounced upstairs to the post of northern secretary of state on 2 December in place of Sir William Trumbull. Before his appointment Vernon wrote to Shrewsbury that: 'You are coming into a strange intricacy. My Lord Chamberlain [Sunderland] in some companies, declares for my Lord Wharton, and knows there is no such thing intended. My lord Wharton shews a willingness to accept it, and, at the bottom, has no mind to it... One you know [Vernon himself] is secretly designed for secretary, and he is utterly incapable of it. ('Letters Illustrative', 1.431)' Shrewsbury's fellow secretary Trumbull had in fact already complained of being slighted and swindled by Vernon in his work, and although Vernon tended to portray himself as a mere official lost in the world of grasping high politics, he was as keenly ambitious as any other later seventeenth-century politician. Despite tearful protests that he had never wanted the post in the first place Vernon seized the seals with alacrity when they were offered. 
Vernon clung on to high office for some six years but he was not, however, a policy maker. He was in reality one of the 'little men... such as were framed for a dependence on a premier minister' ('Letters Illustrative', 2.359). He was often kept in ignorance as to the king's intentions in foreign affairs and as one satire put it, 'Vernon's by all men believed a meer Tool' (Lord and others, 6.222). Vernon also sat in parliament as a court whig for Penryn from 1695 to 1698, for Westminster from 1698 to December 1701, and for Penryn again from 1705 to 1710. He claimed in May 1699 that 'No man has ever had so little conversation with the Tories as myself' ('Letters from James Vernon', letter 183, 13 May 1699). 
Vernon became sole secretary of state from December 1698 to May 1699. When the earl of Jersey was appointed in May 1699 Vernon went into the northern province out of choice, claiming that without rank or ambition he would be exposed to envy should he be placed as senior secretary. It may also be significant that negotiations with France, part of the southern secretary's brief, were also at a delicate stage. With Jersey's dismissal in June 1700 Vernon did take the southern post, but he was able to exchange once more in 1702. He had some part in the formation of the two partition treaties: he was confronted with the terms of the document in the first instance and told to sound out the leading whig responses. In the second case he was merely directed to prepare a commission authorizing the plenipotentiaries with the names left blank. Vernon escaped impeachment, although undoubtedly involved, because it was well known that his role was more of a clerk than a maker of policy and he eagerly produced incriminating documents to a parliament with bigger prey in its sight. 
Vernon finally left the secretary's office on 1 May 1702 claiming that he was 'too obnoxious to the [Tory] party to be continued' ('Letters Illustrative', 3.222). His whig sympathies did not help his case, despite his still-diligent administrative capacity. It was then falsely rumoured that he was to go to Venice as envoy-extraordinary. To compensate him, however, Vernon was given an annual pension of $1000 and his arrears were paid. He was also made teller in the exchequer, a sinecure post which he lost in 1710 on the victory of the tories. Ultimately Vernon seems to have been relieved that his administrative burden had finally been laid down: 'I please myself with the satisfaction I shall find in retirement, and the conversation of honest old authors' and that it was 'infinitely preferable to the bustle of secretaryship' ('Letters Illustrative', 3.222-9). He was a commissioner of the privy seal in 1716 but thereafter lived in retirement in Watford in Hertfordshire until his death on 31 January 1727, aged eighty-one. He was buried in Watford parish church. 
One contemporary thought that Vernon had 'many good qualities, some of which one would not expect under so rough an outside' ('Letters Illustrative', 3.233). Ultimately Vernon was a functional man of government and business rather than a politician or statesman of the first order. Gifted in the administrative field, his earlier career had given him a number of opportunities which he ably exploited, and his voluminous correspondence bears testament to his involvement in much of the complex politics of the 1690s. 


@@@@@


doc= 28244


Vernon, Joseph (c.1738-1782), singer and actor, was born in Coventry illegitimately and grew up in the Coventry charity school. He became a choirboy at St Paul's Cathedral, London, where William Savage was master of the choristers. While still a choirboy he made his Drury Lane debut, on 26 December 1750, as Puck in the pantomime 'Queen Mab'. He also performed that season in T. A. Arne's 'Alfred', Shakespeare's 'Romeo and Juliet', and Boyce's 'The Shepherd's Lottery'. He continued to perform at Drury Lane after his voice broke and he became a tenor. On 27 June 1755 he married Jane Poitier (b. 1736), another singer at Drury Lane. At least one of them was under age. The wedding took place at the Savoy Chapel, whose clergy mistakenly thought they were exempt from the provisions of Hardwicke's 'Marriage Act' of 1754. The marriage was annulled and both the officiating chaplain and the curate, Tate Wilkinson's father, John, were sentenced to transportation to America. Vernon testified against them. On 27 September, and on several later occasions, Vernon was hissed off the Drury Lane stage for his role in the affair. Tate Wilkinson gave a detailed, though naturally biased, version of the episode: his father died on the voyage. 
Vernon spent much of the following six years on the Dublin stage. In 1759 he is said to have witnessed a murder but was paid by the murderer's father not to testify. He returned occasionally to Drury Lane, until on 21 September 1762 he became once again a regular member of the company. He took leading roles in many of the new operas, including most of those by Dibdin, and Rush's 'The Royal Shepherd'. He also acted in plays, including some by Shakespeare. When Sheridan and Linley took over Drury Lane from Garrick in 1776 he was past his best as a singer, but nevertheless took the title role in Linley's first opera, 'Selima and Azor'. He made his final appearance on 9 October 1781. 
On 8 January 1773 Vernon married Margaret Richardson. He was a freemason, a member of the grand lodge, in the 1770s. 
Contemporary critics indicate that Vernon's acting remained strong throughout his career but his singing voice weakened with age. Quoting 'The Theatrical Biography' of 1772, Genest states: 'it is seldom found that a good actor is a good singer -- Vernon stands an exception to that rule; for tho' he now only lives in point of voice upon the echo of his former reputation, he 'was' excellent in both. (Genest, 6.220)' Vernon composed several songs and ballads, mostly for use in stage works in which he performed. He wrote the best-known version of Feste's epilogue in 'Twelfth Night', 'When that I was and a little tiny boy'. 
He died on 19 March 1782 in Lambeth of a lingering illness, and the administration of his effects was granted to his widow, Margaret. He was buried at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 28245


Sir Richard Vernon (1389/90-1451) became speaker of the Commons in 1426. Coming of age in 1411, Vernon inherited an impressive array of properties acquired by his forebears, partly through advantageous marriages. At their heart lay manors in the Peak District and Derwent valley in Derbyshire, centred on Haddon Hall, whose chapel and hall were substantially rebuilt by Richard. The family maintained a secondary residence at Harlaston in east Staffordshire, held the hereditary forestership of Macclesfield Forest in Cheshire, possessed estates in another five English counties, from Westmorland to Buckinghamshire, and also held five manors in south Wales. From his great-uncle, Sir Fulk Pembridge, Richard inherited the lordship of Tong Castle, Shropshire, and the manor of Aylestone, Leicestershire. In 1411 he helped Sir Fulk's widow, Isabel Lingen, secure the elevation of Tong parish church into a collegiate establishment, with an almshouse and school. Isabel was also Richard's mother-in-law, his wife, Benedicta, being her daughter by a previous marriage to Sir John Ludlow of Stokesay, Shropshire. Tong College subsequently became a family mausoleum for the Vernons. 
As well as providing the manpower when necessary for political power, the Vernon estates yielded in the mid-fifteenth century an estimated annual income of $210. Falling rents were offset by the profits of Derbyshire lead mining and by the maintenance of large herds of sheep and cattle. Richard Vernon's wealth and power were also supplemented by offices, leases, and annuities arising from his links with magnate families. He obtained from John Mowbray, third duke of Norfolk, the stewardship of the latter's Derbyshire estates, close by several Vernon manors, and by 1440 he had become simultaneously a retainer of both the earl of Stafford (afterwards duke of Buckingham) and of William, Lord Ferrers of Chartley. But his most important links, as a result of his principal manors being held of the honour of Tutbury, were with the region's greatest territorial power, the crown's duchy of Lancaster. Knighted by December 1417, Vernon rose to an eminence surpassing that of his ancestors. In Staffordshire he was twice sheriff (1416-17 and 1427-8) and represented the county in parliament in 1419. 
Not until the reign of Henry VI, however, did Richard Vernon's office holding in Derbyshire reflect his territorial status there. In 1423 he secured what became a lifelong seat on the county's peace commission, and represented Derbyshire in the parliaments of 1422, 1426 (when he was speaker), and 1433. In seven of the eleven parliaments between 1432 and 1451 a Vernon sat for Derbyshire, either Sir Richard or one of his three (of at least six) sons. Sheriff of Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire (1424-6), Vernon also consolidated his family's territorial power through offices held of the duchy of Lancaster. The most important of these, the stewardship and constableship of the High Peak, he first obtained in 1424. In 1438 he converted this grant to one in survivorship to himself and his son Fulk (died 1449), who was soon to become an esquire in the royal household. Supported by an extensive network of retainers, tenants, and 'well-wishers', he deserved the epithet bestowed upon one of his sixteenth-century descendants, the 'king of the Peak'. 
Sir Richard's magnate and court connections procured for the Vernons several important offices and grants in the 1430s and 1440s. He was a deputy justiciar of south Wales (1431- 'c'.1438) under James, Lord Audley, and by 1445 was serving as knight steward in the court of the constable (Buckingham) and the marshal (Norfolk). He surely owed his position as treasurer of Calais (1445-51), as well as the keepership of his son Fulk of nearby Hammes Castle, to Buckingham, constable of Calais from 1442 to 1450. In June 1450 he acquired a life grant of the shrievalty of Pembroke, then in the king's hands, and a year later surrendered it in favour of his son John. The local authority of the Vernons did not go unchallenged, however, and in the 1440s started to come under pressure. In 1440 Sir Richard had to answer charges of intimidation and extortion, by himself and his deputies, in his High Peak stewardship. There were clashes over pasture rights with the Gresleys and legal disputes over the Pembridge inheritance. Lord Ferrers himself pursued a claim to Tong, which was settled by arbitration. Vernon's dubious claims to estates held by Isabel Lingen led to his engaging in lengthy legal and extra-legal manoeuvres, which in 1450 culminated in his forcibly seizing the valuable Staffordshire manor of Kibblestone. 
Sir Richard died in August 1451, but many of his disputes were inherited by his eldest surviving son, 


@@@@@


doc= 28246


Vernon, Richard (1726-1800), horse-racing entrepreneur and politician, was born on 18 June 1726 and baptized on the same day in Shaveshill, Staffordshire, the fifth son of the seven children of Henry Vernon (1663-1732), MP for Hilton, Staffordshire, and his wife Penelope Phillips (died 1726), daughter and coheir of Robert Phillips of Newton Regis, Warwickshire. Two of his elder brothers were Henry Vernon (1718-1765), who became MP for Lichfield and then Newcastle under Lyme, and Admiral Sir Edward Vernon (1723-1794). 
After travelling in Italy and France in 1743, Vernon was appointed ensign in the 1st regiment of Horse Guards on 22 November 1744. He was promoted lieutenant and captain on 12 January 1747, but resigned on 30 October 1751 in order to enter politics. He attached himself to John Russell, fourth duke of Bedford, and acted as his second secretary when Bedford was lord lieutenant of Ireland. He was returned to parliament on 10 December 1754 for the duke's borough of Tavistock, and, as member for Bedford in the succeeding parliament, was appointed in April 1764 a clerk comptroller of the household. He was re-elected for the same constituency in the next parliament (1768-74), and sat for Okehampton from 1774 to 1780, and for Newcastle under Lyme from 1784 to 1790. There is no evidence that he ever spoke in the Commons during the thirty-six years he sat as an MP in the chamber. 
It was on the turf, and not in the army or in parliament, that Vernon made a name for himself. As early as 4 June 1751 the betting book at the old White's Club records a wager between Lord March and 'Capt. Richard Vernon, 'alias' Fox 'alias' Jubilee Dicky'. Vernon was blackballed at the new club the following year on account of his closeness to Bedford, although he was 'a very inoffensive, good-humoured young fellow, who lives in the strongest intimacy with all the fashionable young men' (H. Walpole to Sir Horatio Mann, 2 Feb 1752, Walpole, 20.301). On 15 February 1759 he married at St George's, Bloomsbury, Evelyn Fitzpatrick, countess of Upper Ossory ('bap'. 1724, died 1763), widow of John Fitzpatrick, first earl of Upper Ossory, and sixth daughter of John Leveson-Gower, first Earl Gower, and his first wife, Evelyn Pierrepont. She was also the sister of the duchess of Bedford. They had three daughters; she died only four years after their marriage on 12 April 1763 at Montauban, France, where she was buried. 
After moving to Newmarket, Vernon entered a racing partnership with Lord March, afterwards the fourth duke of Queensberry, commonly known as Old Q. Thomas Holcroft the dramatist, who was for two and a half years in his stables, thought Vernon 'a gentleman of acute notoriety on the turf'. By means of betting and breeding horses Vernon converted 'a slender patrimony of three thousand pounds into a fortune of a hundred thousand' before quitting the turf as an owner ('Memoirs of... Holcroft', 1.91, 117, 165). 
Vernon, who was one of the original members of the Jockey Club, bred and owned a large number of horses. The Vernon Arabian, sire of the dam of Emigrant, winner of the July Stakes in 1796, was owned if not imported by him; and Diomed, winner of the first Derby, came from his stables. He also ran horses for many years, and in 1758 himself rode in a gentleman-jockey race at Newmarket. In 1753 he won one of the two Jockey Club plates, and in 1768 carried off the first Jockey Club challenge cup with Marquis, son of the Godolphin Arabian. At the first Craven meeting (1771) he won the stakes with Pantaloon against a field of thirteen; and his three-year-old Fame by that sire ran second for the first Oaks on 14 May 1779. In 1787 he won the Oaks with Annette (by Eclipse). 
Vernon was one of those who began the running of yearlings at Newmarket. In 1791, when the conduct of Chifney, the prince of Wales's jockey, had been criticized by the club but upheld by his master, Old Dick Vernon (as he was called) was reported to have said that the prince, having the best horses and the best jockey, was 'best off the turf'. The Jockey Club were his tenants at the old coffee-room at Newmarket. The ground lease was purchased by him in 1771, and bought by the stewards on its expiration sixty years later. 
Vernon was an innovative horticulturist and is credited with the introduction of fruit-forcing. His peaches at Newmarket were famous. His sporting traditions were carried on by his nephew, Henry Hilton, whose name appears in the first official list of the Jockey Club, published in 1835. 
Vernon died at Newmarket on 16 September 1800. Of his daughters, who are frequently mentioned in Horace Walpole's letters, the eldest, Henrietta, married in 1776 George Greville, second earl of Warwick. The second, Caroline, who shared her father's love for horse-racing, married the wit Robert Percy Smith (Bobus Smith), and was the mother of Robert Vernon Smith, Lord Lyveden, who edited Walpole's correspondence with his grandmother, the countess of Ossory. 


@@@@@


doc= 28247


Vernon, Robert (1774/5-1849), art collector and patron, was the son of William Vernon (died 1801) and his wife, Mary. His father was a hackneyman in Mount Street, Berkeley Square, London, from 1793 until his death in December 1801, when his estate was valued at $3350; Vernon took over and greatly expanded the business. By 1812 he had a collection of English historical portraits and old masters, some of which he sold at a loss in 1831. By 1826 he was collecting modern British pictures, and in 1832 he leased 50 Pall Mall, which from 1843 he opened to the public. The adjacent property housed the 'Art Union', founded in 1839 and edited by S. C. Hall, who puffed Vernon's pictures, the right to reproduce which was granted to the journal by Vernon. Indeed, reproductions of Vernon's paintings became a mainstay of that journal. 
On 22 December 1847 a selection of Vernon's collection -- 157 pictures (all British except one), eight sculptures, and one watercolour -- made by the National Gallery was vested in its trustees. One picture depicted the home of Sir John Fleming Leicester, who had anticipated Vernon's idea of a public collection of modern British art, as too had Sir Francis Chantrey. Vernon, however, was the first to realize it. About 1830, together with Chantrey and J. M. W. Turner, Vernon had planned bequests to galleries and of money ($70,000 in Vernon's case) for the benefit of artists. However, he finally made a family friend, Leicester Viney Smith (1798-1860), his heir. Vernon died unmarried at 50 Pall Mall on 22 May 1849 and was buried at Ardington parish church, Berkshire, where he is commemorated by a bust by William Behnes (he had purchased Ardington House in 1839). Smith took the name Vernon in 1850 and inherited the money intended to assist struggling painters. 
George Jones, who had advised Vernon on his purchases, deprecated this change and also the gift of the collection before a room was built for it at the National Gallery. There it was squeezed into the lower floor in 1848, before being moved to Marlborough House in 1850, to South Kensington in 1859, and back to the National Gallery in 1876. Following the 'National Gallery Act' of 1883 the collection was no longer shown together in its own rooms as Vernon had wished (he had declined the suggestion of John Sheepshanks that their gifts be merged). His nephew Vernon Heath (1820-1895), who had been his secretary from 1841, wrote in 1894 that, had Vernon foreseen its fate, he would never have made his gift. Most of it is now in the Tate collection; six works belong to the National Portrait Gallery and nine have perished. 'A strange, singular man' (Heath, 'Recollections', 1), latterly wracked by gout, Vernon was not a popular figure. His gift, received ecstatically in 1847, was soon and has remained unappreciated, despite including such significant examples of nineteenth-century British art as Turner's 'The Dogano, San Giorgio, Citella, from the Steps of the Europa' (1842; Tate collection), the first work from his collection to hang in the National Gallery, and Edwin Landseer's virtuoso performance 'King Charles Spaniels' (1845; Tate collection). 


@@@@@


doc= 28248


Vernon, Thomas (1654-1721), law reporter and politician, was born on 25 November 1654, the only son of Richard Vernon ('c'.1615-1679), a clergyman, of Hanbury Hall, Worcestershire, and Jane Carter (died 1697). He was admitted to the Middle Temple on 11 May 1672 and called to the bar on 20 May 1679. He was licensed on 5 January 1680 to marry Mary (died 1733), one of the many daughters of Sir Anthony Keck of Bell Yard in Chancery Lane, the pre-eminent chancery counsel of his day. This match could only have furthered Vernon's career, as he in turn became a leading practitioner in chancery cases. With judicious investment of his earnings Vernon was able to build up a substantial country estate in the neighbourhood of Hanbury in Worcestershire. Between 1685 and 1717 he spent $62,000 on land, mainly in Worcestershire, and erected a new house at Hanbury which he began to build about 1710. The concomitant of this wealth was increased social prestige and political power. By 1707 he was engaged in Worcestershire politics on the whig side, and in 1715 he was elected knight of the shire. In the House of Commons he supported the government, apart from voting against the 'Peerage Bill', which may have been a sign of family ambition, despite having no children. 
Vernon may have been financially stretched by his estate-building for he returned to the law. Lord Cobham described to Alexander Pope 'Counsellor Vernon retiring to enjoy himself with $5,000, a year which he had got, and returning to Chancery to get a little more when he could not speak so loud as to be heard' ('DNB'). However, in 1720 he was still very active in chancery, standing thirteenth in the list of most busy practitioners. Vernon died on 5 or 6 February 1721 and was buried in Hanbury church, where a monument was erected to his memory. His wife survived him until 6 July 1733. 
Ironically, Vernon's will was the subject of some contention in chancery, a dispute arising over the fate of his manuscript notes on chancery cases between 1681 and 1719. His widow claimed them as part of the 'household goods and furniture' which she had been left; the trustees claimed them as part of the residuary estate, as they had been left 'the residue of my personal estate'; and the heir, Bowater Vernon, claimed them as the guardian of the reputation of the testator. Lord Chancellor Macclesfield decided the case by retaining the manuscripts in order to have them printed under the court's direction without making any profit. Under the direction of Macclesfield and then Lord King they were published as 'Cases argued and adjudged in the high court of chancery, published from the manuscripts of Thomas Vernon' in 1726-8 under the editorship of William Melmoth, the elder, and William Peere Williams. This edition was found to be so full of errors and discrepancies that, at the suggestion of Lord Eldon, a new and far superior edition was brought out in 1806-7 by John Raithby. A further edition appeared in 1828. 


@@@@@


doc= 28249


Vernon, Thomas (bap. 1824, d. 1872), engraver, was born in Staffordshire and baptized at Skelton, Staffordshire, on 7 November 1824, the son of George Vernon and his wife, Hannah, 'nee' Simpson. He is said to have trained in Paris before returning to settle in London and study with the engraver Peter Lightfoot. Like his master, Vernon concentrated on line engraving, but, although he was highly skilled, his choice of such a narrow medium and the fact that he was rarely employed by the book trade meant that he struggled throughout his career. It was no doubt in search of security that he visited America, and worked as a bank note engraver in New York during a stay which appears to have lasted from 1863 to 1865. Vernon exhibited seven engravings at the Royal Academy between 1857 and 1867, three portraits and four history subjects. 
Many of Vernon's most important plates were published by Henry Graves, and these included his two earliest exhibits at the academy in 1857: 'The Infant Amazon: a Portrait of Princess Helena', after Franz Winterhalter, and 'The Virgin and Child', after William Dyce. Both works came from Queen Victoria's private collection and were published, together with two other subjects, in Samuel Carter Hall's 'The Royal Gallery of Art' (1857-8). Graves was also responsible for commissioning other prints after modern artists, such as 'The First Born', after Charles West Cope (1865) and 'Olivia Unveiling', after Charles Robert Leslie (1863). The other outlet for Vernon's modern subjects was the 'Art Journal', which reproduced a number of his works, among them 'The Infant Bacchus', after Martin Archer Shee. 
Vernon's works after old masters encompassed a wide range of periods, and he showed engravings at the Royal Academy after Rubens's 'Portrait of his Wife' and Murillo's 'Pool at Bethesda'. Of the earlier masters, he also exhibited 'Abundance', after Jan Van Eyck, as well as working on an Arundel Society print after Fra Angelico's 'Saint Matthew' from the chapel of Nicholas V in the Vatican. 
Vernon was elected a member of the Graphic Society in 1867. He died on 23 January 1872. Examples of his work are in the print rooms at the British Museum and the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 28250


Veron, Jean (d. 1563), religious writer and translator and Church of England clergyman, was probably born at or near Sens, for he called himself 'senonoys'; nothing is known about his date of birth or about his family or private life. No record of Veron's life in France has been found, but it has been suggested that he may have attended the University of Orleans in 1534. He emigrated to England 'c'.1536 and became a denizen in July 1544. By then he had been in the country for over eight years, living in Aldrichgate ward, and acting as a teacher of gentlemen's children. The record also states that he had been a student at Cambridge at some point during those eight years, but no evidence of his matriculation has come to light. Although there is no proof of his protestant faith until 1548, Veron probably left France for religious reasons, making him one of the first French protestant refugees in England. Perhaps because he had already been in the country so long Veron did not join the group of foreigners who formed their own French and Dutch Reformed congregations in 1550. 
On 21 August 1551 Veron was ordained deacon by Nicholas Ridley, bishop of London. Eight days later he received priest's orders, and on 3 January 1553 he became the rector of St Alphage, Cripplegate. He did not flee to the continent upon the accession of the Catholic queen, Mary I; indeed, he was one of the 'seditious preachers' arrested by Marian authorities in the wake of a riot at St Paul's on 13 August 1553. It is unknown how he managed to escape execution. John Strype's puzzling reference to him as a 'confessor also under Queen Mary' suggests he may have temporarily converted to Catholicism (Strype, 'Reformation', 1/2.1) but there is no primary evidence to justify this claim. During Elizabeth's reign he became the vicar of St Martin Ludgate and Christ Church Greyfriars, and a prebendary of St Paul's. He preached regularly at St Paul's and Whitehall; Strype calls him a 'bold as well as eloquent man' (ibid., 1/1.200) and 'one of the eminentest preachers at this time' (ibid., 1/2.1). His boldness seems to have inspired enmity in the diarist Henry Machyn: Machyn was forced, on 23 November 1561, to kneel in front of Veron and ask his forgiveness for shouting out at a sermon that Veron kept a wench. 
Throughout his career Veron translated and wrote books which advanced protestant belief and practice and criticized Catholicism, his intention being to instruct the 'rude and simple people' in the tenets of the new faith (preface to H. Bullinger, 'An Holsome Antidotus or Counterpoysen, Agaynst... the Anabaptists', 1548, sig. A4'r'- 'v'). During the reign of Edward VI he was responsible for the publication of two tracts by Huldrych Zwingli, the leader of the Reformation in Zurich; three by Zwingli's successor, Heinrich Bullinger; a treatise of his own against the mass; and a compilation of patristic opinions on the Lord's supper. In the preface to Zwingli's 'The Image of both Pastors' Veron makes explicit his hope that his 'little book' will serve as a temporary substitute for the lack of godly preaching in many parishes in England (preface to H. Zwingli, 'The Image of both Pastors', 1550, sig. B2'v'). In these works Veron not only made continental protestant doctrine available to English readers, but he also explained in his own words how and why the material was relevant to England. 
In 1552 Veron issued a version of the French humanist Robert Etienne's French and Latin dictionary, adding English entries to make it a trilingual lexicon; this dictionary went through two more editions during the Elizabethan period. Also during Elizabeth's reign Veron published a series of dialogues in which Philalethes (lover of truth) leads Albion (England gone astray under Catholicism) back to protestant doctrine on predestination, purgatory, free will, justification by works, invocation of the saints, and clerical celibacy. The dialogue against purgatory is an English adaptation of several dialogues on the subject by the Calvinist author Pierre Viret; the rest of the dialogues appear to be original to Veron. In a humorous, highly persuasive style he asserted these protestant doctrines by attacking both Catholicism and Anabaptism, a tactic which had been successful for reformers on the continent and in England during the reign of Edward VI. 
Veron died in London on 9 April 1563 and was buried the next day. It has been stated ('DNB') that he was buried at St Paul's in an unmarked grave, but the evidence for this is unclear. John Awdelie wrote an epitaph in verse which praised the Frenchman's dedication to England and to the protestant faith. 


@@@@@


doc= 28251


Verrio, Antonio (c.1639-1707), decorative painter, was born in the Neapolitan city of Lecce, the son of Giovanni Lycien ('of Lecce'). (Verrio's early work 'St Francis Appearing to Father Mastrilli' survives in the Convitto Nazionale, Lecce.) Verrio's early career took him to Naples, where he worked for the Jesuit college, and then to other Italian cities such as Florence, Rome, and Genoa. His artistic training is uncertain, but a local artist in Lecce, Giuseppe Verrio, may have been his uncle and first teacher. By 1655 he had married Massenzia Tornese. Although Verrio's first biographer, Bernardo De Dominici, stated that Verrio drowned in France, it is clear that he was living and working in Toulouse by 1666. By 3 July 1668 he was married to Francoise De Angeli, whose surname is recorded in the register at Toulouse Cathedral as 'dangely'. Verrio's gregarious personality seems to have made more of an impression on his biographer for this period, J. Malliot, than his painting; little information survives recording his work at this time. More importantly for his English career, by 1671 he was working in Paris, where during the following year he became a member of the Academie Royal de Peinture. It is thought that he worked at Versailles under Charles Le Brun and there learned to paint in the rich baroque style which helped to create the atmosphere of the court of Louis XIV. 
Ralph Montagu, later first duke of Montagu, the English ambassador to the French court in Paris, persuaded Verrio to travel to England in 1672 to decorate the staircase and great room of Montagu House in London. Montagu introduced Verrio to his first significant patron, Henry Bennet, first Lord Arlington, for whom Verrio worked at Euston Hall, Suffolk, his country seat, and in London (at Arlington House, on the site later occupied by Buckingham House and Palace) in 1674. Charles II first encountered Verrio at Arlington House, and it was through Lord Montagu that he was given his first royal appointment as designer for the newly revived Mortlake tapestry works, of which Montagu was in charge from 1674. Verrio's first-known easel painting from his English period, a 'Sea Triumph of Charles II' (Royal Collection), may date from this time, as it appears to have been painted with the royal appointment in mind. The first volume of Edward Croft-Murray's 'Decorative Painting in England, 1537-1837' (1962) includes a catalogue of Verrio's works. 
Verrio was denizened on 5 May 1675. He did not spend long at Mortlake and was soon engaged on a more significant commission, the redecoration of Hugh May's reconstructed north range of Windsor Castle, for which he was paid over $7000 in twelve years. This was to be his principal occupation from 1675 to 1684 and included the decoration of the king's chapel, St George's hall, and around twenty ceilings and three staircases. The interiors he participated in creating at Windsor Castle for Charles II were among the finest baroque decorative schemes ever produced in Great Britain. Almost all of his work was destroyed by George IV's reconstruction of the castle (under Jeffry Wyatville) in the 1820s and 1830s, but visual sources convey an impression of his work at Windsor. Among these are three engravings of lost ceilings by Pierre Vanderbank and W. H. Pyne's aquatint views illustrated in his 'Royal Residences' (1819), as well as the few fragments (notably the newly discovered portrait, still on its original plaster, of Charles II, from the ceiling of St George's hall) that survive in the Royal Collection. 
Verrio's treatment of the architectural spaces at Windsor (and his subsequent work) relied heavily upon Italian baroque models. The ceilings were painted as if open to a mythological sky, populated with historical figures or gods, often elaborately foreshortened. The space between the walls and ceilings, often conveniently coved at Windsor, was generally painted with a balustrade, or other architectural device, so as to manage the difficult transition between myth and reality. St George's hall was decorated with subjects glorifying England's national saint and the Order of the Garter, while the king's chapel was dominated by a rendition of Christ healing the sick. In both spaces Verrio introduced a pattern for treating a huge expanse of wall which was accepted as the standard method of adorning staircases and large rooms for the next fifty years. The principal figural composition is set on a stage framed by a painted proscenium or screen, the columns of which support the false parapet or open dome surrounding the 'sky' on the ceiling. Thus the greater part of the architectural embellishment of the room is created by the ingenuity of the painter. 
The sheer scale of the work at Windsor necessitated the employment of a large team of assistants, most of whom were French or Flemish. Of those listed in a warrant of 1678, the most significant was Louis Laguerre, who later had a successful career in England in his own right. The artists involved were often specialists, for instance Renee Cousin, a French gilder. 
Verrio's undertaking at Windsor did not prevent his accepting the commission for a vast group portrait of the founders for the hall of Christ's Hospital. The piece, which was painted in oil on canvas in three sections, survives in the rebuilt mathematical school at Horsham, Sussex (as does a much reduced copy made for Samuel Pepys, now in the Yale Center for British Art, New Haven, Connecticut). The work progressed very slowly, partly because Charles II's death in 1685 meant that his portrait had to be replaced by that of James II as the principal figure in the composition. The final payment to Verrio took place in 1687. The work is best described as a baroque version of the traditional 'foundation picture'. 
After his work on Hugh May's remodelled apartments at Windsor was complete, Verrio continued to receive royal commissions from James II, namely the decoration of Henry VIII's chapel at Windsor and the decoration of the chapel at Whitehall Palace, both for the Roman Catholic rite. In 1684 he was appointed chief painter to his majesty, at a salary of $200. Verrio was also known as a gardener, and it seems that he laid out the garden at Whitehall during this period, almost certainly using the principles established by Le Notre, which he would have seen in practice at Versailles. By 1686 Verrio had been made 'principal Gardiner & Surveyor to the King' (Vertue, 'Note books', 1.61) and had remodelled the gardens of St James's Palace, where he was living. Accounts describe him as a very sociable person, given to high living and entertaining in a lavish style. He was a member of the Society of Painters, an early artists' club. However, his time in London ended abruptly at the revolution of 1688, as his sympathies lay with the Jacobites and he refused to work for the new monarchy. In 1690 Francoise Verrio returned to France. 
Verrio spent the next ten years or so in the country, mostly at Burghley House, Northamptonshire, and then at Chatsworth, Derbyshire. At the former he decorated six rooms and the staircase ceiling for John, fifth earl of Exeter, the most famous being the so-called heaven room, which depicts the capture of Mars and Venus in Vulcan's net. He was eventually persuaded to return to work for the crown, firstly back at Windsor. However, his major commission at this time was the decoration of Hampton Court Palace from 1701 onwards, where his work survives intact. There he decorated the entire interior of a small banqueting house by the river (the sketch for the ceiling is in the Victoria and Albert Museum), as well as the huge king's staircase and the queen's drawing room. Criticisms, particularly of the colouring, that have been levelled at these last works can be explained partly by Verrio's increasing loss of sight, which might have led to the accentuation of the least attractive elements in his paintings. He finished the last of these works in mid-1704, by which time he was almost completely blind. 
Verrio retired on a royal pension of $200 a year. He died at his lodgings at Hampton Court on 15 June 1707, having made his will two days before. He made bequests to his two sons, John Baptist and Ffrancisco, and his two grandchildren, John Baptist and Mary. The 'Inventory of the Goods Chattels and Creditts of Anthony Verrio at his Lodgings at Hampton Court', which includes a valuation of these effects, made on 2 July 1707, provides a detailed account of the interior furnishings of his home (TNA: PRO, PROB 32/50/1). 


@@@@@


doc= 28252


Vertue, George (1684-1756), engraver and antiquary, was born in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, on 17 November 1684, the eldest child of Roman Catholic parents, James Vertue (died 1711) and Mary Carter ('c'.1663-1743). His mother had been a servant in the household of the duke of York (the future James II), and both parents were in service at the exiled court of James II. His father's later profession is unknown, though he is said to have been a tailor. Following what he described as 'proper schooling', Vertue was apprenticed on 25 March 1697 to a foreign-born silver engraver in London, probably the French silversmith Blaise Gentot. On Gentot's return to France around 1700, Vertue undertook private artistic study for two years before being apprenticed to the well-connected reproductive engraver Michael Vandergucht. 
After seven years under Vandergucht, in 1709 Vertue set himself up as an independent engraver, producing a variety of work, notably reproductions of portraits by Sir Godfrey Kneller. From 1711 he continued his artistic education by attending the Great Queen Street Academy, run by Kneller. In 1715 he engraved that artist's portrait of the newly crowned George I on a large scale, and by Vertue's own account it was this work that established him. At this time Vertue was patronized by Heneage Finch, fifth earl of Winchilsea, and was receiving a number of individual prestigious commissions. In 1714 the lord mayor of London, Richard Hoare, engaged him to design and engrave a two-sheet print, 'The View of the Charity Children in the Strand', for a payment of $100. Two further well-paid projects, for a map of the British empire for the diplomat Henry Ferne and a reproduction of Holbein's painting of the Barber-Surgeons for that company, were aborted. But in 1717 Vertue was appointed the official engraver to the newly revived Society of Antiquaries. As engraver, a post he held until his death, he was responsible for engraving and printing all the images published under the society's auspices, collected as the 'Vetusta monumenta'. This amounted to sixty-four projects, comprising some eighty-six separate plates. Although the plates remained the property of the society, this employment brought Vertue an average annual income of around $20, providing an unusual source of security for a professional engraver. In addition to the engraving work, Vertue undertook occasional duties such as attending the sale of John Talman's collection as the society's agent in 1727 and supplying 'a press for holding prints' in 1754. Uniquely, he was also a fellow of the society, a privilege denied to the antiquaries' subsequent engravers, and so took an active part in scholarly activities, presenting a paper on the tomb of Edward the Confessor in 1731 (published in the first volume of 'Archaeologia', 1770) and describing the method of taking prints off medals to the society in 1746. Additionally, he frequently undertook private antiquarian commissions from members of the society. 
Vertue's researches into the history of art in Britain began late in 1712 and occupied him for the rest of his life. Drawing on published and manuscript sources, as well as on his extensive travels around Britain, it would have been by far the most comprehensive account of the visual arts produced to date. But during his lifetime the most substantial published manifestations of his labours were his accounts of the works of Wenceslaus Hollar (1745) and of the medallist Thomas Simon (1753). 
On 17 February 1720 Vertue married Margaret Evans (died 1776), an event recorded by the artist in an etching (now in the Victoria and Albert Museum) showing the couple 'in the very Habits they were Married', posed before a wall adorned with his engravings. During the 1720s Vertue established himself as a leading figure in London's art circles: in 1724 he was made secretary of the Rose and Crown Club, and in 1726 he was elected to the Society of the Virtuosi of St Luke, whose meetings he attended through to 1743. Probably through the influence of George Clarke of Christ Church, a keen patron of the artist, Vertue succeeded Michael Burghers in 1727 as Oxford University engraver, taking on the responsibility for the engraving of the almanacs. The books were published by Oxford University Press and generally designed by a Mr Green or Greene of Oxford, but this post brought Vertue a handsome $50 a year through to 1751. 
During the 1720s Vertue was very active as a book illustrator, notable projects being the illustrations for an edition of John Urry's 'Works of Geoffrey Chaucer' (1721), Gerard Brandt's 'History of the Reformation' (1720-23), and Edmund Waller's 'Works' (1729). By the 1730s he tended instead to produce only portrait frontispieces for books. Thomas Dodd was able to list more than 120 separate portraits of this type produced between 1709 and 1756, and even this is demonstrably incomplete. Almost all were reproductions, although a handful were original designs by the artist, including the portraits of Edward Calamy that appeared in his 'Sermons' (1722) and of Samuel Dale for his 'Pharmacologia' (1737). Vertue's reputation in this field was such that puffs for new publications would often cite the presence of an engraved portrait by him as a selling point. 
Vertue also established himself as a successful independent publisher of prints. In March 1726 he issued a printed sheet announcing the publication by subscription of 'The Effigies of Twelve of the Most Celebrated English Poets' (published 1726-9), an early example of such a commercial scheme. The idea was developed on a grander scale by the Knapton brothers with their 'Heads of the Kings of England' (1733-6), for which Vertue was co-publisher and engraver. Vertue designed and engraved forty elaborate folio portrait reproductions and engraved twenty folio prints of royal monuments after designs by Gravelot. However, on the Knaptons' next project, the more extensive 'Heads of Illustrious Persons' (1737-42), Vertue was employed on only nine plates before being dismissed for slowness, being displaced by the Flemish engraver Jacobus Houbraken. He continued to publish independently; the last two pages of his published account of the works of the medallist Thomas Simon (1753) lists more than a hundred prints 'Engraved, already Printed and Published' and available from him at his shop in Brownlow Street, Drury Lane. This includes groups of historical portraits, 'Nine Historical Portraits' (1742-51) and the accompanying pamphlet by the artist, the twelve heads of poets, and many single portrait plates, together with antiquarian views and plans, depictions of curiosities, and maps. 
Besides regular work for the Society of Antiquaries and the University of Oxford, and for the booksellers, Vertue received occasional commissions of a highly various nature. He produced the original design for the massive silver wine cooler commissioned by the banker and goldsmith Henry Jerningham in 1730-31 and executed by Charles Kandler and John Michael Rysbrack in 1731-4; engraved James Gibbs's designs for the Radcliffe Camera for the trustees of the library in 1737; and in 1748 was appointed by the office of the ordinance (whose comptroller was Charles Frederick, formerly director of the Society of Antiquaries) to engrave the design of the royal fireworks that were to celebrate the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle in Green Park. The last commission was recorded in great detail by the engraver in a diary, which documents his frustration as an ambitious project involving a whole volume of large prints and text worth $500 to him was whittled down following delays to comprise only a single plate and the production of the tickets, at a charge of 20 guineas. 
Vertue's autobiography, prepared as part of his history of British art, downplays the variety of his commercial printmaking activities in favour of his work as a draughtsman and antiquary in the employment of a series of prestigious patrons. During the 1720s and 1730s he enjoyed a sustained relationship with the earl of Oxford, for whom he drew and engraved and acted as an occasional art agent and touring companion. At the earl's death in 1741 Lady Oxford continued to patronize Vertue, engaging him to draw up an inventory of the Oxford collection and commissioning a number of prints. The earl's daughter, the duchess of Portland, employed him to engrave a series of plates of curiosities in her collection in the late 1740s. Frederick, prince of Wales, also employed Vertue extensively between 1749 and his death in 1751. For the prince, Vertue provided watercolours from stock, acted as an art adviser, and drew up manuscript catalogues of the royal collections. Most commonly, his work for elite patrons involved the production of private plates reproducing family portraits or monuments, for which the artist quoted a charge of 6 to 10 guineas in 1737. A detailed bill to the duke of Norfolk dated 1745-6 encapsulates the variety of his activities, among them charges for copying portraits of the duke's ancestors, drawing a 'lineal pedigree', and providing a volume of prints by Hollar. Only occasionally did he produce original portraits, such as the 1740 gilt watercolour of the third Baron Coleraine (British Museum) taken from life, which was created following a series of antiquarian tours with the baron during the 1730s. 
Vertue's output as a printmaker was prodigious. His manuscript list of his own engravings (held in the Lewis Walpole Library) includes some 500 prints produced between 1708 and 1740 alone, and this is far from complete. He presumably employed assistants, although he mentions only one, Giles King. On several occasions he made up volumes of proofs of his own prints, created variously for James West in 1733, for the Bodleian Library in 1737, and for the earl of Oxford and for Thomas Frankland in 1740. By 1741 his history of British art was nearing a state of completion, and he even prepared a self-portrait to serve as a frontispiece, but the death of Oxford meant that the plan to publish was abandoned. Although suffering ill health, Vertue continued working into the 1750s, publishing his account of Thomas Simon (1753), producing frontispieces and plates, working on his notebooks, and preparing catalogues of the collections of Charles I, James II, and the duke of Buckingham (the first two were later published by Horace Walpole). 
Vertue died on 24 July 1756 and was buried on 30 July in Westminster Abbey. His will specified some $285 in cash payments to relatives and friends, in addition to the repayment of outstanding debts and mourning rings for nineteen individuals, among them the sculptor Rysbrack and the auctioneer Richard Ford. His remaining wealth was left to Margaret, which, according to Vertue's friend the antiquary William Cole, amounted to as much as $1000. His extensive collections of books, drawings, and prints were auctioned by Ford (as stipulated in his will) in sales running between 16 and 22 March 1757. Vertue's independently published antiquarian plates were acquired from his widow by the Society of Antiquaries and subsequently republished for members, while the rest remained with his widow and were distributed after her death by a sale at Langford's on 24-5 February 1777 (with John Boydell as the most extensive purchaser). The forty or more volumes of Vertue's notes on the history of art were purchased by Horace Walpole in 1758, who from September 1759 worked them up into what was published as his 'Anecdotes of Painting in England' (1762-71). As transmitted by Walpole, and published in their original form by the Walpole Society in six volumes (1930-55), Vertue's 'Note Books' have been a cornerstone of British art history, and have ensured that his memory survives. His reputation as an artist, however, went quickly into decline, suffering from a shift in taste that favoured the expressive potential of original printmaking over the assiduous and undeniably dry manner of his reproductions. Yet it was as both engraver and historian that he was celebrated by contemporaries, and it is the very variety of his professional activities and commercial enterprises that demonstrates most fully the vitality of the culture in which he operated. 


@@@@@


doc= 28253


Vescy, Eustace de (1169/70-1216), baron, lord of Alnwick, Northumberland, the son of William de Vescy (died 1183) and Burga, daughter of Robert (III) de Stuteville, lord of Cottingham, Yorkshire, came of age in 1190. He was charged a relief of 1300 marks for his barony, which consisted of 361/2 fees in Northumberland and Yorkshire. He married Margaret, the illegitimate daughter of William the Lion, king of Scots, and half-sister of Alexander II of Scotland; at Richard I's second coronation on 17 April 1194 he witnessed a royal charter in favour of his father-in-law. 
At the end of 1194 Vescy was at Chinon in France with Richard I. He was one of the guarantors of the treaty between John and Renaud, count of Boulogne, on 13 August 1199. In the same year, probably later, he was sent to William the Lion of Scotland to promise him satisfaction of his rights in England; he witnessed his homage on 22 November 1200, and on 10 April 1209 was sent to meet William the Lion on his visit to England. He served King John on his expedition to Ireland in the summer of 1210. In December 1207 Vescy was pardoned of a 300 mark amercement assessed in his plea against Richard de Umfraville concerning custody of an heir. 
Accused along with Robert Fitzwalter of conspiring against John in August 1212, Vescy fled to Scotland. The tale of John's attempted seduction of his wife, and the trick played on him of substituting another woman in the royal bed, which first appears in William of Newburgh, is scarcely credible, and bears some resemblance to similar stories of the king's lecherous designs on others, for example, Robert Fitzwalter's daughter. Vescy was outlawed and his lands seized; but after John's submission to the pope he was forced to invite Vescy back on 27 May 1213, although orders were sent on the same day to cripple his power by destroying his castles at Alnwick and Malton. On 18 July 1213 he was one of the recipients of John's pledge to make restitution to those persons who had suffered damages during the interdict, and his lands were restored to him the next day. In 1213 Vescy was one of six northern barons who refused to participate in John's projected Poitevin expedition, and the next year he refused to pay scutage for the campaign. On 5 November 1214 Innocent III warned him to remain loyal to the king in his disputes with the barons. He was one of the most prominent of the northern barons who led the movement to impose 'Magna Carta' on John. He was closely associated with another Yorkshire rebel, Robert de Ros (died 1226/7), and both were among the twenty-five appointed to see 'Magna Carta' carried out. He was one of nine barons whom the pope excommunicated by name in September 1215. On 3 May 1216 Vescy went to John seeking reconciliation. After Louis of France landed he accompanied Alexander II of Scotland on his way to do homage to the Capetian prince. On their way in late August 1216 they laid siege to Barnard Castle, co. Durham, belonging to Hugh de Balliol, and, approaching too near, Vescy was shot through the head by an arrow. His lands were confiscated and handed over to royal allies. He left a son, William (died 1253), who came of age in 1226. 


@@@@@


doc= 28254


Vescy, John de (1244-1289), baron, was the eldest son of William de Vescy (died 1253) and his second wife, Agnes, daughter of William de Ferrers, and the elder brother of William de Vescy. According to the chronicler of Malton Priory, he was born on 18 July 1244. In 1253, on the death of his father in Gascony, he succeeded to the barony of Alnwick, Northumberland, besides Malton and considerable estates in Yorkshire. Henry III conferred his wardship and marriage on Peter of Savoy, Queen Eleanor's uncle, as a clear grant worth $625 p.a. According to the close rolls (1254), young Vescy was educated, with the Lord Edmund and Henry de Lacy, in the queen's household. Queen Eleanor and Peter of Savoy subsequently married him to their kinswoman Agnes of Saluzzo (died 'c'.1265). From May 1263 Vescy was (according to the chronicler Thomas Wykes) one of the noble 'boys' rebelling under the leadership of Simon de Montfort. His motives were unclear: Henry III had been personally kind to him, with several gifts to him and his mother. His Savoyard wife was devoted to him. Presumably Vescy was attracted by existing friendships with other rebellious royal wards, for instance Henry Hastings and Geoffrey de Lucy. 
Vescy's main activity during the barons' war was fighting the king's supporters in the north. From October 1263 until the middle of 1264 he harassed the sheriff of Yorkshire. In December 1263 he was one of those barons listed as supporting the Montfortians' case at the mise of Amiens. However, it is not certain that he fought at Lewes, and he held no office under Montfort. He was summoned to Montfort's famous Model Parliament of 20 January 1265, which he may have attended (although he was still in the north on 9 January). He was due to attend the Dunstable tournament on 24 February 1265, and it is only from then that he seems to have been at court; he received grants in April and May. He was wounded and taken prisoner at Evesham, but was released and compounded for his estates after the dictum of Kenilworth. He may even have been saddled with a double fine. There is a Northumbrian legend that he took home with him to Alnwick, in bizarre northern fashion, one of Montfort's feet, which until the dissolution was preserved in the priory, shod with a silver shoe. 
In 1267 Vescy rebelled again with some disinherited northern barons. However, early in the year Edward himself went north and forced him to submit, after taking Alnwick Castle by storm with the assistance of the men of Bamburgh. According to Wykes, the king's son treated him so leniently that ever after he was his devoted friend. Vescy was quickly reconciled, securing pardons for at least three retainers, and ransoming his lands from the count of St Pol for 3700 marks, most of which had been paid by Easter 1270. Unusually for ex-Montfortians he took the cross and attended Edward on crusade to Palestine, financed by the lease of manors and loans ['see also 'Lord Edward's crusade]. The story that he helped lead Eleanor of Castile out when Edward was operated upon for his famous wound is now thought apocryphal, but he was growing in favour, and accompanied Edward to Gascony on his return to England. 
From 1274 to 1276 Edward I made Vescy governor of Scarborough Castle. In 1275 he fought in the Scottish expedition which defeated Godred, king of Man. In early 1276 he went on pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela but returned to attend parliament at the end of the year. He was now a trusted member of Edward I's inner circle (although the old tradition that he was the king's 'secretary' stems from a mistranslation). In August 1277 Vescy served in Wales and with Otho de Grandson led the substantial naval force which cut off Anglesey and helped bring Llywelyn of Wales to heel. In 1278 he was one of the ambassadors negotiating the marriage of the king's infant daughter, Margaret, to the duke of Brabant. In the following year, he adjudicated disputes between the king of Scots and the bishop of Durham. Vescy was sent in February 1282 with Antony (I) Bek to Aragon for the preliminary negotiations (ultimately unsuccessful) of a marriage between Alfonso, son of King Peter, and Edward's eldest daughter, Eleanor, and in August signed the contract as proxy at Huesca. Bek and Vescy then helped recruit Gascons for the renewed Welsh war. During that campaign Vescy again held the most important command of Anglesey with Otho de Grandson. In June 1285 he was sent with two others to negotiate the marriage between Edward's daughter, Elizabeth, and the son of the count of Holland. He accompanied Edward to Gascony from 1286 to 1289 and in 1287 assisted in the trial and dismissal of the seneschal, Jean de Grailly. Later in that year he again took part in negotiations with the king of Castile; he acted for a short while as Edward's hostage, and was treated with honour by the Castilians. 
Vescy was married twice: first to Peter of Savoy's kinswoman Agnes, sister of Alice, countess of Lincoln, and daughter of Manfred III, marquess of Saluzzo. She died, presumably just after the battle of Evesham, for the Alnwick chronicler noted that it was 'of grief on hearing of the imprisonment of her lord' (Hartshorne, 2.5). She was buried with her sister at the Blackfriars, Pontefract. It must be significant that Vescy did not remarry for fourteen years. His second wife, whom he married in 1279 or 1280, was Isabel, sister of Henry de Beaumont (later earl of Buchan and lord of Man) and Louis de Beaumont (afterwards bishop of Durham). Vescy bargained with Queen Eleanor, his wife's kinswoman, to pay her $550 if the lady died childless. (Vescy's alleged marriage of 3 January 1279 to Marie de Lusignan, sister of Hugh XIII, count of La Marche, was merely an abortive prenuptial contract.) 
Vescy patronized his family's foundation at Alnwick; additionally, in October 1286, he received a papal faculty to purchase the Friary of Penitence at Newcastle and founded there a house of the Sisters of St Clare. In the same year, he was granted an indult as 'a knight of the king' to have a portable altar for his household. Vescy died aged forty-four, childless, on 10 February 1289 at Montpellier, according to the Alnwick Abbey chronicler; he was buried at Alnwick Abbey, but his heart, as a mark of royal favour, was buried in 1290 with the hearts of Queen Eleanor and Prince Alfonso, in Blackfriars Church, London. His brother William succeeded to his estates. His widow was a prominent favourite of Edward II, and was specially banished by the ordinances of 1311, although she soon returned. She died just before 1 November 1334. 


@@@@@


doc= 28255


Vescy, William de, Lord Vescy (1245-1297), baron, was born on 19 September 1245, the second son of William de Vescy (died 1253), lord of Alnwick, Northumberland, and of Agnes, the daughter of William de Ferrers and his wife, Sybil, one of the daughters of William (II) Marshal, who divided his vast inheritance on the death of their brother Anselm. William senior died in 1253 and was succeeded by his eldest son, John de Vescy, who died without heirs in 1289, leaving the family estate to the younger William, who was then forty-three years old. When his mother died in 1290 Vescy inherited a large portion of the county of Kildare in Ireland, as well as property in England. In middle age he became the head of an impressive patrimony in England and Ireland and took on royal service commensurate with his new status. 
As a younger son, William de Vescy only occasionally appears in royal records before his brother's death, and his early career clearly followed his brother's. John was an adherent of Simon de Montfort and was wounded and captured at Evesham on 4 August 1265. Like his brother, William supported the barons, and had attempted to hold Gloucester Castle against the Lord Edward earlier in June. After a further bout of rebelliousness in the north in 1267, John de Vescy became Edward's close companion, joined him on crusade in 1270-72, and, as his household knight, subsequently performed a variety of tasks, notably as a soldier and ambassador. In 1276 Edward pardoned the two brothers for depredations committed during the barons' wars, and William was given protection to go on a pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela. William stood surety for John in a debt to the king, and in 1280 was described as one of his brother's household knights. In 1289, after his brother died, William was given custody of Scarborough Castle to hold on the same terms on which John had held it. 
During the 1280s William de Vescy began to carve out a career for himself in royal service. He was summoned to perform military service in Wales in 1277, 1282, and again in 1283, and was summoned to parliaments and royal councils in 1283, 1288, and 1295, in consequence coming to be styled Lord Vescy. In 1285 Edward appointed him justice of the forest north of the Trent, and in 1290 named him one of his envoys to treat with the Scots. He also placed him on commissions of gaol delivery and oyer and terminer. 
The year 1290 marked a new phase of Vescy's career, for Edward appointed him justiciar of Ireland, demonstrating how his inheritance there could divert Vescy's attention from his interests as a substantial landholder in the north of England. He had to step down as justice of the forest, and Edward immediately granted the office to Vescy's son, John. Vescy received his commission on 12 September, and landed in Ireland two months later on 11 November. Conditions in Ireland were very disturbed, so that besides the $500 allotted to him yearly to maintain him in his office, he was to receive an additional $500 in time of war. In fact Vescy incurred expenses at once for campaigning against the Irish and maintaining a force of Welsh retainers. In 1291 his attention turned briefly to Scotland. Not only was he summoned to serve in Scotland, but more importantly, after the death of Princess Margaret, he put in a claim to the throne of Scotland based on his descent from his grandmother Margaret, an illegitimate daughter of William the Lion, king of Scots ['see also 'Competitors for the throne of Scotland]. His son, John, represented him in the process, but Vescy did not pursue the claim vigorously, and abandoned the effort just before Edward made his pronouncement on 17 November 1292. 
Various disputes arising out of Vescy's overbearing conduct as justiciar and as lord of the liberty of Kildare demanded his attention in these years. In 1291 the abbot of St Thomas's, Dublin, accused Vescy and the other Marshal coheirs of unjustly impleading him in the court of the liberty. The case took a serious turn when Vescy went ahead and heard the plea anyway after the king had prohibited him from proceeding. Additional accusations, ranging from unjustly taking distresses, issuing prohibitions, proving weights and measures, and harassing officials, to falsely maintaining individuals in suits, were heard by king and council at the parliament at Westminster in October 1293. Edward ordered an inquiry, and the subsequent inquests conducted in March 1294 found Vescy and his men guilty of many transgressions. 
The most sensational dispute involved John fitz Thomas Fitzgerald (died 1316), lord of Offaly, who was Vescy's tenant. Tensions between them mounted to the point that the king intervened in 1293, and ordered Vescy to revoke a military summons that he had issued to raise an army to march on Offaly. Fitz Thomas lodged several of the accusations against Vescy heard in parliament in 1293. The following year Vescy accused fitz Thomas of defaming him before the king and council, by alleging that Vescy had tried to persuade him to enter into a sworn compact against the king. Fitz Thomas denied this accusation, but claimed that Vescy had said even more explosive things about the king, telling him that the Irish were a miserable people, but could be great lords and do without the king. If they knew Edward as well as he did, they would value him less for he was the most perverse and dastardly knight in the kingdom. And he recounted a story of Edward's conduct at Kenilworth during the barons' wars that showed him to be a coward. Outraged, Vescy denied the charges and offered to wage battle to prove his right. The king removed the case to England and ordered fitz Thomas and Vescy to appear before him on July 24. Vescy showed up, armed and ready for battle. Fitz Thomas did not appear, and the case was adjourned several times before it was finally nullified in parliament in 1295. 
William de Vescy was removed as justiciar in 1294. Despite his record, Edward bore him no ill will, for Vescy was with the king in Wales in April 1295, was summoned to parliament in June, and was reappointed justice of the forest the following September. Indeed, Langtoft called him a 'prudent and wise knight' ('Chronicle of Pierre de Langtoft', 2.231). Preparing for the campaign in Gascony of 1296, in October 1295 Vescy received permission to make a grant in mortmain to the prior and convent of Malton, while in December Edward promised that if Vescy died in Gascony he would charge his heirs for any outstanding debts. 
Vescy was summoned to serve again in Gascony in 1297, but he died on 19 July. His wife was Isabel, the second daughter and coheir of Adam of Periton, of Ellington, Northumberland, and the widow of Robert of Welle, who had died in 1265. Their only son, John, died in Wales on 27 April 1295, and in his last years Vescy was much concerned with the inheritance of his estates. In 1296, therefore, he engaged in several transactions with Antony (I) Bek, bishop of Durham (died 1311), to make his bastard son, another 
After his father's death William of Kildare seems to have succeeded by stages to the lands entailed upon him by his father. He did homage for Caythorpe in Lincolnshire on 22 May 1298, and was summoned to serve in Scotland in 1300 as having lands worth more than $40 per annum in that county, but a petition from early in Edward II's reign, asking the king 'to enforce the covenants between the bishop of Durham and his father' ('CDS', 3, no. 187), suggests that he was slow to obtain livery of his inheritance elsewhere. Later allegations that Bishop Bek defrauded William of the honour of Alnwick by selling it to Henry Percy have been shown to be baseless. In 1310 Vescy litigated against the widow of his half-brother, John de Vescy, for the Lincolnshire manor of Stapleford, claiming that his father had assigned it to her as dower with reversion to himself, but no judgment is recorded. None the less at the time of his death William held a number of manors in Yorkshire and Lincolnshire. He is recorded as a knight of Edward II's household, which may explain the summonses to parliament directed to him in 1313 and 1314; he is thus regarded as having become Lord Vescy in his own right. But it was as a retainer of the earl of Pembroke that he fought at Bannockburn, where he was killed on 24 June 1314. According to Dugdale he married Maud, widow of Thomas Neville of Cleatham, Lincolnshire, but this is unlikely. His heir was his distant cousin Gilbert Aton, who succeeded to all that was left of the Vescy inheritance. 


@@@@@


doc= 28256


William de Vescy, Lord Vescy (d. 1314), the inheritor of a number of his English estates. But in 1297 he surrendered the county of Kildare and other Irish lands to the king, and received them back on condition that they would revert to the crown when he died. In return, Edward pardoned all debts and fines to the crown incurred by Vescy as justiciar of Ireland and justice of the forest, as well as the debts owed by his brother John. He was likewise pardoned for all legal actions against him from the time he was justiciar and justice. 


@@@@@


doc= 28257


Vesey, Elizabeth (c.1715-1791), literary hostess, was probably born in Ireland. She was the second daughter of Sir Thomas Vesey, bt, bishop of Ossory (1672/3-1730), and his wife, Mary (died 1746), daughter and heir of Denny Muschamp of Horsley, Surrey. The Veseys were an important Anglo-Irish family; Thomas's father, John, was archbishop of Tuam. Elizabeth was presumably educated at home; her correspondence suggests wide reading and at least some competence in French and Italian. She married William Handcock of Willbrook, co. Westmeath, before December 1731 when Mary Delany reported seeing them at a ball in Dublin. Handcock, who represented the borough of Fore in the Irish parliament, died in 1741. By early 1746 Elizabeth had married a wealthy cousin, Agmondesham Vesey (died 1785) of Lucan, a member of the Irish parliament for Harristown, co. Kildare, and Kinsale, co. Cork. He also served as accountant-general of Ireland. Elizabeth had no children from either marriage. 
The Veseys travelled frequently to England and by the 1760s their stays in Ireland were generally limited to the biennial meetings of parliament. In London they rented houses in Clarges Street and Bolton Row. In Ireland they lived at Lucan. Agmondesham Vesey, who fancied himself as an architect, improved his house there after his marriage, but between 1775 and 1777 he replaced it entirely with a correct Georgian mansion. Vesey was generally held to be an intellectual lightweight, always seeking to follow fashion. He was good company as a casual acquaintance but few valued his advice or friendship. He was also chronically unfaithful to his wife. Elizabeth Vesey maintained the facade of a successful marriage, nursed her husband during attacks of epilepsy, but depended for support upon a circle of female friends. Her domestic companion was a sister of her first husband. Miss Handcock (her first name is not known), who also assumed most of the duties of household management, was always acknowledged cordially by Vesey's correspondents, but she seems to have stayed in the background on social occasions. Vesey's well-known friends included Mary Delany, whom she met in Ireland, Margaret, duchess of Portland, Elizabeth Montagu, Elizabeth Carter, Frances Burney, and Hannah More. 
Vesey and Montagu seem to have met in the late 1740s. By the 1760s they were very close, sharing friends of both sexes and co-operating in establishing a salon where intelligent talk and witty repartee were more important than drink, politics, cards, or sexual encounters. They referred to their circle as the bluestocking philosophers. Vesey seems to have introduced this use of the term bluestocking, applying it to both men and women. The philosophy was put into action most effectively in her drawing-room; Vesey's charm and gifts as a hostess made her salon the most memorable of the group. In 1783 young Mary Hamilton wrote that at the Vesey house: 'one meets with a charming variety of society... the Learned, the witty, the old & young, the grave, gay, wise & unwise, the fine bred Man & the pert coxcomb; The elegant female, the chaste Matron, the severe prude, & the pert Miss, but be it remembered that you can run no 'risque' in Mrs. Vesey's parties of meeting with those who have no claim to respect. (Anson and Anson, 132)' Hannah More's poem 'Bas bleu' (1784) was written to commemorate such an assembly. 
Vesey's success obviously depended on her personality. She was small in stature and retained her girlish beauty for many years. She seems to have been an incurable flirt, but her charm beguiled both men and women. Delany dubbed her Sylph, and her closest friends continued to call her that throughout her life. Like her friend Elizabeth Montagu she suffered from stomach complaints and other ills both real and imaginary. They frequently exchanged medications and medical advice. Vesey's surviving letters, found among those of her friends, reflect her restless flitting from one topic to another and her flights of fancy. They were treasured by such recipients as Elizabeth Carter who wrote that 'All your friends and correspondents receive the same delightful entertainment, and are equally charmed by your Letters, as they ever were; they breathe the same enchanting style which has ever marked what falls from your pen' (Pennington, 4.302). The modern reader, not knowing her in person, often finds Vesey's letters of less interest than those of other bluestockings. Despite her clerical forebears Vesey had no real religious convictions. This distressed many of her friends who believed her lack of belief made her more prey to the depression which afflicted her later years. 
After 1782 the Vesey household did not return to Ireland. None of the principals was in good health, and by then Elizabeth Vesey feared she was losing both sight and hearing. Agmondesham Vesey died on 3 June 1785. His widow and her companion, Miss Handcock, were further distressed to find that neither was mentioned in his will. Their friends reported that Elizabeth had turned over all her funds to her husband at the time of their marriage; now all that remained was Vesey's jointure and Handcock's annuity which together brought in about $800 a year. An added insult was the report that Agmondesham Vesey had left $1000 to his mistress. Some financial help was given to Vesey and Handcock by various relatives and in 1788 they moved to the Chelsea house of Vesey's cousin, Lord Cremorne. After her husband's death Vesey gave way to a tearful depression for some months. She reappeared briefly in society in 1787-8 but never again assumed the place she had previously held. Miss Handcock died in January 1789, leaving Vesey alone with her tears and her depression. She died in Chelsea early in 1791. 
Any account of the bluestockings must include Vesey, although she is the most difficult to pin down. She left no literary remains, no mass of letters, and no autobiographical account. However, the brief success of the bluestocking philosophy probably owed more to her than to any of the other women usually identified with this group. 


@@@@@


doc= 28258


Vesey, John (1638-1716), Church of Ireland archbishop of Tuam, was born in Coleraine, co. Londonderry, on 10 March 1638, the eldest son of Thomas Vesey ('c'.1605-1669?), who held several livings in co. Londonderry. His mother was a daughter of another co. Londonderry clergyman, the Revd Gervaise Walker. According to Harris he was educated at Westminster School and then at Trinity College, Dublin, although the only reference to him in the college registers relates to a doctorate in divinity conferred in 1672. Harris also records somewhat circumspectly ('we are told') that Vesey was ordained by John Leslie, bishop of Raphoe, during Cromwell's lifetime, noting that this would have been before he reached the canonical age. 
Although Thomas Vesey had continued to officiate during the interregnum, he emerged in 1660 as a leading supporter of the return of episcopacy. His son John was appointed chaplain to the Irish House of Commons in 1661, and in the same year was appointed by the crown to the livings of Ighturmurrow and Shandrum in the diocese of Cloyne. On 16 October 1662 John succeeded his father as archdeacon of Armagh; however Thomas Vesey resumed the office the following year. On 4 February 1667 the younger Vesey was collated as prebendary of Kilpeacon in the diocese of Limerick. The day before he had been presented to the deanery of Cork, where he was instituted on 4 November, and at the same time became treasurer of Cloyne. He became bishop of Limerick in 1673 (patent 11 January, consecrated 22 December), and in 1679 was promoted to the archbishopric of Tuam (patent 18 March, enthroned 16 May) and sworn of the privy council. He became warden of Galway in September 1684. In 1676 he published a life of Archbishop John Bramhall, prefixed to an edition of the archbishop's works. This included a sustained attack on Presbyterians for their rejection of the established church. Another publication, 'A Sermon Preached at Clonmel, on Sunday the Sixteenth of September, 1683' (1683), attacked both Catholics and Presbyterians for their subversive doctrines. 
In February 1689 Vesey left Ireland for England, having escaped from Tuam, by his own account, just days before the road 'became impassable by the multitude of skein-men and half-pike men called now Raparies' (Mant, 1.748). He took with him his wife and four children, leaving six others behind. Although he claimed to have a licence for his absence, his goods were confiscated by the Jacobite authorities. He is reported to have supported himself by a lecturership worth $40 per annum, although he also drew up a list of donations, totalling some hundreds of pounds, which he received from sympathizers while in England. A sermon which he preached to the Irish in London on 23 October 1689 was subsequently published. 
On his return to Ireland, Vesey preached before the lord lieutenant and both houses at the opening of the first Williamite parliament in Dublin, on 16 October 1692. His sermon was a careful restatement of traditional Anglican political values, insisting on the absolute necessity of civil government and the special status of monarchy 'as being a copy from the divine original', but also asserting the right of a people deprived of proper government 'immediately to apply the proper remedy, by filling the vacant throne by a free election, where they have power so to do; or peaceable submission to those who have a right without it' ('A Sermon Preached before his Excellency the Lord Lieutenant and the Two Houses of Parliament', 1692, 12). In the reign of Queen Anne he used his control of the borough of Tuam to return two MPs for the tory party. He served as one of the lords justices between 4 February and 22 September 1713, and again between 7 February 1714 and the death of Queen Anne. Contemporaries were puzzled when in October 1713 a mob attacked Vesey's Dublin home and 'were for pulling the old prelate out of his house for a Whig' ('Correspondence of Jonathan Swift', 1.394). The new whig regime that took power under George I kept Vesey in office as lord justice until September 1715, leading Lord Coningsby to protest that 'as he was certainly the most artful and dangerous man in the last commission, so is he much more so in the present' (PRONI, D638/145). But in fact he was by this time too ill to take an active part in government. 
Vesey was an energetic builder and improver. The private residence he erected at Hollymount in co. Mayo was visited in 1756 by John Wesley, who reported that Vesey had 'built a neat commodious house on a little eminence, laid out fruit and flower gardens round it, brought a river to run through them, and encompassed the whole with walks and groves of stately trees' ('Journal', 4.172). He also promoted the development of an estate village, as well as planting the surrounding area with protestant tenants and building a parish church dedicated to King Charles the martyr. Assessments of his performance as a bishop vary. In 1686 he was named as one of the many clergy forced to return to Ireland, in his case after an absence of three years, by the lord lieutenant's refusal to renew licences of absence. The reform-minded James Bonnell, in February 1692, expressed his fear that Vesey, by his 'smooth way', might obtain the archbishopric of Armagh: 'he is one of the nepotismo, and if he were primate, would perfect the ruin of the church' (CUL, Strype MS I, fol. 89'v'). His successor at Tuam, Edward Synge, wrote disparagingly of the state of the archdiocese as he inherited it (Gilbert Library, Dublin, MS 28, 90-94). Archbishop William King, likewise, criticized him for failing to honour a promise to waive his claim to a share in parochial tithes (the 'quarta pars') in exchange for being granted the wardenship of Galway (TCD, MS 2533, 176-81). A late twentieth-century assessment, however, dismisses these criticisms, pointing to Vesey's personal piety and support for charity schools, and suggesting that he should in fact be classed as a significant ecclesiastical reformer (Hayton, 133-4). 
Vesey was married twice; his first wife was Rebecca Wilson, and his second Anne Muschamp, who survived him. His eldest son, Sir Thomas Vesey (1672/3-1730), was bishop of Killaloe (1713-14) and of Ossory (1714-30). Archbishop Vesey died at Holymount on 28 March 1716 and was buried on the estate. 


@@@@@


doc= 28259


Vesey, Sir Thomas, first baronet (1672/3-1730), Church of Ireland bishop of Ossory, was born at Cork, the son of John Vesey (1638-1716), successively dean of Cork, bishop of Limerick, and archbishop of Tuam, and his wife, Rebecca Wilson. His education began in Cork, was said to have continued at Eton College, and brought him to Christ Church, Oxford, whence he matriculated in July 1689, aged sixteen. The family fortunes having been depleted by the Jacobite revanche in Ireland, he was helped through university by the future archbishop William Wake. He graduated BA in 1693 and two years later became a fellow of Oriel College. His father was already regarded as a notable nepotist and the fortunes of the family were further improved by Thomas Vesey's marriage, on 27 July 1698, to Mary (died 1746), the only surviving daughter and heir of Denny Muschamp, muster-master-general of Ireland, and Elizabeth, daughter of Michael Boyle, the long-lived archbishop of Armagh; Vesey's stepmother had also been a Muschamp. Following this access of wealth Vesey was made a baronet on 28 September 1698. Also, in common with two of his half-brothers, he took holy orders, being ordained priest on 24 June 1700. His father immediately appointed him to the archdeaconry of Tuam, which he held in conjunction with two livings in the same diocese and the rectory of Drumcree in the diocese of Armagh. In 1703 the new lord lieutenant, the duke of Ormond, made him a chaplain, whereupon he resigned the archdeaconry. Ormond's patronage suggested tory leanings; these, together with assiduous courtship of the important in London, helped Vesey to the bishopric of Killaloe, where he was consecrated on 12 July 1713. In the following year, on 18 February 1714, he was translated to Ossory -- convenient for Ormond's bailiwick of Kilkenny and for the bishop's recently acquired estate at Abbey Leix, Queen's county. Vesey and his wife devoted much energy and money to embellishing both house and grounds. They also spent long periods in London and at Bath. 
George I's accession greatly diminished Vesey's influence and obliged him to be more circumspect in voicing his political opinions. He was still identified with the once powerful tory interest in Ireland. Despite the changed political climate he continued to appear at the Lords' sittings, particularly in 1719 and 1723-4, as one in a sizeable group of bishops who survived from Queen Anne's reign. Like his father he appointed close relatives to the more valuable livings within his diocese. His notoriety in this respect led to his being accused of ordaining 'debauchees and troopers' and incurred the disapproval of his superior, the more exacting Archbishop King of Dublin (Hunt. L., MS 143198-259, fol. 28; quoted in Pilkington, 2.372). Despite Vesey's laxity and worldly preoccupations, standards of residence, educational provision, and regularity of services improved under his episcopate. One contemporary regarded him as 'a well-bred gentleman as well as a good bishop' ('Whole Works of Sir James Ware', 1.599). He died in Dublin on 6 August 1730 and was buried in St Anne's Church. His eldest son, Sir John Denny Vesey, inherited and further improved the Abbey Leix seat and was created Baron Knapton in 1750. His second daughter, Elizabeth Vesey, married her cousin Agmondesham Vesey and became a celebrated literary hostess. 


@@@@@


doc= 28260


Vetch, James (1789-1869), engineer, third son of Robert Vetch of Caponflat, Haddington, East Lothian, and his wife, Agnes Sharp, was born at Haddington on 13 May 1789. Educated at Haddington and Edinburgh, he entered the military college at Great Marlow, from where in 1805 he was transferred to the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich. He was employed on the trigonometrical survey at Oakingham, Berkshire (1806), until he was commissioned second lieutenant in the Royal Engineers in 1807. He was promoted lieutenant in 1808. After serving for three years at Chatham and Plymouth, he was sent in 1810 to Spain, where he served at the blockade of Cadiz and in the battle of Barossa on 5 March 1811, and was made the bearer of dispatches to Gibraltar. Vetch then went from Tangier to Tetuan to report on the capabilities of the country to furnish engineer supplies. In 1812 he took part in the siege of Badajoz. He was promoted second captain in 1813, and returned to England the following year. For his services in the Peninsula he received the war medal with clasps for Barossa and Badajoz. 
From 1814 to 1820 Vetch commanded a company of sappers and miners at Spike Island in Cork harbour and afterwards at Chatham. In 1819 he was appointed to the Ordnance Survey. After initial work on the Irish survey, he was employed from 1821 until 1823, with Thomas Drummond, Robert Kearsley Dawson, and Thomas Colby, on the triangulation of the Orkney and Shetland islands and of the western islands of Scotland. Their work virtually completed the primary triangulation of Great Britain by the survey, although a long gap caused by a concentration on the Irish survey meant that it was not finally completed until 1838-41. 
Promotion being very slow, Vetch went on half pay on 11 March 1824, and, going to Mexico with John Rule, managed the silver mines of the English Compania de Real del Monte and of the Compania de Bolanos. He also worked for the Anglo-Mexican Association, and later the United Mexican Company. He returned to England in 1829, but again went to Mexico after his marriage on 2 February 1832, in London, to Alexandrina Ogilvie (died 1853), daughter of Robert Auld of Edinburgh. They had ten children. He remained in Mexico until 1835 constructing roads in connection with the mines, organizing efficient systems of transport, and paving the way for the great expansion in mining in that country. Sir Henry Ward, the British envoy, in an official report, called attention to his services. Feeling the want of a good map, Vetch made astronomical and barometrical observations, measured several short base-lines, and triangulated a large tract of country. His papers and maps from Mexico were presented after his death to the topographical department of the War Office. He presented a valuable collection of Mexican antiquities to the British Museum and in 1836 wrote a paper about them. Having returned to England, Vetch was resident engineer of the Birmingham and Gloucester Railway Company from 1836 to 1840 for the construction of one half of that line of railway. 
In 1843 Vetch published an 'Enquiry into the means of establishing a ship navigation between the Mediterranean and Red seas', after having worked on the problem since 1839. The work ran through several editions and attracted much public attention, but the government, and especially Palmerston, opposed the plan as contrary to the political interests of the country. Twelve years later Ferdinand de Lesseps, a former French diplomat who is usually credited with being the inspiration behind the Suez Canal, which opened in 1869, published his scheme, printing Vetch's opinions as an appendix to his work. 
In 1842 Vetch designed an effective system of sewerage for the borough of Leeds. In 1843 he and Sir Henry Thomas De la Beche prepared designs for the drainage of Windsor, and his designs for the drainage of Windsor Castle and parks and the purification of the Frogmore lakes were completed in 1847. Vetch was appointed one of the three commissioners to effect the 'Assessionable Manors of the Duchy of Cornwall Act' of 1844. This reformed tenancy arrangements on the seventeen assessionable manors in the duchy in order to raise agricultural productivity. Vetch resided first at Devonport and then at Truro, and was commended when the commission's work was completed in 1846. 
In 1844, 1845, and 1846 Vetch was examined before the tidal harbours and the harbours of refuge commissions, arguing for the advantages of using wrought-iron framework in the construction of piers and breakwaters. In July 1846 he was appointed consulting engineer to the Admiralty on all questions relating to the harbours, rivers, and navigable waters of the United Kingdom. In 1847 he was appointed to the new harbour conservancy board at the Admiralty, and in 1853 was appointed sole conservator of harbours. He published reports between 1847 and 1859 on several harbours in the United Kingdom. From 1849 to 1853 Vetch held the time-consuming honorary office of metropolitan commissioner of sewers. In 1849 he proposed an extended water supply for London, and in 1850 designed a system of drainage for Southwark. In 1858-9 he was a member of the royal commission on harbours of refuge. 
Vetch retired from the Admiralty in 1863. He was elected a fellow of the Geological Society in 1818 and of the Royal Society in 1830, in which year he was a founder fellow of the Royal Geographical Society. He became an associate of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1839 and a member of the Societe Francaise de Statistique Universelle in 1852, and was a member of other learned bodies. He died on 7 December 1869 at Munster House, Fulham, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. Seven of his children survived him, including the Revd James Edward (died 1870), Robert Hamilton, colonel, Royal Engineers, and William Francis, major-general, Royal Dublin Fusiliers. Vetch published many papers, mostly in connection with the engineering projects on which he was engaged, but also on other geographical and archaeological topics. 


@@@@@


doc= 28261


Vetch, Samuel (1668-1732), army officer and colonial governor, was born in Edinburgh on 9 December 1668, the second son of the three children of William Veitch (1640-1722), a Church of Scotland minister of Robertson, Lanarkshire, and Marion Fairlie (1639-1722) ['see 'Veitch, Marion] from Edinburgh. In his childhood the family lived at Fallowlees, Northumberland, where William Veitch was minister, and from 1675 at Longhorsley. With his brother, also William (1667-1700), Samuel was educated at Utrecht where, aged fifteen, he had been sent to join his father who had been in exile since 1683 from the anti-covenanter policies of Charles II. Both brothers later joined the army of William of Orange and participated in the invasion of November 1688 as members of the Cameronians or 26th regiment of foot. They fought at Dunkeld (August 1689) and later in Flanders at the battles of Steenkerke (August 1692) -- where William was wounded -- and of Neerwinden (29 July 1693). Having returned to Dumfries in 1697, where his father was then minister, Vetch (who had achieved the rank of captain) and his brother volunteered for William Paterson's ill-fated expedition to establish a Scottish colony on the isthmus of Darien. They sailed for central America in July 1698 with 1200 men, Samuel having been elected as one of seven council members to govern the colony. Arriving in November, Vetch oversaw the establishment of a capital, 'New Edinburgh', before opposition from the English and Spanish led to the scheme's collapse and the island's abandonment in June 1699. Vetch and Paterson now sailed for New York. They were followed in September 1700 by William Vetch, who had headed another, equally disastrous, expedition earlier in that year; departing the island for the second time, in April, William died off Jamaica 'en route' for New York. 
On 20 December 1700 Samuel Vetch (who adopted this spelling of his name on arrival in America) married Margaret (died 1763), daughter of Robert Livingstone, secretary for Indian affairs; the couple had three children, two of whom died in infancy. His marriage brought Vetch a comfortable place in New York society which he confirmed with his reputation for charismatic leadership, and a prosperous illegal trade with Canada. By 1705 he was living in Boston. There he began a new trade network under cover of a scheme for prisoner exchanges in which he acted as Governor Joseph Dudley's representative to the Canadian governor-general, Rigaud de Vaudreuil. It is probable that Dudley also expected Vetch to spy on Acadian defences and it was during this period that he gained a detailed knowledge of the navigation channels of the St Lawrence. However, in 1706 he was accused along with other Boston traders of simultaneously supplying the Acadians with arms at a time when Massachusetts traders faced frequent attacks from French-supported Indians. Tried by the Massachusetts general court, he was fined $200 but acquitted in September 1707 following the intervention of the privy council in London. 
During 1708 Vetch travelled in Britain where he sought to convince Queen Anne to sponsor his dramatic plan for the conquest of French Canada, as set out in his detailed paper 'Canada survey'd', submitted in July of that year. The queen's approval granted, Vetch was promised a substantial invasion force together with a colonelcy and governorship of the new territory on its acquisition. Vetch now travelled to Massachusetts to gather support among colonial officials with the help of the former governor of Virginia, Francis Nicholson (1655-1728). However, by October 1709, with considerable colonial forces gathered at Boston, it was clear that the required naval support would not be forthcoming from a British government already heavily committed to war in Europe. With the plan abandoned and Vetch discredited in colonial political circles, Nicholson renewed the call for assistance during a visit to London in 1710. The result was permission for a limited assault on Acadia (Nova Scotia) in which Vetch took the role of adjutant-general subordinate to Nicholson, the expedition's leader. The attack on the Acadian capital, Port Royal, proved successful against a small French garrison, and Vetch was appointed commander of the settlement now renamed Annapolis Royal. But the limits of the expedition's achievements quickly became apparent. By late 1710 Vetch had witnessed the departure of Nicholson and many of the colonial forces, and he spent his first severe winter surrounded by hostile French Canadians, with a garrison numbering fewer than 500 British marines and New England volunteers. In January 1711 he unsuccessfully sought reinforcements before the council of Massachusetts in Boston. His reputation for illicit trading preceded him and his energies were instead spent denying accusations of illegal exchanges with the local Indian population. Vetch returned to find his garrison further depleted while the French and Indians grew increasingly hostile to the British presence. 
In June, Vetch was requested to join an expeditionary force of ten ships of the line and over thirty transports secured by Nicholson to undertake the original proposal set out three years earlier in 'Canada survey'd'. Vetch joined the force, led by Admiral Sir Hovenden Walker and Brigadier-General John Hill, at Boston and left for Quebec on 30 July in the role of commander of the New England forces. In view of his expert local knowledge Vetch was requested to navigate the fleet through the St Lawrence. Before he was able to do so, however, strong winds and poor visibility had scattered parts of the fleet among rocks on the northern shore of the Gulf of St Lawrence with the loss of eight ships and up to 900 men. Despite Vetch's calls to continue, the expeditionary force -- running short of provisions, facing continued bad weather, and having also suffered the destruction of Hovenden's flagship -- turned back. After reinforcing Annapolis Royal with troops from the failed expedition, Vetch returned to Boston from where during the winter of 1712 he continued to impress on Lord Oxford's tory administration the need for further assistance if the garrison were to be held. His cause was not helped when subordinates at Annapolis Royal -- among them his deputy Thomas Caulfield -- began their own correspondence with London in which they accused Vetch of malpractice, exploitation, and of planning the colony's destruction. In summer 1712 he returned to Annapolis Royal where he maintained control for another winter principally with the help of 200 Iroquois reinforcements organized by his father-in-law, Robert Livingstone. By this time Vetch had been replaced as governor by his former associate, and now adversary, Francis Nicholson. Though Vetch knew of the change (confirmed in London in October 1712), he remained in post until Nicholson's arrival in the following summer. The new governor made clear his intention of using Caulfield's complaints as the basis of a charge of maladministration against his predecessor. On 16 April 1714 Vetch left for England in an attempt to defend his conduct against earlier attacks and to seek financial reimbursement from Oxford's government. 
However, Nicholson's governorship did not survive the change of administration following the Hanoverian succession. Vetch found a more sympathetic audience in the new whig government who dismissed Nicholson's and Caulfield's accusations as tory opportunism. In January 1715 he was reappointed as governor of Nova Scotia, though he did not return to Annapolis Royal, and only remained in post until August 1717, when he was succeeded by Richard Philipps (1661-1750), under whose command the colony at last acquired the resources and fortifications it required. Vetch was equally unsuccessful in establishing financial security for himself and his family, who joined him in England in 1717. His final years were spent pursuing a settlement (he requested $3000 per annum until employed) for his contribution to the establishment of Nova Scotia as a British colony between 1709 and 1715, and applying for vacant American governorships which he believed had been promised him by the government. Unsuccessful in all of his attempts, he was eventually imprisoned for debt at London's king's bench gaol, where he died on 30 April 1732; he was buried on 1 May at St George's, Southwark. He was survived by his wife, Margaret, who died in early to mid-1763, and his daughter, Alida ('b'. 1701), who married Samuel Bayard of New York, a nephew of Peter Stuyvesant, director-general of the New Netherland. 
Samuel Vetch's contribution to the development of Britain's North American empire, if largely overlooked and under-appreciated during his lifetime, has since been recognized in favourable biographies by George Patterson (1885) and G. M. Waller (1960) which portray an innovative and dedicated imperial servant whose flair for commercial enterprise, if tarnishing his reputation during his lifetime, undoubtedly contributed to Canada's prosperity and importance to later British governments. A monument to Vetch was erected at Annapolis Royal's old fort in 1928. 


@@@@@


doc= 28262


Veysey, John (c.1464-1554), bishop of Exeter, was the eldest son of William Harman (died 1470) of Moor (or More) Hall, Sutton Coldfield, Warwickshire, and his wife, Joan (died 1525), daughter of Henry Squier of Handsworth, Staffordshire. After an unknown schooling, he followed the arts course at Oxford in the early 1480s, took a BA degree, was admitted as a probationary fellow of Magdalen College on 27 July 1486, and became a full fellow one year later. He subsequently studied civil law, graduating as bachelor by 1489 and doctor by 1495. He left Magdalen in 1496, was presented to the rectory of Clifton Reynes in Buckinghamshire, and took holy orders as subdeacon, deacon, and priest between March 1497 and March 1498. His adoption of the surname Veysey dates from about this time, perhaps as a compliment to John Veysey (died 1492), an Oxford graduate and London city rector, who came from the west midlands and whose will made bequests to Harman and to his brother. 
After leaving Magdalen, Veysey enjoyed the patronage of John Arundell, bishop of his home diocese of Coventry and Lichfield, who gave him the rectory of Edgmond, Shropshire, in 1497, made him his vicar-general by 1498, and promoted him as archdeacon of Chester in 1499. When Arundell was translated to the see of Exeter in 1502, Veysey joined him there as bishop's chancellor and vicar-general, further receiving from him a canonry and prebend of Exeter Cathedral and the archdeaconry of Barnstaple, all in 1503. After Arundell's death in the following year, Veysey continued as vicar-general under his successor, Hugh Oldham, who collated him as precentor of the cathedral in 1508. He also received other benefices at various times, including the rectories of St Mary's on the Hill, Chester, in 1499 and Stoke in Teignhead, Devon, in 1504, the latter a crown appointment. In 1506 he exchanged the Chester rectory for a canonry of Salisbury Cathedral, with the prebend of Alton Borealis. 
Veysey's high reputation by 1507 is shown by his election as president of Magdalen College on 20 January. He resigned on 30 April before his installation (perhaps through inability to hold the office along with his other benefices), but a majority of the college fellows still expressed a preference for him at a subsequent election. In October 1509 he was chosen as dean of Exeter Cathedral by its canons, after Henry VIII had attempted to impose an outsider -- a circumstance that did not prevent his rise into royal favour. By 1514 he was dean of the Chapel Royal, and was made a canon and prebendary of St Stephen's Chapel, Westminster. In 1515 Henry presented him to the deaneries of St George's Chapel, Windsor, and Wolverhampton, and in 1518 to the rectory of Meifod, in Montgomeryshire. Veysey supported the crown against the bishops in 1515 during the disputes about jurisdiction which followed the death of Richard Hunne, and argued the right of secular judges to try clergy in criminal cases. In 1519 the king secured his appointment as bishop of Exeter. The papal provision was issued on 31 August, the temporalities of the see were granted on 4 November, and the archbishop of Canterbury consecrated him at Otford, Kent, on the 6th. 
Veysey began his episcopate by organizing a visitation of his diocese in the winter of 1514-15. It was still in progress a year later and led to injunctions for the reform of the priories of Cornworthy in Devon and Tywardreath in Cornwall, and of the collegiate churches of Crediton and Ottery St Mary in Devon. Later, however, other concerns competed with his diocese for his attention. He became involved in diplomacy, accompanying the king to the Field of Cloth of Gold in 1520, welcoming the emperor Charles V to England in 1522, and greeting the pope's ambassador in 1524. In 1525 Henry made him president of the council in the marches of Wales, with the duty of supervising the household of Princess Mary (later Mary I), who was associated with the council as a royal representative. These duties often kept him in the marches, especially at Ludlow, until 1534, when, after being criticized for keeping poor order in Wales, he was replaced as president by Rowland Lee. He then returned to Devon and stayed there frequently until 1546. His episcopal register suggests that he ran his diocese efficiently, but without major initiatives or distinctive policies. Although he made a summary of the statutes of Exeter Cathedral, preserved in the register among material of 1541, this was mainly based on the legislation of previous bishops. He himself did little more than regulate the admission of residentiary canons and, at the request of the cathedral chapter, reduce from forty-six to thirty-six the number of days on which such canons had to reside each year. 
The bishop was closely attached to his family and to his birthplace. He promoted his sisters' sons, John Gibbons (died 1537) and William Leveson (died 1582), to the chancellorship of Exeter Cathedral and, in Gibbons's case, to be his vicar-general. A third relative, William Veysey (died 'c'.1545), was made apparitor-general of the diocese, a fourth, Henry Squier (died 1582), archdeacon of Barnstaple, and another connection, James Leveson, farmed the revenues of the church of Wolverhampton. Veysey was also a notable benefactor of Sutton Coldfield. In 1528 he secured for the town royal grants of corporate status and of the nearby free chase and park, in return for an annual rent of $58. He improved the parish church with new nave aisles, chancel chapels, organs, and a steeple. He gave a meadow to support fifteen poor widows and, between 1540 and 1543, endowed a free grammar school. He also built the moot hall and prison, laid out the market place, paved the town, gave pasturage in the chase to the local poor, erected fifty-one stone houses, and provided new bridges at Curdworth and Water Orton. Moor Hall was reconstituted as a brick house for his own residence, which passed after his death to John, the eldest son of his brother Hugh. He further attempted to establish the manufacture of Devonshire kerseys in Sutton, but this, according to his younger contemporary the Exeter historian John Hooker, 'in the end came to small effect' (Hooker, sigs. H2'v'-I1'r'). 
Much that happened during the Reformation was probably unwelcome to Veysey. He issued an indulgence as late as 1536, and was rumoured to lack enthusiasm for change. His royal connections, however, kept him subservient to the crown, and he was dutiful in publicizing and enforcing its policies and edicts in his diocese, notably through a surviving set of injunctions in 1538. These are also noteworthy for instructing that children should be taught the Lord's prayer, Ave Maria, creed, and ten commandments either in English or in Cornish. Veysey complied, too, with requests from the royal court for leases of episcopal properties and, under Edward VI, demands for outright grants. As a result, the annual revenue of the bishopric of Exeter fell from $1566 in 1535 to a notional $500 in 1551. Serious unrest broke out in the diocese with the so-called western, or 'prayer-book', rebellion of 1549, and two years later the octogenarian bishop received a royal command to resign, which he obeyed on 1 August 1551. He was succeeded as bishop by Miles Coverdale, a staunch protestant, and remained chiefly at Sutton, until the accession of Mary I in July 1553 led to Coverdale's deprivation and his own restoration, his register of acts resuming on 10 September. Although about ninety years old, he visited his palace at Exeter in November and stayed there for nearly two months before returning to Sutton, where he died at Moor Hall in 1554 'of a pang, going to his stoole yn the night tyme', according to Hooker (Exeter City Archives, book 51, fol. 351'r'). An inquisition post mortem, taken in Staffordshire, dated his death as 22 October, but his episcopal register gave the 23rd. He was buried in the north chancel chapel which he had built in Sutton church, beneath an effigy depicting him in mass vestments with mitre and pastoral staff. The effigy survives on a later tomb chest. 
Hooker, a protestant writing in the reign of Elizabeth I, characterized Veysey as 'a very wor[l]dly wyse man and yn greate credyte with the king and counsell... He was as courtelyk [that is, courtly] a man as no man exceaded hym in any courtlyk behaviour'. Warwickshire tradition believed that he kept a retinue of 140 men in scarlet livery. His generosity is evident, as is his competence as an administrator, but he is less notable for originality or energy. Hooker (and some later writers) censured the grants of episcopal property which he made from the 1530s onwards. 'How well so ever he deserved of noble men and gentlemen, he deserved small commendement and thanckes of his church and bishopryk'. This does insufficient justice to the pressures faced by post-Reformation bishops, which made Veysey's actions virtually unavoidable. 


@@@@@


doc= 28263


Vicars, Hedley Shafto Johnstone (1826-1855), army officer and evangelical, was born on 7 December 1826 in Mauritius, where his father, Richard Vicars (died 1839), a captain in the Royal Engineers, was then stationed. After passing his examinations at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, he received a commission in the 97th regiment on 22 December 1843, and in the following year proceeded to Corfu. On 6 November 1846 he obtained his lieutenancy. In 1848 his regiment was removed to Jamaica, and in 1851 to Canada. In November of that year he underwent an evangelical conversion which influenced the remainder of his life. He became a Sunday school teacher, visited the sick, and read the 'Bible' and prayed with the men of his company, a most unusual proceeding at that time. In 1852 he became adjutant of his regiment. In May 1853 the regiment returned to England, and in August he resigned the adjutancy. He became a frequent attendant of meetings held at Exeter Hall, a centre of London evangelicalism, and an active member of the Soldiers' Friendly Society, besides holding frequent religious meetings with railway navvies. Before his regiment left England for the Crimea, early in 1854, it was reported that 'since Mr. Vicars became so good, he has steadied about four hundred men in the regiment'. At the Piraeus many men of the 97th died of cholera, and Vicars, while conducting the burial parties, took every opportunity of preaching to those at the graveside. On 3 November 1854 he was promoted to the rank of captain. 
On 20 November 1854 Vicars landed in the Crimea, and, with his regiment, took part in the siege of Sevastopol. Here he continued his religious work, holding prayer meetings in his tent, visiting the sick in the hospitals, and carefully looking after his men. On the night of 22 March 1855, while he was in the trenches, the Russians made a sortie from Sevastopol, took the English by surprise, and drove them from their trenches. Vicars, keeping his men in hand, fired a volley into the enemy at twenty paces, and then, charging with the 97th, he drove the Russians back and regained possession of the trenches. He cut down two men with his own hand before he fell, bayoneted and shot through the right shoulder. He died shortly afterwards and was buried on the following day on the Vorontsov road, close to the milestone. In his dispatch on 6 April, Lord Raglan made special mention of Vicars's gallantry. Vicars became a posthumous hero, his deeds and his evangelicalism equally celebrated, notably in the best-seller by Catherine M. Marsh (published anonymously), 'The Memorials of Captain Hedley Vicars' (1855). Evangelical meetings allowed Vicars to develop close relationships with private soldiers of a sort otherwise impossible in the class-stratified mid-Victorian army, and his example was for long an inspiration in the burgeoning military evangelical movement. 


@@@@@


doc= 28264


Vicars, John (1580-1652), chronicler and poet, was probably born in London. Orphaned when young, he was brought up and educated on the charity of Christ's Hospital, London. As a penniless young man he was enabled by a stroke of providence (a lucky find, as he recalls in his will) to study for some time at Queen's College, Oxford, but not for long enough to graduate: he lamented that he was '(ah too soone) wained from the brests of my Sacred 'Mother' the most famous University of Oxford'. He returned to Christ's Hospital as usher and remained there until old age, referring to himself as 'schoolmaster' in his will. He started writing translations, and his works show knowledge of Greek and Hebrew as well as of Latin. He published a translation of Virgil's 'Aeneid' (1632). In his sixties when the civil war broke out, Vicars, a devout Calvinist and presbyterian, threw himself into the cause, heart and soul. His series of four chronicles, 'Jehovah-Jireh, or, God in the Mount' (parts 1 and 2, 1644), 'Gods Arke over-Topping the Waves' (1646), and 'The Burning-Bush not Consumed' (1646), is an important source for historians. Although reluctant to concede any victories to the royalists, they provide many valuable details, being based on fresh eyewitness accounts; for example, he names his main informant for his account of the battle of Edgehill as Captain Nathaniel Fiennes, who fought in it. Vicars presents the parliamentarian commanders, particularly Sir Thomas Fairfax and the New Model Army, in a heroic light and stresses the role played by the tradesmen and apprentices of London. He compares Fairfax to Julius Caesar and praises his mercy after the battle of Marston Moor. He is scathing in his presentation of the royalists, and emphatic in asserting divine providence on the parliamentarian side. His description of the confusion caused by the wearing of a variety of colours on both sides belies popular anachronistic stereotypes. In 'England's Worthies' (1647) Vicars wrote eulogies of Cromwell and the other parliamentary leaders. 
Vicars's poems often comment on politics, for example, the Spanish match for Prince Charles and public jubilation when it failed. Despite believing, as Hill notes, that England was an elect nation (Vicars, 'England's Hallelu-jah', 1631), Vicars was essentially a militant protestant who wanted a confessional foreign policy. In 'England's Remembrancer' (1641) he expressed solidarity with the Huguenots of La Rochelle, and advised Charles I to intervene on behalf of the protestants in the Thirty Years' War ('Thy royall Sisters poore Palatinate'). Apocalyptic beliefs, especially the papal Antichrist, abound in his works. His early translation in 1617 of Francis Herring's work as 'Mischeefe's Mysterie', recast in heroic couplets in 1641 as 'The Quintessence of Cruelty', is related to the apocalyptic comedies of Foxe and Dekker in its theology and its use of extended dialogue. Its allegory of the Whore of Rome spawning, with Pluto, a son, Treason, resembles Milton's allegory of Satan, Sin, and Death in book I of 'Paradise Lost'. 'The Quintessence of Cruelty' has a commendatory quatrain contributed by William Prynne, who addresses Vicars as 'his most affectionate, kind Friend'. It may have been Prynne's friendship which furthered Vicars's work as parliamentary propagandist. 
Vicars married Jane, probably either Brackley or Stevens (his will refers to his 'most dearely beloved friend and brother Mr Thomas Birackley ['sic']' and also to 'my most dearely beloved brother Mr Paul Stevens'). He had a son, John, who was ordained, and two daughters, Frances and Hester. He died at Christ's Hospital on 12 April 1652, leaving bequests to it and to the poor of London and Witney in gratitude for the benevolence he felt he had received. He asked to be buried as near as possible to the school which had taken him in 'when my Father and mother forsooke me' and this was done. His gravestone in Christ Church Greyfriars was destroyed in the great fire of London. 


@@@@@


doc= 28265


Vicars, Thomas (1589-1638), theologian, was born and baptized in Carlisle, the eldest of the twelve children of William and Eve Vicars, and tells us he attended the school there. He matriculated from Queen's College, Oxford, on 19 June 1607; he graduated BA on 16 December 1611 and MA on 17 June 1615. He was elected chaplain on 7 July 1615 and fellow on 20 April 1616, and on 10 May 1622 was licensed to preach, receiving at the same time the degree of BD. In that year he married Anne, daughter of Sir Henry Neville and stepdaughter of a Carlisle man, George Carleton (1557/8-1628), bishop of Llandaff, who on his translation to Chichester, also in 1622, presented Vicars to the vicarages of Cowfold and Cuckfield in Sussex. Carleton employed Vicars as his chaplain and in 1624 made him a prebendary of Chichester Cathedral. Vicars appears to have resided at Cuckfield, where the parish register records the baptism of five of his children; of these the only son, George, and the eldest girl, Anna (baptized on 26 July 1624), died before their first birthday. 
In 1620 Vicars issued a translation from the Latin of Bartholomew Keckermann entitled 'A Manuduction to Theologie'. The work was dedicated to the service and good of the church, to Lady Anne Neville (perhaps his wife's mother), and to 'The Lady Anne Fetiplace of Chilrey', Berkshire. In it he aimed 'to further the simplest of my countrymens growth in all godliness' (Fincham, 196). In 1624 he published 'Astrologomania: the Madness of Astrologers', addressed to his cousin Thomas Carleton of Carleton Hall in Cumberland, JP. The preface made clear his disbelief, 'whether it be a more artificial delusion, which satan worketh in the learned and great clerks of the world, or a more simple and gross kind of insinuation which he practiseth on the ruder and unlettered people', and cited a personal reason: during his school days at Carlisle, a 'cunning man' or 'wizard' visited the Vicars household while Thomas was entertaining a young schoolfriend. Having been persuaded to tell the fortunes of the two boys, he predicted that Thomas would become a scrivener and the other would be a preacher. 'Now it fell out, that my school fellow proved the scrivener, and I prove the preacher.' In the third edition of his education manual, ''Cheiragogia': manuductio ad artem rhetoricam' (1628, first published 1621), Vicars made an early, punning reference to Shakespeare -- 'that famous poet who takes his name from 'shaking' and 'spear'' -- which indicates that the dramatist and poet was regarded by some school and university students as an important vernacular writer from the late 1620s. Vicars was buried at Cuckfield church on 29 August 1638. 


@@@@@


doc= 28266


Vicary, Thomas (d. 1561), surgeon, whose name is often written Vicars, Vikers, Vycars, and Vycary in contemporary records, was probably a native of Kent, and was a member of the Barbers' Company of London. In 1525 he was elected third warden. In 1528 he was upper warden, and in 1530 was elected master, to which annual office he was again elected in 1541, 1546, 1548, and 1557. His presence in London is, however, recorded as early as 1514, when he was licensed by the bishop of London to practise surgery within London and a 7 mile radius following the act of 3 Hen. VIII c. 11. At the same time he seems to have maintained a modest practice in Maidstone, and it was here in 1527, according to Clippingdale, that he successfully treated Henry VIII for a leg complaint, for which service he was appointed a royal surgeon at an annual salary of $20, his quarterly payment appearing for the first time at Christmas 1528. He married the sister of Thomas Dunkyn, a yeoman of St Leonard, Shoreditch; they had one son, William, who was admitted to the freedom of the company on 26 June 1547. 
In 1530 Vicary obtained a promise of the reversion of the office of sergeant-surgeon to the king; he succeeded in 1536 and held the office, then worth $26 13's'. 4died a year, until his death. Further evidence of royal favour is shown in Holbein's painting of the king with members of the new Company of Barber-Surgeons of London, established by act of parliament in 1540, in which Vicary is depicted as receiving royal authority on behalf of the company in the form of a charter. He was probably active in securing new powers for the company under this act, among them the right to the bodies of four hanged felons yearly for dissection at quarterly anatomical lectures; he and other surgeon members of the company were certainly insistent on claiming the first body from Tyburn before the mayor's court in December of that year. 
In 1546, on the grant of Henry VIII's second charter to St Bartholomew's Hospital, the city undertook the hospital's refitting, and Vicary was, on 29 September 1548, appointed a governor, and was reappointed each year until June 1552, when he was made 'one of the assistants of this house for the terme of his life' (minute book). On 2 October 1554 it was ordered that he should have the oversight of all such officers as be within the hospital, in the absence of the governors. He lived in the hospital, where his house was kept in repair by the governors, and he received an annual grant of livery of 'fyne newe collour' of 4 yards, at 12's'. a yard. He was superior to William Cartar, Thomas Bailey, and George Vaughan, the first surgeons; and his friendly relations with the two who survived him are shown by his bequest to Bailey of a gown of brown blue lined and faced with black budge, a cassock of black satin, his best plaister-box, a silver salvatory box, and all his silver instruments, and to George Vaughan of a doublet of crimson satin. 
Vicary continued sergeant-surgeon to Edward VI and Elizabeth, and in 1554 he was appointed surgeon to Philip. In 1539 he had been granted a lease for twenty-one years of parts of the dissolved abbey of Boxley in Kent, the lands of which had been given to Sir Thomas Wyatt, and in 1542 he, with his son William, was appointed bailiff of the manor of Boxley, and received a regrant of the office from Philip and Mary in 1555. He bought a house and land in the same district. 
In December 1547 Vicary married Alice Bucke of London, who survived him. He made his will on 27 January 1561 in St Bartholomew's Hospital, two days after treating Sir William Petre at Ingatestone Hall in Essex, and died at the end of that year. His will was proved on 7 April 1562. Besides bequests to his family and friends he left 1's'. each to forty poor householders living within the hospital walls, and 10's'. each to the chaplain, matron, steward, cook, and porter of St Bartholomew's. He alludes to his possession of the 'Surgery' of Guido and of Vigo, and of other books, but mentions no work by himself. However 'A Profitable Treatise of the Anatomie of Man's Body', of which the earliest extant edition is of 1577, is stated on the title-page to have been compiled by him. It is dedicated to Sir Rouland Haiwarde, the president, and the governors, by William Clowes, William Beton, Richard Story, and Edward Bayly, surgeons to the hospital. The book was examined by Dr J. F. Payne ('BMJ', 25 Jan 1896) and later by Sir Clement Price Thomas, among others, and is clearly an abbreviated version of a late fourteenth-century manuscript in English, which is itself based upon Lanfranc and Henri de Mondeville, with a few short additional passages. Its anatomy therefore belongs to the classical world of Galen and does not reflect the new ideas of writers such as Vesalius, which Vicary himself may have rejected. 'A Profitable Treatise' was, however, the first anatomical textbook in English and could have been published both in memory of Vicary and for practical use by apprentices, few of whom knew Latin at that time. In many ways an obscure figure, Vicary is nevertheless an important one. Five times master of his company, a number never exceeded, and in 1555 its financial saviour by paying its debts, he brought stability to the practice of surgery in London and thus ensured the company's later eminence in the development of British surgery as a whole. The Thomas Vicary lecture has been delivered annually at the Royal College of Surgeons since 1919. 


@@@@@


doc= 28267


Viccars, John (bap. 1604, d. 1653?), orientalist, was baptized on 30 October 1604 at Treswell, Nottinghamshire, the second of four children of Gregory Viccars (died after 1612), yeoman. He entered as pensioner at Christ's College, Cambridge, in July 1618, graduating BA in 1622. He was incorporated at Lincoln College, Oxford, on 24 February 1625 and proceeded MA on 28 March. By 1627 he was rector of St Mary's, Stamford, Lincolnshire, where he earned the enmity of some parishioners who in 1628 denounced him as a heretic. This led to his trial before Bishop Laud and others at the court of high commission in November 1631. He was convicted of keeping conventicles and of heresy and was sentenced to be removed from office, defrocked, and fined $100. Viccars spent several years in prison after, and possibly before, this trial, but in November 1635, after submitting and recanting, he was through the good graces of Laud restored to the ministry (though forbidden to serve at Stamford) and was forgiven the fine. 
Soon after this Viccars embarked on extended scholarly travels in France and Italy. He examined manuscripts in Paris, Rome, Florence, Venice, and other Italian cities, and he consulted scholars such as Athanasius Kircher in Rome and learned Jews at Venice, Leghorn, Bologna, and elsewhere. The result of this was Viccars's sole publication, 'Decapla in psalmos', completed in 1638 and published in London in 1639, an erudite and voluminous commentary on all 150 psalms using ancient, medieval, and modern versions in ten different languages, including Hebrew, Syriac, and Arabic. Much of the commentary is extracted from rabbinical authors, but under the heading 'alius auctor' ('another author') Viccars provides his own remarks, which include, besides extensive classical quotations, sidelights on his travels with descriptions of monuments and eyewitness accounts of Vesuvius, the Alps, and other natural marvels. The book cost John and his younger brother Samuel much money for Syriac and Arabic types specially cast (the latter only the second Arabic font produced in England) and a fine engraving by Wenceslas Hollar for the title-page. 'Decapla in psalmos' was dedicated to Laud and it was presumably as a reward that Viccars was presented to the rectory of South Fambridge, Essex, on 30 May 1640. However, his conversion to Laudian orthodoxy was soon overtaken by the civil war: among the accusations made against him before the Essex county committee on 16 April 1644 was that he was a Roman priest, because he had been at Rome. He was sequestered and he perhaps never again held a benefice, for it is not certain whether the John Viccars who was instituted as rector of Battlesden, Bedfordshire, 5 May 1645, is the same man. 
Viccars may have been living in London in 1652 when he was named by Brian Walton in the prospectus for the polyglot 'Bible' as one of those to be employed in preparing the copies. However, it is likely that he died soon afterwards for there is no trace of his participation in the published work, which was issued between 1653 and 1657. The 'second edition' of 'Decapla in psalmos' (1655) is simply the sheets of the 1639 edition reissued by a new publisher, omitting the dedication to Laud, and it may well be posthumous. Viccars was certainly dead by 1660 when a successor to him was appointed at South Fambridge. He seems never to have married, but through the two marriages of his elder sister, Helen, the second to the nonconformist minister Obadiah Grew, he became uncle to the physician Henry Sampson and the scientist Nehemiah Grew. 


@@@@@


doc= 28268


Alfred Vickers (1786-1868), landscape painter, and his wife, Mary Agnes. Born at Newington, London, on 10 September 1786, Vickers senior exhibited numerous pictures of English scenery at the Royal Academy, from 1828 to 1868, as well as at the British Institution, and the Suffolk Street Gallery. He died on 20 November 1868. He is now best known for his river scenes, an example of which is in the Victoria and Albert Museum. The work of the father and son is often confused. 


@@@@@


doc= 28269


Vickers, Alfred Gomersal (1810-1837), marine painter, was born at Lambeth, London, on 21 April 1810 and baptized on 20 November 1811 at St Mary, Lambeth, the son of 
The son, Alfred Gomersal Vickers, who received instruction in art from his father, exhibited paintings in both oil and watercolours at the same galleries and at the New Society of Painters in Water Colours from 1827 until his death. He painted marine subjects, architecture, and figures. On 20 April 1833 he married Mary Liverseege. In the same year he was commissioned by Charles Heath to make sketches in Russia for publication. Steel-engravings from these and from many of his marine pieces appeared in the annuals (1835-7). His work indicates that Vickers used the opportunity of the commission to travel widely in Europe. Sketches of Turkish and Italian scenes are recorded, in addition to views of Poland, Germany, France, and the Low Countries. His talent, which surpassed that of his father, was beginning to obtain public recognition when he died on 12 January 1837 at his home, 20 Cumming Street, Pentonville, London. His pictures were sold at Christies on 16 February in the same year. Pencil and watercolour drawings by Vickers are in the Victoria and Albert Museum and the department of prints and drawings at the British Museum, London; the Williamson Art Gallery, Birkenhead; Birmingham City Art Gallery; the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge; New Port Art Gallery; and York City Art Gallery. 


@@@@@


doc= 28270


Vickris, Richard (d. 1700), religious writer, was born in Bristol, the son of Hester (died 1722?) and Robert Vickris (died 1684) of that city. His father was a puritan merchant and local politician whose family came from Bewdley, Worcestershire. Like his own father, Richard Vickris the elder (died 1668), sheriff in 1636, Robert Vickris was a prosperous merchant who served as master of the Merchant Venturers' Society. Both men opposed the growing Quaker presence in Bristol. 
Richard Vickris received a gentleman's education. Probably following the example of his mother, who was a member of the Bristol Quaker meeting from at least 1669 or 1670, young Richard Vickris began an association with the Quakers. Aiming to rid him of his new beliefs, Robert Vickris sent his son to France. There he continued his education and encountered the ideas of Nicolas Malebranche, who had been employing a modified Cartesianism to formulate a 'search for truth'. The ideas that eventually found their way into Malebranche's 'Recherche de la verite' (1674) provided Vickris with a metaphysical explanation for the central Quaker tenet, the inner light of Christ. Consequently, Vickris left France intellectually as well as spiritually engaged with his beliefs. 
After his return to England, Vickris married Elizabeth Bishop (1655-1724), daughter of Elizabeth Bishop, 'nee' Canne (died 1658), and the Bristol Quaker organizer and writer Captain George Bishop (d. 1668). Their marriage, on 25 March 1672, took place at a Bristol Quaker meeting. Richard and Elizabeth Vickris left Bristol in 1684 and raised their eight or more children at Firgrove, the family estate at Chew Magna, Somerset. There Vickris hosted Quaker meetings, was involved in their administration and the enforcement of discipline, and opposed the schismatic William Rogers. He aided George Fox and William Penn to record Quaker history and 'sufferings'. 
Before the 'Toleration Act' of 1689 Vickris publicized the violence and persecution of Quakers that had increased under the prescription of the Restoration settlement. He was detained and fined on several occasions for attending Quaker meetings. Refusing to retract his beliefs and attend the services of the Church of England, he was made an example of when the authorities indicted him under the 1670 'Conventicle Act' (22 Chas. II c. 1) and subsequently tried him under the Elizabethan act of 35 Eliz. I c. 1, against recusants and sectaries, which carried the death penalty for those who refused to abjure their beliefs or depart the realm. This harsh action was instigated by the sheriff of Bristol in 1681-2, Sir John Knight, and may have been propelled by a fanatical hatred of Quakers so extreme that he had once threatened personally to hang Vickris's father-in-law for attending their meetings. Vickris was sentenced to death on 23 August 1684. He and his lawyer used a number of legal tactics to postpone any action that would curb his freedom. Backed by the substantial support of their co-religionists, and in particular of the influential William Penn (a friend of the family whose marriage certificate was to be witnessed by Vickris's brother-in-law Nathaniel Wade), Elizabeth Vickris travelled to London and met James, duke of York. The duke used his influence and the case, removed for trial to London under a writ of habeas corpus because of alleged errors in the original indictment in October 1684, was quashed by Sir George Jeffreys the following month. Vickris was the only English Quaker who was threatened with the death penalty for his refusal to conform, though during the reign of Charles II some Baptists also faced death under the act of 35 Elizabeth (and at least 450 Quakers did actually die in disease-ridden gaols or from being beaten up by arresting officers). The Quakers' response to the Vickris case has been cited as a prime example of their legal sophistication in the later Stuart period. In December 1681, in an effort to reconcile Robert Vickris with his son, William Penn wrote an inspirational letter, commending Richard's father for 'the sincere love thou hast shown to thy son and his troubles' (Penn to Robert Vickris, 4 Oct 1681). 
Vickris wrote several tracts which, in comparison with those of Quaker contemporaries, are notable for the moderation of their polemics. His most important work, 'A Just Reprehension' (1691), counters the attack on the Quakers made by the Anglican clergyman John Norris. Norris, the chief proponent of Malebranche's ideas in England, had dismissed the inner light as 'a gross notion'. Vickris died at Chew Magna in April 1700, leaving substantial holdings, including property in Chew Magna and Bristol and elsewhere in Somerset and Gloucestershire. His wife, Elizabeth, lived until 1724. A daughter married into the Dickinson family of Somerset, themselves wealthy members of the gentry, and continued the Quaker beliefs which remained in the family until at least the fourth decade of the eighteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 28271


Victor, Benjamin (d. 1778), theatre manager and writer, began life as a barber 'within the liberties of Drury Lane', but from the first was drawn to the stage. In 1722 he was at Norwich for a term, possibly to establish a business in the sale of Norwich linen. That year, after he had been introduced to Richard Steele by the poet and dramatist Aaron Hill, he defended, in 'An Epistle to Sir Richard Steele' (two editions, 1722), Steele's play 'The Conscious Lovers' against the attacks of John Dennis. He married Mary Rooker (died 1757) at Charterhouse Chapel, Finsbury, on 3 July 1722. In 1728 he was introduced to Barton Booth, and his 'Memoirs of the Life of Barton Booth, Published by an Intimate Acquaintance' (1733) is one of the chief authorities on that actor's career. 
After the arrival of Frederick, prince of Wales, in England in December 1728, Victor presented to him a congratulatory poem in the hope of obtaining a place in the prince's household, but was disappointed. The following year he composed a satire called 'The Levee Haunter', which looked for and gained the approval of Sir Robert Walpole. But Walpole was not much given to literary patronage, and Victor returned to the linen trade and established a business in Pall Mall. He experimented with acting, and played Polydore in Thomas Otway's 'The Orphan' at Lincoln's Inn Fields on 18 April 1734, but does not seem to have acted again. Between 1734 and 1746 he made two visits to Ireland in order to extend his linen trade connections. The business did not prove profitable, however, and in January 1746 he resolved to give it up. On 11 October 1746 he settled with his family in Dublin as treasurer and deputy manager to Thomas Sheridan (1719-1788) at the theatre in Smock Alley. 
From that year Victor wrote the birthday odes for the court of Dublin, and the duke of Dorset, when resigning the position of lord lieutenant in 1755, obtained permission to appoint him poet laureate of Ireland, with a pension of $50 per annum. Several of these painful productions are in his collections of 1776, and two of them, printed separately, are in the British Library. The theatre was for some years fairly successful, but about 1753 Sheridan was at odds with a portion of the theatregoing public, and for two years Victor and John Sowden, a principal actor in the company, took over its management. On 15 July 1755 Sheridan returned to Dublin, and Victor resumed his old position. After much discouragement and financial trouble the theatre was closed on 20 April 1759, and Victor returned to England, out of debt, but with little money at his command. 
Between October 1758 and June 1759 Victor married his second wife, Penelope Wolseley (died in or after 1794), the daughter of Sir William Wolseley, bt, and his mistress, Christina Horton, an actress. Victor had known Wolseley since 1729; Penelope had joined Sheridan's company at Smock Alley in February 1749, and acted as Penelope Danvers. In 1752 Victor drew up the articles for the marriage of Sir William to Ann Whitby. Whitby later claimed that the marriage had been forced upon her and that she was already married to John Robins. Victor wrote 'The Widow of the Wood', published in 1755, as an attack on Whitby and a defence of Wolseley; he was a witness for Wolseley when the latter sued for divorce on grounds of adultery, but Sir George Hay, the presiding judge, ruled that Ann Whitby had indeed already been married to John Robins, and so no divorce could be granted. Victor's book reached a second edition in 1769. Although it was written in support of Wolseley, it was said to be so offensive to members of the Wolseley family that they destroyed every copy of the narrative that they could obtain, but in the nineteenth century it was still to be found in catalogues of secondhand books. 
Shortly after his return to England, Victor was appointed treasurer of the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, a post which he retained until his death. In 1761 he published, in two volumes, the work for which he is chiefly remembered, 'The history of the theatres of London and Dublin from the year 1730, with an annual register of all plays performed at the theatres royal in London from 1712', and in 1771 he published a third volume, bringing the narrative down to that date. The second volume has much information on the lives of the chief actors from about 1710 to 1745, and the work retains its value at the beginning of the twenty-first century. Its egotism was so marked that Charles Churchill said 'Victor ego' should have been Victor's motto. Walley Chamberlain Oulton compiled in 1796 a continuation of the work in two volumes, bringing the record down to 1795, and in 1818, in three more volumes, he carried it on to 1817. 
Victor published in 1776, with a dedication to David Garrick, three volumes of 'Original Letters, Dramatic Pieces, and Poems'. The first volume preserved some interesting anecdotes, especially on Sir Richard Steele, and the second volume contained Victor's plays -- 'Altamira', a tragedy; 'Fatal Error', a tragedy; 'The Fortunate Peasant', a comedy; and 'The Sacrifice, or, Cupid's Vagaries', a masque -- all of which were unperformed. Victor also produced an adaptation of Shakespeare's 'The Two Gentlemen of Verona', which was given five times at Drury Lane in 1763. 
Victor was living in Maiden Lane, Covent Garden, when he received a legacy of 50 guineas from Hester Booth. He died at his lodgings in Charles Street, Covent Garden, on 3 December 1778. His wife, Penelope, survived him, and was still receiving her pension of $100 per annum (granted 1763) in 1794. 


@@@@@


doc= 28272


Victor, prince of Hohenlohe-Langenburg (1833-1891), naval officer and sculptor, was the third and youngest son of Prince Ernst of Hohenlohe-Langenburg and his wife, Princess Feodore, the only daughter of Emich Charles, reigning prince of Leiningen, and his wife, Princess Victoria of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld, afterwards the duchess of Kent; his mother was half-sister to Queen Victoria. He was born Victor Ferdinand Franz Eugen Gustaf Adolf Constantin Friedrich at the castle of Langenburg in Wurttemberg, Germany, on 11 November 1833 and was sent to school at Dresden, from which he ran away. In 1848, through the interest of Queen Victoria, he entered the British navy as a midshipman on the 'Powerful'. He then served in the 'Cumberland', the flagship of Admiral Sir George Seymour on the North American station. During the expedition to the Baltic in 1854 he was slightly wounded at Bomarsund. He was next appointed to the 'St Jean d'Acre' off Sevastopol, and was afterwards transferred to the naval brigade and did duty in the trenches. As aide-de-camp to Sir Harry Keppel he was present at the battle of the Chernaya, and was distinguished for his bravery under fire. 
In 1856 Prince Victor was appointed flag lieutenant to Sir Harry Keppel in China; he took a prominent part in the fighting and was recommended for the Victoria Cross. Repeated illness, however, undermined his constitution and prevented him earning fresh distinction in the navy, and he was compelled to retire on half pay in 1866. He was created KCB in January 1866, and was appointed by the queen to be governor and constable of Windsor Castle. On 26 January 1861 he married Laura Williamina, the youngest daughter of Admiral Sir George Francis Seymour. By an old German law Prince Victor's wife, not being of equal rank, was disqualified from using her husband's title. So Prince Victor assumed the title of Count Gleichen, the second title in the family, by which he was known for many years. 
After he retired from the navy Count Gleichen devoted himself to an artistic career, for which he had considerable talent. Being fond of modelling, he studied for three years under William Theed. The loss of his fortune, the result of a bank failure, caused him to look to sculpture as a serious profession. He had been granted by Queen Victoria a suite of apartments in St James's Palace, where he set up a studio and entered into regular competition as a working sculptor. He made several imaginative groups as well as monuments and portrait busts. Some of the busts were considered very successful, notably those of the earl of Beaconsfield, the marquess of Salisbury, and Sir Harry Keppel. His most important work was a colossal statue of Alfred the Great, made for the main square of the town of Wantage. His success as a sculptor enabled him to build a small house near Ascot. In 1885 Count and Countess Gleichen were permitted by the queen to revert to the names of Prince and Princess Victor of Hohenlohe-Langenburg. In 1887 Prince Victor was promoted GCB and admiral on the retired list. He died at St James's Palace, London, on 31 December 1891. He was survived by his son, Count, later Major-General Lord, Albert Edward Wilfred Gleichen (1863-1937) of the Grenadier Guards -- who served in the Sudan, South Africa, and the First World War -- and three daughters, of whom the eldest, Lady Feodora Gleichen (1861-1922), inherited her father's skill in sculpture. 


@@@@@


doc= 28273


Victoria, Princess, duchess of Kent (1786-1861), mother of Queen Victoria, was the fourth daughter of Franz Friedrich Anton (Francis), duke of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld ('b'. 1750), and his wife, Augusta Caroline Sophia, the daughter of Count Reuss-Ebersdorf. She was born Victoria Mary Louisa at Coburg on 17 August 1786 and married, first, in 1803, Emich Charles, prince of Leiningen (died 1814), with whom she had a son, Charles, and a daughter, Feodore, and second, Edward, duke of Kent (1767-1820), the fourth son of George III and Queen Charlotte. They had one daughter, the future Queen Victoria. 
Widowed first in 1814, Victoria was persuaded by her brother Prince Leopold, the widower of Princess Charlotte, George IV's heir, to marry Prince Edward and secure the English succession. They married at Coburg on 29 May 1818 (Lutheran rite) and at Kew Palace on 13 July. Although the duchess was pregnant, the couple lived abroad until just before the birth of Princess (Alexandrina) Victoria at Kensington Palace on 24 May 1819. Fortunately the sensible duchess brought with her Frau Siebold, a German doctor, and nursed her baby, though a wet-nurse was usually hired. Suddenly, on 23 January 1820, the duke died of pneumonia in Devon, leaving her in straits. 
Money was not the only problem during the first eighteen years of the mother-daughter relationship with Princess Victoria. Parliament and Prince Leopold made necessary contributions. The main trouble was a bitter division in the duchess's household. Springing from fierce rivalries between Baroness Lehzen, Princess Victoria's beloved governess, and Sir John Ponsonby Conroy, the duchess's major-domo, the schism developed into a tight domestic cabal known as the Kensington system. At its centre lay Conroy's ambition to run not only the mother's household but also the daughter's future court. Conroy played on the duchess's fears of the royal family. Would they not kidnap Victoria unless she was closely guarded? Accordingly she was kept away from her royal relatives and, until her accession, was made to sleep in her mother's bedroom. Queen Victoria criticized 'Mama' for limiting her close childhood friends to Feodore (who married abroad in 1828) and Conroy's daughters Victoire and Elizabeth Jane. 
The diarist Charles Greville noticed Conroy's familiarities with the duchess, and thought they must be lovers. The duke of Wellington agreed. Lord Melbourne, the prime minister, told the speaker of the House of Commons: 'God, I don't like the man; there seems to be something odd about him' (Queen Victoria, journal, 29 April 1838). There was indeed something odd: Conroy cherished the illusion that his wife had royal blood, making them all semi-royal. But if Conroy did have a royal mistress, it was more likely to have been Princess Sophia, another inhabitant of Kensington Palace. She corresponded familiarly while Conroy managed -- or mismanaged -- her finances, as he did the duchess's. No lovers for the duchess. 
Melbourne considered the duchess foolish and weak-minded; but she was pious. She would not let Victoria read a novel such as 'Oliver Twist'. In her diary, studied by a deeply remorseful Queen Victoria after her death, the duchess expressed touching devotion to a child who had believed herself unloved and who took to calling the pair curtly in 'her' diary Ma and JC. The duchess claimed that Conroy was useful because he organized tours to show Victoria to the people. Though these 'royal progresses' infuriated William IV, they educated the princess. Her mother hoped she would first reign as a minor (under eighteen) with herself as regent. But William survived until 20 June 1837, when his niece was over eighteen. 
As the queen's mother, the duchess found her trials increased. Victoria quitted her bedroom; night fell on the duchess for nearly three gloomy years. After the coronation Queen Victoria kissed her aunt Queen Adelaide, but only shook her mother's hand. When Lady Flora Hastings, her mother's lady-in-waiting, was dying of a liver tumour, Victoria and Lehzen decided she was ''with child!'' -- by JC (Queen Victoria, journal, 3 Feb 1839). 
There was 'a schocking alternative' (Queen Victoria, journal, 17 April 1839) to life with Ma -- marriage. On 10 February 1840 Victoria married the duchess's nephew Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, Conroy and Lehzen were both tactfully ejected, and Queen Victoria entered her 'safe haven' (Longford, 165-6). The duchess spent twenty harmonious years at court and with her grandchildren, and was the first to spot that the newborn Prince Leopold was affected by an undiagnosed illness (in fact haemophilia). She died of cancer at Frogmore House, Windsor, on 16 March 1861 and, after temporary interment in St George's Chapel, Windsor, was buried in the Royal Mausoleum at Frogmore. Queen Victoria broke down with grief and guilt. Nine months later she lost her husband also. 


@@@@@


doc= 28274


Vidal, Robert Studley (1770-1841), antiquary, was the son of Robert Studley Vidal (died 1796) of Exeter, formerly a solicitor in London. He was called to the bar at the Middle Temple on 22 August 1795. He had antiquarian tastes, and communicated two papers on trial by ordeal and on the site of Kenwith Castle, Devon, to the Society of Antiquaries through his friend Henry Wansey: they were published in 'Archaeologia', volume 15. His chief work was the translation of J. L. von Mosheim, 'Commentaries on the Affairs of the Christians before the Time of Constantine'. The first two volumes were published in 1813, but the third did not appear until 1835. In the intervening years Vidal prepared the third edition of Charles Watkins's 'A Treatise on Copyholds', published in 1821, and the fifth edition of Sir Geoffrey Gilbert's 'The Law of Tenure', published in 1824. His projected edition of Ralph Cudworth's 'The Intellectual System of the Universe' (1678) was not published. Vidal formed a valuable collection of coins and medals, which was sold by Leigh and Sotheby on 18 June 1842 after his death. He kept a pack of harriers at Cornborough, near Bideford, Devon. He died there at his home, Cornborough House, on 21 November 1841. By his will he founded two scholarships of $20 a year each at St John's College, Cambridge, which were charged upon his manor of Abbotsham. 


@@@@@


doc= 28275


Vidler, William (1758-1816), Universalist minister and Unitarian preacher, was born on 4 May 1758 at Battle, Sussex, the tenth and last child of John Vidler (died 1780) and Elizabeth Bowling. He was apprenticed to his father, a stonemason, a trade for which, as an asthmatic, he was hardly suited. When George Gilbert came to Battle in 1776 an independent Calvinist church was organized. Vidler joined and started preaching. He seems to have received some training with Mr Nairne, vicar of Godshill, Isle of Wight, from 1777 to 1778. After he was persuaded of the correctness of believer's baptism and baptized by Mr Purdy of Rye (January 1780), the Battle church re-established itself as a Particular Baptist church. Although Vidler, called to be its minister, was still working as a stonemason, the number of members rose from 15 to 150. They took over and pulled down the disused Presbyterian meeting-house and built a new one, which left them $160 in debt. 
Vidler offered to travel afield to collect funds. At the same time he took the opportunity to test the doubts which the Universalist Elhanan Winchester's 'Dialogues on the Universal Restoration' had raised for him. After meeting John Ryland and Andrew Fuller in Northampton, he continued into Lincolnshire, where Winchester had followers among the General Baptists. He returned to Battle a convinced believer in the universal restoration of all humankind. This provoked the withdrawal of a minority of the church; while the majority remained they were eventually expelled from the local Particular Baptist association. 
Vidler fortified his allegiance with Winchester, and in 1794 he became Winchester's assistant at Parliament Court Chapel, London, and then, in 1796, his successor. With John Teulon, Vidler opened a bookshop, first in the Strand and then in High Holborn. They started a periodical, the 'Universalists' Miscellany' (from 1805 the 'Monthly Repository'), among whose readers was the Unitarian missionary Richard Wright. Wright became Vidler's friend and convinced him of the truth of Unitarianism. This divided the Parliament Court congregation, which in turn divided the General Baptist assembly when Parliament Court joined in 1803. 
Vidler ardently promoted both Universalist and Unitarian views. He was associated with a number of new Universalist and Unitarian societies at Northiam, Rye, Steyning, Reading, and Boston, and in 'the North Marches of Lincolnshire'. He co-founded, with Richard Wright, the Unitarian Evangelical Society (1804) and the Unitarian Fund (1806) (from 1825 the British and Foreign Unitarian Association, and from 1928 the general assembly of Unitarian and Free Christian Churches). Their evangelical fervour did much to transform the conservative rational dissent of the eighteenth century into the more vigorous Unitarianism of the nineteenth. Meanwhile Parliament Court Chapel (from 1824 South Place Chapel, Finsbury) became the South Place Ethical Society (from 1927 at Conway Hall, Red Lion Square, London). 
Vidler published 'God's Love to his Creatures' (1799), in which he held that God's love extends to animals; 'Letters to Mr. Fuller on the Universal Restoration' (1803); and new editions of Paul Siegvolk's 'The Everlasting Gospel' (1795) and Winchester's 'Dialogues on the Universal Restoration with a Memoir of its Author' (4th edn, 1799). He was also associated with Nathaniel Scarlett's 'A Translation of the New Testament from the Original Greek' (1798). 
On 7 September 1780 Vidler had married Charity Sweetingham ('c'.1752-1808), daughter of William Sweetingham of Battle. They had five children, three of whom survived him -- a daughter, who married William Smith, the Parliament Court organist; Ebenezer, a sailor; and William (died 24 March 1861), missioner at Chapel Street Domestic Mission, London. 
Vidler was excessively large and always booked two seats when travelling. While returning to London from Wisbech in 1808 to see his dying wife, the post-chaise in which he was travelling fell down a steep bank. Never fully recovering from the accident, he delivered his sermons from then on sitting down. He died on 23 August 1816 at his home in Spencer Street, Northampton Square, London. He was buried on 28 August in the graveyard of the Unitarian chapel at Hackney. 


@@@@@


doc= 28276


Vieuxpont, Robert de (d. 1228), administrator and magnate, came of a family that took its name from Vieuxpont-en-Auge (Calvados) in Normandy. He was the younger son of William de Vieuxpont (died in or before 1203), who became an important Anglo-Scottish landowner, and his wife, Maud de Morville (died 'c'.1210), whose father Hugh (in 1170 one of the assassins of Thomas Becket) forfeited the barony of Westmorland in 1173. Robert's elder brother, Ivo, inherited their father's estates in Northamptonshire and Northumberland, while Robert had entered royal service by 1195, and was custodian of the honours of Peverel, Higham Ferrers, and Tickhill in the latter years of Richard I's reign. But he achieved much greater eminence under John. At first he was principally employed in Normandy, especially as a paymaster of troops and director of military works, including those on Rouen Castle, and in 1203 he became 'bailli' of the Roumois. His services were rewarded by the grant of Vieuxpont itself, formerly held by an uncle who had joined the French, and also by grants in England. In February 1203 he was given custody of the castles of Appleby and Brough, to which the lordship of Westmorland was added a month later; then in October 1203 custody during pleasure was changed to a grant in fee simple, for the service of four knights, and Vieuxpont had become one of the leading barons in northern England. He was also to be given a number of valuable wardships, while his wife, Idonea, the daughter of John de Builli, whom he married before June 1213, brought him lands in Bedfordshire and a claim to the Yorkshire honour of Tickhill. 
After leaving Normandy with John in December 1203 Vieuxpont was in frequent attendance on the king until the end of 1205, when he became increasingly involved in northern administration. In October 1204 he became sheriff of Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire, and so had control of the strategically important castle of Nottingham, which was also a major repository for royal treasure -- 11,000 marks were sent there from Winchester in July 1207 -- and thus a base for the king's authority. Employed in 1206 as a justice and assessor of tallage in the northern counties, in 1207 he was given custody of the see of York, and in April 1208 custody of that of Durham. His manifold responsibilities may have been more than he could handle, since at the end of 1208 he had to proffer 4000 marks for royal 'grace and favour', and undertake to submit a number of delayed accounts. But he was pardoned 3000 marks of his fine, and though he ceased to be sheriff of Nottingham he continued to be prominent in John's service. He held Durham until 1210, and in the following year was employed in Wales, as the king's lieutenant in Powys. His loyalty to John brought him the accolade of a place in Roger of Wendover's list of that king's evil counsellors, and John himself acknowledged Vieuxpont's reliability by temporarily placing his second son, Richard, and his niece Eleanor in his custody. He also continued to handle substantial sums of royal money -- in May 1213 he and Henry of Braybrooke received 30,000 marks from the king's treasure. He accompanied John to France in 1214, and in the civil war that broke out in the autumn of 1215 was one of the principal defenders of royal castles and interests in Yorkshire. In January 1216, moreover, he was entrusted with the custody of Cumberland and Carlisle Castle. He also had important interests of his own to defend in the north-west. His acquisition of Westmorland had been followed by an accumulation of estates in the region, including one on which he built a castle at Brougham, in order to defend his lordship against attack from the north -- the constable of Scotland, Alan of Galloway, had a claim to Westmorland through his mother, Helen de Morville, and occupied the lordship for a year when the Scots overran English Cumbria in 1216. 
Vieuxpont fought for the young Henry III at Lincoln in 1217, but gave much trouble in the years that followed. He was said by Wendover to have continued to plunder after peace had been made, but greater difficulties arose from his claim to Tickhill, which was disputed by Alice, countess of Eu. In order to appease him for the time being the regency government, which had reappointed him sheriff of Cumberland in September 1217, conceded in the following year that he should hold that office without accounting for the profits of office until justice had been done on his claim to Tickhill. In the event he held Cumberland until 1222, without accounting for any issues at all. Having dislodged Alan of Galloway from Westmorland, he was by far the greatest figure in the north-west, which he governed with a heavy hand -- there were complaints over his administration of the royal forest in 1220 and 1225, and he quarrelled with William of Lancaster, lord of Kendal, over suits to Westmorland county court. He was not always fractious, however, and served as a justice itinerant in Yorkshire and Northumberland in 1218-19. In 1222 the dispute over Tickhill was settled; Vieuxpont abandoned his claim to the honour, settling instead for six and a half knights' fees and $100 in cash. A further consequence was that he immediately lost his shrievalty of Cumberland, and with it yearly revenues of nearly $300. He may have been discontented, since at the end of 1223 he was one of the adversaries of the justiciar, Hubert de Burgh, protesting against the resumption of royal castles and sheriffdoms. But he had been reconciled to the government by February 1225, when he attested the reissue of 'Magna Carta', and in 1226-7 headed a judicial eyre in Yorkshire. Although Vieuxpont was a benefactor to the Cumbrian monasteries of St Bees and Shap, in 1227 he bequeathed his body, along with his estate at Wycombe in Buckinghamshire, to the knights templar. The bequest itself, and the fact that its witnesses included a doctor, point to failing health, and by 1 February 1228 he was dead, probably very recently. He left a son and a daughter. The latter, Christian, he married to his ward, Thomas, son of William of Greystoke, the heir to the barony of Greystoke in Cumberland. His son and heir, John, died in 1241, his grandson, another Robert, in 1264. Divided between this younger Robert's daughters, the Vieuxpont inheritance was finally reassembled by the Cliffords, to form the basis of one of the greatest, and longest-lasting, northern lordships. 


