@@@@@


doc= 28277


Vigani, John Francis (c.1650-1713), chemist, was born in or near Verona. No record of his early life in the area remains, and there is no evidence of his having a degree or licence or following a regular course of study. However, he did travel extensively in Italy, France, Spain, the Netherlands, and England. As a wandering scholar he studied medicine and pharmacy, and collected plants and minerals. In 1671 he was in Parma, where he saw a quack swallow snake poison. In September 1682 he settled in England, at Newark-on-Trent, but it is likely that he had already been in London for some time. It was probably about this time that Vigani married. He and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1711), later had two daughters, Frances ('bap'. 22 Jan 1683) and Jane ('bap'. 7 March 1864). 
In 1682, Vigani's 'Medulla chemiae' was printed in Danzig, bearing an undated dedication to a gentleman from the Low Countries, one Joannes de Waal, 'Toparcha in Ankeveen', whom the author extolled for his generous patronage. The book, being a small collection of chemical processes, contains references to the chemical work of Jean Baptiste van Helmont, Robert Boyle, Sylvius, and Otto Tachenius. Vigani clearly adopted a corpuscular theory of matter and rejected the chemical theory of the three principles (sulphur, mercury, and salt). In 1683 Vigani published the second, enlarged, edition of his work, with the title of 'Medulla chymiae', which he dedicated to William, earl of Devon, Philip, earl of Chesterfield, and Thomas, Viscount Fauconberg. Prefixed to the work was a letter to the author signed 'T. R.', possibly the initials of his correspondent Dr Robson. The letter, dated London, 10 September 1682, eulogized Vigani for adhering to Boyle's corpuscular philosophy as well as for ruling out the three principles and the related, obscure terminology. In the preface the author briefly outlined the theoretical foundation to his chemical work: 'the world', he wrote, 'is concreted of atoms of various figures, with the innate qualities of motion, figure, magnitude and place'. The remainder of the work deals with the analysis of some substances, such as vitriol, urine, common salt, and nitre, describes the preparation of a number of chemical medicines, and includes three plates, depicting furnaces and vessels, by Vigani and his friend the chemical physician, John Troutbeck. The 'Acta Eruditorum' for 1684 published a laudatory review of this edition of Vigani's 'Medulla', which was subsequently reprinted with additions in 1685, 1693, and 1718. The 'Medulla' was conceived of as a guide to performing experiments in chemical courses, rather than as a textbook. 
Vigani started teaching chemistry in Cambridge in 1682 or 1683, independently of any university or college connection, to apothecaries and medical students, but continued to live in Newark. In a letter to Dr John Covell, master of Christ's College, of 2 August 1692, he wrote that he had been invited to write a treatise on chemistry, the preparation of which he had carried on for several years, but that was never published. From 1696 to 1704 Vigani was associated with St Catharine's College, and from 1704 he lectured in Queens' College cloisters (both chemistry and materia medica), where he had a laboratory with a remarkable number of drugs, which were purchased at the expense of the college. In 1707 Bentley built a laboratory for him at Trinity. Surviving notes of his course of chemistry show that he lectured there from November 1707, and it is likely that he taught regularly for several years. There is, however, no evidence that he was a member of any college in Cambridge. In February 1703 the senate conferred on him the title of honorary professor of chemistry in the University of Cambridge. As no stipend was paid to him, he depended entirely on student fees and opened his lectures to the public. He also had a laboratory in Newark, where he carried on some experiments. His surviving lectures on materia medica and chemical courses cover a wider range of subjects than his published work. In them Vigani did not confine himself with practical instructions, but also made a number of observations on medical and chemical topics. He adhered to the acid/alkali theory and explained fevers as the outcome of an exceeding acidity of human blood. 
Vigani's knowledge and skill in chemistry were recognized by his contemporaries. Among his students were William Stukeley, Stephen Hales, and Abraham de la Pryme, the latter of whom described him as 'a learned chemist... but a drunken fellow' ('The Diary of Abraham de la Pryme', Surtees Society publication no. 54, 1870, 24-5). Vigani was one of Newton's few friends in Cambridge. They used to have conversations on chemical subjects, but Newton, who possessed a copy of the 1683 edition of Vigani's 'Medulla', broke with him when Vigani told him an improper story about a nun. Vigani corresponded with Robert Boyle in 1682 (two letters from Vigani to Boyle are recorded, but they are no longer extant), and with Roger Cotes in 1708. 
Vigani's will was made on 19 July 1712. It was proved in the exchequer court of York by the oath of Frances Phisick, the sole executrix and legatee, on 13 June 1713, and the contents of his laboratory were valued for probate at $20. Vigani died in February 1713 at Newark, where he was buried on 26 February at the church of St Mary Magdalen. 


@@@@@


doc= 28278


Viger, Denis-Benjamin (1774-1861), politician in Canada, born at Montreal on 19 August 1774, was the only son of Denis Viger ('b'. 1741), a businessman and member of the house of assembly, and his wife, Perine-Charles (died 1823), the second daughter of Francois-Pierre Cherrier. He was educated at the College de Montreal, and, after serving articles (1794-9), was called to the bar on 9 March 1799, where he soon became distinguished. On 21 November 1808 he married Marie-Amable (died 1854), the daughter of Pierre Foretier. Their one child, a daughter, died in infancy. 
Viger entered the assembly as member for Montreal in 1808, and, being a cousin of Louis-Joseph Papineau, espoused the popular side. In 1809 he issued a pamphlet urging in the interests of Great Britain that the manners and institutions of the French Canadians should be preserved. When the Anglo-American War of 1812-14 broke out he was promoted captain in the militia; he served until the end of the war. From 1810 to 1814 Viger represented the county of Leinster in the legislature, and from 1827 to 1830 that of Kent. In 1828 he was chosen by the legislature as one of three delegates to proceed to Westminster as the exponent of their grievances. In 1830 he became a member of the legislative council, and in 1831 was again sent to England as the legislature's agent. He remained there until 1834, and was joined at times by other colonial leaders, including William Lyon Mackenzie. During the rebellions of 1837 and 1838 he played an obscure role in financing radical newspapers, and on 4 November 1838 he was arrested for seditious articles published in one of these. Having declined bail, he was kept in prison for nineteen months. 
In 1841, when the two Canadas were united, Viger entered the new parliament as member for Richelieu county, and in 1845 was elected member for Trois Rivieres. He denounced the union because it did not respect representation by population and restricted the use of French. However, when in 1843 the Liberals resigned, Viger, who appreciated the statesmanship of Sir Charles Metcalfe's policy and had supported him in his quarrel with the ministry, was sworn in as president of the council (12 December 1843). He was virtually head of the administration until 2 September 1844. The French Canadians, however, failed to understand his motives, and owing to the general dissatisfaction he was forced to resign in June 1846. On 25 February 1848 he was again called to the upper house; but, tired of political struggles, he did not attend. In 1858 his seat was declared vacant. He died at Montreal on 13 February 1861. Viger Square and Viger Garden in Montreal were named after him. 


@@@@@


doc= 28279


Viger, Jacques (1787-1858), author and surveyor, only surviving child of Jacques Viger (died 1798) and Amaranthe Prevost, was born in Montreal, Canada, on 7 May 1787 into an influential family circle. Denis-Benjamin Viger and Louis-Joseph Papineau were among his cousins. He studied at the College St Raphael (1799-1808) before leaving to undertake editorial work on 'Le Canadien' (1808-9). On 17 November 1808 he married Marie-Marguerite, 'nee' La Corne, widow of Major John Lennox, and daughter of the Chevalier de St Luc. They had three children, all of whom died in infancy. The marriage brought Viger money from the Lennox estate and stepdaughters from his wife's first marriage. In 1810 he began his scholarly writing with a book on Canadian neologisms which, however, was not published until 1909-10. He served in the Anglo-American War of 1812-14, as a lieutenant and then captain, and by 1829 was lieutenant-colonel of the Montreal 3rd militia battalion, having kept his interest in military matters. 
Meanwhile, in 1813 Viger had become surveyor of roads and bridges in Montreal. This post involved him in some early town planning, and in 1817 and 1837 he had town directories of Montreal compiled to help in his work. In 1825 he became census commissioner and by requiring information over and above that demanded by census legislation he compiled a set of returns which form a valuable historical source and of which he compiled a summary. It has been suggested that he collaborated with Joseph Bouchette in drawing the first map of the city or by contributing to his topographical works, but the evidence seems slight. Although he failed in his attempts to achieve a range of public offices, he was mayor of Montreal from 1833 to 1836, helped by his influential political connections. During his time as mayor he had drained a marshy suburb of the city which had been badly hit by the cholera epidemic of 1832, but his term was marred by controversy; in 1836 he lost his post as mayor and in 1840 that of surveyor of roads. 
Viger is best known as a local historian and antiquary, although most of his writing remained unpublished. His chief work is his unpublished 43-volume 'Ma saberdache', begun in 1808, of which the first thirty volumes included material which could be used for the history of the Canadas; the latter volumes were a miscellany of notes and documents relating to events in which he himself had taken part. He was also a keen collector of books and materials related to Canadian history. In 1858 he was a founder and first president of the Societe Historique de Montreal. He was well connected in influential Roman Catholic church circles and used with pride his title of commander of the papal order of St Gregory the Great, awarded in 1855. Viger died in Montreal on 12 December 1858. Although he and his notes and compilations were much consulted in his lifetime, he had rather little lasting influence because his works were mainly unpublished and, although now accessible in the archives of the Seminaire de Quebec, long remained in the private possession of his family. His most important work is now judged to be his 1825 census material. 


@@@@@


doc= 28280


Vigfusson, Gudbrandur (1827-1889), scholar of Icelandic literature, was born on 13 March 1827 in Galtardalur, Dalasysla, western Iceland. He was the son of Vigfus Gislason, of an old and respected Icelandic family, and Halldora Gisladottir. He was brought up by his foster-mother and great-aunt Kristin Vigfusdottir, to whom, as he thankfully recorded in his last days, he owed not only that he became a man of letters, but almost everything. He received his early education in the house of his cousin, a clergyman, who prepared him for the Latin high school of Bessastadir; he studied there, moving with the school to Reykjavik. In 1849 he left the school, and Iceland, for Copenhagen University, which he entered in 1850, holding a bursary at Regentsen College. He was appointed stipendiarius under the Arnamagnaean trustees, and worked in the Arnamagnaean Library, under the patronage of Jon Sigurdsson, leader of the Icelandic independence movement. It was this work that made him familiar with every vellum and paper copy of the classic and popular Icelandic and Old Scandinavian literature, and gave him the material for his future research. For fourteen years he led a life of research interrupted by two visits to Iceland (the second in 1858) and tours in Germany (during which he called on Jakob Grimm) and Norway. His superb travelogue recounting the last tour was published in 1855 by Jon Sigurdsson in the Icelandic journal he edited. 
Vigfusson's first printed piece of scholarship was 'Timatal' (written between October 1854 and April 1855), a complete chronology of the whole body of classic Icelandic literature, which has not been entirely superseded by subsequent scholarship. His work on editing the sagas began with 'Biskupa sogur' in 1858. In 1860 followed 'Bardar saga' and 'Fornsogur' (in partnership with Theodur Mobius), and in 1864 'Eyrbyggja saga'. In 1868 he finished eight years' work in co-operation with Carl Richard Unger, and published the last volume of his edition of 'Flateyjarbok'. The prefaces to these editions opened a new era of Icelandic scholarship, in which historical method and the results of modern philology were applied with a view to elucidating the whole history of classic Scandinavian literature. During these years Vigfusson's chief friends were H. Larpent (the translator of 'Tartuffe'), K. Dahlenborg, Konrad Maurer, Mobius, Unger, and Jon Arnason. For Arnason he sought out folk-tales in Iceland, and he wrote a preface for Arnason's collection, which is still of significance in Icelandic folklore. In 1858 Vigfusson became engaged to the daughter of an important local government official in Dalasysla, an engagement which foundered on the long wait for him to take his final examination. Eventually Elinborg Kristjansdottir married another. Vigfusson never married. 
In 1864 Vigfusson was approached by Sir George Webbe Dasent, who had been entrusted by the representatives of Richard Cleasby with the task of completing and printing an Icelandic-English dictionary, on which that scholar had been engaged until his death. Konrad Gislason had been supposedly engaged on the work for nearly twenty years, but the heirs, foreseeing no speedy conclusion, asked Dasent to find someone else. Dasent persuaded Vigfusson to come to London and take up the work. The Oxford University Press, largely at the instigation of the dean of Christ Church, H. G. Liddell, agreed to publish the book, and, after some months in London, Vigfusson moved to Oxford in 1866, where he resided until his death. Without transcribers or assistants, with the help of his own collections of Fritzner's 'Icelandic-Danish Dictionary', then appearing in fascicles, and a miserably inadequate mass of materials supplied by Cleasby's Copenhagen employees, Vigfusson finished the 'Oxford Icelandic-English Dictionary' in 1873. During its progress he had the advantage of being able to consult Liddell, whose practical knowledge of lexicography was unrivalled. Liddell obtained for him an honorary MA (1871) and common-room rights at Christ Church. The dictionary was generally well received, though Dasent's insistence on retaining Cleasby's name in the most prominent position on the title-page caused his estrangement from Vigfusson. 
Vigfusson made many firm English friends, though his laborious life left him little time. And, despite his 'weird but imposing personality', he built up a devoted group of students, including W. P. Ker, John Sephton, Charles Plummer, W. A. Craigie, and Joseph Wright. It was during this period that Vigfusson became embroiled in a major feud with Britain's other prominent Icelandic scholar, Eirikur Magnusson, over a new translation of the 'Bible' into Icelandic. 
In 1874-5 Vigfusson went to Copenhagen and to Stockholm to make transcripts for the 'Rolls Series' editions of 'Orkneyinga Saga' and 'Hakonar saga', and discovered a fuller text of part of the former than had before been known to exist. These appeared with prefaces in 1887. The next three years, 1875-8, were occupied with 'Sturlunga saga' (1878), to which was affixed a complete literary history of old northern literature, with a full account of the extant manuscript material. Unfortunately 'Sturlunga saga' 'fell foul of factors as banal as excessive cost price, hopeless advertising and total absence of reviews' (Wawn, 836). Scarcely a copy reached Iceland, while the prohibitive cost limited purchasers in Scandinavia. 
In 1879 Vigfusson brought out an 'Icelandic Prose Reader'. In 1883 the 'Corpus poeticum boreale' appeared; although, after the dictionary, this represents Vigfusson's most lasting memorial, the 'Corpus' -- 'so vast, so full of delights, so unbelievably unreliable' (Dronke, 93) -- was innocent of new philological methodology, and today remains a quarry for ideas rather than a model for a text. The 'Grimm Centenary Papers' (1886), containing many of Vigfusson's most original thoughts on Norse history and Germanic literature, may be considered as an appendix to the 'Corpus'. He also wrote several papers in the Oxford Philological Society's 'Transactions', in the Philological Society's 'Transactions', and in the 'English Historical Review', on philological and historical subjects. 
From 1866 to 1889 Vigfusson was occupied with his edition of the 'Landnama-boc', and with the duties of his readership, for he had been appointed reader in Icelandic in the University of Oxford in 1884, a position created for him at the instigation of Liddell and York Powell. He was centenary doctor of Uppsala in 1877, and he received the order of the Dannebrog in 1885. He had a long stay in Copenhagen, working at the Arnamagnaean Icelandic manuscripts. In 1886 he went to the Isle of Man, and published in the 'Manx Note Book' his readings of the runic monuments there. In the autumn of 1888 he fell victim to cancer, and he died on 31 January 1889 at the Sarah Acland Home, Wellington Square, Oxford; he was buried on 3 February at St Sepulchre's cemetery in a ceremony attended by every notable philologist in Oxford. 'Origines Islandicae', on which he was working until his death, and which York Powell was supposed to complete, was published by the press after the latter's death with a hasty list of corrigenda by W. A. Craigie, but otherwise in a lamentably error-ridden condition. 


@@@@@


doc= 28281


Vigne, Godfrey Thomas (1801-1863), traveller, eldest son of Thomas Vigne of Walthamstow, Essex, was born on 1 September 1801. He entered Harrow School in 1817, was admitted a student of Lincoln's Inn on 23 December 1818, and was called to the bar in 1824. In 1831 he travelled in the United States of America and Canada, publishing an account of his journey in 1832, entitled 'Six Months in America'. In the same year he left Southampton for India, on 16 October, and, after passing through Persia, spent the next seven years travelling north-west of India. He visited Kashmir, Ladakh, and other parts of central Asia, besides travelling through Afghanistan, where he had several interviews with the emir, Dost Mohammed. Vigne was described by Boase as the first Englishman to visit Kabul. The Scot Alexander Burnes, described by Dost Mohammed as the first Englishman he had met, had reached Kabul in the spring of 1832. Vigne described his travels in 'A Personal Narrative of a Visit to Ghuzni, Kabul, and Afghanistan' (1840) and 'Travels in Kashmir' (1842). These two books give a valuable view of northern and western India before the establishment of British supremacy. The former was reprinted in 1982 and 1986, the latter in 1981. 
In the years after 1852 Vigne visited the West Indies, Mexico, Nicaragua, and the United States. He died unmarried, at The Oaks, Woodford, Essex, on 12 July 1863, while preparing for the press his 'Travels in Mexico and South America' (1863). He was neither 'a professional author nor a commissioned tourist'. He travelled for amusement; as his will was proved at 'under $12,000' it is clear he did not write for money, and, despite having visited some strategically extremely important areas, he seems to have had no ulterior political motives. 


@@@@@


doc= 28282


Vignoles, Charles Blacker (1793-1875), civil engineer, was born on 31 May 1793 at Woodbrook, co. Wexford, the only child of Charles Henry Vignoles (died 1794), a descendant of a Huguenot military family serving in Ireland, and Camilla (1764?-1794), youngest daughter of Charles Hutton. His father was a captain in the 43rd or Monmouthshire regiment of foot, which was sent out to the West Indies; he was wounded and taken prisoner at the storming of Pointe-a-Pitre in Guadeloupe in 1794. Soon afterwards he and Camilla died of yellow fever. 
Charles Vignoles was brought to England by an uncle, and raised by his grandfather. When eighteen months old Vignoles was gazetted as an ensign on half pay in his father's regiment, a common method of compensating deceased officers' families. He was educated at the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich, where his grandfather taught, but since his grandfather favoured a legal career he was articled to a proctor in Doctors' Commons for seven years. How long he remained is not known, but in 1813 he rowed with his grandfather, possibly over his decision to give up law, and left home. This breach was never healed. 
In November 1813 Vignoles was transferred to the York chasseurs, and soon afterwards was at Sandhurst as a private pupil of Thomas Leybourn, one of the college lecturers. Leybourn was guardian of Mary Griffiths (died 1834), eldest daughter of a Welsh gentleman farmer, and Charles and Mary became secretly engaged. Assisted by the duke of Kent, Vignoles was commissioned in the 1st or Royal Scots regiment in January 1814. He was present at Bergen-op-Zoom in March, and was then in Canada for eight months. In October 1815 he was made lieutenant and posted to Scotland, and from April 1816 until May 1817 was aide-de-camp to General Sir Thomas Brisbane at Valenciennes, where he produced comparative tables of French and English weights and measures for the duke of Wellington. 
Put on half pay in May 1816 and with no private means, Vignoles had to seek his livelihood elsewhere, although he did not leave the army until 1833. After returning to England, he married Mary at Alverstoke, Hampshire, on 13 July 1817, and set sail for America, intending to serve with Simon Bolivar, but by the end of 1817 he was at Charleston, South Carolina, as assistant to the state civil engineer. In 1821 he became city surveyor at St Augustine, Florida, and in 1823 published a map of Florida. Severe financial problems and news of his grandfather's death persuaded him to return to England in early 1823. 
Vignoles worked as a surveyor and wrote articles for the 'Encyclopaedia Metropolitana', becoming assistant to James Walker, engineer of the London Commercial Docks. By mid-1824 he had his own office in Hatton Garden, with three pupil assistants. In 1825 he was hired by George Rennie (1791-1866) and Sir John Rennie (1794-1874) to survey a railway between London and Brighton, and a new Liverpool and Manchester line, after parliament had rejected George Stephenson's original scheme. Vignoles moved north and made Liverpool his base for the next fifteen years. His legal training made him a good parliamentary witness, a factor in the success of the second 'Liverpool and Manchester Railway Bill', and it brought much similar work subsequently. He was employed as Stephenson's assistant, but a clash of personalities made him resign in January 1827 after disagreements over measurements for Edge Hill Tunnel. Marc Brunel offered Vignoles a post as resident engineer on the Thames Tunnel, but the offer was withdrawn when Brunel realized he could appoint his son Isambard to the post. Vignoles subsequently spent a year in the Isle of Man, surveying government property. He was then recommended by Brunel to straighten the northern section of the Oxford Canal, but fell out with Brunel, after criticizing work on the breached Thames Tunnel and submitting new proposals, which were rejected in June 1830. In 1829 Vignoles was involved in the locomotive trials at Rainhill, working with John Braithwaite and John Ericsson on the 'Novelty'. In 1830 he and Ericsson patented a method of ascending steep inclines on railways (no. 5995). Vignoles also advocated a flat-bottomed rail which would bear directly on sleepers without any chair, but despite occasional trials the rail was never adopted in Britain. On the continent it was, and in Germany and France it was named after him. 
During the 1830s Vignoles surveyed and constructed numerous English railways, especially in Lancashire, and also worked in Ireland, France, and Germany. Between 1832 and 1834 he worked on Ireland's first railway, the Dublin and Kingstown Railway, and between 1836 and 1838 he was engineer to the royal commission on railways in Ireland. At the end of the decade financial problems almost ruined him. In 1835 he had surveyed the proposed Sheffield, Ashton under Lyne, and Manchester Railway, and he became the resident engineer. Problems arose with raising the necessary finance, so Vignoles, with the blessing of the company directors, bought many depreciated shares in the names of friends and relatives, on the understanding that they were trustees for himself and that no calls would be made on them. This manoeuvre allowed work to commence, but financial difficulties meant that the directors later insisted that calls be met, leaving Vignoles with a bill for $14,000 he could not meet. He fought the decision, but had to resign. He did recover and pay these debts, but the next three years were difficult. He became professor of civil engineering at University College, London, advocated and built atmospheric railways, and reported on railways in the German kingdom of Wurttemberg. Then the 'railway mania' of 1844-6 brought him much work. 
Vignoles had no spectacular engineering achievement to his credit, but in 1846 he was employed to construct the Kiev Bridge in Ukraine, a suspension bridge over 11/2 miles long, which brought him fame. In 1847 he moved to Ukraine and lived there until the bridge was completed in 1853. During these years Vignoles paid several visits to England, and on 16 June 1849 married Elizabeth Hodge (died 1880) at St Martin-in-the-Fields, his first wife, Mary, having died on 17 December 1834. After Russia, Vignoles was involved in some English projects, but his main work lay abroad: the Frankfurt, Wiesbaden, and Cologne Railway; the Western Railway in Switzerland; the Bahia and San Francisco Railway in Brazil; and the Tudela and Bilbao Railway in Spain. In 1863 he retired, and in 1867 acquired a house at Hythe, near Southampton, where he became a country gentleman and JP. He still visited London frequently, actively participating in several scientific societies. On his return from one such visit he suffered a stroke and died four days later, at his home, Villa Amalthea, Hythe, Hampshire, on 17 November 1875. He was buried in Brompton cemetery, London, on 23 November. From his first marriage there were seven children, five of whom reached adulthood. Three of his sons -- Charles Francis Fernando, Hutton, and Henry -- became engineers, although mental problems forced Charles to retire early. Another son, Olinthus John, became a minister of the Church of England and wrote a biography of his father, published in 1889. 
Vignoles joined the Institution of Civil Engineers on 10 April 1827, and became president in December 1869. He became a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society on 9 January 1829. Bad weather spoiled his view of a total solar eclipse near Kiev, but while building a Spanish railway he entertained a government astronomical expedition and in 1860 published his observations of this solar eclipse, and in 1870 was part of another government expedition to observe a solar eclipse. He became a fellow of the Royal Society on 7 June 1855, was a founder member of the Photographic Society of London, served in 1855 as a member of the royal commission on the Ordnance Survey, and was connected with the Royal Irish Academy and the Royal Institution. 


@@@@@


doc= 28283


Vigors, Nicholas Aylward (1785/6-1840), zoological administrator and quinarian, was born at Old Leighlin, co. Carlow, Ireland, the son of Nicholas Aylward Vigors (1755-1828) and his first wife, Catherine, daughter of Solomon Richards of Solsboro, co. Wexford. He entered Trinity College, Oxford, in 1803, and was also admitted a student at Lincoln's Inn in 1806. Leaving Oxford in 1809, after preparing for publication 'An Inquiry into the Nature and Extent of Poetick Licence' (1810), he purchased an ensigncy in the Grenadier Guards. He was severely wounded during the Peninsular War in 1811. Invalided home, he left the army and returned to Oxford, graduating BA in 1817. 
As a wealthy gentleman Vigors devoted himself to ornithology and entomology, becoming a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1819. It was here that his gifts as a reforming administrator and systematist became apparent. He reacted against the Linnean's botanical emphasis, slow publication rate, and old methodology, and (with W. S. MacLeay, J. F. Stephens, Adrian Howarth, and others) formed the semi-autonomous Zoological Club on 27 November 1822. It became a forum for the zoological careerists at the hub of an expanding maritime nation and for methodological dissidents (Vigors was a quinarian) rebelling against Linnaean systematics. It also set the trend for enthusiast-driven societies, being less formal and socially stratified, and it prepared the way for more regional autonomy of scientific disciplines. While still in the Linnean orbit, the club had its own by-laws (drawn up by Vigors and others), electoral procedures, subscriptions, and fast publication in its own cheap house organ, the 'Zoological Journal' (1824-34), which allowed free taxonomic discussion. 
By the mid-1820s Vigors was the leading quinarian, arguing for a geometric ordering of species, orders, and families into sets of five bounded by a circle, a system pioneered by William MacLeay (1792-1865). The general minutes testify that Vigors, the secretary of the club and its last chairman in 1828-9, was the real power. He exhibited specimens and circular charts, and steered discussions towards quinarian explanations. Quinarianism provided a strong heuristic and led to his overhaul of avian classification in 'Observations on the natural affinities that connect the orders and families of birds', read at the club in 1824 and published in 1825. Vigors wrote on birds, mammals, and insects in the 'Zoological Journal' and in 1827 became its principal editor until the journal closed in 1834. 
Vigors was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in February 1826. By then his discomfort at an increasingly restrictive Linnean Society was apparent. As a result the Zoological Club's personnel slid readily into managerial positions at the new Zoological Society. It was Vigors, with Joseph Sabine and Sir Stamford Raffles, who drew up the prospectus for the Zoological Society in February 1826, and it was founded in April, with Vigors as its first secretary. He was joined by E. T. Bennett, his Zoological Club assistant, as vice-secretary in 1827. 
Vigors's organizational flair was again apparent. The Zoological Society minutes show that he, Sabine, and Lord Auckland were the driving force in the early years. Vigors's careerists, interested in systematic science and a vocation from imperial gains, staffed the society's museum in Bruton Street, Mayfair. However, they were often at odds with the aristocrats, who, as the titular heads of the promenading gardens, saw the zoo's role as a game park, to provide exotic delicacies for the nobleman's table. Vigors donated his preserved birds to the museum, as well as display cases and cabinets of insects. He bought collections at auction and catalogued the museum's birds and mammals. Bruton Street became a repository for specimens gathered during surveying voyages. Captain Phillip Parker King of the 'Beagle' had Vigors examine his birds, and it was Vigors who described the birds of the American north-west from Captain Frederick Beechey's voyage in the 'Blossom'. Vigors's forty-odd papers (some co-authored with Thomas Horsfield) covered a wide ornithological range and introduced many new species. 
The zoological gardens, according to Humphry Davy's original plan, were to exhibit animals of the colonies and assert London's global pre-eminence. Vigors's zoology too spoke of imperial pride and he sparked a rash of anti-Gallic papers from the Bruton Street careerists. The former grenadier, who had seen war with France, insisted that her Napoleonic days of appropriating nature were over. However, his domineering style alienated outsiders, not least the prickly William Swainson, who accused Vigors of bureaucratic dictatorship. 
On the death of his father in 1828 Vigors succeeded to the family estate in co. Carlow, although he spent the scientific season at his house in Chester Terrace, Regent's Park. He was created an honorary DCL by Oxford University on 4 July 1832. On 15 December 1832 he entered the reformed parliament as the member for Carlow, resigning as secretary of the Zoological Society in 1833. He was an extreme Liberal and usually voted with the radicals. He rarely spoke in the house, but he was a key radical witness before the 1836 parliamentary select committee on the British Museum, where he deplored the lack of scientifically trained commoners among the titled trustees and wanted a professional board appointed by the learned societies. In the management of science, Vigors proved himself a critical transitional figure in the move towards the hegemony of gentlemanly specialism over aristocratic interest. He lost the seat of Carlow (where he was deputy lieutenant) in 1835, but was returned in 1837, and he represented this constituency until his death at his home, Chester Terrace, Regent's Park, on 26 October 1840. He was buried in the nave of Old Leighlin Cathedral. Vigors did not marry but was survived by a son, Ferdinand Vigors ('b'. 1814/15) who went to Trinity College, Oxford, in 1833. 


@@@@@


doc= 28284


Villettes, William Anne (1754-1808), army officer, born at Bern, Switzerland, on 14 June 1754, was the second son of Arthur Villettes (1701-1776), diplomatist. His family, who were Huguenot, had left France and settled in England after the revocation of the edict of Nantes. His father, who was British plenipotentiary at Turin, and afterwards in the Helvetic cantons, retired to Bath, where he died. Villettes was educated at Claverton School, Bath, and St Andrews University; intended for the bar, he completed two or three terms at Lincoln's Inn. But he was set on a military life, and his father granted him his wish and obtained for him a cornetcy in the 10th light dragoons on 19 December 1775. He was promoted lieutenant in the regiment on 25 December 1778 and captain on 22 January 1782. On 24 December 1787 he was promoted to a majority in the 12th light dragoons. 
For part of the earlier period of his service in the army Villettes served as aide-de-camp and military secretary to General Sir William Pitt, commanding the forces in Ireland. On 30 July 1791 he was promoted lieutenant-colonel of the 69th foot, and he commanded that regiment during the siege of Toulon, where his good services were acknowledged by General Charles O'Hara and his successor, General David Dundas; here he commanded a mixed force of British and Neapolitan troops, and defended, until ordered to withdraw, the key position of Les Sablettes. 
Villettes was next engaged in the conquest of Corsica, in 1794. He commanded a force of 1200 soldiers which landed from the fleet, and, with Nelson, then captain of the 'Agamemnon' and 250 naval gunners, was entrusted with the siege of Bastia. Admiral Lord Hood bore testimony to his good services, and Nelson described him as 'a most excellent officer' ('Dispatches and Letters', 1.393). On the surrender of Bastia on 9 May 1794 Villettes was appointed governor of the town and gazetted colonel from 21 August 1795. In June 1796 he led a punitive expedition, accompanied by Sir Gilbert Elliot, the viceroy, to crush a rebellion in central Corsica, but was not permitted to finish the task, as Elliot conceded the rebels' demands. Ill health compelled his return to England, but on 30 November 1796 he was appointed a brigadier-general with a force sent to Portugal under Sir Charles Stuart. On 23 March 1797 he was transferred from the lieutenant-colonelcy of the 69th foot to that of the 1st dragoon guards, and was shortly afterwards made comptroller of the household to the duke of Kent. 
On 18 June 1798 Villettes was promoted major-general. In 1799 he was sent to Corfu to raise a corps of Albanians -- a mission that proved impracticable. The following year he was posted to Malta as second in command to General Pigot. He succeeded the latter in 1801. On 25 July 1802 he took over from General Fox as commander-in-chief in the Mediterranean. In the meantime he was made colonel of a newly raised regiment of foot from 12 April 1799, and on 28 March 1801 was appointed colonel commandant of a newly raised battalion of the 4th King's Own (disbanded on 24 May 1802). He served in Malta until 1807, exhibiting great tact and firmness during a sometimes difficult period. He had to face the unpopularity caused by the explosion of a powder magazine in the city of Vittoriosa, and to suppress a mutiny in Froberg's regiment in 1807. He raised the Royal regiment of Malta, and was appointed its colonel on 7 December 1804. On 30 October 1805 he was promoted lieutenant-general. 
Although he was recalled to England in 1807 to join Cathcart's expedition to the Baltic, Villettes arrived too late to participate, but on 7 November he was appointed lieutenant-governor and commander of the forces in Jamaica, with the local rank of general. On 4 January 1808 he was appointed colonel of the 64th foot. While on a tour of inspection in the island in July 1808 he fell ill with yellow fever, and he died, unmarried, on 13 July 1808 at Union. He was buried with military honours in the parish of Halfway Tree, near Kingston, and a monument was erected to his memory in Westminster Abbey. He had proved to be one of the most popular and capable commanders in the British army, his favourite maxim always being ''Suaviter in modo, fortiter in re'' (Bowdler, 11). 


@@@@@


doc= 28285


Palmer, Barbara, countess of Castlemaine and 'suo jure' duchess of Cleveland (bap. 1640, d. 1709), royal mistress, was baptized at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 27 November 1640, the only child of William Villiers, second Viscount Grandison (1614-1643), and his wife, Mary ('c'.1623-1672), daughter and coheir of Paul Bayning, first Viscount Bayning, a wealthy merchant. Grandison was one of the influential Villiers family, his father being half-brother to George Villiers, first duke of Buckingham. He himself was a royalist colonel who was seriously wounded at the siege of Bristol in July 1643 and died some two months later, on 30 September 1643. His daughter later put up a monument to him in Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford. Mary Bayning was twice married again: in 1648 to Grandison's cousin, Charles Villiers, second earl of Anglesey, who died in 1661; and then to Arthur Gorges of Chelsea, Middlesex. 
Barbara Villiers was living in London when she became the mistress of Philip Stanhope, second earl of Chesterfield (1633-1714) in 1656 or 1657. In 1657 she wrote him arch, lively letters arranging several assignations: 'My freind [Lady Ann Hamilton] and I are just now abed together a contriving how to have your company this afternoune. If you deserve this favour, you will come and seek us at Ludgate Hill, about three a clock, at Butler's shop' and 'the joy I have of being with you the last night, has made me doe nothing but dream of you' (Steinman, 11-13). It was an affair which she continued after marrying, on 14 April 1659, Roger Palmer (1634-1705), royalist and lawyer, second son of Sir James Palmer of Dorney Court, Buckinghamshire, at St Gregory by Paul, London. Palmer seems to have soon become aware of the situation as Barbara wrote again to Chesterfield after her marriage, 'Since I saw you, I have been at home, and I find the mounser [monsieur, Roger Palmer] in a very ill humer, for he sayes that he is resolved never to bring mee to town again and that nobody shall see me when I am in the country' (Steinman, 16). She advised Chesterfield to put off visiting her that day but the affair probably continued until January 1660 when Chesterfield, having killed a man in a duel, went to France. Little trace remains of Barbara's whereabouts immediately before the Restoration and it is unclear how or where she met Charles II (1630-1685): the king acknowledged her first daughter, Anne, born on 25 February 1661, a birth date which suggests that their affair must have begun within two or three weeks of his arrival in London on 29 May 1660, but leaves open the question of whether they had in fact met before Charles's return to England. 
By July 1660 the Palmers were living in King Street, just across from the privy garden of Whitehall Palace, when one evening the diarist Samuel Pepys stood listening to the music he could hear from the house, an entertainment put on for the king and his brothers James, duke of York, and Henry, duke of Gloucester, by 'Madam Palmer'. According to Pepys's information the royal brothers had 'a fancy to make her husband a cuckold' (Pepys, 1.199), but in fact Barbara was already the king's mistress, something Pepys certainly knew by October 1661 when Charles determined to give Barbara a title. The king instructed a grant to be prepared making Roger Palmer Baron Limerick and earl of Castlemaine with a remainder limited to his heirs male by Barbara, 'the reason whereof everybody knows' commented Pepys (ibid., 2.229). Barbara thus became countess of Castlemaine on 11 December 1661. She was then pregnant with her first son with the king, baptized Charles on 18 June 1662 in a ceremony attended by the king ['see 'Fitzroy, Charles, second duke of Cleveland and first duke of Southampton]. In July, Pepys heard that the earl of Castlemaine had had the boy baptized in a Catholic ceremony, causing a furious row with his wife, who left the house and went to her uncle Colonel Villiers at Richmond Palace. Although she soon returned, thenceforward they lived separate lives. A bond indemnifying the earl of Castlemaine for any debts, up to $10,000, contracted by Barbara was signed by her uncle George Villiers, third Viscount Grandison, and James Howard, earl of Suffolk, her uncle by marriage, in 1662 and effectively signals the couple's separation. Charles II's new queen, Catherine of Braganza, arrived in England in May 1662, and Castlemaine appeared determined to maintain her position as the king's acknowledged mistress and to gain an ascendancy over Catherine. Her proposed appointment as a lady of the bedchamber to Catherine (which had first been reported in March 1662), caused great conflict in the court, Catherine initially refusing to accept Castlemaine and the courtiers dividing over the issue. However, Charles did not waver in supporting his mistress, writing to his chancellor, the earl of Clarendon, that 'whosoever I finde to be my Lady Castlemaine's enemy in this matter, I do promise upon my word, to be his enemy as long as I live' (Wynne, 32). Catherine's resistance was eventually overcome and Castlemaine was victorious, being appointed along with the rest of the ladies of the bedchamber on 1 June 1663. Castlemaine often appeared at court events, sometimes taking a leading part, as at a ball held on 31 December 1662, when she appeared in the first dance partnered by the duke of Monmouth, and was placed third in line after the king and queen and the duke and duchess of York. Castlemaine also formed a mutually beneficial alliance with the court artist Sir Peter Lely: in the 1660s he painted a series of portraits of her in the guise of Magdalen, Madonna, a 'Sultana', and St Catherine, which allude to her relationship with the king and may be seen as part of her challenge to the queen. It was in part through Lely's many and influential portraits of her that she established her image as a great court beauty and the king's accepted mistress, and the great number of copies of Castlemaine's portraits attest to her success in this programme of self-promotion. The portraits suggest that she had dark, almost black, hair and blue eyes, confirming the description of her in Mme d'Aulnoy's 'Memoirs of the Court of England' (p. 150). 
As early as January 1663 there were rumours that Castlemaine was having an affair with the courtier Henry Jermyn (bap. 1636, d. 1708). However, she did not lose her position as royal mistress and indeed by May 1663 had moved into apartments in Whitehall situated over Holbein's Gatehouse, where Charles frequently dined and where courtiers sought an invitation. Castlemaine's main rival for the king's affections in the 1660s was not the queen but a maid of honour, Frances Stuart, later duchess of Richmond. Early in 1663 Charles began to show an interest in Frances: his insistence that she be allowed entry to Castlemaine's apartments when he was there caused Castlemaine to withdraw from court in July. She was soon persuaded to return, and it was reported that she 'commands the King as much as ever, and hath and doth what she will' (Pepys, 4.238). Her second son, Henry Fitzroy, first duke of Grafton, was born on 20 September 1663. There may have been some doubt over his parentage as he was not at first acknowledged by the king when further titles were given to Castlemaine in 1670. 
In December 1663 Castlemaine's conversion to Roman Catholicism was made public. Contemporaries speculated that her motives were not genuine, but some years later Lorenzo Magalotti was told that it was prompted by a fear of death brought on by a dangerous illness, and indeed Castlemaine remained a Catholic for the rest of her life. The contradictory rumours concerning Castlemaine's credit with the king continued. In February 1664 she made her presence felt at the theatre by moving from her box to go and sit between the king and the duke of York; at least one observer thought that 'she did it only to show the world that she is not out of favour yet as was believed' (Pepys, 5.33). Indeed, Charles dined frequently with Barbara, and in September she gave a magnificent dinner for the French ambassador and his wife, where it was remarked that Charles behaved more as a host than a guest (Comminges to Lionne, 15 Sept 1664, TNA: PRO, PRO 31/3/113, fol. 300). Barbara's daughter Charlotte was born on 5 September 1664, and her last child with the king, a son, George Fitzroy, duke of Northumberland, on 28 December 1665 at Oxford. Her children with the king were one of her great advantages over the childless queen: Charles was said to be 'mighty kind to his bastard children' visiting them often in her apartments (Pepys, 5.164). Castlemaine's favour with the king was often used on behalf of others: she influenced the appointment of her great-uncle, Henry Glenham, as bishop of St Asaph in February 1667, and in the same year Sir Robert Paston wrote to Castlemaine thanking her for interceding with the king over a grant to himself and 'that I must with silence and admiration consider a bounty in you beyond all things of example' (Wynne, 85). Paston's praise of Barbara may have been more than usually extravagant as it seems he owed her money for her intercession but was unable (or unwilling) to pay. 
From 1667 Castlemaine's pre-eminence gradually diminished. Her name was again associated with Henry Jermyn in 1667, and in July that year a report circulated that she was pregnant and insisting that the king own the child 'or she will bring it into Whitehall gallery and dash the brains of it out before the King's face' (Pepys, 7.355). The king's refusal led to another tactical withdrawal from court by Castlemaine, whereupon Charles soon felt compelled to visit her and a reconciliation was effected; nothing more is heard of the pregnancy. On the other hand the king's attraction for Frances Stuart survived her marriage with the duke of Richmond and by the end of 1667 her imminent return to Whitehall was thought likely to cause conflict between the factions of the two women. 
Then in January 1668 the king's affair with the actress Mary Davis was public knowledge and said to be discomforting Castlemaine. In May that year Castlemaine moved into Berkshire House, opposite St James's Palace and purchased for her by the king for $4000, but she confounded expectations that she would fade into the background. In February 1668 she acted in a court production of Corneille's 'Horace', and wore some of the crown jewels, 'far outshining the queen' (Evelyn, 3.505). Later that year she made an appearance at the queen's birthday ball 'so glorious in jewells that she was the wonder of all who saw her' (newsletter, 18 Nov 1668, BL, Add. MS 36916, fol. 119). In 1668-9 the king continued to make frequent visits and was especially assiduous when she fell ill in October 1669. Castlemaine had apparently made the transition from royal mistress to close friend. Her lovers were said to include the rope-dancer Jacob Hall (fl. 1662-1681) about 1667, the actor Charles Hart (bap. 1625, d. 1683) the next year, the playwright William Wycherley (bap. 1641, d. 1716) in 1671, and John Churchill, later duke of Marlborough (1650-1722) -- apparently giving the last a substantial sum of money -- in 1671-5. 
During the first decade of the Restoration, Castlemaine was involved in the factions which formed around the king's ministers. Those she helped into high office included Henry Bennet, earl of Arlington, and Charles Berkeley, earl of Falmouth, who were appointed secretary of state and keeper of the privy purse respectively in 1662. Berkeley paid Castlemaine money from the king's privy purse and when he was killed in 1665 in the Second Anglo-Dutch War she was anxious to promote Baptist May to the post. Although the king favoured another for the position Castlemaine used her usual tactic of withdrawing from court and eventually prevailed. On the other hand, the earls of Clarendon and Southampton, the king's lord chancellor and lord treasurer, disapproved of Castlemaine and obstructed all official grants to her. The hostility was reciprocated: on one occasion in September 1662 Castlemaine denounced Clarendon in public and hoped she would see his head on a stake outside Westminster. Her apartments came to be frequented by Clarendon's enemies and his downfall in 1667 was widely reported to have been 'certainly designed in my Lady Castlemaine's chamber' (Pepys, 8.404). In Bishop Burnet's assessment 'the mistress [Castlemaine] and the whole bedchamber were perpetually railing at him [Clarendon]. This by a sort of infection possessed the King' ('Burnet's History', 1.369-71). The king clearly resented Clarendon's hostility towards Castlemaine and on one occasion rebuked him for his wife's lack of courtesy in refusing to visit Castlemaine, whereupon Clarendon seized the opportunity to expostulate on 'the lady' and those who courted her favour. Castlemaine did not hide her satisfaction when the end came: Clarendon wrote that as he was leaving Whitehall on 25 August he saw Castlemaine, Arlington, and Bab May looking 'out of her open window with great gaiety and triumph, which all people observed' ('Life of... Clarendon', 2.304-7). 
Castlemaine had a changeable relationship with her kinsman, George Villiers, duke of Buckingham. In 1666 they had a falling out (of unknown motivation), which greatly displeased the king. In July 1667, however, when Buckingham was in the Tower for his behaviour during the last parliamentary session, Castlemaine was reported to have: 'so far solicited for him, that the King and she are quite fallen out; he comes not to her nor hath for some three or four days, and parted with very foul words, the King calling her a whore, and a jade. (Pepys, 8.331, 334)' It seemed doubtful that Buckingham would be freed but, in fact, a few days later he was at liberty. Pepys speculated that Castlemaine 'hath at last overcome the King' (Pepys, 8.342), and it was Castlemaine who brought Buckingham to the king in her apartments where they were formally reconciled. This temporary alliance may have been prompted because both Castlemaine and Buckingham desired Clarendon's ruin. The situation altered during the course of 1668, however, when James, duke of York, returned to favour. Previously relations between Castlemaine and the duke and duchess of York had been distant but in 1666 there were rumours that Castlemaine was attempting a rapprochement with James by encouraging the affair of the duke and Margaret, Lady Denham. Certainly by April 1668 Castlemaine had joined the rush to court James, beginning by ingratiating herself with Anne, duchess of York, whom she had not seen for six months. At the same time Pepys wrote that 'the King and the Duke of York and Duchess and my Lady Castlemaine are now all agreed in a strict league' (Pepys, 9.153). 
This new alliance may have contributed to Buckingham's and Castlemaine's next disagreement. Late in 1668 Castlemaine, in alliance with the duchess of York, used her influence to block an attempt by Buckingham and Lord Arlington to replace the duchess's brother, Henry Hyde, Lord Cornbury, as the queen's lord chamberlain with another man. Buckingham and Arlington consequently engaged Elizabeth, Lady Harvey, in an attempt to destroy Castlemaine's credit with the king. Lady Harvey, who was well known for her wit and involved in many court intrigues, took every opportunity to ridicule Castlemaine's conduct in the king's hearing. Castlemaine retaliated and eventually the campaign was carried to the stage in January 1669 when it appears that Castlemaine arranged for an actress to caricature Lady Harvey during a performance of Ben Jonson's 'Cataline', whereupon the actress was imprisoned but soon released by Castlemaine's influence. The episode culminated in victory for Castlemaine: Lady Harvey retired from the fray while Buckingham presented himself at Castlemaine's house and a reconciliation was effected. Castlemaine's friendship with the duke and duchess of York continued: she was seen enjoying herself at a party arranged by the royal couple in March 1669 and in May she told the French ambassador's wife that it was she who had achieved the recent reconciliation between the duke and the king. Other courtiers agreed that it was her influence. Castlemaine also found a new ally in Roger Boyle, earl of Orrery, whom she hoped would be useful against Arlington, and her feud with Buckingham soon recommenced. 
Castlemaine was also courted by foreign ambassadors. At first she favoured the Spanish, and gave a dinner in honour of the Spanish ambassador in June 1665 in return for one given for her. However, in 1667 the intrigues of the Spanish in attempting to interest Charles in another woman turned Castlemaine towards the French, and she indicated to the French ambassador her willingness to work for the French interest. In 1669 when negotiations for an Anglo-French treaty were under way this offer was taken up, and Castlemaine began to pass information to Ambassador de Croissy concerning the attitudes of the king and his ministers, in particular denouncing Buckingham and Arlington as ill-intentioned. She and the ambassador gave dinners in honour of each other and a substantial gift was presented to Castlemaine from Louis XIV. De Croissy reported that Castlemaine was sincere in wishing to do everything in her power to contribute to the success of Anglo-French negotiations; however, in the event the French drew back from further involving her in their negotiations for fear of annoying Arlington, and how much, if anything, she knew of the secret treaty of Dover with the French is unclear. Castlemaine attended the state visit of the king's sister Henriette-Anne at Dover in 1670, when the treaty was secretly signed, a newsletter writer specifically noting the jewel worth $2500 given by Castlemaine to Henriette-Anne (newsletters, 7 May, 25 June, BL, Add. MS 36916, fols. 180, 185). 
In 1670 Castlemaine was given a series of grants by the king. In January she was granted the reversion of the office of keeper of Hampton Court, which seems to have come into her possession almost immediately. On 3 August she was created duchess of Cleveland, countess of Southampton, and Baroness Nonsuch, with remainders to her sons Charles and George (the latter being described as her second son, no mention being made of Henry). She was also granted substantial interests in land including Nonsuch Palace and its surrounding grounds of 1701 acres in July 1670. In 1673 a grant of Phoenix Park in Dublin, a place traditionally used for the benefit of the lord lieutenant of Ireland, was resisted by the then lord lieutenant, Arthur Capel, earl of Essex, who enlisted several senior courtiers on his side and eventually persuaded her to accept other lands of equivalent value. His subsequent delays in finding such lands make it uncertain whether she ever enjoyed the benefit of this grant. In addition to her palace apartments and Berkshire House (renamed Cleveland House), Castlemaine was given several substantial pensions for life by the king, usually paid to her trustees, her uncles George, Viscount Grandison, and Colonel Edward Villiers. Beginning with $1000 per annum from the Post Office revenues granted in May 1667, which was increased to $4700 per annum from January 1669, the pensions gradually increased until they reached, in theory, some $12,000 per annum from July 1674. However, Castlemaine's declining status at court after 1670 undoubtedly affected her ability to collect her pensions and by 1684 she was owed some $23,000. Such financial difficulties as this caused were, however, relieved on occasion by supplementary gifts of money. 
The arrival in 1670 of Louise de Keroualle, duchess of Portsmouth, and her establishment as the leading royal mistress in 1671-2 marked the end of Cleveland's 'reign', although she did not entirely lose her influence. She was present at the court masque of February 1671 and in spring that year it was reported that 'the great duchess of Cleveland goes about the streets with eight horses in her coach, the streets and balconies and windows full of people to admire her' ('CSP dom.', '1671', 271). In February 1672 there was a disturbance at court to do with Cleveland, perhaps the revelation of her pregnancy, probably to John Churchill, and the king's visits decreased. The child, Barbara, was born on 16 July 1672, and was never acknowledged by the king. However, Cleveland retained some semblance of cordial relations with the king and her children with him helped maintain her importance at court. In July 1672 Cleveland's son Henry was acknowledged, being given the title of earl of Euston and the surname Fitzroy. (Cleveland's other children also took this surname at the same time.) The title was in anticipation of the marriage of Henry and Arlington's daughter, Isabella, which took place on 1 August 1672 with much magnificence. A few days later Cleveland invited many courtiers to a dance where one of the guests was Sir Robert Southwell, who wrote that, 'as her grace is very obliging, so the whole company are very forward in their respects' ('CSP dom.', '1672', 429, 463). Cleveland's children were then granted arms signifying their royal connection: her sons in December 1672, and her first two daughters the following February. 
Cleveland's daughter Charlotte was much sought after by courtiers and in May 1674 the successful suitor was Edward Lee, created earl of Lichfield in honour of the marriage, and a connection by marriage of the earl of Danby, whom Cleveland wished to court due to his influential position as lord treasurer. At the same time Cleveland's first daughter, Anne, was married to her relative Thomas Lennard, created earl of Sussex. The French ambassador noticed that Cleveland appeared much in favour with Charles at Newmarket in October 1672, and in September 1674 it was reported that when Cleveland had been at Oxford to arrange for the education of her son Charles, on the morning she left, 'she sate at least one hour in her coach that everybody might see her' (Wynne, 44-5). On 10 September 1675 her eldest son, Charles, was created duke of Southampton; the following day his brother Henry was made duke of Grafton, while Cleveland's third son, George, was created earl of Northumberland on 1 October 1674, his title being elevated to duke of Northumberland on 6 April 1683. 
Cleveland also continued to be active in managing the king's patronage. This could be for straightforward financial benefit, as in the case of Benjamin Mildmay, who was said to have paid both Cleveland and the duke of Buckingham to promote his claim to a barony. In a more complex case, in 1671 Cleveland intervened to help Thomas Wood become bishop of Lichfield in return for Wood's help in the marriage of his niece to Cleveland's eldest son. Wood was the brother of the extremely wealthy Sir Henry Wood, who died on 25 May 1671 having signed a contract arranging for the marriage of his seven-year-old daughter and sole heir, Mary, to Charles Fitzroy. Mary at first went to live with her aunt Lady Chester but before long was living with Cleveland who, when challenged, apparently returned the haughty reply that 'The Dutchess hath her and will keep her, and that the Dutchess wonder that so inconsiderable a person as the Lady Chester will contend with a person of her Quality' ('The case of Mrs Mary Wood', BL, Harley MS 5277, fols. 22-3). In the subsequent lawsuits over the marriage and control of the Wood estates it was distinctly to Cleveland's advantage to have one of that family obliged to her. 
Another who benefited from Cleveland's patronage was Sir John Trevor, whom she employed to advise her on her land interests, and who was with her help returned as an MP in 1673. It was clear, however, that Cleveland's credit was slowly fading: by 1673 she had resigned her place in the queen's bedchamber, in 1674 she was fined for recusancy, in 1675 the duchess of Portsmouth's son was created a duke before her own sons, and then, finding herself in some financial difficulties, she decided to go to France for two years in order to economize. She left in March 1676, and did not return permanently until 1682. 
Cleveland took her daughters with her to be educated in the English convent of the Order of the Conception in Paris, to which she donated $1000 for new buildings. In 1678 she made a brief but dramatic re-entry into court politics, two long letters by her to the king giving an unusual insight into her life at this time. In France she had established an amicable relationship with the English ambassador there, Ralph Montagu (1638?-1709), later duke of Montagu, and may even have had an affair with him. She also apparently had an affair with Alexis-Henri de Chatillon (1652 NS - 1737 NS) which Montagu betrayed to the king, intercepting some of her love letters and sending them to Charles. Moreover while Cleveland was visiting England in April-June 1678, Montagu evidently began an affair with her daughter Lady Sussex. Cleveland became aware of this double betrayal and some days after her return to Paris she wrote a letter to Charles which exposed the ambassador to certain ruin. Without actually admitting an affair with Chatillon, she wrote: 'Now all I have to say for myself is that you know, as to love, one is not mistress of one's self, and that you ought not to be offended with me, since all things of this nature is at an end with you and I; so that I could do you no prejudice.' She then launched into details of Montagu's conversations with her when he had 'several times told me that in his heart he despised you and your brother; and that for his part he wished with all his heart that the Parliament would send you both to travel; for you were a dull governable fool and the Duke a wilful fool.' She reported that Montagu planned to ensnare the king with a certain fortune-teller whom he would control and in whom, he claimed, Charles set great store. Montagu was confident he could soon rise to be lord treasurer and had said, 'and for the King, I will find a way to furnish him so easily with money for his pocket and his wenches that we will quickly out Bab May and lead the King by the nose'. Cleveland had turned down the invitation to join with Montagu in ruining the current lord treasurer and the duchess of Portsmouth, and told him, 'the Devil was not more designing than he was'. Cleveland swore to the king that this was all true and that she was not motivated to write by malice, indeed, 'I would not have been so base as to have informed against him for what he said before me had he not provoked me to it'. She begged for the king's commands on the situation with their daughter and after yet more revelations of Montagu's appalling behaviour, promised that her conduct would be 'such as that you nor nobody shall have occasion to blame me', while also reminding Charles that the last time he had seen her, he had said, 'Madam, all that I ask of you... is live so for the future as to make the least noise you can, and I care not who you love'. Charles's reply to this letter was evidently all that Cleveland hoped for, but she was forced to tell him that his commands had had little effect on Lady Sussex, who was still being manipulated by the shameless Montagu (Andrews, 201-6). The result was that Montagu, afraid of what Cleveland might have revealed, returned to England without leave and attempted to see the king but Cleveland having 'done his errand', Charles cut off his explanations, removed him from his posts and banished him from court ('Ormonde MSS', new ser., 4.441). 
Both her finances and her religion kept Cleveland in France, proclamations against Catholics during the Popish Plot crisis giving rise to fears that she would be prevented from going near Whitehall and indeed would be pressured to reconvert to protestantism. Evidently Cleveland received reassurances that she would be protected as she did in fact make another visit to England in 1679 for some four months, undoubtedly to request some money, but also to try and break off the match between her son Henry and Isabella Bennet in favour of a match with the heiress Elizabeth Percy, countess of Northumberland, and to ask for a promise of her aunt's place as first lady of the bedchamber and groomess of the stole, the last two projects being unsuccessful. 
After returning to England in 1682 Cleveland was little regarded by the court in the face of Portsmouth's ascendancy, and it was reported that the king delayed for some time in seeing her. About 1684 she began an affair with the actor Cardell Goodman (b. 1653), but, in what may have been a conspiracy by Cleveland's sons to remove him from her presence, he was convicted of conspiring to poison the dukes of Grafton and Northumberland and fined $1000 in September 1684. Cleveland however, continued to see Goodman for some time: it was rumoured that she had a son by him in 1686 (although this cannot be confirmed as nothing more is heard of the child), and he witnessed a deed involving some of her property in 1687. Their affair probably finished about 1690 and had certainly ended by 1696 when he was exposed as a Jacobite conspirator and went into exile. Little more is heard of Cleveland until 25 November 1705 when Robert, or Beau, Feilding (1650/51-1712), a former army captain, involved her in a bigamous marriage. Feilding had recently married one Mary Wadsworth thinking she was a rich widow named Mrs Deleau. Unaware that he had been tricked he went on to marry the duchess of Cleveland who was then living in Bond Street. Living with her was her granddaughter Charlotte Calvert ('nee' Lee) who had taken refuge from an unhappy marriage, and who soon began an affair with Feilding and consequently moved out of Cleveland's house in March 1706. The bigamy was eventually discovered in June 1706 when Mary Wadsworth and her accomplice Mrs Villars went to Cleveland and told her the story. On being confronted Feilding attacked the duchess and threatened her with a gun until she managed to call for help out of a window, whereupon the watch arrived and Feilding was arrested. Cleveland exacted revenge by suing Feilding for adultery at the Old Bailey where she had his obscene love letters to Mary Wadsworth read out in court and subsequently published. The marriage was annulled in May 1707. Cleveland lived her last years in Chiswick and died there of a dropsy on 9 October 1709; she was buried in Chiswick parish church four days later. Her will, written on 11 August 1709 and proved the day after her death, constituted her grandson Charles, duke of Grafton, as her principal heir and sole executor. 
As the first acknowledged royal mistress in Britain for some centuries, Cleveland's potential influence over the king was of prime concern to Restoration courtiers, and her great beauty, forceful personality, and genius for self-promotion made her both admired and feared. Contemporary comment concentrated on condemning her flagrant affairs and extravagant expenditure: in Bishop Burnet's disapproving opinion she was a 'woman of great beauty but most enormously vicious and ravenous; foolish but imperious' ('Burnet's History', 1.132), while another observer wrote, 'the prodigious amount of money dissipated by this woman, who has no moderation or limit in her desires, passes all bounds and exceeds all belief' ('Lorenzo Magalotti', 72). The author Mary Delariviere Manley, who had lived with Cleveland for a short time in the 1690s, characterized her in a scandal novel, 'The New Atalantis', as 'querilous, fierce, loquacious, excessively fond, or infamously rude... The extreames of prodigality and covetousness; of love and hatred; of dotage and aversion were joyn'd together in Hilaria's [Cleveland's] soul' (Steinman, 192). Indeed, Cleveland's relationship with Charles II often threatened to dissolve under the strain of their respective infidelities, yet she maintained her position for some ten years, in the process establishing the position of royal mistress as one of political significance and acquiring great wealth and high honours for her children. 


@@@@@


doc= 28286


Villiers, Charles Pelham (1802-1898), politician, was born on 3 January 1802 in Grosvenor Street, London, the third son of George Villiers (1759-1827) and his wife, Theresa Parker (1775-1856), the only daughter of John, first Baron Boringdon, and his second wife, Theresa, daughter of Thomas, first Lord Grantham. His sister was Lady (Maria) Theresa Lewis (1803-1865). His grandfather was Thomas Villiers, first earl of Clarendon. With the Parker and Villiers families later co-residing at Kent House, Knightsbridge, Villiers was brought up in a lively political home, where Canning was a frequent visitor. George William Frederick Villiers and Thomas Hyde Villiers were his elder brothers. He attended the Kensington school of Thomas Wright Hill before going to East India College, Haileybury, Hertfordshire, with India beckoning as a career. As a result of poor health, he went instead to St John's College, Cambridge, matriculating in Michaelmas term 1820, graduating BA in 1824, and proceeding MA in 1827. He presided over the union in 1822 with Macaulay, Howick (third Earl Grey), W. M. Praed, and Charles Austin among his circle. In 1823 he entered Lincoln's Inn, and qualified for the bar in 1827. 
The law was to prove Villiers's main financial stay until the late 1850s but these early years also permanently marked his political vision. At Haileybury he had been taught by Thomas Malthus and Sir James Mackintosh; in London he heard John McCulloch lecture, and with his brothers, he was soon deeply involved in a number of 'March of Mind' societies, discussing issues such as population, the poor law, and Owenite co-operation. This brought him into touch with the Benthamites and J. S. Mill but Villiers, unlike his brothers, acquired increasingly radical political views. However, it was as a liberal tory inspired by Huskisson that he contested Hull in 1826, reputedly on the cry of 'Cheap Bread', the theme that would shape his life. While George had become a commissioner of customs in 1823, and Hyde had been elected for Hedon in 1826, Charles, considered by some the most brilliant, if also the most difficult, of the brothers, took the western circuit and served as secretary to the master of the rolls in 1830. In 1832 his intellectual interests were well suited to his appointment as an assistant poor-law commissioner, investigating the midland and western counties, and he also acquired at first hand a knowledge of London's slums. Villiers became a convinced supporter of the new poor law, for whose administration he would later be responsible. In 1833 he was appointed examiner of witnesses in the court of chancery, a well-paid if relatively onerous post which he held until 1852. This gave him sufficient financial security to sustain his political career, for otherwise he was largely dependent upon an income generously allowed him by his elder brother (and subsequently by his heir). He also dabbled in the stock market and was for many years a director of the General Life Assurance Company. 
Villiers entered parliament for Wolverhampton in 1835, for while his association with the new poor law proved a handicap, Wolverhampton was primarily a strong centre of opposition to the corn laws, led by its MPs Richard Fryer and William Wolryche Whitmore. Villiers formed a successful constituency partnership with the Liverpool merchant Thomas Thornely, standing as a free-trader and radical, and acting with the philosophical radicals in parliament. Above all, he readily took up opposition to the corn laws as his parliamentary metier, working with the London Anti-Corn Law Association and in 1836 seconding William Clay's motion for a fixed duty of 10's'. on corn. At the election of 1837 in Wolverhampton Villiers pledged himself to move for total repeal, which he did for the first time on 15 March 1838. By this time other cities had also become active in the movement against the corn laws, and with the formation of the Manchester Anti-Corn Law Association in September 1838, Villiers was soon the parliamentary pivot of the free-trade movement, ready to co-ordinate action with the provinces. Having banqueted in Manchester in January 1839, he urged that its anti-cornlaw campaigners be heard at the bar of the house in February, and in March, prompting a lengthy debate, proposed for the second time total repeal of the corn laws. Villiers now became an extremely forceful advocate in parliament of free trade, renewing his motion for repeal of the corn laws in April and May 1840, but also bolstering the cause by his part in the highly influential select committee on import duties, nominally chaired by Joseph Hume, whose work Villiers in effect took over. As the spokesman for the radical extra-parliamentary movement, and a seeming rebel to his class, Villiers was placed in a difficult position with regard to the whigs, as they showed a growing readiness to support freer but not completely free trade, and his conspicuous advocacy of total repeal cost him many personal and political friendships. 
With the return of an even stronger protectionist majority in the election of 1841 (only 90 voted for Villiers's repeal motion in 1842, compared with 177 in 1840), Villiers was increasingly identified with the Anti-Corn Law League, performing 'a manly part' in its out-of-doors work (A. Prentice, 'History of the Anti-Corn Law League', 1853, 2.101). His annual motions were important not so much for the recruits they made as for the opportunity to rehearse, with growing sophistication, the case for total repeal. These set pieces focused a national debate, allowing the Anti-Corn Law League to orchestrate its campaigns and exert pressure upon parliament in a way that would slowly erode the protectionist majority. Villiers, however, by no means always agreed with the tactics of the league and found more palatable the milder views of James Wilson, with whom he struck up a strong friendship and whom he assisted in setting up 'The Economist' in 1843. With the return to parliament of the league's leader Cobden in 1841, Villiers gradually ceded the leadership of the free trade party, especially as Cobden, and later Bright, rose into talented and inspiring political orators. As a result, when the corn laws were finally repealed in 1846, Villiers and his friends felt that his pioneering role was not given sufficient due, and Cobden himself recognized 'I have trod upon his heels, nay, almost trampled him down, in a race where he was once the sole man on the course' ('Free Trade Speeches', 1.lxvii). However, Villiers did not bear grudges. He formed a lasting political rapport with Bright, and his outwardly successful alliance with the league was confirmed by his election for South Lancashire in 1847. Claiming poverty, Villiers sensibly stuck to Wolverhampton, and was to remain its MP until his death, forming the longest continuous link between MP and constituency in nineteenth- and twentieth-century Britain. 
After 1846 Villiers was never to recapture the political limelight that he had hitherto enjoyed, especially as Lord John Russell -- for whom the Villiers family were never true whigs -- declined to give him an important office in 1846 (although he was considered as governor of Bombay, until vetoed by the East India Company). He remained a strong radical, urging further parliamentary reform and especially the ballot, but he also became embroiled in the feud between Edwin Chadwick and the Villiers and Lewis families over the administration of the new poor law following the Andover workhouse scandal. In 1852 he once more acted with the Manchester school, urging in the debate that closed the corn law issue that repeal should be recognized as 'wise, just, and beneficial'. On this occasion Palmerston's milder resolution won the day, and Villiers was later distanced from his league allies, believing for example that the Anglo-French commercial treaty of 1860 was a breach of the unilateral free trade principles of 1846; by 1861 Cobden noted 'I seem to feel as if we had never a thought in common, instead of our having been seven years in constant correspondence' (Cobden to Bright, 14 Oct 1861, BL, Add. MS 43651, fol. 262). 
In 1852, after his 'eighteenth year of unrequited toil in that House' (Villiers to Cobden, 27 Dec 1852, Cobden MSS, 10, W. Sussex RO), Villiers's career took a new turn as he eventually achieved significant (and well-paid) office under Aberdeen, that of judge-advocate-general, a position he also held under Palmerston (1855-8). In 1853-4 Villiers also chaired an important select committee on public houses, which proved a benchmark in subsequent debate. Its report was considered too 'free-trading' by a growing band of temperance critics but Villiers, who had no great faith in governments making men moral, rejected undue restrictions on drink until rational recreation was available for the working classes. In the 1850s Villiers enjoyed considerable influence in the Commons from his radical past, was very much a fixture in London society, and was extremely well-informed politically, 'always sensible, unprejudiced and the most satisfactory person to talk to', according to the Whig diarist Greville (L. Strachey and R. Fulford, 'The Greville Memoirs, 1814-1860', 1938, 7.351). His eventual appointment to the cabinet as president of the poor-law board in 1859 considerably strengthened Palmerston's first 'liberal' government, while providing for Villiers a post at last fully commensurate with his interests and talent. 
For, as his legal career had shown, Villiers had a capacity for drudgery, and ably served by officials, especially Sir John Lambert and Sir Robert Rawlinson, his tenure at the poor-law board was marked by the most important series of reforms since 1834. First, the crisis in poor relief in London in the winter of 1860-61 led to Villiers setting up a select committee, which he chaired over three parliamentary sessions and whose evidence led ultimately to the 'Union Chargeability Act' of 1865. This act, still described by Beatrice and Sidney Webb in 1929 as 'the latest measure substantially changing the Poor Law' ('English Poor Law History', 3.431), made the union, not the parish, the unit of financial responsibility, a reform of vital importance in London but one that also helped to undermine the negligence of landlords in closed rural parishes. Second, the report of the committee set in train a series of reforms in London's poor-law relief, with the extension of the board's authority over committees set up under local acts, the establishment of a common fund for relief of the casual poor, and the equalization of metropolitan poor rates. These reforms, in the pipeline under Villiers, were largely embodied in the 'Metropolitan Poor Law Act' of 1867. Villiers, open to persuasion by Florence Nightingale, also began important steps for the reform of nursing within the poor law. Third, Villiers's association with Lancashire was renewed when the poor law proved unequal to the demands placed on it by the cotton famine of 1861-5. Villiers met this crisis in a remarkably flexible manner, foreshadowing the 'Union Chargeability Act' by allowing parishes to seek union or even county-wide support and by allowing unions to raise loans. More innovatively, the 'Public Works (Manufacturing Districts) Act' (1863) fostered job-creating public health schemes, which although by no means equal to the extent of unemployment had important multiplier effects on the local economy. Interestingly, Villiers refused to encourage emigration schemes but did eventually relax the labour test for poor relief. Finally, Villiers was responsible for a variety of other measures, including the 'Union Assessment Act' of 1862 (giving power to assess rates to committees, not underqualified overseers), and the irremovability of paupers after one year's residence, and he prepared the ground for the poor-law board to become a permanent part of the machinery of government. Villiers's administrative pragmatism combined with political nous did much to give shape to the poor law into the twentieth century. 
Villiers's contribution to the poor law was therefore a notable, if unsung, success, belying his reputation as a political weathercock, more interested in gossip than policy-making. He also played an important part in further parliamentary reform, for it fell to his board to prepare the electoral statistics upon which the reform bills of the 1860s were based. Villiers guardedly supported an extensive measure, ultimately preferring the claims of democracy to those of plutocracy, for while he always had a strong confidence in aristocratic rule, he was far more critical of Mammon than of the masses. 
After the second 'Reform Act', Villiers's political career withered, partly overshadowed by the greater stature of his brother the earl of Clarendon but most probably because of the antipathy between Villiers and 'the old devil' Gladstone. For while Gladstone and Villiers shared a common acquaintance with the reformed prostitute Laura Thistlethwayte (at whose salon they often met), Gladstone had often been the butt of Villiers's caustic wit, and in 1868 he omitted Villiers from his cabinet, ostensibly on the ground that two brothers could not sit in the cabinet (as they had previously done in those of Palmerston and Russell). Villiers's later mark therefore was confined to his chairmanship in 1871 of the select committee on conventual and monastic institutions, where he had little truck with the anti-Catholic prejudices of Charles Newdegate and whose report paradoxically pointed towards the further removal of Catholic disabilities. Villiers remained a frequent attender at the Political Economy Club (to which he had been elected in 1847), a pillar of the Reform Club, and a noted social personality, ill-dressed but witty, informed, civilized, at times mischievous, well loved in his family circle, and widely popular outside it. He declined a peerage in 1885. 
Villiers by the late 1870s had in fact become more important as a political symbol than as an active participant in the house, a position recognized by the erecting of a statue to him in Wolverhampton in 1879, an unusual honour for a living politician. Against the background of the fair-trade movement too, Villiers's past career was celebrated by the publication of his 'Free Trade Speeches', an edition prepared by Agnes Lambert, the daughter of Sir John. Her projected biography of Villiers was never published. Villiers also remained a conscientious, if absentee, local MP, keeping closely in touch with constituency activists and making the issue of redistribution in Wolverhampton the subject of his last speech in the House of Commons in 1885. In 1886 he supported the Liberal Unionists, distrusting the leadership of Gladstone, an abiding antagonism still strongly voiced in the 1890s. 'Father of the House', Villiers was re-elected in 1892 and 1895 but rarely attended the Commons save to vote against home rule. On the jubilee of the repeal of the corn laws in 1896 he was presented with a commemorative address by the Cobden Club and replied with a lucid defence of free trade since 1846 but was too ill to attend the celebrations. In his declining years, frail but alert, he retained a lively interest in politics, observing the operation of parish councils and the rise of the Independent Labour Party, supporting women's suffrage, reading the newspapers thoroughly, and maintaining an extensive correspondence. For the last thirty years of his life Villiers, who had never married, was looked after by his housekeeper, Maria Walsh. He died of a severe cold, following his ninety-sixth birthday celebrations, on 16 January 1898 at his home, 50 Cadogan Place, London. He was buried at Kensal Green on 20 January. 
Villiers left a large hoard of papers and a considerable personal fortune. His vast correspondence was reputedly destroyed by his housekeeper, to whom he had bequeathed it. His wealth, over $350,000, occasioned surprise and a minor political outcry. For he had received (and carefully guarded from Gladstonian frugality) a pension of $2000 p.a. on the grounds of income insufficient to sustain his former cabinet rank, lamenting on leaving office in 1866 'I have always been unlucky and I am worse off now than when I began thirty-one years ago' (Villiers to Mrs Anne Graham, July 1866, BL, Add. MS 48214). His change of fortune may have been largely due to the legacy he received in 1880 from a family friend, Catherine Mellish, which included a life interest in a 2000 acre Hertfordshire estate (Hamels Park), sold in 1884 to the textile bleacher H. S. Cross. 


@@@@@


doc= 28287


Villiers, Christopher, first earl of Anglesey (d. 1630), courtier, was the third son of Sir George Villiers (c.1544-1606) ['see under 'Villiers, Sir Edward] of Brooksby, Leicestershire, and his second wife, Mary Beaumont ('c'.1570-1632), later countess of Buckingham in her own right. John Villiers, Viscount Purbeck, and George Villiers, first duke of Buckingham, were his brothers and Sir Edward Villiers was his half-brother. Christopher, though 'an unattractive and unintelligent' youth ('DNB'), shared the good fortune of the family consequent upon the rise of his brother George. In February 1617 he was appointed gentleman of the bedchamber to James I (though not sworn until January 1618), and on 7 March following he was granted an annuity of $200 a year. In December 1617 Sir Robert Naunton, who had no sons, was appointed secretary of state on condition that he made Villiers his heir; the latter consequently received lands worth $500 a year. He was also promised $800 a year out of the monopoly for gold and silver thread, but actually received only $150 during the whole of its existence. In addition to these sources he received considerable sums from the patent for ale houses, and his malpractices in this connection formed the subject of charges against him in parliament, which were, however, abandoned. In 1620 it was said that Villiers was in line for the office of master of the robes, which would have secured his place at court, and his access to its bounty. 
Villiers's next step was to secure a suitable heiress as a wife; ineffectual suit was made first for the only daughter of Sir Sebastian Harvey, lord mayor of London, and then for Elizabeth Norris, daughter of the earl of Berkshire. He eventually married Elizabeth (died 1662), daughter of Thomas Sheldon of Howley, Leicestershire. On 23 March 1623 he was created Baron Villiers of Daventry and earl of Anglesey, the patent passing on 18 April. His mediocre abilities prevented his employment in any important position, and he himself acknowledged to his brother the duke that 'his want of preferment proceeded from his own unworthiness rather than from the duke's unwillingness' ('CSP dom.', '1627-8', 327). His weakness appears to have been alcohol, and in 1625 it was rumoured that he had been 'banished the court... the king saying he would have no drunkards of his chamber' (GEC, 'Peerage', 1.132n). On 6 December 1628 he was appointed keeper of Hampton Court, and on 4 March 1629 of Bushey Park. About the same time he was said to have purchased the reversion of the office of chancellor of the exchequer from Edward Barrett, Lord Newburgh. He died on 3 April 1630 at Windsor, and was buried on 12 April in St George's Chapel. His widow married Benjamin Weston in 1641. Villiers's only son, Charles (died 1661), succeeded as second earl of Anglesey. On 25 April 1648 he married Mary, widow of his cousin William Villiers, Viscount Grandison, and mother of Barbara Villiers. He died childless and was buried at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, on 4 February 1661. His honours became extinct, and the estates passed to his sister Anne, widow of Thomas Savile, earl of Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 28288


Villiers, Sir Edward (c.1585-1626), government official and administrator, was the second son of Sir George Villiers and his first wife, Audrey (died 1587), daughter and heir of William Saunders of Harrington, Northamptonshire. 
Edward Villiers matriculated as a fellow-commoner from Queens' College, Cambridge, in 1601. About 1612 he married Barbara, one of the daughters of Sir John St John of Lydiard Tregoze in Wiltshire, with whom he had ten children. A captain and muster-master in the Leicestershire militia by 1614, in the following year he resigned his positions after a scandal involving regimental funds. His fortunes were dramatically transformed by the rise to royal favour of his younger half-brother, George. Soon after George Villiers was ennobled, Edward was knighted (7 September 1616), and on 23 December 1617 he became master of the mint at the behest of his brother, who was by then earl of Buckingham. He held this lucrative office, which was thought to be worth between $1500 and $2000 per annum, until August 1619, after which time he shared its duties with another man. At various times between 1618 and 1622 he was tipped to become comptroller of the household, master of the wardrobe, master of the jewel house, and even lord deputy of Ireland, but further preferment temporarily eluded him. 
By the early 1620s Villiers was settled in Dean's Close, Westminster, but he also purchased the manor of Baggrave, in his native Leicestershire, for which in October 1620 he paid $6900. He was well able to afford such a sum, for in addition to the income from his office he ruthlessly exploited his kinship with Buckingham for financial gain. For example, in 1620-21 the Irish magnate Richard Boyle paid him $4500 for the earldom of Cork and a viscountcy for his eldest son. Villiers also invested heavily in several projects, most notably the farm for the sole manufacture of gold and silver thread. He sank $4000 into this scheme, for which he derived an annual return of at least $500. This valuable source of income was threatened in August 1619 when several silkmen refused to enter into bonds promising to give over their trade. Villiers urged that they be imprisoned to which the attorney-general, Sir Henry Yelverton, agreed, fearing that to refuse would incur the anger of Buckingham. In November 1620 Villiers persuaded the lord chief justice, Sir Henry Montague, to pay Buckingham $20,000 for the lord treasurer's staff and a peerage. Buckingham was so pleased at this valuable service that he arranged for Villiers and his sons by his wife, Barbara, to be allowed to inherit the title of Viscount Grandison, which on 3 January 1621 was bestowed upon Barbara's childless uncle, Sir Oliver St John. 
Villiers was elected to parliament for Westminster in December 1620, undoubtedly on the interest of Buckingham, the borough's high steward, but in the following month he was sent to the Palatinate bearing James I's message of support for his son-in-law, the beleaguered elector, Frederick V. During his absence Villiers was denounced in the Commons for his part in imprisoning those silkmen who had earlier refused to enter into bond. News of this development reached him while he was abroad, and it was only with the greatest reluctance that he crossed the channel. On his return Buckingham advised him not to take his Commons seat until the House of Lords had exonerated him from any ill-dealings. Villiers accordingly delayed his entrance until after Yelverton and the patentees had been examined, but he failed to wait until he was formally cleared and entered the house prematurely on 2 May, prompting calls for him to be ejected. Rather than suffer such an indignity, he withdrew voluntarily. The Commons were finally notified that he had been cleared on 4 June, but on this day parliament adjourned for the summer, so he could not resume his seat until it reassembled in November. In September he was again sent to the Elector Frederick to persuade him to disarm his forces and leave the Dutch army, which he had joined. On his return to England in the following month Villiers reported that his mission had succeeded and that Frederick had agreed to renounce the throne of Bohemia in return for the restoration of the upper Palatinate. 
Villiers's financial interests had been damaged by the king's cancellation of the gold and silver thread patent following the parliamentary outcry in 1621. For this reason, in 1622 Buckingham procured for him a 21-year lease of the import duties on gold and silver thread. However, in order to secure this grant Villiers was first required to surrender his co-mastership of the mint. He eventually did this in July 1623, but by then the grant on the import duties had been undermined by the erection of a company of goldwiredrawers. He therefore persuaded the king to grant him office as joint warden of the mint, which was not as lucrative as his previous position, and an annuity of $500. Moreover, he also coerced the new Goldwiredrawers' Company to pay him an additional annuity. Despite these generous arrangements, he resented the new company, and in March 1624, having been once again elected to parliament for Westminster, he helped thwart the Goldwiredrawers' attempt to obtain statutory recognition of their charter, although his call to suppress the indigenous manufacture of gold and silver thread went unheeded. 
In April 1625 Villiers and his departmental colleagues were joined in commission to execute the office of master of the mint after the previous incumbent was dismissed. By this time, however, he was no longer much interested in the mint, as he had been promised appointment as lord president of Munster. His letters patent were sealed on 27 May 1625, and orders were given to allow him a lump sum of $3000 as a reward for his former services. He was also granted 500 acres of the Forest of Dean for industrial exploitation. Before leaving England he sold Baggrave and sat in parliament for a third time as member for Westminster. He reached Waterford in October and, lacking an official residence, rented the college of Youghal from the earl of Cork. Early in the new year he endeavoured to billet and clothe survivors of the ill-fated Cadiz expedition whose ships had put in to Youghal. In June 1626 he complained that he had 'shipwrecked' his own credit in this service. On 2 September he fell sick at Youghal, possibly from dysentery contracted from those he had sought to assist. He died in the early hours of the morning on the 7th and was buried the following day in the newly built chapel at Youghal. By the terms of his will, drafted on 31 August 1625, he entrusted his estate and the settlement of his debts, which were substantial, to his widow, as his eight surviving children were under age. His eldest son, William, succeeded Sir Oliver St John as second Viscount Grandison in 1630; he was father of Barbara Villiers, duchess of Cleveland. Sir Edward's second and third sons, John and George, succeeded as third and fourth viscounts Grandison; a fourth son, Sir Edward, was father of Edward Villiers, first earl of Jersey. Villiers's widow died in 1672. 


@@@@@


doc= 28289


Villiers, Edward, first earl of Jersey (1655?-1711), politician, was the eldest son of Sir Edward Villiers (1620-1689), knight marshal, and his first wife, Frances (1630-1677), youngest daughter of Theophilus Howard, second earl of Suffolk. Villiers entered St John's College, Cambridge, on 17 March 1671, aged sixteen. Villiers's father -- a member of the Sealed Knot during the 1650s -- was very much a courtier and in 1676 Villiers obtained the reversion of his father's post as knight marshal. Together with his sister Elizabeth Villiers (who may later have become William III's mistress), Villiers accompanied Princess Mary to the Netherlands in 1677 on the occasion of her marriage to William of Orange. On 8 December 1681 Villiers was licensed to marry Barbara (1662/3-1735), daughter of William Chiffinch, keeper of the backstairs to Charles II. Villiers returned with William in 1688 and was soon a favourite of the new court. He became Queen Mary's master of horse in February 1689 and succeeded his father in July. On 20 March 1691 he was created Baron Villiers of Hoo and Viscount Villiers of Dartford. He was made ranger of Hyde Park in 1693, a post he kept until February 1702. However, the death of Queen Mary on 28 December 1694 made his office as master of the horse redundant. 
Villiers was then employed as a diplomat, being named on 17-18 May 1695 as envoy-extraordinary to the states general of the United Provinces and arriving in Rotterdam on 8 July. On 26 February 1697 he was made envoy-extraordinary and -plenipotentiary to the peace conference at Rijswijk (Ryswick), and at the suggestion of the earl of Sunderland he was made a lord justice of Ireland in April 1697. His Catholic wife may have caused Villiers problems in this regard, but he did not leave the United Provinces until November of that year. Before his return he was created, on 13 October 1697, earl of Jersey and was made a privy councillor on 25 November 1697. On 26 July 1698 he was made ambassador-extraordinary to France, and arrived in Paris on 11 September 1698; he spent part of November and December in the Netherlands, and returned from France on 26 May 1699. 
Although a nominal tory, Jersey was primarily a courtier, and moreover a friend of the new court favourite the earl of Albemarle. This no doubt smoothed his appointment on 13 May 1699 as secretary of state for the southern department, taking the senior secretaryship even though he was technically junior to James Vernon. As befitted his new office he was named a lord justice in June 1699, when William III was away on the continent during the summer. Jersey was also a signatory of the second partition treaty, even though he and Albemarle intrigued against it, possibly because he was not included in most of the negotiations. Jersey was also now one of the key ministerial servants in the House of Lords and acted as a conduit of information for the king. Thus, when the houses became deadlocked over the resumption of Irish forfeited estates in April 1700 it was Jersey whom Henry Boyle sought out to communicate with the king, and Jersey who lobbied peers to avoid the loss of the bill (which included the land tax) and back down over amending the bill. In June 1700 he exchanged his secretaryship for the post of lord chamberlain. In May-June 1701 Jersey came under attack from whigs seeking to defend their colleagues under threat of impeachment for their role in the partition treaty, but his affinity with the new tory ministry protected him, and Speaker Harley ruled an attempt to impeach him as out of order. This did not prevent his voting on 17 June 1701 against the acquittal of Lord Somers. 
Jersey retained his office as lord chamberlain following the accession of Queen Anne in March 1702, but his relations with the queen were somewhat frosty, probably owing to the perceived slights suffered by the queen when Princess Anne after she had come into conflict with her sister and retired from court in February 1692. As it was, his son lost a lucrative post as teller of the exchequer. In fact Jersey was one of many tory politicians in office at the beginning of Anne's reign. However, he was also critical of the military strategy of the duke of Marlborough and by June 1703 he was described as one of those who 'does not do the Queen that service they ought to do' (Snyder, 1.202). He voted in favour of both the first and second occasional conformity bills in 1703. His dismissal in April 1704 for persistently obstructing the policies of Godolphin and Marlborough brought protests from the earl of Nottingham and a personal justification from Jersey to the queen as he was reported to be 'extremely surprised, not being conscious of any crime of omission or commission that might deserve such a disgrace' (ibid., 1.284n.). 
Jersey joined the tories in opposition. When a tory propagandist in 'The Memorial of the Church of England' cast aspersions on Marlborough's and Godolphin's commitment to the church, Marlborough laughed at the idea of Jersey as a pillar of the church given that he 'would have been a Quaker or any other religion that might have pleased the late king' (Snyder, 1.475). He was omitted from the privy council following the union with Scotland in 1707. Jersey voted on 20 March 1710 in favour of a lenient punishment following the impeachment of Dr Sacheverell. The new ministry formed under Robert Harley later in 1710 would have liked to employ Jersey, possibly in the Admiralty, but this proposal foundered on the queen's obstinate refusal to employ him on the grounds that he was a Jacobite. Jersey certainly had good links in the diplomatic community and among the Catholics to act as a secret agent in Harley's peace strategy, as it was Jersey who met with Gaultier and thus initiated the process which ended at Utrecht. The death of the duke of Newcastle in July 1711 presented a suitable opportunity to reward Jersey with the post of lord privy seal, aided by Jersey's disavowal of his Jacobitism in a letter to Harley. Unfortunately on the morning of 26 August, the day his appointment was to be made public, he collapsed at his house near St James's and died of a 'gout in his stomach or apoplexy, or both' (Swift, 345). He was in his fifty-sixth year. 
Jersey was buried on 4 September in Westminster Abbey. Macky's comment was that 'he hath gone through all the great offices of the kingdom with a very ordinary understanding' (GEC, 'Peerage'). Jersey died in debt and his wife sold what she could and fled to France with her youngest son, Henry. This caused considerable embarrassment to Jersey's heir, William, and was made worse by her Catholicism and Jacobitism, which saw him created a Jacobite peer. She died in Paris on 22 July 1735. 
Jersey's eldest son and successor, 


@@@@@


doc= 28290


Villiers, Elizabeth, countess of Orkney (c.1657-1733), presumed mistress of William III, was the eldest daughter of Sir Edward Villiers (1620-1689) of Richmond, Surrey, knight marshal of England. Her mother, Frances (1630-1677), was the daughter of Theophilus Howard, second earl of Suffolk, and governess to princesses Mary and Anne. Upon Princess Mary's marriage to William of Orange ['see 'William III and II] in 1677 Villiers accompanied her to The Hague. In 1685 rumours about Villiers's intimacy with Mary's husband reached the ears of James II's ambassador Bevil Skelton, who (it was said) sought to drive a wedge between the prince and princess of Orange. As a result, Villiers was expelled from the royal household, along with the servants and chaplain who had conveyed the gossip. Villiers none the less maintained some sort of relationship with William until Mary's death in 1694, when, according to William Whiston, Archbishop Tenison persuaded the widowed king to break off all contact with her. On 25 November 1695 Villiers married the distinguished soldier Lord George Hamilton (bap. 1666, d. 1737), who was created earl of Orkney five and a half weeks later. They had several children, among them Frances Lumley-Saunderson. 
Villiers's status as William's mistress was commonly enough regarded as fact in the eighteenth century for Horace Walpole to repeat the story that Catherine Sedley, upon meeting Elizabeth Villiers and the duchess of Portsmouth in a drawing-room at Windsor, cried 'God! who would have thought that we three royal whores should meet 'here'' (Walpole, 33.529). But unlike the mistresses of Charles II, she attracted little public comment in William's lifetime. The king was more commonly satirized by his enemies as a sodomite rather than a heterosexual adulterer, while his supporters would not jeopardize the politically useful image of the royal couple as models of conjugal love and moral probity. 
Villiers did receive unwelcome public attention during William's reign as a result of the king's gift to her of lands in Ireland formerly belonging to James II. In 1699 the commissioners appointed by parliament to investigate the fate of the Irish lands forfeited by Jacobites gratuitously included in their report a final paragraph estimating that the countess of Orkney's property was worth $26,000, a figure which the government claimed was grossly exaggerated by the 'country' party in order to embarrass the king. The lands were then resumed to public use, but Villiers may have been compensated for her loss by payments of $13,000 out of secret service funds in 1701 and 1702. Her lasting contribution to Ireland (or to English interests therein) was the generous endowment of a school at Middletown, Cork, in 1709. 
Villiers has often been portrayed as a political intriguer, but evidence of her role is elusive. She doubtless politicked actively to protect her Irish lands. But of her alleged part in Marlborough's fall from favour in 1692 there is little proof beyond the duchess of Marlborough's remark that 'Mrs. Villiers... was my implacable enemy' ('Marlborough-Godolphin Correspondence', 41). The story that Villiers deliberately promoted Arnold Joost van Keppel, who became earl of Albemarle, in William's affections in order to undermine the power of her hated brother-in-law William Bentinck, earl of Portland, is perhaps substantiated by a letter of Charles Montagu to Shrewsbury reporting that 'my lord W[harton] has been framing a new scheme, in concert with a fair lady, to make my Lord Albemarle the minister' (Coxe, 533). Her most well-documented political act was her attempt, carried out with great charm but no immediate success, to persuade the earl of Shrewsbury to become secretary of state in 1693-4. The friendship between Villiers and Shrewsbury continued, at least intermittently: in 1710 Godolphin warned Marlborough that '[Orkney's] lady and [Shrewsbury] are all one, and both of them extremely meddling, and 'tis hard to determine which is the greater politician' (Snyder, 3.1497). 
As Godolphin's letter suggests, Lady Orkney's loyalties in Anne's reign were not rigid. Her letters to Harley, although they hardly substantiate Swift's claim that 'her advice [was] asked and followed in the most important affairs of state' ('Correspondence of Jonathan Swift', 5.224), suggest she was sympathetic to Harley's goals and eager to cultivate his favour. Yet, she was also spotted in the company of Harley's enemy the duchess of Marlborough, offering 'a health to her and all that's for the Duke's interest, and total destruction to those that are not for it' ('Portland MSS', 4.542). It is likely that she kept a foot in each camp. 
In the Hanoverian era Lady Orkney remained in the social orbit of the court, hosting both George I and George II at her estate at Cliveden in south Buckinghamshire, on the Thames near Maidenhead. When she appeared at the coronation of George II in 1727 her physical appearance, never regarded as her best asset, was mocked by Mary Wortley Montagu, who gleefully described her 'mixture of fat and wrinkles... considerable pair of bubbys a good deal withered, a great belly that preceded her... the inimitable roll of her eyes, and her grey hair which by good fortune stood directly upright' ('Complete Letters', 2.85-6). She died on 19 April 1733 in Albemarle Street, London, and was buried at Taplow, Buckinghamshire, six days later. Her eldest daughter inherited the Orkney title. 
Like many women of her generation, Villiers expressed herself primarily in conversation rather than writing. Observers as different as Jonathan Swift, who considered her 'the wisest woman I ever saw' (Swift, 'Journal to Stella', 2.558), and the duchess of Marlborough agreed that she was an exceptionally good talker. Only a few of her letters survive. They suggest personal warmth, an interest (though not powerful influence) in politics, and an appealing lack of self-importance. It is a pity there are not more of them; in the absence of a written record, Villiers will remain someone about whom much is said and little known. 


@@@@@


doc= 28291


Villiers, Francois Huet (1772-1813), painter, was the second son of Jean-Baptiste-Marie Huet, a French artist, and his wife, Marie-Genevieve, 'nee' Chevalier. He was born in Paris on 12 or 14 January 1772, and studied under his father. According to Foskett 'He enlisted in 1792 and took up painting professionally on leaving the army' (Foskett, 572). He exhibited portraits at the Paris Salon in 1799, 1800, and 1801, and then settled in London, adopting the name Villiers, from the village of Villiers-sur-Orge where his father owned land. His name appears as both Huet-Villiers and Villiers-Huet. He was a versatile artist, drawing landscapes, animals, and architecture, but excelled in his portraits in miniature on ivory, alabaster, and marble, and in larger size in oils and chalk. He was appointed in 1805 miniature painter to the duke and duchess of York, his portraits of whom were engraved, as were also those of Louis XVIII (he was painter to the king of France), the duke and duchess of Angouleme, the duc d'Enghien, and Mrs Quentin. Villiers painted portraits of many actresses and other ladies in mythological character and his 'Hebe' was very popular and frequently engraved. His miniature of the opera singer Angelica Carulani (1806) is in the Victoria and Albert Museum. He exhibited largely at the Royal Academy and other exhibitions from 1803, when he exhibited a self-portrait, until his death, and was a member of the Associated Artists in Water-Colours from 1807 to 1812. He published two sets of etchings: 'Rudiments of Cattle' (1805) and 'Rudiments of Trees' (1806-7), and made the drawings for some of the plates in R. Ackermann's 'History of the Abbey Church of St Peter's Westminster, its Antiquities and Monuments' (1812; letterpress by William Combe). Villiers died at his home in Great Marlborough Street, London, on 28 July 1813, apparently unmarried, and was buried on 1 August in St Pancras churchyard. Examples of Villiers's work in miniature are in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London; the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford; the Royal Collection; and the Musee Conde, Chantilly. At Westminster Abbey are volumes containing drawings by Villiers. 


@@@@@


doc= 28292


Sir George Villiers (c.1544-1606) came of a family which had been settled at Brooksby in Leicestershire from at least 1235. A prosperous sheep farmer, he was the eldest son of William Villiers and Colett, daughter and heir of Richard Clarke of Willoughby, Warwickshire, and widow of Richard Beaumont of Coleorton, Leicestershire. He served as sheriff of Leicestershire in 1591-2, was knighted in 1593, and represented his county in parliament from 1604 until his death on 4 January 1606. He had four daughters from his first marriage and two sons, the eldest of whom, Sir William, obtained a baronetcy in 1619. Sir George's second marriage, about 1590, was to his beautiful but penniless first cousin by the half-blood, Mary ('c'.1570-1632), daughter of Anthony Beaumont of Glenfield, Leicestershire, with whom he had four children: John Villiers, Viscount Purbeck; George Villiers, first duke of Buckingham; Christopher Villiers, first earl of Anglesey; and Susan Villiers, who married William Feilding, first earl of Denbigh. Sir George's widow was created countess of Buckingham for life on 1 July 1618, and had two more husbands: first Sir William Rayner and then Sir Thomas Compton. 


@@@@@


doc= 28293


Villiers, George, first duke of Buckingham (1592-1628), royal favourite, was born at Brooksby Hall, Leicestershire, on 28 August 1592. He was the second son of Sir George Villiers (c.1544-1606) ['see under 'Villiers, Sir Edward] and his second wife, Mary ('c'.1570-1632), daughter of Anthony Beaumont of Glenfield, also in Leicestershire; he was the brother of John Villiers, first Viscount Purbeck (1591?-1658), and Christopher Villiers, earl of Anglesey (d. 1630), and the half-brother of Sir Edward Villiers (c.1585-1626). 
At ten years of age George Villiers was sent to school at Billesdon, 9 miles south-east of Brooksby, where the vicar, Anthony Cade, had established a reputation for himself as a good teacher. He respected Cade and later acted as his patron, but he was not a natural scholar. He excelled in skills such as dancing, fencing, and riding, and since these were combined with exceptional good looks and charm of manner he was well equipped for life as a courtier. After the death of Sir George Villiers in January 1606 his upbringing became the responsibility of his mother, with whom he enjoyed a loving but stormy relationship. She had no links with courtly circles, but after a brief second marriage she made the acquaintance of Sir Thomas Compton, who was to become her third husband. As the son of a peer and the brother of the future earl of Northampton, Compton had the connections that Mary Villiers lacked, and it was through his agency that Villiers and his elder brother, John Villiers, secured privy council passes in 1609 'to repair unto the parts beyond the seas, to gain experience' (BL, Add. MS 11402, fol. 147'v'). 
The two brothers were abroad for some three years, spending the last part of that time in Angers, which had an academy renowned as a finishing school for young gentlemen. When Villiers returned to England in 1611 he made his way to London, where he met Sir John Graham, a gentleman of the king's privy chamber, who advised him to seek his fortune at court and acted as his mentor and promoter. It was probably no coincidence that in August 1614 Villiers was at Apethorpe, the Northamptonshire seat of Sir Anthony Mildmay, when James I came to stay. The king was known to be susceptible to the charms of good-looking young men, particularly those whose manners had been polished in France, and Villiers made a good impression. However, his scope for further advancement was limited by the fact that the king already had an established favourite, Robert Carr, recently created earl of Somerset. Carr blocked a proposal to appoint Villiers a gentleman of the king's bedchamber, but he could not prevent his rival being given the post of cupbearer, which entailed waiting on the king at table. James appreciated the fact that Villiers, who had been carefully groomed by Sir John Graham, was well informed about public affairs and openly praised him for the quality of his conversation. 
Somerset had recently married Frances Howard, after she had been divorced from her first husband, the earl of Essex. This brought him firmly within the orbit of the influential Howard family, whose members were in general supportive of James's policy of friendship with Catholic Spain, and who were opposed by a protestant grouping, led by George Abbot, archbishop of Canterbury, and William Herbert, earl of Pembroke. Despairing of any change in James's policy while the Howards were in the ascendant, Abbot and Pembroke took up Villiers and used him as an instrument to bring about Somerset's downfall -- to be followed, they hoped, by that of the Howard connection. Their efforts were crowned with success in April 1615, when Villiers was not only appointed gentleman of the bedchamber but was also knighted by James and given an annual pension of $1000. Later that year, in August, he and the king occupied the same bed at Farnham Castle, where the king was on progress. Sharing a bed was not uncommon in the early seventeenth century, and did not necessarily imply physical intimacy. Yet there was every indication that the relationship between the king and Villiers had entered a new phase, and that the days of Somerset's favour were numbered. 
Early in 1616 Somerset and his wife were found guilty of the murder of Sir Thomas Overbury, formerly Somerset's close friend and adviser, and although James saved their lives he ordered them to be imprisoned in the Tower of London. With Somerset removed from the scene the way was now open to Villiers, and in January 1616 James made him master of the horse -- a prestigious post which Somerset had long sought but never attained. A few months later, in April 1616, James appointed Villiers to the Order of the Garter, and on 27 August, the eve of his favourite's birthday, he created him Baron Whaddon of Whaddon and Viscount Villiers. Villiers declined James's offer of the Sherborne estate, which had previously belonged to Somerset, on the grounds that he did not wish to build his fortunes upon the ruins of his predecessor's, but he agreed to accept crown lands with the equivalent value of $30,000. He also benefited from Somerset's fall in that the king secured for him the office of chief clerk for the enrolment of pleas in the court of king's bench, worth some $4000 a year. 
James continued to delight in the company of his new favourite, whom he called affectionately Steenie, a diminutive of Stephen, since St Stephen, according to the 'Bible', had a face like an angel. On 6 January 1617 -- the customary time for new year's gifts -- James elevated Viscount Villiers to the earldom of Buckingham, and in the following month he was sworn of the privy council. Just under a year later, on 1 January 1618, James created Buckingham a marquess. The king made no secret of his feelings for his favourite. On the contrary, in September 1617 he declared before his privy councillors that 'he loved the Earl of Buckingham more than any other man' and that they should not regard this as a defect in his nature. After all, 'Jesus Christ had done the same as he was doing... for Christ had his John and he had his George' ('Documentos ineditos para la historia de Espana', 1936-45, 1.101-2). 
James took it for granted that his favourites would marry, and encouraged Buckingham to ask for the hand of Lady Katherine Manners ['see 'MacDonnell, Katherine, duchess of Buckingham (1603?-1649)], whose father, the earl of Rutland, ruled the roost in the part of the world where Buckingham had grown up. Katherine was an heiress, which no doubt carried weight with Buckingham, but was far from being a beauty. She was also a Roman Catholic, like her convert father. James would not hear of his favourite marrying a Catholic, and instructed one of his chaplains, John Williams, to persuade Katherine to give up her faith. After a long struggle Katherine did so, and it was Williams who carried out the private marriage service at Lumley House, near Tower Hill, on 16 May 1620. Katherine brought with her a dowry of $10,000 as well as lands worth some $5000 a year, but the marriage was not merely one of convenience. Buckingham loved his wife, and as for Katherine, she told him in 1623 that 'never woman was so happy as I am, for never was there so kind a husband as you are' (Goodman, 2.309-14). They had four children. First, in March 1622, came Mary ['see 'Villiers, Mary, duchess of Lennox and Richmond (1622-1685)], named after Buckingham's mother. Next, in November 1625, was a son, baptized Charles in honour of the new king, but he died before he was two years old. A second son, George Villiers (1628-1687), was born in January 1628 and in due course succeeded his father as duke of Buckingham. A third son, Francis (1629-1648), who inherited his father's striking good looks, was born in April 1629, by which time Buckingham was dead, but he was killed in July 1648 while fighting for the king in the civil war. 
At the time of his creation as Baron Whaddon, Buckingham had been presented by the king with estates in Buckinghamshire which had come to the crown by forfeit. He was now a landowner in the county from which he drew his titles, but he was eager to acquire property in his native Leicestershire. In 1617 he purchased an estate at Dalby from his former neighbour Sir Edward Noel, and shortly after his marriage he bought Burley on the Hill, in the adjoining county of Rutland. Burley cost him $28,000, and more money was needed as he transformed the existing mansion to suit his own tastes. Burley, however, was too far removed from London to be used regularly, so in July 1622 he bought the Elizabethan mansion of New Hall, just outside Chelmsford in Essex, for $20,000. He also acquired a substantial house at Wanstead, in Essex, from Mountjoy Blount, for whom he procured an Irish baronage. 
Although he had official lodgings in the royal palace of Whitehall, Buckingham felt the need for a London residence of his own and in 1621 persuaded the fallen Bacon to hand over York (later Buckingham) House, on the Thames. At the same time he purchased Wallingford House, which had an enviable position overlooking St James's Park. It was worth a great deal more than the $3000 he paid for it, but Viscount Wallingford, the previous owner, was the brother-in-law of Frances Howard, and as part of the bargain Buckingham secured the release of Somerset and Frances from their long imprisonment. The final addition to his London properties came in 1626, when he used the opportunity provided by Cranfield's impeachment to acquire from him the great house at Chelsea which had once belonged to Sir Thomas More. Wallingford House remained Buckingham's principal London home, where his wife and children lived. York House was used mainly for official functions, and for the display of the magnificent collection of pictures which he built up. His adviser on artistic matters was the architect Sir Balthasar Gerbier, who told him in 1625 that 'sometimes when I am contemplating the treasure of rarities which your excellency has in so short a time amassed, I cannot but feel astonishment in the midst of my joy; for out of all the amateurs and princes and kings there is not one who has collected in forty years as many pictures as your excellency has collected in five! (Goodman, 2.369-76)' Buckingham admired Italian painters, particularly the Venetians. When he was in Spain in 1623 he was so impressed by Titian's portrait of Charles V on horseback that he had a copy made, to be hung in the great hall at York House. He subsequently commissioned an equestrian portrait of himself from Rubens, whom he regarded as the greatest living artist. Buckingham did not confine his collecting activities to paintings. He also acquired sculptures, books, and manuscripts. Like many of his contemporaries he was fascinated by unusual objects from all over the world, made available by the expansion of European commerce, and he assembled a major collection. He was assisted in this by his gardener, John Tradescant, who subsequently established one of the earliest museums in England. 
Buckingham spent at least $100,000 on purchasing properties and renovating them, which was far more than he had available from his own resources. In addition to a royal pension of $1000 a year he made $1300 out of a grant of 3died in the pound on the trade of alien merchants, and $4000 from the clerkship of the king's bench. His estates brought him in $3000 in rents, and other miscellaneous payments raised his 'open' income to about $14,000. He was also in receipt of a concealed income from such things as monopoly grants, 'gifts' in return for patronage, and the profits of acting as the king's agent for the sale of titles and offices, all of which brought in a minimum of $6000 a year. Buckingham, then, had a total income of $20,000, and quite possibly a good deal more, but the demands on his purse were considerable. His income probably did not cover his regular expenditure; it certainly could not have coped with the cost of buying land and houses. He resorted to borrowing, and James was so alarmed about the scale of this that he turned for help to Buckingham's client Lionel Cranfield, whom he had created earl of Middlesex and appointed lord treasurer. A number of complicated transactions took place, involving the surrender to the crown of certain properties belonging to the favourite, and Buckingham was saved from insolvency, but only at considerable cost to the royal exchequer (BL, Trumbull Alphabetical MSS, XVIII, 82). 
Although Buckingham paid $30,000 for the Dalby estate this may have been below its market value, for Sir Edward Noel received a baronage in addition to the purchase money. The sale of titles had started before Buckingham appeared on the political scene, but he turned it into a lucrative business. As a result, the eighty-one peerages existent in December 1615 had increased to 126 by the time of his death. The crown profited from the sale of both honours and offices, but the major beneficiary was Buckingham. He specialized in selling Irish titles, and may have been responsible for the creation of a new order of Irish baronets in 1619. He seems to have regarded Ireland as virtually his own preserve, set aside for plunder by the Villiers kin and connection, and his operations there, conducted mainly for financial gain, were subversive of the established government. Taken together with his involvement in the shady underworld of monopolists, financiers, and projectors in early Stuart England, they explain why he became for many members of the political nation the embodiment of corruption. 
Buckingham was also blamed for securing titles and offices for his many relatives, though the initiative in this was probably taken by James. His immediate kindred were the first to profit from the king's bounty. His mother was given the title of countess of Buckingham in 1618. His elder brother, John, was appointed groom of the bedchamber in 1616, and elevated to the peerage as Viscount Purbeck in 1619. Christopher Villiers, the favourite's younger brother, became a gentleman of the bedchamber in 1617 and subsequently master of the robes. However, he had to wait until 1623 before being created earl of Anglesey. Buckingham's sister, Susan, had long been married to William Feilding, a Warwickshire gentleman, but as a consequence of her brother's rise to favour her husband became master of the wardrobe and earl of Denbigh. Edward Villiers, Buckingham's half-brother, was knighted in 1616 and subsequently appointed master of the mint and comptroller of the court of wards. At the very end of James's reign he was given the additional office of president of Munster. Edward Villiers married a niece of Sir Oliver St John, for whom Buckingham secured the major post of lord deputy of Ireland. The rapid rise of Buckingham's kindred provoked hostile comment, but a good deal of this arose from envy and it should not be assumed that his actions ran counter to prevailing conventions. When defending himself against impeachment charges in 1626 Buckingham argued that he would have deserved condemnation by 'all generous minds if, being in such favour with his master, he had minded only his own advancement and had neglected those who were nearest unto him' ('JHL', 3.662). 
While Buckingham was to become the major distributor of royal patronage in Jacobean England he never obtained a monopoly -- except in the negative sense that he could usually block the promotion of those of whom he disapproved. When the king, as was usually the case, had no strong opinions on an appointment, Buckingham's choice was likely to prevail. If, however, the king chose to intervene directly, the favourite had no choice but to acquiesce. In 1619, for example, James chose Sir George Calvert as secretary of state, ignoring Buckingham's candidates. Similarly, in 1621, when a new lord keeper was needed to replace Sir Francis Bacon, the king disregarded Buckingham's recommendations and selected John Williams, at that time dean of Westminster. Buckingham immediately set about bringing Williams within his circle of influence, showing a typical capacity for making the best of a situation that was not of his own devising. 
Patrons expected to be rewarded by their clients, and Buckingham was no exception. Gifts of money, plate, and works of art were significant additions to both his wealth and his prestige, but this does not mean that he was prompted solely by considerations of profit when he advanced the claims of one of his clients. Among the most prominent of these was Sir Francis Bacon, who resented the fact that despite his exceptional talents he had not attained high office. No sooner did Buckingham appear on the scene than Bacon appointed himself as the new favourite's guide and mentor, and, as a consequence, his career at last took off. In 1616 he was made a privy councillor, and in the following year he achieved his ambition of becoming lord keeper -- the office which his father had held under Elizabeth. Another of Buckingham's clients who well merited the advancement the favourite procured for him was Lionel Cranfield, a successful merchant turned financier and government adviser. Cranfield, as James later told parliament, 'was an instrument, under Buckingham, for reformation of the household, the navy and the exchequer, Buckingham setting him on and taking upon himself the envy of all the officers; and he himself many a time protested unto me that he had not been able to do me any service in the ministerial part if Buckingham had not backed him in it. ('JHL', 3.344)' Naval affairs were the responsibility of the lord admiral, Charles Howard, earl of Nottingham. He had won renown when he commanded the English fleet against the Armada, but by 1618 he was over eighty and no longer in control of the principal officers of the navy, who had become bywords for corruption. Buckingham had been informed about the true state of the navy by Cranfield, and was eager to demonstrate that although he had come to prominence on account of his looks he could be of real service to the crown. His lack of seagoing experience was not a major impediment, since the lord admiral's job was mainly administrative. What was needed, apart from good advisers, was energy, commitment, and the support of the king, and on all these counts he was well qualified. This was the logic behind his appointment as lord admiral in January 1619. He decided that the principal officers of the navy should no longer run it as they saw fit. Instead, he transferred responsibility to the reform commissioners, who brought about a steady improvement. When Buckingham became lord admiral the amount spent on the navy exceeded $50,000 a year. By 1624 this figure had been cut to $30,000, yet the number of seaworthy ships had gone up from twenty-three to thirty-five. Officers' pay was increased in 1618, and that for ordinary sailors in 1624. All in all his administration of the navy in the years of peace that lasted until near the end of James's reign was effective and successful. However, the war years were to show that underlying weaknesses remained. 
James gloried in the name of peacemaker, but the prospects of maintaining peace in Europe became markedly worse after 1619, when his son-in-law, Frederick, the elector palatine, who had rashly accepted the offer of the Bohemian crown, was driven out of Prague by forces acting in the name of Ferdinand, the deposed king of Bohemia and now Holy Roman emperor. Frederick and his wife, Elizabeth, could not simply return to the Palatinate because Spanish forces had occupied the area on the left bank of the Rhine while the army of the Catholic League was advancing along the right bank. Buckingham was said to be an ardent advocate of the palatine's cause, and strongly approved of James's decision to send a volunteer force to the Palatinate to garrison a number of key towns. His initial enthusiasm cooled as a result of a clash with Frederick's ambassador, who rejected his nomination of Sir Edward Cecil as commander of this force, but he nevertheless contributed the large sum of $5000 to the voluntary benevolence which James authorized as a means of financing it. 
The benevolence was at best a short-term palliative. For more substantial support a parliament was necessary, and James summoned one to meet in January 1621. Apart from the short-lived Addled Parliament of 1614 this was the first meeting for eleven years, and the Commons were certain to seize the opportunity to make known to the king the grievances of which their constituents complained. The principal grievance concerned the abuse of monopolies. These were licences, or patents, either sold or given by the crown, granting the patentees the sole right to engage in a specific activity. Buckingham was not a monopolist himself, but he had secured a number of grants for members of his family. The most notorious of these was the patent for regulating inns, which had been acquired by Sir Giles Mompesson, the brother-in-law of Sir Edward Villiers, on the understanding that the profits -- mainly gained from extortion -- would be shared with Sir Edward and Christopher Villiers. Another monopoly in which Sir Edward was involved was that for the manufacture of gold and silver thread. Before the session opened Buckingham had been advised by Bacon to 'put off the envy of these things (which I think in themselves bear no great fruit) and rather take the thanks for ceasing them than the note for maintaining them' ('Works of Francis Bacon', 14.148-9). The advice was timely, for no sooner had parliament opened than the Commons mounted an attack upon Mompesson, who was one of its members. Mompesson appealed to Buckingham for help, but promptly went into hiding, thereby implicitly acknowledging his guilt. Attention then turned to the role of Sir Edward and Christopher Villiers, but Buckingham warded off criticism of himself by assuring members of both houses that if his two brothers were guilty of malpractice 'he would not protect them; but we should see that the same father who begot them that were the offenders begot a third that would get them to be punished' (W. Notestein and others, eds., 'Commons Debates, 1621', 7 vols., 1935, 2.212). 
Buckingham's insistence that he, like James, had been misled by the spurious claims of monopoly seekers switched the attention of the Commons to the referees whom the king appointed to scrutinize all projected patents and report on whether they were in accordance with law and for the public good. Among the principal referees was Bacon, now lord chancellor, and the Commons' investigations revealed that he had taken bribes. They transmitted this information to the Lords and called on them to take appropriate action. Bacon, who had retired to his sickbed, appealed to Buckingham, whom he described as 'my anchor in these floods' ('Works of Francis Bacon', 14.225), but although the favourite made repeated visits to his mentor he did not intervene on his behalf. In the event, Bacon acknowledged his guilt and was sentenced by the Lords to loss of office, imprisonment, and a heavy fine. Buckingham was the only member of the upper house to vote in Bacon's favour. 
Further problems for Buckingham arose when the Lords questioned the attorney-general, Sir Henry Yelverton, about the heavy-handed way in which he had enforced the patent for gold and silver thread. Yelverton responded by throwing all the blame upon Sir Edward and Christopher Villiers and claiming that 'my lord of Buckingham was ever at his majesty's hand, ready upon every occasion to hew me down'. He added that 'if my lord of Buckingham had but read the articles exhibited in this place against Hugh Spencer, and had known the danger of placing and displacing officers about a king, he would not have pursued me with such bitterness' ('JHL', 3.121). The house was shocked by the comparison of Buckingham with the Despensers, the hated favourites of Edward II, and James even more so. 'If he Spencer', said the king, 'I Edward II... I had rather be no king than such a one as King Edward II' ('Camden Miscellany', 20, CS, 3rd ser., 83, 1953, 33). It may be that Buckingham's enemies in the upper house had planned to use Yelverton as an instrument to procure his downfall, but if so they overplayed their hand. The Lords, to whom James had remitted Yelverton's judgment, had no choice but to find him guilty and sentence him to fines and imprisonment -- though Buckingham immediately remitted the fine of 5000 marks which had been imposed for the slur upon his honour. 
Buckingham had been a regular attender in the Lords during the first session of the 1621 parliament, but was rarely present in the second, which opened in November 1621, since the king demanded his company in the hunting field. A decisive moment in the debates came when Sir George Goring, acting on Buckingham's instructions, suggested that the Commons should draw up a petition to the king proposing that if the Spaniards intensified the fighting in Germany by continuing to assist the emperor, James should announce his readiness to redress the balance by entering the conflict. The Commons followed Goring's suggestion, but extended its terms by asking that the prince of Wales should be married to a protestant. This infuriated James, who was engaged in delicate negotiations for Charles to marry a Spanish princess. His angry response to the Commons' petition set in train a course of events that led to the abrupt dissolution of parliament. Many people accused Buckingham of bringing this about in order to prevent further attacks upon himself, and in particular to blunt the effectiveness of the commission of inquiry into the governance of Ireland which James, at Cranfield's prompting, had agreed to set up. Buckingham was virtually the sole channel of communication between the king at Newmarket and parliament and the privy council in London, and could conceivably have limited the amount of information that James received, and encouraged him to take a hard line with the Commons. But James was never merely a cipher. He had strong opinions of his own, not least upon the role of the Commons, and it may well be that Buckingham was acting as the executant of the king's policy rather than pursuing his private interests. Goring's motion could have been an attempt on James's part to strengthen his hand in the negotiations with Spain by demonstrating the strength of popular feeling on the palatine issue. If this was his intention, then his anger against the Commons is understandable, for by 'misreading' his message they transformed it into something that was, from the king's point of view, counter-productive. On this issue, as on a number of others, the surviving evidence is inconclusive. 
James was convinced that the best hope for restoring Frederick to the Palatinate lay in co-operation with Spain, and was therefore anxious to conclude the long-drawn-out negotiations for his son's marriage. John Digby, his ambassador at the court of Philip IV, sent back optimistic reports, but these failed to dispel suspicions that the Spanish ministers were not acting in good faith. In order to clarify the situation James dispatched Endymion Porter to Madrid. Porter was a member of Buckingham's household and a relative by marriage; more to the point, he had been brought up in Spain and spoke the language fluently. When he returned to England in January 1623 Porter gave assurances that negotiations for both the marriage and the restoration of the Palatinate were well advanced. However, he revealed to Buckingham his suspicion that the count of Olivares, Philip IV's chief minister, was opposed to both projects. This news was unwelcome to Prince Charles, who was in his twenty-third year and eager to be married, and he may have been the author of the plan to make an unannounced journey overland to Spain, since, by arriving in person in Madrid, he would compel Philip and Olivares to reveal their true intentions. If this interpretation is correct, the prince would have turned to Buckingham for assistance in winning James's consent. James did eventually agree, but only on condition that Buckingham accompanied his son. Buckingham and Charles set out for Paris, disguised and under assumed names, on 18 February 1623, and on 7 March they arrived at Digby's house in Madrid. 
The prince and Buckingham spent the next six months in Spain, and in the course of firsthand encounters with Philip IV and his ministers Buckingham was made aware that their principal objective was the maintenance and increase of Habsburg power in Europe, with little regard to English interests. The Spaniards demanded further concessions on the treatment of English Catholics before they would agree to the marriage, and Olivares believed that the prince would have been prepared to accept these, had it not been for Buckingham's countervailing pressure. Relations between the two favourites deteriorated, and in one of his letters home Buckingham blamed 'the foolery of the Conde of Olivares' for the failure to complete the negotiations. He accused the Spaniards of 'first delaying us as long as possibly they can. Then, when things are concluded of, they thrust in new particulars, in hope they will pass, out of our desire to make haste' (BL, Harley MS 6987, fol. 107). The articles of marriage were eventually drawn up and accepted by both sides, but the Spaniards refused to allow the infanta to leave until a papal dispensation had arrived. They were hoping that the prince would stay on, while Buckingham returned home, but by this time even Charles was distrustful of the Spaniards' promises, especially since there had been no agreement on their part to assist in the recovery of the Palatinate. Buckingham and the prince therefore decided to leave Madrid at the end of August 1623 and to make their way to Santander, where an English fleet awaited them. 
Buckingham had taken a risk by absenting himself from England, and in particular from James, for so long a period. Even before he left there had been talk of the king's increasing fondness for Cranfield's brother-in-law, Arthur Brett, and Buckingham ensured that the young man was sent into temporary exile. Yet James remained as attached as ever to his favourite. He delighted in the frequent letters -- beginning with 'Dear Dad and Gossip' and signed by 'Your humble slave and dog' -- which Buckingham wrote on behalf of himself and the prince, and responded with his own to 'My sweet boys'. One of James's letters, sent in May, informed Buckingham that he was now a duke, and Buckingham wrote a fulsome reply thanking the king for the way in which he had 'filled a consuming purse, given me fair houses, more land than I am worthy of to maintain both me and them, [and] filled my coffers so full with patents of honour that my shoulder cannot bear more' (BL, Harley MS 6987, fol. 153). James longed for the return of his 'dear venturous knights' (G. P. V. Akrigg, ed., 'Letters of King James VI & I', 1984, 388) and when the two young men reached Royston on 6 October the warmth of his reception was unmistakable. Yet Buckingham was no longer the uncritical executant of royal policy that he had been before the Spanish journey, nor was Prince Charles. James complained that when the prince set out for Spain he had been 'as well affected to that nation as heart could desire, and as well disposed as any son in Europe; but now he was strangely carried away with rash and youthful counsels and followed the humour of Buckingham, who had he knew not how many devils within him since that journey. ('Cabala', 276)' The prince had returned without his bride, though negotiations for the marriage had not yet been formally broken off, and Buckingham was convinced that the expansion of Habsburg power was a threat to England as well as other states, and would have to be resisted. He was clearly envisaging war with Spain, but he needed the support of parliament, not simply to win over the ever-hesitant James but also to rally public opinion behind his policy and ensure financial backing for it. As the first step towards a parliament he gave a report on his negotiations to a cabinet-council of leading ministers, but these were divided in their response. Even those who were eager for a change of course found it hard to accept that a man who had been so closely identified with the king's pro-Spanish stance had really changed his spots. Buckingham would probably not have secured majority support if he had been acting alone. However, with Prince Charles firmly behind him he succeeded in doing so, and James thereupon agreed to summon the parliament which began its session in February 1624. 
Buckingham had prepared the way for a constructive meeting by making conciliatory gestures towards his principal opponents in the Lords and establishing close contacts with his former critics in the Commons. He also addressed a meeting of both houses, giving them a detailed account of all that happened during the time that he and the prince had spent in Spain, and making plain his belief that it was futile and dangerous to rely upon Spanish promises. He ended by calling on the assembled members to decide whether they should advise James to continue the negotiations with Spain or 'to trust in his own strength and to stand upon his own feet' (Rushworth, 1.125). Buckingham would have liked parliament to make a speedy vote of supply, not simply to enable the fleet to be set out but, even more important, to show James that his subjects could be trusted to support him if he took a firm line against Spain. However, James, like Buckingham, was a hostage to his former attitudes, and members of parliament had good reason for fearing that any moneys they voted would be frittered away. Conversely, James had been taught by experience that parliaments were generous in their promises of assistance but unforthcoming when it came to putting them into effect. Years of mutual distrust could not be swept away overnight, particularly since there was no agreement over policy objectives. Buckingham, like most members of parliament, wanted a sea war against Spain. James, on the other hand, was thinking in terms of a limited military campaign in the Palatinate. He had not broken off his contacts with the Spanish envoys in England and still hoped to secure a resolution of the crisis through diplomacy. 
Buckingham could not openly advocate a sea war against Spain for fear of alienating the king. At the same time he could not confine himself to pressing for military action in the Palatinate, since this would have lost him support in parliament. He therefore pursued a deliberately ambiguous policy, encouraging all the parties involved to feel that he was advancing their interests and playing down the significance of any differences that became apparent. His assumption was that once war was in progress the course of events would dictate appropriate responses. However, the path to war proved to be tortuous, and by acting as the link figure between the king and parliament Buckingham was in constant danger of losing the confidence of both. His frequent visits to court served to keep James in line, but only at the cost of straining personal relations, as was shown when the king accused him of using 'cruel, Catonic words' (BL, Harley MS 6987, fol. 196). Meanwhile, the Spanish envoys were mounting a propaganda campaign against the duke, alleging that he intended to keep James permanently in the country while he took over the reins of government himself. The sudden reappearance on the scene of Arthur Brett was another alarm signal. Buckingham had already lost patience with Brett's brother-in-law, Lionel Cranfield, earl of Middlesex, for opposing war with Spain on financial grounds, and also for continuing his efforts to combat corruption -- much of it linked with the Villiers connection -- in Ireland. The favourite now struck back by instigating the lord treasurer's impeachment in April 1624. Middlesex's cost-cutting measures, while benefiting the crown, had alienated all those who profited from James's largess, and his abrasive manner had won him few friends. Overthrowing Middlesex was therefore calculated to increase Buckingham's popularity at the same time as it removed a threat to his policies and position. 
By April 1624 Buckingham had persuaded the Commons to give the first reading to a subsidy bill in return for a formal assurance, which he delivered to both houses, that the king had broken off negotiations with Spain. He had also persuaded James to receive the mercenary commander, Count Mansfeld, who had offered his services for the recovery of the Palatinate. At the same time Buckingham, despite the lack of parliamentary funding, had set on foot preparations for a naval expedition against the Spaniards, in which he invited the Dutch to join. The conflicting pressures upon him contributed to a breakdown in his health, but although this removed him for some six weeks from his central role, it had the advantage of restoring his position with James. The king came to see him frequently, sent gifts of fruit, and gave repeated assurances that he loved and trusted him as much as ever. Buckingham was profuse in his thanks to his sovereign, whom he described as 'my purveyor, my goodfellow, my physician, my maker, my friend, my father, my all' (NL Scot., Denmilne MSS 33.1.7, vol. 22, 79). 
When he returned to court in mid-June 1624 Buckingham concentrated on concluding an alliance with France, to be cemented by a marriage between Prince Charles and Louis XIII's sister, Henrietta Maria. Negotiations, which began in early April, had been proceeding smoothly, but in June 1624 Louis dismissed his chief minister and replaced him by Cardinal Richelieu, who insisted that no marriage could take place unless James gave a formal promise to relax the persecution of English Catholics. James's immediate reaction was hostile, but Buckingham, working hand in glove with the French ambassador, persuaded him to make a constructive response. The area for compromise was limited by the fact that Prince Charles had given an undertaking in the House of Lords that the terms of a French marriage, if ever it came about, would include no concessions to the recusants at home. This was circumvented when James, under pressure from Buckingham, agreed to give the written assurance that Richelieu required, but only on condition that it should not be included in the formal marriage treaty. In the French negotiations, as with those he had earlier conducted between the king and parliament, Buckingham was working on the assumption that the essential first step was to get the parties committed. Half-truths and ambiguities were part of the price that had to be paid to bring this about, but the pressure of events -- or so he hoped -- would make these irrelevant by forcing the constituent parts of the anti-Habsburg alliance into ever closer co-operation. This gamble might have paid off had the initial operations been successful. In the event, failure led to accusations of bad faith against Buckingham, who had been the architect of the strategy. 
The first fruits of Anglo-French co-operation consisted in an expedition to the Palatinate under the command of Mansfeld. England was to provide 10,000 infantry, while 3000 cavalry were to come from France. If Buckingham had been a free agent, as his enemies assumed, the expedition would have had a reasonable chance of success, but James insisted on imposing conditions that prompted the French to draw back. Mutual distrust led to last-minute changes of plan which effectively sabotaged Mansfeld's expedition. His troops were held so long on board ship, waiting for agreement on where they should go, that infection set in and they died like flies. Matters were no better when the survivors arrived in the Netherlands, for the winter quarters provided for them were inadequate and food supplies exiguous. News of the disintegration of Mansfeld's army had a profound effect upon English public opinion, and responsibility for the failure was firmly pinned upon Buckingham. 
The death of James I in March 1625 could have entailed the end of Buckingham's influence, for history had few examples of favour being transferred from a reigning monarch to his successor. However, during the journey to Spain in 1623 the relationship between Buckingham and the prince of Wales had developed into a deep friendship, and one of Charles's first actions after he ascended the throne was to assure the duke that his favour would continue into the new reign. It might have been better for Charles if he had not done so, for Buckingham was now the object of suspicion and even hatred among the king's subjects, but Charles saw no reason to dispense with the services of a man he trusted and who shared his own views on how to respond to the crisis in Europe. A key element in their strategy was to cement the alliance with France, and Buckingham hoped to do this when he went to Paris in May 1625. The official purpose of his visit was to bring back the king's bride, Henrietta Maria, but he took the opportunity to hold discussions with Richelieu designed to commit France to an anti-Habsburg league. The timing of his initiative was unfortunate, for the Huguenots of La Rochelle, alarmed by the accession to power of a man they regarded as a hardline Catholic, had taken up arms in self-defence. Richelieu regarded it as axiomatic that as long as the Huguenots were in revolt against Louis's authority France could not risk foreign entanglements. He therefore declined to enter into any new engagements of the sort that Buckingham wanted. The duke was not only disappointed; he also had to consider the possibility that Richelieu, as might be expected from a churchman, put religious before political considerations and was more inclined to 'detente' with Catholic Spain than alliance with protestant England. If this were the case, then Richelieu would have to be removed from power. The cardinal had many enemies at court, not least the queen, Anne of Austria, to whom Buckingham expressed his devotion in ways that some observers believed exceeded the bounds of decorum. Louis's anger when he heard reports of this became another thread in the tangled skein of Anglo-French relations. 
When Charles opened his first parliament in June 1625 he assumed that its members, thankful for the accession of a ruler who shared their desire for active involvement in the European war, would make a generous grant of supply. However, he gave them no indication of how much money was needed, and left to their own devices the Commons granted a mere two subsidies. When Buckingham heard of this he urged his friends and clients in the lower house to push for more, and instructed Sir John Coke, his principal adviser on naval matters, to provide the Commons with a detailed account of the government's financial needs. The Commons refused to enlarge upon their grant, yet money was urgently required for Mansfeld, who was still in the field -- though his army now consisted mainly of German mercenaries -- and for the king's uncle, Christian IV of Denmark, who was ready to invade north Germany. The greatest need of all was for the fleet which Buckingham was assembling to attack the Spanish coast. The Dutch had already agreed to join in the expedition, but if its departure was delayed until the autumn, when the weather worsened, its prospects of success would be diminished. 
Buckingham was insistent that parliament should be recalled for a second session, this time to Oxford, since plague had broken out in London. Charles agreed, and the two houses reassembled at the beginning of August. Although on this occasion they were given full particulars of the king's requirements it became clear when debate opened in the Commons that members had no confidence in Buckingham and were unwilling to finance his strategy. The duke decided to use the tactics that had succeeded so well in 1624 by appearing in person before the two houses and publicly rebutting the complaints made against him. On this occasion, however, he did not succeed in winning over his critics, who now claimed that he was responsible for everything that had gone wrong. The king therefore decided to cut his losses, and on 12 August 1625 he dissolved parliament. 
Buckingham had originally planned to lead the expedition against Spain himself, but his health was still far from robust, and he was engaged in negotiations for the formal establishment of an anti-Habsburg alliance that demanded his presence elsewhere. He therefore appointed Sir Edward Cecil, a soldier with long experience fighting for the Dutch, as commander. Charles had raised loans from the City and international financiers to set out the expedition, but shortage of money remained a major problem, and continued delays undid much of the work already done. The expedition was not ready to sail until early October, by which time the weather was deteriorating. Despite suffering storm damage in the Bay of Biscay, it managed to reach the Bay of Cadiz, but a half-hearted attempt to assault the town turned into farce when the soldiers stumbled across wine vats and broke them open to quench their thirst. Cecil's army was transformed into a drunken rabble, incapable of fighting, and he had no alternative but to re-embark it and sail for home. Food and water were now running short and infection had set in. Both soldiers and sailors were in such bad shape that the journey back to England was a nightmare, and when the ships at last straggled into harbour their crews looked like skeletons. Among those who witnessed this inglorious return was Sir John Eliot, and in the 1626 parliament he expressed a sense of outrage, focused on Buckingham, which was widely felt: 'our honour is ruined, our ships are sunk, our men perished, not by the sword, not by an enemy, not by chance, but... by those we trust' (Eliot, 1.155). 
While the Cadiz expedition was making its way home Buckingham was in The Hague to sign a treaty with Danish and Dutch representatives which committed their respective countries to joint military action for the restoration of the Palatinate and the containment of Habsburg power. He hoped that France would join the alliance, but the situation was complicated, as always, by the Huguenot revolt. In late 1624, when France had been planning an attack upon Genoa, which was a Spanish satellite, Louis had asked the Dutch and the English to lend warships to blockade the port. Both states made a positive response, but after the outbreak of the Huguenot revolt there were fears that the ships might be used against La Rochelle. The Dutch could do little about this, for they had already handed over their vessels, but Buckingham engaged in delaying tactics until assured that peace had been concluded between Louis and the rebels. This assurance proved incorrect, but because of their late arrival the English vessels, unlike the Dutch, played only a minor part in the naval engagement in early September in which the Huguenot fleet was virtually destroyed. This did not prevent Buckingham's detractors from asserting that he had connived with the French to defeat the Huguenots instead of defending them, as a good protestant ought to have done. 
Buckingham was eager to see the dispute between Louis and the Huguenots resolved, for, as he told the French ambassador, it was impeding the creation of 'a great union of all the states which are apprehensive about the power of Spain' (TNA: PRO, Baschet transcripts, 31/3, bundle 62, fol. 159'v'). He therefore dispatched two trusted envoys, the earl of Holland and Sir Dudley Carleton, to France to try to reconcile the warring parties. This they succeeded in doing in January 1626, and he was hopeful that Richelieu would now commit France to the objectives of the Hague treaty, even if he preferred to remain outside the formal alliance. Holland and Carleton were given assurances to this effect, yet while Richelieu was talking about a forthcoming military campaign in Italy, he was secretly negotiating a settlement with Spain which would restore peace to the Peninsula. When news of this leaked out it revived all the earlier doubts about the cardinal's exact intentions and made it imperative to consider the possibility of concerted action to remove Richelieu from power. 
Since any action would require money the king summoned parliament to meet in February 1626. Before it did so Buckingham called a conference at York House to discuss the vexed question of Arminianism. The Arminians, who formed a minority high-church group within the Church of England, were regarded by the non-Arminian majority as crypto-Catholics. It was widely assumed that Buckingham -- whose mother and father-in-law, as well as many of his friends, were Catholic -- was himself an Arminian sympathizer, and he was under pressure from his critics to make his position plain. There was no doubt that if he aligned himself with the anti-Arminians, his relationship with parliament would improve, and the York House conference, which took place on 11 and 17 February 1626, provided an appropriate opportunity. The key question was whether he would support the anti-Arminians' proposal that the established church should adopt the articles drawn up by the Synod of Dort, held in the Netherlands in 1619, which formally condemned the principal Arminian positions. In the event, Buckingham -- who was aware that the king inclined towards the Arminians -- refused to do so, and although the York House conference ended inconclusively it left Buckingham exposed to the wrath of the anti-Arminians who dominated the House of Commons. 
Parliament met under the shadow of the failed Cadiz expedition, and the Commons set up a committee to identify the causes of the evils by which the state was afflicted and to propose remedies. The committee decided that Buckingham was the principal cause and that he should therefore be impeached. In the charges presented to the Lords on 8 May 1626, he was accused of holding too many offices; of delivering English ships into French hands for use against the Huguenots; of selling honours and offices; of procuring titles for his kindred; and, finally, of poisoning James I. In his reply to the charges, which he made on 8 June, Buckingham acknowledged that he had been 'raised to honour and fortunes... beyond my merit' but insisted that 'what I have wanted in sufficiency and experience... I have endeavoured to supply by care and industry'. He dealt with the charges one by one, giving his version of disputed issues, and ended with the assertion that 'his love and duty to his country have restrained him and preserved him (he hopeth) from running into heinous and high misdemeanours and crimes' ('JHL', 3.656, 663). 
Impeachment was a legal process, dependent upon proof, but there was no clear evidence of either criminal intent or activity in Buckingham's case. The attack on the favourite was essentially political, and was aimed at removing him from the king's counsels. But Charles saw no reason to abandon him, especially since, as the king had already made plain, 'he hath not meddled or done anything concerning the public or commonwealth but by special directions and appointment, and as my servant' (Rushworth, 1.217). Far from deserting Buckingham he exerted all his influence to ensure that the duke acquired yet another prestigious office, namely the chancellorship of Cambridge University, in June 1626. Charles believed the attack upon the favourite was really aimed at himself and monarchical rule in England. Rather than allow the impeachment to continue its course before the Lords, who could no longer be relied upon to throw out the charges, he dissolved parliament. 
Before the dissolution the Commons had decided, in principle and as a quid pro quo for Buckingham's dismissal, to vote three subsidies. Charles and his councillors now decided to raise the equivalent amount by means of a forced loan. This would enable the king to continue supporting his allies in the anti-Habsburg league. Buckingham was more than ever convinced that the key to success for the league was to be found in Paris, but there was continuing uncertainty about the true nature of French intentions. Richelieu's decision to assume responsibility for naval matters and begin construction of a powerful French fleet implied a threat to England of which Buckingham, as lord admiral, was particularly conscious. Of more immediate concern was the French seizure of the entire English wine fleet, lying in harbour at Bordeaux in late 1626, in retaliation for the English capture of French vessels accused of trading with Spain. Buckingham riposted by sending a fleet under the command of one of his best captains, John Pennington, to cruise up and down the French coast and 'intercept and take... all French, Dunkirkers' and Spanish ships and goods as shall come out of the Low Countries for the use of the French king' (BL, Add. MS 37817, fol. 31'v'). 
As evidence of Richelieu's apparent untrustworthiness mounted, Buckingham became convinced that the cardinal must be overthrown. He planned to achieve this by fusing the discontents of peripheral states such as Savoy and Lorraine with those of the Huguenots and the French nobility, who deeply resented Richelieu's monopoly of power. Knitting together these various elements was a complex operation, and nothing effective would be accomplished without a clear lead from England. Buckingham planned to provide this by a combined naval and military expedition to the island of Re, off La Rochelle. The capture of Re would inhibit French attempts to blockade the Huguenot stronghold and also enable reinforcements to be sent in if Richelieu launched a direct attack. More important, it would be a major blow to Richelieu's reputation and weaken his hold on power. 
Charles I's financial position had eased as the proceeds of the forced loan came in, especially as these were supplemented by the sale of goods and ships taken by Pennington. As a consequence the expedition which Buckingham assembled was far better prepared than that for Cadiz. The fleet arrived off the south-eastern tip of Re on 12 July 1627 and the troops were successfully landed, although they suffered losses from attacks by enemy cavalry. Five days later the army reached St Martin, the main town on the island, and invested the citadel into which the French defenders had withdrawn. By the end of September the garrison was close to capitulation, and one of the leading Huguenot nobles, the duke of Rohan, subsequently gave his opinion that if the citadel had fallen 'there was every possibility of a great change in the face of affairs' ('Memoires Du Duc de Rohan', 1675, 207). However, Richelieu, who had taken personal charge of the French forces on the nearby mainland, dispatched a convoy of small ships which slipped through the English blockading fleet and brought supplies to the starving garrison. There was no prospect now of a swift victory for Buckingham's army, and his officers advised him to withdraw from Re before the onset of winter, particularly since the reinforcements sent from England had been too little and too late. Buckingham made one last attempt to capture the citadel, this time by storming it, but his troops were beaten off by the defenders. He then gave the order to retreat, but the way to the ships was blocked by French forces sent over from the mainland. The English had to fight their way through, and suffered heavy casualties. Buckingham's army numbered nearly 8000 when it set out for Re, but only 3000 returned to Portsmouth in November 1627. 
The failure of the Re expedition made Buckingham even more unpopular, if such a thing was possible, and anonymous ballads spread the message that 'These things have lost our honour, men surmise: Thy treachery, neglect and cowardice' (Fairholt, 24). He was also held responsible for actions such as the levying of the forced loan, the imprisonment of resisters, and compulsory billeting of troops that seemed to threaten fundamental English liberties. Yet Charles, who blamed himself for not ensuring the timely dispatch of supplies and reinforcements to Re, had no intention of abandoning either Buckingham or the policies which they had jointly formulated. The immediate need was to secure the English coast against privateers and enemy forces, and in February 1628 the lord admiral ordered the construction of ten pinnaces 'of extraordinarily good sail... and with the most advantage as may be for sailing and rowing' (TNA: PRO, SP 16, 94, 37). He also ended the reign of the navy commissioners, whom he blamed for the failure to cope with the demands of wartime, and restored control to the principal officers. Changes in administrative structures, however, could not compensate for the crippling shortage of money. Only parliament could provide the solution, but Charles was reluctant to summon one unless he had some assurance that it would not renew the attack upon Buckingham. However, there was by now a general recognition that disharmony between the king and his subjects had reached dangerous heights and that some sort of reconciliation must be attempted. It was against this background that the king sent out writs for his third parliament, which met on 17 March 1628. 
In response to detailed expositions of the government's policy the Commons decided, in principle, to offer the king five subsidies, worth over a quarter of a million pounds. Charles welcomed this as a positive step, but the offer was conditional on his acceptance of a petition of right, confirming English liberties. Debates on the wording lasted until early June, and Buckingham spent much of this time trying to persuade the Lords that a clause explicitly confirming the king's prerogative powers should be inserted. However, his influence had been diminished by the retreat from Re and the subsequent failure of an expedition to La Rochelle, sent out under the command of his brother-in-law, the earl of Denbigh. In the end the Lords agreed to go along with the Commons, and Buckingham accepted their decision. He was now involved in preparations for another expedition, to be led by himself, but these were hamstrung by the continuing shortage of money, and nothing would be forthcoming until the petition had passed through all its stages. This process was virtually completed by 2 June, when the king gave his response, but since it was not in the traditional form it deprived the petition of its quasi-statutory status. The Commons blamed Buckingham for Charles's equivocal reply, and although the king tried to assuage their anxieties by summoning both houses before him and ordering the conventional response to a petition of right to be read, he could not stop them from renewing the attack upon the favourite. In the remonstrance which the Commons presented to Charles on 17 June 1628 they called on him to consider 'whether, in respect the said Duke hath so abused his power, it be safe for your majesty and your kingdom to continue him either in his great offices or in his place of nearness and counsel about your sacred person' (Rushworth, 1.626). Charles had already declared that he was fully persuaded of Buckingham's innocence, 'as well by his own certain knowledge as by the proofs in the cause' (ibid.), and on 26 June 1628 he put an end to further proceedings by bringing the session to a close. 
The expedition which Buckingham was now planning included a number of fireships packed with explosives, designed to blow gaps in the floating palisade which the French had constructed to cut off the seaward approaches to La Rochelle. The fleet was assembling at Portsmouth, but the duke remained in London until late July, since his presence was essential if the vital supplies and munitions were to be dispatched on time. Writing to Secretary Conway, who was with the king at Portsmouth, on 6 August, he complained that 'I find nothing of more difficulty and uncertainty than the preparations here for this service of Rochelle. Every man saith he hath all things ready, and yet all remains as it were at a stand' (TNA: PRO, SP 16, 112, 32). Shortage of money remained, as always, an intractable problem, and Buckingham was frequently distracted from his principal task by hungry sailors who thronged round his house and coach, demanding relief. The duke caused a proclamation to be set up in the Royal Exchange, reminding the sailors that 'I have done more for you than ever my predecessors did. I procured the increase of your pay to a third part more than it was. I have parted with mine own money to pay you, and engaged all mine own estate for your satisfaction. (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 276, 114)' His commitment to the Huguenot cause did not make him any more popular. The passions aroused by the debates in the Commons had created a climate of barely suppressed violence, and while he provided bodyguards for his own safety he could not protect his associates. These included the astrologer John Lambe, whom he had frequently consulted. On 13 June, the day before the Commons formally adopted the remonstrance against the favourite, Lambe was set upon by a London mob who taunted him with being 'the Duke's devil' and hacked him to death. 'And shortly after', as Rushworth records, 'so high was the rage of people that they would ordinarily utter these words:'Let Charles and George do what they can, 

The Duke shall die like Doctor Lambe.' 
(Rushworth, 1.618)' Before leaving town Buckingham took steps to strengthen his position by rewarding his friends and extending an olive branch to his enemies. The earl of Marlborough, who had succeeded Cranfield as lord treasurer, was replaced by Sir Richard Weston, one of the duke's clients. At the same time Buckingham gave up the lord wardenship of the Cinque Ports, which he had purchased in 1624 in order to complement his authority as lord admiral, to a close friend, the second earl of Suffolk. The bishop of Lincoln, John Williams, and the earl of Arundel, both of them opponents of the duke, were invited to York House and given a warm reception, while one of the duke's most outspoken critics in the lower house, Sir Thomas Wentworth, was created a baron. 
Buckingham arrived at Portsmouth, where the expedition was assembling, on 14 August, and established his headquarters at The Greyhound inn, near the dockyard. He kept in close touch with Charles, who had taken up residence at Southwick House, just outside the town. It was while he was preparing to ride over to the king, on 23 August, that Buckingham met his death. He went down into the hall of the inn, which was, as usual, crowded with people, and while he was talking to one of his colonels he was suddenly stabbed through the left breast. The assassin escaped in the confusion but later gave himself up. He was John Felton, a professional soldier who had served under Buckingham in Re and blamed him for lack of promotion and indebtedness. However, as he later explained, it was 'reading the remonstrance of the House of Parliament' that convinced him that by 'killing the Duke he should do his country great service' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. B 183, 191). 
Buckingham's corpse was carried back to London by coach, appropriately escorted, and lay in state at Wallingford House while preparations were made for the funeral. This took place at night on 18 September, and he was given his final resting place in Henry VII's chapel in Westminster Abbey, where, in 1634, his widow set up a tomb with effigies of herself and her husband by Hubert Le Sueur. In the following year she married Randal MacDonnell, second earl and first marquess of Antrim. Another monument was erected in Portsmouth parish church (later Portsmouth Cathedral) by Buckingham's sister, Susan, countess of Denbigh. 
Before leaving for Re, Buckingham had drawn up a will. The greater part of his estate went to his widow and his son, the second duke, but there were also bequests to relatives and to members of his household. It was not easy to honour these, for he died heavily in debt, with many of his lands mortgaged. His wealth had derived from the crown, but he had spent much of it in the king's service, and although Charles I appointed a special commission to try to sort out the dead duke's finances it was unable to clarify them beyond a certain point. The debts seem to have been paid off, presumably with Charles's assistance, within two years, but probate was not finally granted until March 1635. 
Buckingham was vilified during his lifetime, and historians have, in general, echoed the opinions of his contemporaries. One of the main charges against him, that of corruption, is clearly valid. He used his position to build up his power and wealth and was unscrupulous about the methods he and his associates employed. Because he was royal favourite the scale of his operations surpassed that of his contemporaries, but the quantitative difference should not be taken as implying a qualitative one. In early Stuart England there was a general assumption that the holding of public office opened the way to personal enrichment. The distinction between acceptable and unacceptable conduct was hazy, and varied with persons and circumstances. Buckingham has been linked with a decline in public morality, but there is no clear evidence that standards were slipping in James's reign. Moreover, if they were, the primary responsibility was the king's. 
Another charge against the duke is that he was essentially a playboy, who took from the state but gave nothing back. This is far from the case. His administration of the navy was effective, and the mounting of both the Cadiz and Re expeditions would have been impossible without his personal involvement. He used his own money and the credit he could command to fill the gaps left by the shortage of public funds, and he chose as his assistants men such as Sir John Coke and Edward Nicholas who were dedicated to the state's service. 
Buckingham has been accused of allowing personal considerations, such as his dislike of Olivares and Richelieu, to determine his attitude towards foreign powers in and after 1623, and of engaging England in unnecessary wars, conducted without due regard to the resources available. Yet there are good grounds for arguing that he had a clearer perception of the power struggle in Europe, and of how England should react to this, than most of his critics. The house of Austria, under the leadership of Philip IV and the emperor Ferdinand, was expanding its authority and, in the process, imposing an intolerant Catholicism on large parts of Europe. This was a threat to all non-Habsburg states, both protestant and Catholic, and the Hague league which he brought into existence was an appropriate response. 
Buckingham was correct in his assumption that the adhesion of France to the league was essential, if it was to succeed in its aims, and although it is clear, with hindsight, that he misread Richelieu, he was not alone in this respect. During his first years as Louis XIII's principal minister the cardinal cultivated ambiguity as a means of winning support. Only once he felt secure in office did he reveal himself as a determined opponent of Spain. It was Buckingham's misfortune that his attempts to bind France into the anti-Habsburg league coincided with this period of uncertainty in French politics -- a confusion compounded by the Huguenot revolt, which Charles and Buckingham felt bound to support, even though it held back France from participating in operations against the common enemy. 
It is true that Buckingham did not match his aims with his resources, but had he postponed action until assured of parliamentary support he would never have acted at all. The political nation wanted England to intervene effectively in the Thirty Years War, but its representatives in the Commons showed no understanding of the true costs involved or any willingness to vote the requisite sums. Given this situation, the best response, as James I instinctively understood, was to do nothing, but inaction at such a critical juncture diminished the prestige of the monarchy and raised doubts about its commitment to the protestant cause. Buckingham attempted to give the political nation what it demanded and showed that the administrative system of the 'ancien regime' could be goaded into activity as long as he was there to exert the necessary pressure. His assumption was that if only he could get England fully committed to the war, the country would unite behind the king and give him the moral and financial support he needed. This turned out to be a miscalculation and he became a scapegoat instead of a hero. Since part of the function of a favourite was to shield the monarch from blame for the actions of his government, Buckingham's fate was not inappropriate. 


@@@@@


doc= 28294


Villiers, George, second duke of Buckingham (1628-1687), politician and wit, was born on 30 January 1628 at Wallingford House, Westminster, the third child of George Villiers, first duke of Buckingham (1592-1628), courtier and royal favourite, and Lady Katherine Manners (later Katherine MacDonnell; 1603?-1649), eldest daughter of the earl of Rutland. His elder brother, Charles, died in infancy. Following the murder of their father in 1628 Buckingham and his posthumous younger brother, Lord Francis Villiers, were brought up with the king's children in the royal nursery at Richmond. In 1636 Buckingham was placed under the joint guardianship of the earls of Rutland and Newcastle. In 1641 he was sent up to Trinity College, Cambridge, and was admitted to the degree of MA on 5 March 1642. 
Buckingham's youth prevented his taking part in the military campaigns of the civil war, but he and Francis did attend the siege of Lichfield Close in April 1643. Parliament reacted by sequestering the lands and movable goods of the two brothers (10 February 1644). That same year the boys' interests were placed in the hands of Algernon Percy, the parliamentarian earl of Northumberland, and William Aylesbury, a royalist whose father had served the first duke. In 1646 Aylesbury took the two boys on a continental tour to complete their education: 'I was not thought of age sufficient to beare armes' said Buckingham later (BL, Add. MS 18979, fol. 286) while Northumberland lobbied parliament to have the sequestered goods returned. On 4 October 1647 the Commons lifted the sequestration order. Despite this, the two Villiers boys took up royalist arms in the second civil war, apparently emboldened by the Commons' reported insulting of the first duke. They joined the earls of Holland and Peterborough for action in Surrey. Parliament, with advance intelligence of their movements, secured all the strategic local outposts, and on 7 July 1648 Francis Villiers was killed in a skirmish near Kingston. Three days later Buckingham and Holland were intercepted at St Neots in Huntingdonshire; Holland was captured, while Buckingham escaped to the continent. 
The execution of Charles I on 30 January 1649 prompted many royalists to abandon the cause and compound for their confiscated estates, and Buckingham was no different. In April he approached parliament through his aristocratic sympathizers, Northumberland, Pembroke, and Denbigh, but could not accept the 'base submissions' required of him (O. Ogle and others, ed., 'Calendar of the Clarendon State Papers Preserved in the Bodleian Library', 5 vols., 1869-70, 2.7). Instead, he joined the future Charles II's court in exile, quickly establishing himself among the pragmatists who were urging the prince to form an alliance with the Scottish presbyterians. His advance in royal favour was both rapid and tangible. On 19 September 1649 he was created a knight of the Garter; on 25 January 1650 he was commissioned to raise and supply troops on the continent, and on 6 April was sworn to the privy council. Accompanying Charles to Scotland, he attached himself to their presbyterian host, the marquess of Argyll, and that way survived the Scots' purge of the royal household. In February 1651 a royalist-presbyterian army was mobilized, top-heavy in senior officers appointed to satisfy rival factions, in which Buckingham was commissioned to lead the English royalists. He was, nevertheless, dismayed to find that the Scot David Leslie outranked him, and although he, like Charles, escaped to the continent after the crushing defeat at Worcester (3 September 1651), the snub appears to have soured relations between the boyhood friends for many years to come. 
Barred from royal counsels, and with his financial credit exhausted, Buckingham's career now took a bewildering switchback course, glimpsed briefly and intermittently in the censorious correspondence of senior royalists-in-exile such as Hyde and Nicholas, and in the intelligence reports of Cromwell's agents. For the next five years he was variously reported as having made his peace with Cromwell, spying for Cromwell, and co-ordinating an ambitious scheme to unite France, the papacy, royalists, and republicans in the overthrow of the protectorate. In 1657, having the previous year failed in an attempt to reconcile himself with Charles, Buckingham returned to England and paid suit to Mary Fairfax (1638-1704), daughter and sole heir of Thomas, Lord Fairfax, the parliamentarian general. Mary, smitten with the duke, broke off her engagement to the earl of Chesterfield, and Buckingham and Mary were married on 15 September at Bolton Percy in Yorkshire. As Fairfax had been granted the major portion of the duke's confiscated estates, the marriage was a blatantly opportunist move to secure his inheritance. Because the Fairfax family were known to be in contact with royalist agents Cromwell feared subterfuge, and ordered Buckingham's arrest. The following spring this was commuted to house arrest, and when in August he broke this, he was placed in the Tower. Brian Fairfax later suggested that only Cromwell's death, on 3 September, prevented the duke's execution (BL, Harleian MS 6862, fol. 10), but no such warrant was issued, and it is most unlikely that the protector would have alienated Fairfax in this way. The duke was released on 21 February 1659, Fairfax standing security of $20,000. 
The council now allowed Buckingham to retire to Fairfax's Nunappleton estate in Yorkshire. He was thus able to join the force that Fairfax raised in January 1660, an action which facilitated General Monck's unchallenged passage to London. Even so, Buckingham received no more than a royal pardon at the Restoration, and achieved the distinction of being the only former privy councillor still alive not to be resworn to the new council. He attended parliament regularly throughout the summer of 1660, concerned as he was with his petition, presented on 13 June, for the recovery of his estate. Early the following year he made overtures to Lord Chancellor Hyde (later created earl of Clarendon), who replied soothingly. Charles had also relaxed his hostility, perhaps through the agency of his latest mistress, Buckingham's young cousin Barbara Palmer ('nee' Villiers). As a result, he was admitted as a gentleman of the bedchamber in August 1661, and on 30 October was sworn in as lord lieutenant of the West Riding. 
The West Riding lieutenancy had attached to it more deputies than any other county, and therefore promised Buckingham extensive local patronage. Within months he had created a loyal clientele of youngish, politically inexperienced deputies, among whom Sir Thomas Osborne (later earl of Danby) and George Savile (later marquess of Halifax) were to advance farthest. He also lobbied for the presidency of the council of the north, the regional court whose reconstitution after the Restoration was widely predicted. However, the rival candidature of Lord Strafford split opinion both in Whitehall and the north, and Charles seems to have decided that the renewal of the court was not worth the factionalism it created. The duke was readmitted to the privy council on 28 April 1662. He was not, though, appointed to any important conciliar committees and made only a token appearance throughout the first few years of his membership. Nor, at this stage, was he active in the House of Lords, excepting the debates upon the 'Uniformity Bill' in early 1662, when he opposed Clarendon's proviso allowing the king to dispense with the act in order to exempt individual ministers from observing certain rites. He was studiously ambivalent when, in July 1663, the earl of Bristol attempted to impeach Clarendon. Instead, he entertained the court with impersonations of the ageing lord chancellor, and tried to anticipate a shift in the king's romantic liaisons by sponsoring Frances Stuart as a rival to his cousin (now countess of Castlemaine). Frances, although fascinated by Buckingham's skill in building castles of playing cards, proved too virtuous to oblige his wider plan. 
The duke's first real chance to advertise his abilities, and to expunge the republican taint that his return to England in 1657 had created, occurred in autumn 1663, when news reached London of a major republican conspiracy in Yorkshire. The duke journeyed to York, and requested a commission to raise a horse regiment. This was unduly alarmist, since government spies had already infiltrated the claques, but three rabble-like gatherings of dissidents did take place on 12 October, and this appeared to vindicate his caution. He was instructed to oversee the prosecution of the ringleaders, and some twenty men were hanged in Yorkshire early the following year. The Anglo-Dutch War represented another opportunity for him to display his martial prowess. In April 1665 he joined the fleet, but quarrelled with York and Sandwich and was ordered ashore. He felt the humiliation keenly: 'I have soe long accustomed to bee ill used, that I may very well begin to thinke that I deserve noe better, and that it is high time for me to leave off the persuing of those things that I have had soe little success in' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 34, fols. 160-61). He retired from political life completely for the next few months, not once attending the autumn 1665 session of parliament. 
In 1666 Buckingham fell in love with Anna-Maria Brudenell, countess of Shrewsbury, a society beauty who had already acquired a reputation as a 'femme fatale'. 'I would take a wager she might have a man killed for her every day, and she would only hold her head the higher for it' was Count Grammont's observation (A. Hamilton, 'Memoirs of Count Grammont', 2 vols., 1908, 2.3). Their affair was to have tragic consequences, but in the first instance it seems to have reawakened Buckingham's taste for political intrigue. On 5 October, two weeks into the new parliamentary session, he took his seat in the Lords and introduced a 'wild motion' that those guilty of embezzling public funds be executed for treason (Pepys). Thereafter, he attended Westminster with unusual assiduity, was named to all the most important standing committees, and chaired several inter-house conferences. Meanwhile, he courted aggrieved and energetic MPs in the Commons, notably Sir Richard Temple, Sir Edward Seymour, Sir Robert Howard, and William Garway. These men filibustered debates on supply for the king, challenged a ruling made by Clarendon in his legal capacity as lord chancellor, and promoted a bill to ban the import of Irish cattle, passage of which would undermine the government's Irish administration and deprive the king of customs duties. Buckingham was its leading sponsor in the Lords, where tempers flared. On 25 October Lord Ossory, son of the lord lieutenant of Ireland, challenged him to a duel for insulting his countrymen ('whoever was against the bill had either an Irish interest or an Irish understanding'); both were sent briefly to the Tower to cool off (Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 35, fols. 109, 111, 115, 117; 'JHL', 12.18-20, 22). Charles now lost his patience with Buckingham and ordered the intelligence services to collect incriminating evidence against him. On 25 February 1667 a warrant for the duke's arrest was issued on the grounds that he had both encouraged seamen to mutiny and had commissioned a horoscope of the king's birth -- a treasonable offence, since it presupposed the encompassing of the king's death. Buckingham went into hiding, while Whitehall learned that many 'thought his crime small, or none at all' ('CSP dom.', '1667', 11). In early summer 1667 the devastating Dutch raid along the Medway damaged the government's standing beyond repair, achieving in a few hours what Buckingham and his allies had laboured over throughout the winter. Confident now that the government would not press charges, he emerged from hiding. He was conveyed to the Tower in June 1667, in what became a triumphal procession -- dining as he did at a tavern before a crowd of applauding onlookers. He was released in the following month after a perfunctory interrogation that he treated with contempt. Pepys called his enlargement 'one of the strangest instances of the fool's play with which all public things are done in this age' (Pepys, 8.342). On 23 September Buckingham was restored to the privy council and the bedchamber. 
In restoring him to favour Charles was effectively inviting Buckingham to employ his populist talents on the government's behalf. Thus, ten days into the new parliamentary session the duke's allies in the Commons impeached the now dismissed Clarendon. When the issue came before the Lords, Buckingham led the protest (20 November) at the house's decision not to commit the earl upon an unspecified charge of treason. It was rumoured that Charles would break the legal deadlock by proroguing parliament and trying the earl before a court of twenty-four selected peers, presided over by Buckingham. Although it is unlikely that the duke, who had no legal expertise, would have chaired such a court, the threat was sufficiently real for Clarendon to take ship and flee to France. 
Buckingham did not himself gain high office from Clarendon's disgrace: he lacked administrative experience and was probably content to operate in a more casual advisory role. His position was, nevertheless, formalized over the next nine months. On 2 November 1667 he was recommissioned as lord lieutenant of the West Riding. More important, on 31 January 1668 he was added to the committee for foreign affairs, an inner cabinet that met weekly on Mondays to debate the most sensitive policy matters. Finally, in the summer he bought from the duke of Albemarle, for the colossal sum of $20,000, the post of master of the horse, a position with sentimental value, since his father had held the post half a century earlier. The duke's security in royal affections is also suggested by his immunity from prosecution and disgrace following his duel, on 16 January 1668, with his cuckold, the earl of Shrewsbury. The status of the combatants, the number who fought (three on each side), and the bloody outcome (one killed, one seriously wounded) combined to make it the most notorious duel of the reign. The affair embarrassed the government on the eve of a fresh parliamentary session. As Pepys sarcastically put it, 'This will make the world think that the king hath good councillors about him' (Pepys, 9.27). But it did not deflect business. Charles pardoned the duellists (27 January), and parliament made no reference to the episode until 18 March, when Shrewsbury, wounded and bedridden, died. Buckingham responded by moving the countess into one of his London residences, Wallingford House. 
All the same the duke's efforts to manage parliament in 1668 were strikingly unsuccessful. His attempt to introduce legislation on behalf of protestant nonconformists -- his client Sir Richard Temple terming it a policy 'by which the presbyterians are absolutely gained and the nation satisfied' (BL, Stowe MS 304, fol. 88'v') -- was a serious misreading of the mood at Westminster. In the Lords, senior churchmen spoke against the rumoured bills to such effect that none was presented. The duke absented himself from Westminster for much of the second half of the session, and when he returned, on 21 April, it was to drive on a jurisdictional dispute between the two houses in the hope of wrecking a session that had turned against him. For the next few years he consistently urged Charles to dismiss the assembly. When supply was eventually voted, on 2 May 1668, Charles was bemused to see that it was Clarendon's friends, not Buckingham's, who had forwarded his business most effectively. 
Buckingham was excluded from the secret negotiations that led to the secret treaty of Dover (22 May 1670). This committed Charles to war with the Dutch, and to declare himself Roman Catholic, in return for a French subsidy, an undertaking by France not to attack Spain, and a suspension of Louis XIV's shipbuilding programme. In July 1670 Charles sent Buckingham to Versailles to treat with Louis XIV for an 'official' alliance. The resulting treaty (21 December) omitted the Catholic clause, and was signed by all the principal cabinet officers: Clifford, Arlington, Buckingham, Ashley, and Lauderdale (whose combined initials provide the resonant but misleading acronym Cabal). Buckingham rarely attended Westminster during the 1671 session of parliament. His illegitimate child with the countess of Shrewsbury died in infancy, and was buried in the Villiers family vault at Westminster Abbey on 12 March 1671 (which caused an outcry). In the summer he diligently and successfully canvassed to be chancellor of Cambridge University (11 May). His main concern, as ever, was to cover himself in military glory. In January 1672 he pressed for the war with the Dutch to be started with an unprovoked attack on Cadzand. On the outbreak of war he took a small vessel and joined the fleet, but, as in 1665, was swiftly recalled. His commission to lead a regiment of foot (19 June) was some compensation. 
There is some evidence that Buckingham was now alerted to the existence of the secret treaty by the duke of York (W. D. Christie, 'A Life of Anthony Ashley Cooper, First Earl of Shaftesbury, 1621-83', 2 vols., 1871, 2.85-6). To placate him Charles attached Buckingham to the embassy to The Hague (June 1672), which achieved the limited goal of ensuring that William of Orange did not detach either ally. The sluggish war effort and the unparliamentary nature of Charles's declaration of indulgence (1672) provoked great unity of opposition within parliament when it reconvened in February 1673. According to Burnet, Buckingham advised Charles to use the military to eject the recalcitrant MPs ('Bishop Burnet's History of my Own Time', pt 2, 'The Reign of Charles II', ed. O. Airy, 2 vols., 1897-1900, 2.11). The duke was commissioned lieutenant-general on 13 May 1673, junior only to York and Prince Rupert. However, his association with increasingly unpopular policies undermined his recruitment activities that summer. To distance himself from charges of popery he took the sacrament in 'almost all' the West Riding churches (W. D. Christie, ed., 'Letters Addressed to Sir Joseph Williamson... 1673-4', 2 vols., CS, new ser., 1874, 1.25, 57-8), but was still short of men when the army mustered at Blackheath in July. When a Huguenot count was promoted above him he refused to serve. 
Aware now of his exclusion from influence Buckingham turned to mischief-making. In November it was reported that he sought censure in parliament, if only to gain a platform from which to incriminate Arlington: 'contented to loose an eye himself to leave his enemie none' (W. D. Christie, ed., 'Letters Addressed to Sir Joseph Williamson... 1673-4', 2 vols., CS, new ser., 2.62). At the same time he took the precaution of obtaining a royal pardon for all offences committed up to the present (granted 19 November). On the opening day of the new session, 7 January 1674, the young earl of Shrewsbury's family petitioned against the 'wicked and scandalous life' led by Buckingham and the countess of Shrewsbury ('JHL', 12.599). The house ordered him not to converse with or cohabit with the countess on pain of a $10,000 fine. Correctly fearing a Commons address for his removal, which, unlike an impeachment charge, would give him no opportunity to defend himself, the duke requested, and was granted, permission to address the house himself. His cryptic, evasive, and frivolous defence impressed no one, and after two days' debate the Commons duly addressed Charles for the duke's removal from all his employments, and from his presence and councils forever. Charles agreed. 
Even before he had been officially dismissed Buckingham was noted as having joined a cabal of disgruntled peers who met at the presbyterian Lord Holles's house. On 21 April 1675, after a year of retirement, he joined Shaftesbury and twenty-one other peers in protesting that the government's non-resisting bill encroached upon the privileges of the house. The bishops, bloc voters for the bill, were ridiculed by Buckingham in a speech of 'eloquent and well placed nonsense' (A. Marvell, 'The Poems and Letters of Andrew Marvell', ed. H. M. Margoliouth, 3rd edn, 2 vols., 1971, 2.341-3). In November 1675 the duke delivered a short speech to the Lords asking leave to introduce a private bill advocating toleration for protestant dissenters. This was both a reply to Charles's request, made at the start of the session, that ways be found to secure the protestant religion, and a declaration of solidarity with government critics. The bill was never presented as Charles prorogued the session on 22 November, but the gesture had been made. 
In 1676 the duke divided his time between the new country mansion he was building at Cliveden, near Maidenhead, and the City of London, where he was involved in corporation politics. On 4 October Whitehall received intelligence that Buckingham and the Leveller John Wildman had drunk a health to a new parliament, 'and to all the honest men of it who would give the king no money' ('CSP dom.', '1676-7', 352). The king's decision not to call parliament in 1676 determined Buckingham's next move. On the opening day of the next session, 15 February 1677, he delivered a long speech arguing that the prorogation had 'ipso facto' rendered parliament dissolved, since there existed two unrepealed medieval statutes decreeing that a parliament be called at least every twelve months. 'Statutes are not like women, for they are not one jot the worse for being old', he explained to their lordships (Phipps, 104-12). Despite its wit and ingenuity, the speech was a major tactical blunder. The campaign was never likely to commend itself to the Commons for the simple reason that MPs, unlike peers, would have the expense and uncertainty of re-election. Accordingly, the Commons voted not to debate the issue. In the Lords, Buckingham and his fellow dissolutionists (Shaftesbury, Salisbury, and Wharton) were required to seek the pardon of the house, and, when they refused, were sent to the Tower (16 February). As in 1667, the intelligence service collected evidence of Buckingham's subversion, but the duke's courtier friends, Middlesex, Rochester, and Nell Gwyn, together, surprisingly, with Lord Treasurer Danby (BL, Add. MS 28051, fol. 41), persuaded Charles to relax the duke's confinement; on 5 August 1677 he obtained a full release. 
For the next few years Buckingham was a marginal figure, dependent upon payments from the French government, who thought him a usefully popular figure in London. The Popish Plot allegations of 1678 briefly revived his parliamentary career. On 28 October 1678, shortly after the mysterious death of Sir Edmund Godfrey, the London JP who had taken Titus Oates's depositions, Buckingham suggested a special subcommittee to investigate the supposed murder, and proceeded to nominate government critics such as Shaftesbury, Halifax, and Winchester to sit alongside him on it. The duke was subsequently invited to manage important inter-house conferences upon the security of the realm and the protestant religion. The following year his scope for action was circumscribed by a complicated vendetta with his former client, Danby, and was absent from Westminster for almost the entire session of the new parliament, which met in early March 1679. In August and September he electioneered on behalf of whig candidates in areas where he possessed land and influence, thereby earning a dressing down from the king (Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 228, fol. 121). Next, he was accused of sodomy -- an increasingly common political charge, as it carried the same penalty as for treason, and therefore allowed the crown to dispose of the defendant's estate should the prosecution succeed. In May 1680 a grand jury brought a verdict of 'ignoramus', after which Buckingham successfully sued his accusers, who included the spy-adventurer Colonel Blood, for libel. 
Ill health prevented Buckingham from attending the much prorogued parliament until 22 November 1680. It is a measure of his diminishing sway that he survived the tory 'revanche' of 1681-5. Only when James II succeeded Charles in 1685 did Buckingham return to public life. He attended almost every day of the new session of parliament, and published a religious tract implicitly advocating toleration for Roman Catholics as well as for protestants. He spent the last two years of his life in retirement on his Yorkshire estates, dying on 16 April 1687 of a chill caught on the hunting field -- not, as Pope had it, in 'the worst inn's worst room' ('Moral Essays', epistle 3, 1.299), but in the house of a tenant at Kirkby Moorside. On 7 June he was interred in the Villiers family vault in St George's Chapel, Westminster Abbey. 
Legend has it that Buckingham died a bankrupt, having frittered away a splendid inheritance: 'In squandring wealth was his peculiar art' (J. Dryden, 'Absalom and Achitophel', line 559, printed in G. de F. Lord and others, 'Poems on Affairs of State: Augustan Satirical Verse, 1660-1714', 7 vols., 1963-75, 2.455-93). His inheritance was indeed splendid, comprising as it did major estates in Yorkshire, Buckinghamshire, Rutland, Leicestershire, and Lincolnshire, large properties in Essex and Herefordshire, two London mansions (York House and Chelsea House), and an enormous art collection, the paintings in which were valued by parliament in 1645 at $20,000. The estate was dismantled by parliament in April 1650. Fairfax was the chief beneficiary, gaining York House and most of the Rutland and Yorkshire holdings; the rest of the duke's lands were put up for sale on 16 July 1651. Buckingham's marriage to Mary Fairfax in 1657 had made him joint heir to all the lands granted to Fairfax, and in summer 1660 he regained his inheritance by parliamentary petition. 
A survey of his English lands, drawn up in 1668, showed an annual rental of $19,306 18's'. 6died In the 1660s his policy was to sell his outlying, hard to administer properties and mortgage the rest to secure large-scale loans. This allowed him to meet extraordinary expenditure such as the mastership of the horse ($20,000 in 1668), and the building of the Cliveden estate in the 1670s. His principal creditor was the duke of Albemarle, who loaned a massive $40,000 before his death in 1670. By 1671 nearly all Buckingham's estate was under mortgage, some properties three or four times over. In August 1671 he created a freehold trust to administer the estate and retain all profits in return for an annual allowance of $5000, an arrangement which persisted until the death in 1704 of his widow, Mary. Contemporaries assumed that this abdication of responsibility revealed the duke's financial plight, but there is reason to suppose that it was no more than a legal device to protect the estate from escheating to the crown should Buckingham be prosecuted for treason (Melton, 307-13). Had the duke fathered an heir he might have shown more respect for landed wealth, as opposed to monetary wealth; as it was, he died both without heir and intestate, obliging the trustees to alienate the remainder of his estate. 
Buckingham enjoyed the loyalty and affection of a wide and talented circle of friends, thanks largely to his own social and conversational gifts. 'He was the finest gentleman of person and wit I think I ever saw', wrote Sir John Reresby ('The Memoirs of Sir John Reresby', ed. A. Browning, 1940, 40). The duke's boyhood governor, the earl of Newcastle, was a strong influence, for Buckingham soon came to share Newcastle's enthusiasm for plays, poetry, music, and scientific inquiry. Grammont held that Buckingham had a fine singing voice, while Pepys thought his 'musique' the 'best in towne' (Pepys, 9.13). The duke's scientific interests grew out of his belief in empiricism and rational thought. He was a fellow of the Royal Society (1661-85), installed a laboratory in Wallingford House, and even had one fitted in his chambers when he was sent to the Tower in 1677. His efforts to convert flint glass into high quality glass yielded a successful glass making factory at Vauxhall. He also attended an astrological discussion group run by John Digby, and it was at one of these that he met the lawyer-cum-astrologer John Heydon, whose horoscope drafting was to embarrass Buckingham so severely in 1667. 
The duke's intellectual household was ornamented by liberal Anglican scholars such as Martin Clifford (author of 'A Treatise of Humane Reason', 1672) and Thomas Sprat (propagandist for the Royal Society and later bishop of Rochester). Clifford was a friend from Buckingham's undergraduate days at Cambridge; in the early 1660s he was acting as the duke's accountant, and became a trustee of his estate in 1675. Sprat's career pursued a similar path: he entered the duke's service soon after the Restoration as a chaplain, and like Clifford was a trustee of the duke's estate. He was one of the first men to be told of Buckingham's death in 1687. In drafts of the duke's will that were never formalized Clifford and Sprat were both beneficiaries, as was Sir Charles Wolseley, the former Cromwellian courtier who in 1668 wrote a pamphlet advocating liberty of conscience. In contrast to contemporary rumour Buckingham did not patronize nonconformist ministers to any great extent. His close epistolary friendship, in the last few years of his life, with the Quaker William Penn was altogether different, since Penn, as the confidant of James II, was effectively the patron in the relationship. On the other hand, the duke had a natural affinity for the political 'demi-monde'. In the 1650s he consorted with the Levellers John Lilburne, Edward Sexby, and John Wildman, the Irish Jesuit Peter Talbot, and the Catholic convert Ellis Leighton. The association with Wildman and Leighton endured into the 1680s. Leighton had a gift for diplomatic intrigue and became the duke's agent in the latter's various dealings with the French government, while Wildman combined a flair for radical solutions with a sound business brain. He became a trustee for the duke's estate in 1675, and was almost certainly the duke's point of contact with London radicals such as Slingsby Bethel and Francis Jenks in the late 1670s. 
Socially the duke felt most at home with sophisticated but politically unambitious courtier wits such as John Wilmot, earl of Rochester, Charles Sackville, earl of Dorset, Sir George Etherege, and Sir Charles Sedley. Rochester helped secure Buckingham's release from the Tower in 1677, and they spent much of the summer and autumn together. As an undergraduate at Cambridge, Buckingham befriended the poet Abraham Cowley, ten years his senior, and the two were sufficiently close for Cowley to act as best man to Buckingham in 1657. After the Restoration he employed Cowley as a bailiff on his manor at Garrendon, and when Cowley died, in 1667, put up a large sum of money for an elaborate iron and stone memorial. The satirist Samuel Butler, author of 'Hudibras', was part of the duke's entourage in France in 1670, and became his secretary when Buckingham returned to Cambridge University as chancellor. The duke was also friendly with Charles de Saint-Evremond, with whom he collaborated in a court play, 'Sir Politic Would-Be' (1662), and, through Saint-Evremond, with the poet Edmund Waller. Finally, the duke had an acquaintance with the playwright William Wycherley, for in 1672 he made him a lieutenant in the regiment he never got to lead. 
Buckingham's literary reputation was sewn soon after the Restoration and was embroidered by a series of editions and miscellanies published in the hundred years or so after his death. The first, 'Miscellaneous Works, Written by his Grace George, Late Duke of Buckingham', edited by T. Brown, appeared in 1704. Subsequent editions by other editors followed in 1705, 1715, 1752, 1754, and 1775. These eighteenth-century collections exploited Buckingham's name to introduce readers to writings by a variety of Restoration wits: most of the items printed were not in fact written by him. He then suffered two hundred years of editorial neglect, until in 1985 Christine Phipps produced an edition of his non-dramatic works. 
The duke's principal literary claim to attention is his satire upon contemporary heroic drama, 'The Rehearsal', which showed how well his gift for caricature and mimicry translated to both stage and page. The play was several years in the writing, and was apparently a collaborative effort with Martin Clifford, Thomas Sprat, and Samuel Butler. When eventually it was first performed, at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, on 7 December 1671, it exhibited both literary targets (Dryden) and political (Arlington). 'The Rehearsal' was immediately popular, being published five times in his own lifetime, and performed nearly three hundred times until 1777, during which its lead role (Bayes) was taken by the greatest actors of the day such as Colley Cibber and David Garrick. The appearance in 1779 of an even better satire, Sheridan's 'The Critic', effectively ended its run, but 'The Rehearsal' retains its importance as the pioneer of a tradition of dramatic burlesque upon the English stage. 

'The Chances' was Buckingham's adaptation of John Fletcher's comedy of the same name. This was probably the play that Pepys saw in early 1667. The text was published in 1682, at the time of its next performance. A slightly bowdlerized version was revived by Garrick in 1773, and performed eleven times that season. It was playing as recently as 1962, with Laurence Olivier in the role of Don John. The play's endurance is not surprising, for most critics agree that it far surpasses Fletcher's original. Even Dryden praised Buckingham's comic enrichment of the character of Don John. 'The Restoration, or, Right will Take Place' was Buckingham's adaptation of Beaumont's and Fletcher's 'Philaster', and was aimed at his sometime political ally, Shaftesbury. It is unclear whether or not the play was performed. Buckingham is also credited as being co-author, with Sir Robert Howard, of 'The Country Gentleman' (1669). In fact, the duke's contribution came after the play was substantially complete, and helped to render it unperformable: he inserted a buffoon of a character, Sir Cautious Trouble-All, who was clearly modelled upon the naval treasurer, Sir William Coventry. Coventry heard of the impertinence and challenged Buckingham to a duel, whereupon he was deprived of his office. The play, which was due to open on 27 February 1669, was halted and its text was not discovered and identified until the 1960s. An edition edited by Scouten and Hume was published in 1976. 
Except for the poems written into his commonplace book (Phipps, 163-227), no holograph manuscripts of Buckingham's poetry survive, and the dozen or so pieces generally ascribed to him (Phipps, 141-53) are not especially distinguished. The commonplace book also contains squibs, aphorisms, gnomic couplets, lampoons of political opponents such as Clarendon and Dryden, and an unfinished play. 
The duke's prose works (Phipps, 81-137) carried a political purpose, or at least allowed him to turn political resentment to a creative end. 'The Battle of Sedgmoor', written in July 1685, was a one-act farce directed against the earl of Feversham, the French-born general of the royalist forces at the battle. Several of the duke's parliamentary speeches were printed (1668, 1674, 1675, and 1677). Of these, his November 1675 speech, requesting leave to introduce a toleration bill, was perhaps the most influential: it was published with a speech of Shaftesbury's in a single pamphlet, sold well in the London coffee houses, and attracted comment in the provinces. 'A letter to Sir Thomas Osborn... upon the reading of a book called 'The present interest of England stated'' (1672) was written to justify the Anglo-Dutch War. It took the form of a reply to a pamphlet of Slingsby Bethel's published the year before, and argued that since the Dutch were England's greatest commercial rivals, they were also her natural enemies in war. 'To Mr Martin Clifford on his Humane Reason' (1672) proclaimed Buckingham's faith in 'reason, and the interpretation of Scripture'. It could have been an oblique criticism of the declaration of indulgence, promulgated that same year, for in the essay Buckingham explicitly excluded Roman Catholics from his proposed toleration. By contrast, 'A Short Discourse upon the Reasonableness of Man's Having a Religion, or Worship of God' (1685), implicitly embraces the desirability of toleration for Catholics: there was no mention of 'protestants', only 'Christians'. The paper was apparently written at the behest of Buckingham's Quaker friend William Penn, with the specific aim of currying favour with the new king, the Roman Catholic James II. Theologically lightweight, it nevertheless provoked a lively controversy among theologians, to which Buckingham contributed a brief, humorous defence, 'The duke of Buckingham's letter to the unknown author of... A short answer to the duke of Buckingham's paper' (1685). The hoped-for return to court was not, however, forthcoming. 
Buckingham's career reveals both the possibilities and limitations of friendship with the king. Charles II usually forgave his indiscretions, but from their first falling out, at Worcester in 1651, he never really trusted him. As a result, the duke's political and military ambitions were constantly thwarted. His status as the leading non-royal peer, and his genuine talents for friendship and intrigue, made him a powerful and inspiring patron: his clientele was the most diversely brilliant and loyal of the period, and an apt reflection of his own broadminded intellect. His satirical gifts brought him sporadic popularity at court, in parliament, and on the streets of the capital. They also shaped his best writing. Ultimately, however, the man who had been brought up with two future kings of England expected more. Buckingham died an embittered man. 


@@@@@


doc= 28295


Villiers, George Bussy, fourth earl of Jersey (1735-1805), courtier, was born on 9 June 1735 and baptized on 6 July at St George's, Hanover Square, London, the second but only surviving son of William Villiers, third earl of Jersey (died 1769), and Anne (died 1762), daughter of Scrope Egerton, first duke of Bridgewater, and widow of Wriothesley Russell, third duke of Bedford. Styled Viscount Villiers from 1742, he was educated at home by his tutor, the future poet laureate William Whitehead, and then from 1754 to 1756 he and Lord Nuneham toured Germany, Switzerland, and Italy, Whitehead acting as tutor to both young men. In 1756 he succeeded his uncle Thomas Villiers as MP for Tamworth, a seat he retained until 1765. He then sat first as MP for Aldborough, Yorkshire (1765-8), and later for Dover from 1768 until his elevation to the peerage on his father's death on 28 August 1769. A close friend of the duke of Grafton, he followed his political lead in both the Commons and Lords. He first held office as a lord of the Admiralty in the duke of Newcastle's ministry from 1761 but was dismissed in autumn 1762 for voting against Lord Bute's peace preliminaries. He returned to office as vice-chamberlain in Rockingham's ministry in 1765, and held a succession of court posts until 1800, apart from during the period 1777-82 when he was in opposition. He was sworn of the privy council on 11 July 1765 and was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1787. 
In the month that Villiers took his seat in the Lords as fourth earl of Jersey he married, on 26 March 1770, Frances (1753-1821) ['see 'Villiers, Frances], daughter of Philip Twysden, bishop of Raphoe, and Frances Carter. They had at least ten children but his wife was notoriously unfaithful and had a string of affairs, the most significant of which was her liaison with the prince of Wales from 1793. It was undoubtedly through her influence that Jersey was appointed master of the horse to the prince of Wales in 1795 and after she had fallen out of favour in 1799, Jersey was dismissed from his post in January 1800. At court Jersey gained a reputation as a fop and was noted for his ostentatious etiquette that bordered on sycophancy; Elizabeth Montagu dubbed him 'the Prince of Maccaronies'. 
Jersey died suddenly, probably from a heart attack, on 22 August 1805 while walking with his eldest son, George Villiers ['see under 'Villiers, Sarah Sophia Child-], near his son's house, Prospect Lodge, in Tunbridge Wells. He was buried at the family seat, Middleton Stoney, Oxfordshire, and was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 28296


George Child-Villiers, fifth earl of Jersey (1773-1859)], who caught the heiress; she married him in London on 23 May 1804. 


@@@@@


doc= 28297


Villiers, George William Frederick, fourth earl of Clarendon (1800-1870), politician, was born in Upper Grosvenor Street, London, on 26 January 1800, the eldest son of George Villiers (1759-1827), third son of the first earl, and his wife, Theresa (1775-1856), daughter of John Parker, first Lord Boringdon. Thomas Hyde Villiers and Charles Pelham Villiers, politicians, and Henry Montagu Villiers, bishop, were his younger brothers. His father, Pittite MP for Warwick from 1792 to 1801, supported a numerous family on the income from a string of sinecures bestowed in the classical eighteenth-century fashion on the cadet of a house whose wealth was not equal to its rank. His mother was the dominant influence on her children; her strength of character, understanding of the world, and ready wit compensated for the weakness and misfortunes of her husband as a gentleman farmer. The younger George Villiers was educated at Christ's Hospital, probably as the private pupil of a master and not on the foundation, and at St John's College, Cambridge, matriculating in Michaelmas 1816 and graduating MA in 1820. 
'... the learning of languages is the only thing I have any turn for', wrote the undergraduate Villiers to his only sister, Theresa ['see 'Lewis, (Maria) Theresa], who, after the death of her first husband, Thomas Henry Lister, a minor literary figure, married her brother's future cabinet colleague, George Cornewall Lewis (Maxwell, 1.17). She was the sibling closest to him, the recipient of a stream of affectionate, revealing letters. A subvention from his uncle John, the third earl, enabled Villiers to enter diplomacy as an unpaid attache at St Petersburg; but anxiety to provide for himself and assist his family led him to describe his otherwise agreeable years in Russia (1820-23) as 'wasted... I [am]... unable to make or improve acquaintances that may be useful to one' (ibid., 34). The warm friendship of his ambassador, Sir Charles Bagot, the patronage of George Canning, his father's friend, parental links with the court, and George IV's pleasure when shown one of his amusing, apparently well informed letters, combined to raise Villiers to a commissionership of customs -- a dramatic change of fortune still possible in the last years of the unreformed parliament. Financially secure for life, he shouldered his dead father's responsibilities and his debts. Over nearly ten years (1824-33) he proved an able administrator with a talent for pleasing his political masters. Sent to Ireland in 1827-9 to effect a departmental reorganization, he became close to the cautious liberalizing viceroy of the day, Lord Anglesey. This experience on the eve of Catholic emancipation confirmed the Canningite toryism that made him a supporter of parliamentary reform and Lord Grey's ministry, in which his brother Hyde (died 1832), to whose heavy election expenses he contributed, held minor office. Like many other reformers, he was alarmed by the spread of what he regarded as subversive ideas and by the violence of the popular agitation. Together with his friend Charles Greville, the diarist, he attempted to start a newspaper which they thought of calling the 'Anti-Radical', but failed to raise the money for the venture ('Greville Memoirs', 2.94-5). His partisanship, and a successful commercial mission to France (1831) undertaken jointly with the Benthamite John Bowring, commended Villiers to Palmerston, another Canningite, who appointed him minister to Spain (August 1833). Although they were not always on the best of terms, Villiers never ceased to feel grateful to Palmerston: 'when I was a commissioner of customs and miserable at so passing my life but too poor to resign, he made me minister at Madrid... and from that moment I got on' (Kennedy, 135). He had put security first: now he was free to pursue ambition. 
Villiers was young for his important post. He replaced a tory, recalled as unsympathetic to Spanish liberalism. Palmerston set great store by his policy of integrating Spain and Portugal with the western entente of Britain and Louis Philippe's France; Villiers was his instrument in circumstances considerably more difficult than the British foreign secretary realized. Palmerston's success in concluding the Quadruple Alliance of 1834 did not, as Villiers hoped, overawe the reactionary Carlist rebels against the succession of the infant Isabella II and the regency of her mother, Queen Maria Cristina, Ferdinand VII's widow identified with the Spanish liberals. The First Carlist War (1833-40) involved Villiers in an incessant struggle to save the liberal regime from collapse under the strain of military defeat, factional strife, and disordered finances. His task was the harder because direct British assistance was limited to the deployment of warships and the landing of a few marines. The British Legion of volunteers paid in arrears by the Spanish government and commanded by the radical soldier and MP de Lacy Evans was a doubtful military asset. 'The affairs of the Legion almost drive me mad', confessed Villiers as he wrestled with its problems, which included, at times, a reluctance to face the enemy ('Palmerston: Private Correspondence', 631). Anglo-French co-operation in Spain, of which much had been expected, quickly gave way to rivalry for influence. In his private letters to Palmerston, Villiers raged against the 'selfish and inhuman policy' he ascribed to the French king (ibid., 758). The British minister played a significant, and occasionally crucial, part in ensuring the survival of the regime. He saw quite clearly that the Spanish people were indifferent or hostile to liberal institutions which he believed essential to their well-being. He would have preferred to administer his political medicines 'in small doses and well disguised or they will all be 'brought up'', but the pressures of the time were too great (ibid., 227). 
Villiers backed Juan Mendizabal, recalled from exile in London, the one politician with the intelligence and the will to make the liberal revolution succeed. Villiers persuaded the regent to make him prime minister in January 1836, although well aware of his weaknesses -- 'good intentions enough to lay down the whole of Hell with new pavement' ('Palmerston: Private Correspondence', 363). The nationalization of monastic property that followed was a turning point, giving purchasers a vested interest in defeating the Carlists. In Palmerstonian mode, Villiers had no qualms about interfering in Spain's internal affairs. The liberals' eventual victory in the civil war owed something to his relentless badgering of the politicians in Madrid, who neglected to pay and equip their armies. 
Spain was the making of Villiers. While the fruits of his commercial and financial diplomacy were disappointing for British exporters and investors in Spanish bonds, he had acquired a considerable reputation at home, where whigs and radicals took a proprietary interest in Spanish liberalism. His published letters from Madrid reflect the personal charm, restless energy, and talent for intrigue characteristic of him. Soon fluent in Spanish, the handsome British minister was a popular figure in the society of the Spanish capital, especially with the ladies. His Edwardian biographer records that when the countess de Montijo was asked whether her daughter Eugenie, the future empress of the French, was really Villiers's child, she replied, after a pause for thought, 'Les dates ne correspondent pas' (Maxwell, 2.91). 
'... an independent income -- that's the only wish I have', wrote Villiers in 1837, a wish granted when he succeeded his uncle as the fourth earl of Clarendon (22 December 1838) and the owner of some 2000 acres in Hertfordshire and Warwickshire (Maxwell, 1.139). He was then about to propose, through his sister Theresa, to Lady Catherine Barham (died 1874), the wealthy widow of John Foster Barham and daughter of Walter James Grimston, first earl of Verulam, whom he married on 4 June 1839. Not a love match on either side, it was nevertheless a happy marriage from which six children were born. Lady Clarendon was neither beautiful nor brilliant, but she understood her clever husband and supported his political career. He craved 'the interest of business and the excitement of responsibility... indispensable to me' (ibid., 157). Before he left Madrid he was offered first the post of governor-in-chief of British North America in succession to Lord Durham (February 1839) and on his return political office outside the cabinet, as master of the Royal Mint. Urged on by Charles Greville, he held out for a seat in the cabinet, which he secured as lord privy seal (privy council, 3 January 1840). Tory as well as Liberal newspapers approved of the appointment. Clarendon said of himself in later years that 'allegiance to party is the only strong political feeling I have', but Lord John Russell, the guardian of the whig tradition, sometimes questioned his loyalty to it (ibid., 2.319; Mandler, 101). The new recruit had, and retained, a Canningite fondness for the idea of coalition. He soon came into conflict with his old patron, Palmerston, over the latter's policy in the Near East. Clarendon, and others, objected to Britain's combination with the conservative powers in defence of the Ottoman empire against France and her protege, Mehmet Ali, the ruler of Egypt. Lacking Palmerston's nerve, he protested at the risk of war in the midst of an economic recession: 'it would almost amount to national ruin' (Maxwell, 1.190). Palmerston got his way by threatening resignation, and was triumphantly vindicated by the outcome of his diplomacy in the Straits convention (1841). Behind a confident exterior, Clarendon was a cautious politician at home and abroad. Largely for that reason, he was not as reactionary as he often seemed in private. On the formation of the next whig government (1846), led by Russell, in which Clarendon was president of the Board of Trade, he pressed his colleagues to adopt 'a 'middle class' policy' and to reconstruct a party he described as 'nearly effete' by taking in selected Peelites and Cobden, to whom overtures were made. The plebeian electorate cared about nothing except 'taxes, trade and peace', a Cobdenite formula (ibid., 1.265, 267, 273). 
When he followed Lord Bessborough as viceroy in May 1847, Clarendon spoke of the 'sacrifice and... misfortune' which the post involved for him personally; but he was really 'in a great fright' that it would go to someone else ('Greville Memoirs', 5.449). A member of the Political Economy Club (elected 1833) in his days as a commissioner of customs, he was eager to distinguish himself in the tremendous crisis of the great famine in Ireland; an immense task of social reconstruction faced her rulers. Beset by a host of problems, he struggled to do more than maintain order and let economic forces do their work. His efforts to extract additional funds for relief operations from the Treasury ran up against 'that harsh Trevelyanism', the doctrine of Sir Charles Trevelyan, the department's assistant secretary, that Irish expenditure should as far as possible fall upon Irish property-owners. ''Ireland' 'cannot be left to her own resources'', argued Clarendon in one letter after another on that theme (MSS Clarendon, Irish letter-books, 31 Dec 1849, 23 Oct 1847). His remonstrances met with limited success: he was even less successful with plans for land banks on the Prussian model and a rather stronger government bill to compensate tenants for the little capital and intensive labour sunk in their holdings. He pointed in vain to advice from some of the Catholic hierarchy that this modicum of legal security for peasant occupiers would 'do more than anything else to... knock Repeal [of the Union] on the head' (ibid., 26 Oct 1847). 
Want, starvation, and disease acting on endemic nationalist and agrarian unrest quickly drove Clarendon into repressive measures which he knew to be 'essentially bad'. The savagery of rural violence, compared with the weakness of political agitation by Old and Young Ireland, convinced him that 'whether the pretext be repeal of the union or separation from England... war against property is the object both of priest and peasant' (MSS Clarendon, box 81, 5 Nov 1847; Irish letter-books, 26 Nov 1847). With Russell, he devised a scheme for detaching the Catholic clergy from their popular sympathies by means of a state endowment; the probable outcry in protestant Britain ruled it out. The cabinet killed off their proposals for resettling Irish emigrants in the colonies. Clarendon was left to hope that the massive unaided emigration and the forced sale of landed property under the 'Encumbered Estates Act' (1849) would somehow effect the regeneration of the economy and society. The viceroyalty enhanced Clarendon's reputation. It confirmed him and his countrymen in the reassuring belief that Ireland's ills, social and political, were, at bottom, due to the character of the people: 'The real Celt is... almost incapable... of foreseeing the consequences of his own acts... He will... rather plot than work... sooner starve... than prosper by industry' (ibid., Irish letter-books, 10 June 1848). His name is not kept in benediction by the descendants, in Ireland and the Irish diaspora, of those whom he so described. 
Clarendon's ill-concealed ambition was to step into Palmerston's shoes at the Foreign Office. Throughout the life of the ministry to which they belonged, he complained of his old patron's diplomacy as 'mischievous and disgraceful', setting all Europe against Britain (Maxwell, 1.330). When Russell finally dismissed his too independent foreign secretary in December 1851, Clarendon was the cabinet's preferred successor but Russell chose to take his protestations at face value -- 'Heaven knows I never coveted 'any' office, and much less his' -- and appointed Lord Granville (ibid., 336). Charles Greville thought his friend was afraid of Palmerston, easily the most popular politician of the day. 
After Palmerston had brought down Russell in February 1852, Clarendon reached the Foreign Office in Lord Aberdeen's coalition of Peelites and whigs formed at the end of 1852. Regarded as a safe choice, because he was not Palmerston, who consented to go to the Home Office, Clarendon came down on Palmerston's side against Aberdeen when Britain and France moved towards war with Russia in defence of the Ottoman empire. At his suggestion Palmerston was invited to join the inner cabinet that endeavoured to frame policy. Inevitably, the former foreign secretary dominated the small group of ministers and handled Clarendon with skill and unfailing good humour. Palmerston had public opinion, increasingly warlike, behind him, while Clarendon lamented that 'the newspapers now render the business of government almost impossible' (Maxwell, 2.30). Palmerston always insisted that more resolute diplomacy could have averted the Crimean War. Clarendon's letters show that he was 'in a state of muddle and hesitation' (Taylor, 53, n. 4). His heart was not in the ensuing conflict (March 1854-April 1856); he anticipated a 'monster catastrophe' (Maxwell, 2.50). On the collapse of Aberdeen's ministry in January 1855, he was mentioned as a possible premier, but Queen Victoria and her husband, with whom he was a favourite, nevertheless observed that he lacked the necessary courage ('Letters of Queen Victoria', 1st ser., 3.86). 
Retained at the Foreign Office in Palmerston's first administration, Clarendon made a better foreign secretary under a prime minister who decided policy for him. He was genuinely fearful of revolution in the violent, if passing, storm of criticism that assailed aristocratic government after the administrative and military failures of the first Crimean winter. Defeatist until the fall of Sevastopol -- 'our prospects at home and abroad are as little cheering as our worst enemy could desire' (Steele, 'Palmerston's foreign policy', 66) -- he was frightened by Palmerston's effective tactic to prevent the French, tired of war, from diluting the terms of peace: the intimation that Britain would fight on alone, if need be. '... we should have had all Europe against us at once, and the United States... soon', Clarendon told his brother-in-law Cornewall Lewis, conjuring up an improbable combination. He was uneasy when the British fleet was deployed in the Black Sea to enforce the peace: 'Palmerston is for acting rather more strongly than I am, but not much' (ibid.). Yet if he lacked the nerve that is a requisite of statesmanship, he was an accomplished diplomat, and won high praise for his technical performance at the congress of Paris (February-April 1856). Palmerston's oversight of the execution of policy, as distinct from its formulation, was galling: 'it was nonsense to write to me what Russia should be told and what Russia ought to do, &c' (ibid., 67). 
Clarendon's caution where powerful countries were concerned did not prevent him from frequently denouncing the pusillanimity and turpitude of others. He was scathing about 'our cowardly public' for its indifference to the encroachments of the United States upon British interests in Central America. In the Far East he was bellicose: the restraints of international law did not apply, he contended, to dealings with 'barbarous states' like the Chinese and Japanese empires (Steele, 'Palmerston's foreign policy', 69; Steele, 'Palmerston and Liberalism', 58). The Indian mutiny, which broke out during the second (1856-8) of the wars to open China more widely to Western trade, made him sharply critical of Palmerston for underestimating the magnitude of the revolt, and its implications for Britain's position among the great powers. Mismanagement of the Indian crisis was his ostensible reason for turning against Palmerston after his ministry was overthrown in February 1858 on the 'Conspiracy to Murder Bill', a legislative gesture of appeasement to the French emperor, following a British-based attempt upon his life. Clarendon had fully supported the bill, but he believed, like many others, in Palmerston's political extinction on the sudden end of his government. 
Clarendon had long been uncomfortable with Palmerstonian hostility to Austria in Italy and friendship for Sardinia, although he was strongly anti-papal and had censured misrule in the pope's dominions and Naples at the Paris congress. Clarendon grew less liberal with age, telling Palmerston that Britain would be unwise in the light of the Indian uprising to encourage Napoleon III in his plans for an Italian federation once Austria had been beaten: 'if we are to engage in a crusade for oppressed nationalities, it is a comparison we should make privately to ourselves... the Austrians cannot be more hated than we are' (Steele, 'Palmerston's foreign policy', 68). These sentiments, and Russell's wish to take that department for himself, cost Clarendon the Foreign Office on the formation of Palmerston's second administration in June 1859; 'we would have felt so sure with Lord Clarendon', wrote the queen regretfully (ibid.). He declined to fill any other post, and cast himself in the role of the ministry's candid friend until in April 1864 he entered the cabinet as chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster. Always an influential figure in whig circles and now close to the tories, especially after his daughter Constance married Lord Derby's younger son in 1863, he was undoubtedly useful to a government with a small majority, and it was the stronger for his return. 
As chancellor of the duchy, Clarendon was enlisted to help Palmerston and Russell in the last stages of the struggle over Schleswig-Holstein, in which Britain's diplomatic support failed to save for Denmark even a part of the territories she had disputed with the German powers. On Palmerston's death in October 1865, he succeeded to the Foreign Office under Russell's premiership. From the start of the new administration he was nervous of his leader's long-standing commitment to another instalment of parliamentary reform: 'I dread the advance of democracy', he had written in 1850 (MSS Clarendon, box 81, 27 February). Acquiescing in the 'Reform Bill' of 1866, which he thought went too far, he was in politicians' minds as prime minister at the head of a ministry of tories and conservative Liberals when the bill was the undoing of Russell. Though he disliked and feared the coming man among the Liberals, Gladstone, as 'a far more sincere Republican than Bright' ('Greville Memoirs', 7.459), his party allegiance was too strong to be broken, and he refused to continue at the Foreign Office in Derby's minority government (June 1866). He viewed with dismay the tory 'Reform Bill' that conceded household suffrage in the boroughs, calling Disraeli's tactics 'Hebrew thimble-rigging' (Maxwell, 2.333). Gladstone rewarded his reluctant loyalty to a changing Liberalism with his third, and final, spell as foreign secretary. 
This time, the widowed Queen Victoria strongly objected to Clarendon at the Foreign Office, saying that he was the only minister who had ever been impertinent to her. The old court favourite had forfeited her esteem by openly contemptuous references to Germany's princes and peoples over the years leading up to national unification. By his own account, Victoria 'gave it him pretty sharply, telling him he forgot the stock she came of' (Maxwell, 2.353, 282). Perhaps more importantly, he had also amused himself by gossiping about her relations with John Brown. Gladstone was, however, pledged to reappointing Clarendon, and pointed out that by then he was the only candidate whose name carried some weight in the chancelleries of Europe ('Selection', ed. Vincent, 64; Gladstone, 'Diaries', 6.641-2, 645). Clarendon took an Erastian view of the Vatican Council in 1870, but his hostility to infallibility was cautious (too much so for Gladstone). He was believed to have a significant influence with Napoleon III, which he used in 1869-70 to resist the drift to war between France and Prussia. While he lacked the element of idealism in Gladstone's thinking on foreign policy, he was quite as convinced of the need for peace and for European co-operation to that end which stopped short of adding to existing treaty obligations. Without optimism he worked, unsuccessfully, to secure a measure of Franco-Prussian disarmament. He did succeed in lowering the tension between the two powers: Bismarck later remarked that, had he lived, Clarendon might have averted the war that destroyed Napoleon III's France and completed German unity (Maxwell, 366). 
Gladstone described Clarendon as the pleasantest colleague he had ever had. The first of Gladstone's Irish 'Land Acts' in 1870, thoroughly distasteful to the former viceroy in its unprecedented invasion of landlord rights, did not lead to the resignation of which he freely talked. 'He is always a tall talker', wrote Granville; 'His normal state is a passion for office' (Ramm, 1.6). These weaknesses were well known to his contemporaries. Never an MP or a parliamentary candidate, he was not hardened to the rough and tumble of political life, remaining the talented, hard-working official of his formative years. His alarm about the 'Irish Land Bill' as the precursor of a general attack on his class in the United Kingdom tends to confirm what a 'Times' editorial (4 July 1870) said of him after his death. It spoke of his want of 'popular fibre', and suggested that he probably understood foreign rulers and ministers better than his own countrymen. 
A cultured man, Clarendon broke Spanish law, when minister at Madrid, in exporting paintings by the country's masters for his private collection ('Palmerston: Private Correspondence', 676). Out of office in the early 1860s, he chaired the eponymous royal commission on the ancient public schools, and showed himself, in that context, a judicious modernizer. But his principal recreation was gossip, the stuff of an enormous correspondence with colleagues, family, and friends; he was one of Charles Greville's best sources. As a letter-writer and conversationalist, he was exceptionally lively and amusing, though prone to considerable exaggeration. If he often excited the disapproval of the serious-minded, he was the kindest of men, a devoted father and brother. His wife tolerated an 'amitie amoureuse' with Queen Sophia, wife of William III of the Netherlands and a frequent visitor to England ('Selection', ed. Vincent, 63, 27, 406). Two great ladies in London society -- Mary, marchioness of Salisbury, later countess of Derby, and the young duchess of Manchester, wife of the seventh duke -- were among his other correspondents. There are very few allusions to personal religious beliefs in all his letters. He professed to detest evangelicals, but his brother Montagu was a noted evangelical prelate. Clarendon was 'no sceptic... [I] believe in the resurrection of man and his admission to paradise' (Maxwell, 2.362). The worldliness fought with a Victorian ethic. His working habits at the Foreign Office depict the man: accustomed to spending the day in talk, he compensated by toiling over his papers far into the night, one of the first recorded chain-smokers of the cigarettes he had learned to like in Spain. 
Clarendon died suddenly on 27 June 1870 at his London house, 1 Grosvenor Crescent, just before the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War, and was buried in a cemetery near his country house, The Grove, on the outskirts of Watford on 2 July. His honours included the Garter (23 March 1849); he refused a marquessate after the congress of Paris, pleading insufficient means to support the dignity. The earldom passed to his second and eldest surviving son, Edward, Lord Hyde (died 1905), lord chamberlain in unionist governments (1900-05). 


@@@@@


doc= 28298


Villiers, Henry Montagu (1813-1861), bishop of Carlisle and of Durham, was born in London on 4 January 1813. He was the fifth son of George Villiers (1759-1827) and his wife, Theresa (1775-1855), only daughter of John Parker, first Baron Boringdon. George William Frederick Villiers, the fourth earl of Clarendon and foreign secretary, was his eldest brother. Nothing is known of Villiers's early education. He entered Christ Church, Oxford, in 1830 and held a studentship there, graduating BA in 1834 and MA in 1837. He was awarded an Oxford DD in 1856. On 30 January 1837 he married Amelia Maria (1815-1871), eldest daughter of William Hulton of Hulton Park, Lancashire, and they had a family of two sons and four daughters. 
Villiers was ordained deacon in 1836 and became curate of Deane, Bolton-le-Moors, Lancashire; on being ordained priest in 1837 he became the vicar of St Nicholas's, Kenilworth, Warwickshire. In 1841 the lord chancellor (Lord Lyndhurst) gave him the wealthy rectory of St George's, Bloomsbury, London, and in 1847 he became a canon residentiary of St Paul's Cathedral. In the 1840s he was described in a document prepared for J. T. Delane, the editor of 'The Times', as perhaps 'the most influential clergyman in London' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Add. c. 290). 
Shortly after ordination Villiers became an evangelical through a fellow curate, and on moving to Kenilworth was converted to Calvinism and premillennialism through William 'Millennial' Marsh. From 1842 Villiers held annual Lent lectures on the second coming of Christ. A large, diverse congregation was attracted by his sermons, many of which were published. His 'Balls and Theatres, or, The Duty of Reproving the Works of Darkness' was published in 1846 and achieved a fourth edition in the same year. He also gave lectures under the auspices of the Young Men's Christian Association and the Church of England Young Men's Society. A hard-working and able parish administrator, he had a team of curates and made use of lay workers and London City Missioners, and worked in close harmony with nonconformists. 
Villiers was consecrated bishop of Carlisle in April 1856, the first of Lord Palmerston's episcopal appointments. Having authority over an enlarged diocese, he unified the ancient diocese of Carlisle with that of the northernmost part of the Chester diocese. He encouraged the appointment of Francis Close as the dean of Carlisle and the two men worked together in promoting the evangelical cause throughout the diocese. His diocesan appointments of archdeacons and rural deans were not, however, partisan. 
Villiers encouraged greater personal piety among his clergy and raised the academic standard for those entering the diocese. But as the majority of livings were poor it was difficult to retain able clergy. He exercised discipline over drunken clergy, three of whom were dismissed. He encouraged monthly communion services and took pains over his confirmation services, and began the practice of confirming candidates from the English chapels in Scotland. He travelled extensively throughout his diocese and was also in demand elsewhere as a speaker. In 1857 he preached the first of a series of sermons to the working classes in Exeter Hall. Villiers was keen to improve elementary education in his diocese, in which he was supported by the activity of the philanthropist George Moore. Villiers was little involved in the politics of the day and rarely spoke in the House of Lords. With Lord Shaftesbury he was active in the London Society for Promoting Christianity amongst the Jews. 
He was translated to Durham in 1860 and began his work in earnest. However, in the following summer he became ill; he died within a fortnight on 9 August 1861 in Auckland Castle, Bishop Auckland, and was buried in the chapel there. His wife and family were left in financial difficulties and Amelia and her three unmarried daughters were given grace-and-favour accommodation at Hampton Court Palace. His eldest son, Henry Montagu Villiers (1841-1908), became vicar of St Paul's, Knightsbridge. 
The last six months of Villiers's life were blighted by the Cheese affair, and it may well have contributed to his early death. Edward Cheese (died 1886) married Villiers's daughter Amy Maria in 1860. In February 1861 Villiers appointed his new son-in-law and domestic chaplain to the lucrative living of Haughton-le-Skerne, near Darlington. 'The Guardian' accused Villiers of gross nepotism. He became the target of wounding criticism and was the subject of a cartoon in 'Punch' (9 March 1861). Although he contemplated resignation, his friends encouraged him to remain as bishop. Bishop A. C. Tait saw him in a different light, as 'a man of rare charm and full of friendship' (E. H. Thomson, 'Life and Letters of William Thomson', 1919, 53). 


@@@@@


doc= 28299


Villiers, John, Viscount Purbeck (1591?-1658), courtier, was the eldest son of Sir George Villiers (c.1544-1606) ['see under 'Villiers, Sir Edward] and his second wife, Mary ('c'.1570-1632), daughter of Anthony Beaumont of Glenfield, Leicestershire. His two younger brothers were George Villiers, the future duke of Buckingham (1592-1628), and Christopher Villiers, the future earl of Anglesey (d. 1630). Nothing is known of his education, but in 1602 his brother George went to school at Billesdon, Leicestershire, where Anthony Cade was the master, and Villiers may well have preceded him. 
In May 1609 Villiers's mother was able to procure a pass via her future third husband, Sir Thomas Compton, to enable Villiers and his brother George to travel abroad. Three years were spent at places such as Blois and Angers before the brothers returned in 1612-13. By the beginning of 1616 George Villiers had begun his meteoric rise to power and influence, and he was not averse to advancing his elder brother. On 30 June 1616 John Villiers was knighted, and he soon became groom of the bedchamber and master of the robes to Prince Charles (the future Charles I). When the king conferred the earldom of Buckingham on George in January 1617, it was entailed upon his elder brother should the new earl die without male heirs. 
Villiers married on 29 September 1617 Frances (1599-1645), daughter of Sir Edward Coke and his second wife, Lady Elizabeth Cecil ['see 'Hatton, Elizabeth], widow of Sir William Hatton (and therefore known as Lady Hatton). For Coke this was a marriage intended to form an alliance with the Villiers family, and so regain royal favour. For Villiers the attractiveness of the match was more material: as Lady Hatton put it, her daughter 'is heir to the mother to a fortune not much inferior to any unmarried heir of England' ('Letters of John Holles', 2.185). Lady Hatton was opposed to the marriage, and hid her daughter at Oatlands, near Hampton Court. Coke then forcibly took possession of his daughter, who seems to have reconciled herself to the match knowing that 'it will be a means of the King's favour to my father', and because Villiers was 'not to be misliked; his fortune is very good; a gentleman well born' (Lockyer, 43). The marriage was conducted by the bishop of Winchester at Hampton Court, in the presence of the king, the queen, and Prince Charles. 
Lady Hatton appears to have accepted the match, but when it came to bestowing some of her fortune, inherited from her late husband, on to the couple, she prevaricated, and it is not known how much was eventually settled upon them. It was in anticipation of some of the Hatton property on the Isle of Purbeck, Dorset, being settled on Villiers that James I on 19 July 1619 created him Baron Stoke and Viscount Purbeck. In 1620 Purbeck and his wife were abroad, visiting Spa; this was possibly an early indication of the need to find a cure for his ill health. By this date he was exhibiting signs of mental instability, which took the form of several days of uncontrolled behaviour, before he subsided in a 'dull fit', which allowed him to be calmed down. In October 1622 Purbeck was at Compton to recover from 'his fit', and Lady Purbeck was living elsewhere and enjoying financial support from Buckingham. 
On 19 October 1624 Lady Purbeck gave birth to a son, Robert. The father was rumoured to be Sir Robert Howard, a younger son of the earl of Suffolk. Buckingham was outraged, given that at this date he was without an heir himself and the child stood to inherit his titles and honours. Both Lady Purbeck and Howard protested their innocence and were ordered to appear before the court of high commission on 5 March 1625. Purbeck himself accompanied Buckingham on his embassy to the Netherlands later in 1625. A second hearing before the court of high commission took place on 19 November 1627, when Lady Purbeck was found guilty of adultery, fined, and ordered to undertake a public penance. This she avoided by taking refuge in the Savoy, and she then escaped to live with her father. After Coke's death in 1634 she returned to London, but for fear of renewed prosecution she fled to France with Howard, before returning in the early 1640s. She was buried on 4 June 1645. 
Following the death of Buckingham in 1628, Purbeck appears to have been put under royal protection. A letter survives from 1632 which enjoins a strict regimen for Purbeck, now a patient at the home of Dr Cudiman: no tobacco or wine, nor any visitors apart from those who came with him out of the country. At some point after 1645 Purbeck was married for a second time, to Elizabeth (died 1696), daughter of Sir William Slingsby of Kippax, Yorkshire, and the widow of Colonel Chichester Fortescue of Dromiskin, Ireland. Purbeck made his will on 29 August 1655, making his wife executrix. In December 1655 he petitioned for lodgings at Somerset House, but these were refused. His death was reported on 26 February 1658 by two of Secretary Nicholas's Parisian correspondents, but another source reported his death on 18 February 1658 at Charlton, near Greenwich, Kent. Robert Danvers (1624-1674), either his son or the illegitimate son of his wife, fought for the king, married the daughter of a regicide, became a presbyterian, and died a Catholic in France. 


@@@@@


doc= 28300


Villiers, John, styled third earl of Buckingham (c.1677-1723), peerage claimant, was born about 1677, the only surviving son of Robert Villiers or Danvers, styled third Viscount Purbeck ('c'.1656-1684), and his wife, Margaret Maccarty (died 1698), the widow of Charles Maccarty, third Viscount Muskerry, and the daughter of Ulick Bourke, marquess of Clanricarde. His grandfather was the adventurer Robert Danvers, regarded as the illegitimate son of Frances Coke, the wife of John Villiers, Viscount Purbeck. His father had called himself third Viscount Purbeck, despite the fact that his claim to succeed to that dignity had been disallowed by the House of Lords in 1678 on the grounds of Robert Danvers's illegitimacy. Robert Villiers had left England heavily in debt, and was killed at a duel at Liege in April 1684. His widow subsequently married the notorious rake Robert Feilding. 
John Villiers, styled fourth Viscount Purbeck from the death of his father, was educated at Eton College, 'from whence he entered into the debaucheries of the town, and associated himself with the gamesters of it' (Sterry, 345). On 16 April 1687, on the death of his grandfather's supposed first cousin George Villiers, second duke of Buckingham, he became (if his grandfather's illegitimacy was set aside) third earl of Buckingham under the terms of a patent issued by James I to the first duke in 1617. On 23 November 1699 he married Frances (died before 1730), the widow of George Heneage of Lincolnshire and the daughter of a clergyman called Moyser, 'a person of a dissolute abandoned character but of a large jointure' (ibid.). She may have been Frances Moiser, the daughter of George Moiser, baptized at St Michael's, New Malton, Yorkshire, on 23 December 1677. They had two daughters, Mary (died 1703) and Elizabeth ('c'.1701-1786), and a son, John, styled Lord Villiers (1707-1710?). 
Villiers is first recorded using the title earl of Buckingham in a petition to the House of Lords on 16 May 1702, but he did not make a formal claim to the earldom until April 1709, nor did the Lords then take any notice of his appeal. In 1720 he unsuccessfully petitioned George I for the title. He died at Dancer's Hill, South Mimms, Middlesex, on 10 August 1723, and was buried at South Mimms on 18 August as Lord Buckingham. His claims were adopted by his first cousin George Villiers (1690-1748), vicar of Chalgrove, Oxfordshire, but he did not press them beyond issuing a thin pamphlet, 'The Case of George Villiers', in 1723. On the death of this clergyman's son, George, vicar of Frodsham, Cheshire, on 24 June 1774, this claim to the earldom of Buckingham became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 28301


Villiers, John Charles, third earl of Clarendon (1757-1838), politician, was born on 14 November 1757, the second son of Thomas Villiers, first earl of Clarendon of the second creation (1709-1786), diplomatist and politician, and Lady Charlotte Capel (1721-1790), eldest surviving daughter of William Capel, third earl of Essex, and Jane Hyde. He was educated at Eton College (1766-74) and at St John's College, Cambridge; he graduated MA in 1776 and LLD on 30 April 1838. At Cambridge he met and became friends with William Pitt the younger. He entered Lincoln's Inn in 1774 and was called to the bar on 22 June 1779. On 6 February 1782 he was made joint king's counsel in the duchy court of Lancaster by his father, then chancellor of the court. 
In January 1784 Villiers was brought into parliament for the pocket borough of Old Sarum by Thomas Pitt, Lord Camelford, at the request of William Pitt. Villiers voted consistently with the administration and was rewarded with several court appointments. He became surveyor of woods south of the Trent on 29 July 1786, and comptroller of the king's household, and was sworn of the privy council on 19 February 1787. In February 1790 he was made a commissioner of the Board of Trade and left his post in the household to accept the sinecure of warden and chief justice in eyre north of the Trent, which brought him an income of $2250 per annum. In the same year he was returned for Dartmouth, which he continued to represent until 1802. He did not make his mark as a debater in parliament but was known as 'a mere courtier, famous for telling interminable stories' ('Diaries', ed. Jackson, 2.302). The 'Rolliad' described him as 'Villiers, comely with the flaxen hair' and, together with Wraxall, regarded him as 'the 'Nereus' of Pitt's forces' ('Memoirs of... Wraxall', 5.112). 
On 5 January 1791, at her father's house in Savile Row, Villiers married his first cousin, Maria Eleanor Forbes (1758/9-1844), the younger twin daughter and coheir of Admiral John Forbes (1714-1796) and Lady Mary Capel, daughter of the third earl of Essex. Following the outbreak of war with France, he volunteered to use the income from his sinecure to help raise a regiment of fencible cavalry, to which he was appointed colonel on 14 March 1794. He remained a staunch supporter of Pitt during Addington's administration and was returned on Lady Sutherland's interest for Tain burghs at the general election in 1802. He succeeded as first protonotary of common pleas in the county palatine of Lancaster in 1804, a reversionary sinecure that required him to seek re-election to parliament, which he did, though not without some demur. Pitt's return to office with Addington, which Villiers strongly disapproved of, led him to break formally with Pitt on 10 February 1805 and he gave up his seat in May 1805. 
Villiers returned to the Commons as MP for Queenborough in 1807 and, to general astonishment, was chosen by Canning to be envoy to the Portuguese court in 1808. Arriving in Lisbon in November 1808, he did not relish his diplomatic role and asked to be recalled in September 1809, although he did not leave until February 1810. He seems, however, to have established a reasonable relationship with both Wellington and Wellesley and afterwards felt confident to offer advice on policy in the Peninsula. On the death of his elder brother, Thomas, unmarried, on 7 March 1824, Villiers succeeded to the earldom. Thereafter he took little part in political life apart from voting with the whigs in the upper house, and devoted himself to religious and charitable works. 
Clarendon died suddenly at his home, Walmer Terrace, Deal, on 22 December 1838, and was buried in Watford on 29 December. He was survived by his wife, who died aged eighty-five at Clarendon House on 18 March 1844. Their only child, Mary Harriet, had died unmarried on 20 January 1835 and so he was succeeded by his nephew George William Frederick Villiers as fourth earl of Clarendon. 


@@@@@


doc= 28302


Villiers, Thomas, first earl of Clarendon (1709-1786), diplomatist, was the second son of William Villiers, second earl of Jersey (c.1682-1721) ['see under 'Villiers, Edward, first earl of Jersey], and his wife, Judith (died 1735), daughter and heir of Frederick Herne, a wealthy London merchant. He was educated at Eton College (1725), and matriculated from Queens' College, Cambridge, in 1728, but left the university without a degree. After making a grand tour to France and Italy in 1733-4, he entered the diplomatic service. 
Early in 1738 Villiers was sent as envoy-extraordinary to the court of Augustus III, elector of Saxony and king of Poland, residing in both Dresden and Warsaw from 23 May 1738 to December 1742. From 1742 to 1743 he served as minister-plenipotentiary to Augustus in his capacity as elector of Saxony. From mid-January to mid-March 1743 he was envoy at Vienna, from where he was sent to a number of imperial cities. In July 1743 he was reporting from Hanau on the progress of the War of the Austrian Succession. In September of the following year he returned to Poland, where Augustus had taken refuge on being driven out of Saxony by Frederick the Great. In November 1745 Frederick instructed his minister to make proposals for peace with Saxony through the medium of Villiers. Carlyle judged that Villiers showed himself 'really diligent, reasonable, loyal; doing his very best now and afterwards; but has no success at all' (Carlyle, 6.109). He followed Augustus in his flight to Prague, and continued his efforts there without success until Frederick's victory at Kesselsdorf on 12 December 1745 rendered Augustus more amenable. Villiers made several journeys between Prague and Berlin during the negotiations, and peace was eventually signed on Christmas day 1745. These efforts gained for Villiers Frederick's good opinion, and on 3 January 1746 he was appointed resident minister at Berlin, where he resided from 22 February to 5 September 1746. Horace Walpole, however, attributed Frederick's liking for Villiers to his dislike of men of ability: '[Villiers] has, you know, been very much 'gazetted', and had his letters to the king of Prussia printed, but he is a very silly fellow' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 20.17). 
In February 1748 Villiers retired from the diplomatic service and devoted himself to home politics. He had been returned to parliament for Tamworth on 3 July 1747, in spite of his confession to Walpole that he did not understand elections, and on 24 December 1748 he was made a lord of the Admiralty in Henry Pelham's administration. He was re-elected for Tamworth on 18 April 1754, but vacated the seat on his creation, on 3 June 1756, as Baron Hyde of Hindon. He had married, on 30 March 1752, Lady Charlotte (1721-1790), third but eldest surviving daughter of William Capel, third earl of Essex (1697-1743), and coheir of his first wife, Lady Jane Hyde (died 1724), daughter of Henry Hyde, fourth and last earl of Clarendon of the first creation. They had three sons and one daughter. The second son was the politician John Charles Villiers, third earl of Clarendon. 
On 2 September 1763 Hyde was sworn of the privy council, and on the 10th he was appointed joint postmaster-general in Grenville's administration. He was chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster from 14 June 1771 to 1782, during Lord North's administration. On 14 June 1776 he was created earl of Clarendon of the second creation, and on 16 July 1782 obtained license to add to his arms the royal eagle of Prussia, for Frederick III had created him a count of that kingdom. In 1783 he joined the opposition to Pitt's administration. 
Clarendon died at Watford on 11 December 1786, and was buried there on the 20th. He was succeeded in the title by his eldest son, Thomas (1753-1824). 


@@@@@


doc= 28303


Villiers, Thomas Hyde (1801-1832), politician, born on 27 January 1801, was the second son of George Villiers (1759-1827), who married, on 17 April 1798, Theresa (1775-1856), only daughter of John Parker, first Baron Boringdon. Villiers's father died at Kent House, Knightsbridge, on 21 March 1827; his mother survived until 1855. Three of Thomas's brothers were G. W. F. Villiers, C. P. Villiers, and H. M. Villiers. 
Villiers was educated at home and very imperfectly. He was then sent with his eldest brother, George, to St John's College, Cambridge, and, keenly conscious of his own defects, set to work to repair the loss of time. At Cambridge he mixed with Charles Austin, Edward Strutt, John Romilly, T. B. Macaulay, and other young men of ability and advanced opinions, several of them influenced by the views of Jeremy Bentham. In 1822 he graduated BA, and in 1825 MA. After taking his degree in 1822 he entered the Colonial Office, where early in 1824 Sir Henry Taylor (1800-1866) became his subordinate and then his close friend. 
The brothers lived during their earlier years with their parents in part of Kent House at Knightsbridge, but from 1825 Thomas Villiers and Taylor shared a house in Suffolk Street. In that year, Villiers joined a debating club called the Academics, where several of his college friends, and J. S. Mill, discussed politics and economics. His chief speech, an hour long, on colonization 'made some noise, procured him a compliment and an invitation from the chancellor of the exchequer' ('Correspondence of Henry Taylor', 6-7). Not long afterwards Villiers abandoned the government service to embark on politics. His chief source of income from that date until his acceptance of office arose from the agencies for Berbice and Newfoundland ('Hansard 3', 5, 1831, 283-7). 
At the general election in June 1826 Villiers was elected for Hedon in Yorkshire, and sat until the dissolution in 1830. In 1830 and 1831 he sat, respectively, for Wootton Bassett, Wiltshire (a family borough), and Bletchingley, and voted for the 'Reform Bill' in all its stages. Villiers travelled in Ireland in 1828 with the object of informing himself on Irish affairs, and set out his views in long letters to Taylor. A letter written by him in February 1829 was shown to R. L. Sheil, who thereupon brought about the suppression of the Catholic Association. In 1831 Villiers suggested the formation of the royal commission on the poor law, and helped in its preliminary inquiries. On 18 May 1831 he became secretary to the Board of Control under Charles Grant (afterwards Lord Glenelg). On 22 August 1831 he made a long speech in the House of Commons on the Methuen treaty with Portugal ('Hansard 3', 6, 1831, 437-9). The committees on Indian affairs, whose labours formed the basis of subsequent legislation, were organized by Villiers, with the assistance of Lord Althorp. The question of the renewal of the charter to the East India Company, which came up for consideration at this time, demanded all his faculties, and official work weighed heavily. On 2 November 1831 Villiers and Taylor entered as students at Lincoln's Inn. 
At the time of his death Villiers was a candidate for the constituency of Penryn and Falmouth in Cornwall, and had a promising political career. After three months' suffering from an abscess in the head, he died, unmarried, on 3 December 1832 at Carclew, the seat of Sir Charles Lemon, near Penryn, where he was staying. A monument was placed to his memory in Mylor church. Villiers possessed 'indefatigable industry and a clear understanding, set off by pleasing address and considerable powers of speaking'. It was a scheme of his to give 'parliamentary seats, without votes, to persons holding certain offices' ('Correspondence of Henry Taylor', 196). 


@@@@@


doc= 28304


William Villiers, second earl of Jersey (c.1682-1721), politician, was known as Viscount Villiers from 1697 to 1711. Villiers entered Queens' College, Cambridge, in 1699, and graduated MA in 1700. He was appointed teller of the exchequer in 1701, but on the accession of Queen Anne in 1702 exchanged the post for a pension. On 22 March 1705, at Hampstead, he married Judith Herne (died 1732), daughter of Frederick Herne, a London merchant. They had two sons, William, later third earl of Jersey (died 1769), and Thomas Villiers, later first earl of Clarendon (1709-1786), and a daughter, Barbara. Both Lord and Lady Villiers gained reputations for extramarital affairs. In May 1705 he was elected member of parliament for Kent, but his performance was criticized and he did not seek re-election in 1708. He succeeded his father as earl of Jersey in 1711, and supported the Oxford ministry in the Lords. He remained a tory following the fall of Oxford and the accession of George I. His mother's overt Jacobitism led him to be arrested on suspicion of treason in 1715; he was created earl of Jersey in the Jacobite peerage by the Stuart pretender, 'James III', in 1716. He was in Paris on grounds of ill health in 1718, and died at Castlethorpe, Buckinghamshire, on 13 July 1721, and was buried on 23 July at Westerham, Kent, near the family home of Squerries. He left his wife, Judith, 'having refused to settle her lands on her children, and for other sufficient reasons not proper to be mentioned here' (GEC, 'Peerage', 7.89), one shilling. 


@@@@@


doc= 28305


Vilvain, Robert (bap. 1576, d. 1663), physician and philanthropist, was born in the parish of All Hallows, Goldsmith Street, Exeter, and baptized in its church on 17 March 1576. He was the son of Peter Vilvain (died 1602), steward of Exeter in 1579, and his wife, Ann (died 1616). Robert received his early education at Exeter and matriculated from Exeter College, Oxford, on 22 February 1594, aged eighteen. He graduated BA on 9 May 1597 and MA on 11 July 1600. On 30 June 1599 he was elected to a Devonian fellowship of his college, which he held until 30 June 1611. 
Vilvain began to practise medicine about 1600, and on 20 June 1611 took the Oxford degrees of BM and DM. He was incorporated at Cambridge in 1608, and with these further degrees was reincorporated in 1612. From this date he practised with great success in his native city, where he spent the rest of his life. His wife, Ellenor, second daughter of Thomas Hinson of Tavistock, who married Anne, daughter of Sir William Spring of Pakenham, Suffolk, was buried at All Hallows, Exeter, on 7 December 1622. Their only child, Thomas, matriculated at Exeter College, Oxford, on 8 April 1636, aged sixteen, graduated BCL on 7 March 1642, and died unmarried on 20 May 1651. Ten epicedial distichs composed on his death are in his father's 'Enchiridium epigrammatum' (1654), leaf 185. 
In 1640 Vilvain was one of twelve doctors -- five in theology, four in medicine, and three in law -- living in Exeter. His epigram on them, the English translation, and a list of their names are printed in Richard Izacke's 'Antiquities of the City of Exeter' (1723, 156). Thomas Fuller (1608-1661), when he visited Exeter, was delighted by some rare manuscripts in Vilvain's library and his museum of natural curiosities. Vilvain's benefactions to his native city and his college were numerous and costly. He gave $20 towards the cost of the new buildings at Exeter College about 1624, and he founded at the college in 1637 four exhibitions of $32 each per annum, to be paid through the rector and sub-rector. For the free school at St John's Hospital, Exeter, he gave a tenement in Paris Street without the east gate of Exeter, and he erected new buildings within the hospital at a cost of about $600. 
On Vilvain's motion the corporation of Exeter in December 1657 allowed the lady chapel in the cathedral to be fitted up as a library, and the valuable collection of books then at St John's Hospital, which had previously formed the cathedral library, to be moved there. Vilvain defrayed the cost of the alterations in the lady chapel, and the care of the library was entrusted to him. The books remained there until 1820. With Vilvain's charitable benefactions and decreasing strength there came a loss of income; the preface to his 'Enchiridium epigrammatum' refers to his ruined fortune. Between 17 April and 4 November 1662 there are frequent references in the state papers (domestic series) to the lease to him from 1647 by the dean and chapter of Exeter of the manor of Staverton, which he 'deserves to forfeit for ill-carriage during the late distractions'. 
'In his younger days Vilvain was esteemed a very good poet, orator, and disputant, and, in his elder, as eminent for divinity as his proper faculty', but what should have been his most productive years were not fruitful and his writings are 'nothing but scraps, whimseys, and dotages of old age' (Wood, 'Athenae Oxon.', ed. Bliss, 3.631-3). 
Vilvain died on 21 February 1663 and was buried in the north aisle of the choir of Exeter Cathedral, where a stone marks his resting place; a mural tablet to his memory was placed on the north side of the entrance to the lady chapel, but was later taken to St James's chantry. 


@@@@@


doc= 28306


Vince, Samuel (1749-1821), mathematician and astronomer, was born at Fressingfield, Suffolk, on 6 April 1749, the youngest son of John Vince, a bricklayer, and his wife, Ann. He worked with his father until he was about twelve, when the Revd Warnes noticed him sitting reading beside his hod. Warnes lent him books and eventually sent him to Mr Tilney's school at Harleston, Norfolk, where he acted as assistant teacher. In 1768 Vince's early competence in mathematics allowed him to propose one, and answer ten, of the serious mathematical problems regularly set in the 'Ladies' Diary'. With financial help from Dr Samuel Cooper of Great Yarmouth, he briefly attended St Paul's School, London, from where in 1771 he was admitted sizar at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge; he graduated in 1775 as senior wrangler and first Smith's prizeman. He was a member of the Hyson Club, established by the wranglers of 1757. His contemporary Gilbert Wakefield recalled Vince as 'an accomplished mathematician [and] an amiable man... rewarded with no preferment adequate to his reasonable pretentions' ('Memoirs of the Life', 137). Vince migrated to Sidney Sussex College, where he proceeded MA in 1778; he continued to reside at least partly in Cambridge. 
In 1780 Vince married Mary, daughter of Thomas Paris; she survived him, with their only child, Samuel Berney Vince (1781-1845), later vicar of Ringwood, Hampshire. Having taken orders, Vince was presented in 1784 to the rectory of Kirby Bedon, Norfolk, which he occupied for two years before handing over to a curate and moving to the vicarage of South Creak, Norfolk, in 1786. He was presented to the prebend of Melton Ross with Scamblesby, Lincolnshire, in 1803, and in 1809 to the archdeaconry of Bedford. 
During these years Vince published books of a religious nature and others dealing with astronomy and mathematics. He was one of the last representatives of the English synthetical school. His textbooks were used in the university and ran through several editions. He also communicated several papers to the Royal Society: the first to be published, 'An investigation of the principle of progressive and rotatory motion' ('PTRS', 70, 1780, 546-77), gained him the society's Copley medal. He was elected fellow of the Royal Society on 22 June 1786. He followed with a series of papers on the summation of infinite series, and delivered several Bakerian lectures: between 1794 and 1797 on aspects of fluid rotation and of bodies rotating in fluids, in 1798 on an unusual horizontal refraction of the air, and in 1804 on the hypotheses of gravitation. He contributed the last volume, dealing with fluxions, hydrostatics, and astronomy, to James Wood's four-volume digest of university lectures entitled 'The Principles of Mathematical and Natural Philosophy' (1793-9). 
On the death of Anthony Shepherd (1721-1796), Vince was appointed to succeed him as Plumian professor of astronomy and experimental philosophy at Cambridge, and he held the post until his death. His masterly and best-known work, 'A Complete System of Astronomy' (3 vols., 1797-1808), appeared in a second enlarged edition in 1814-23. Professor John Playfair asserted in the 'Edinburgh Review' of June 1809 that the tables collected in the third volume marked 'a great epoch in astronomical science'. At some time prior to 1811 Vince retired to Ramsgate, Kent, where he died on 28 November 1821. 


@@@@@


doc= 28307


Vincent, Augustine (c.1584-1626), herald and antiquary, was born presumably at Wellingborough or Finedon, Northamptonshire, the third and youngest son of William Vincent (died 1618) and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of John Mabbott of Walgrave, merchant of the staple. Nothing is known of his education. About 1599 he obtained a post in charge of records in the Tower of London, where he was probably simply a clerk but acquired a reputation as an antiquary. On 30 June 1614 he married Elizabeth (died 1667), third daughter of Francis Primecourt of Canterbury. In 1616 he was given the position of Rouge Rose pursuivant-extraordinary in the College of Arms, almost certainly through the influence of his friend William Camden, who had been made Clarenceux king of arms in 1597. In spite of criticism of the practice from opponents resentful of Camden's promotion, the king of arms made use of Vincent as his deputy in heraldic visitations, alone in Northamptonshire and Rutland in 1618-19, with others in Warwickshire and Leicestershire in 1619 and in Surrey and Shropshire in 1623. Vincent played a prominent part in the celebrated public quarrel between Camden and Ralph Brooke, York herald, contributing, in defence of Camden, 'A discoverie of errours in the first edition of the catalogue of nobility published by Ralphe Brooke' (1622), essentially a reprint of Brooke's book, in sections, with hostile comments after each. The dispute is notable for the way in which both sides made critical use of original source materials: while Brooke utilized the evidence of armorial bearings on tombs, Vincent employed his expert knowledge of the public records, something of an innovation in the scholarly argument of the day. 
Over the years Vincent accumulated a very significant reference collection of heraldic and genealogical manuscript material, regarded as the most important collection attributable to a single herald at the College of Arms. It consists of 260 volumes, many of which were written by himself. In his 'Discoverie of Errours' Vincent announced his intention to produce a 'Baronage of England' and a 'Lives of all the knights of the Garter' (foreshadowing William Dugdale), and that he was pursuing this as an active project is shown by the existence of a volume by him with 396 pages of peers' pedigrees, with painted arms. As he observed to Sir Robert Cotton, 'I find the further I go in that labour the further I am to seeke, yet it shall not discourage me' (Nicholas, 75). 
Vincent's further intention was to write a county history for Northamptonshire. His collection of manuscripts contains a substantial body of Northamptonshire material; he is known to have collected information about armorial bearings in the county during his visitation. The papers accumulated by the Northamptonshire antiquary John Bridges in preparation for his own 'History of Northamptonshire' include a copy of a list of headings under which Vincent intended to systematically consider his Northamptonshire material. Like many other contemporary antiquaries, however, overwhelmed by notes, Vincent did not manage to publish his work. None the less, his material was offered to, and made use of by, William Burton for his 'Description of Leicestershire' (1622), William Dugdale, and John Weever for his 'Ancient Funerall Monuments' (1631). Weever was particularly grateful for Vincent's help and encouragement, symptomatic of a general tendency to share the fruits of research within antiquarian circles. In Vincent's case, the circle also included John Selden. 
Vincent's position within the College of Arms was regularized in May 1621 when he became Rouge Croix pursuivant; in June 1624 he became Windsor herald. He died on 11 January 1626 and was buried on 14 January at St Benet Paul's Wharf, London. His widow married, before 30 November 1630, Eusebius Catesby of Castor, Northamptonshire; she died on 6 August 1667. 
Vincent's son John (1618-1671) was also interested in genealogical and antiquarian matters, although not possessing the scholarly abilities of his father. He took over his father's manuscript collections and made additions to them, finishing, but not managing to publish, the work on the baronage. When he died he bequeathed the collection to his patron, Ralph Sheldon of Beoley, Worcestershire, who left them to the College of Arms in 1684. 


@@@@@


doc= 28308


Vincent, George (1796-1832), landscape painter, was born in the parish of St John Timberhill, Norwich, and baptized there on 27 June 1796, the son of James Vincent (1756-1834), worsted weaver and shawl manufacturer, and his first wife, Mary Freeman (died 'c'.1800). Vincent was educated at Norwich grammar school, where fellow pupils were John Berney Crome and James Stark. As a small boy he was 'always fond of drawing with charcoal' ('Eastern Daily Press', 20 Jan 1885), and about 1811 he was articled to the Norwich school artist John Crome (1768-1821). In the same year he exhibited with the Norwich Society of Artists and continued to contribute fairly regularly until 1831. He also exhibited in London with the Royal Academy (1814-23), the British Institution (1815-31), the Society of Painters in Water Colours (1818-29), and the Society of British Artists (1824-30) as well as in Manchester and Glasgow. In 1816 he accompanied John Berney Crome and Benjamin Steel (who later married John Crome's daughter) to Paris. Vincent suffered from seasickness: 'They had a charming voyage over, Vincent belshing as loud as the steam packet, much to the discomfiture of some of the other passengers' (John Crome to James Stark, January 1816 [1817?], BL, Add. MS 43830, fol. 73). Soon after he probably painted 'Rouen' ('c'.1817; Norwich Castle Museum and Art Gallery), the only continental subject known by Vincent. By 1818 he had moved to London and was living at 86 Newman Street, close to his Norwich friends James Stark and Joseph Clover (1779-1853). About this time Clover painted Vincent's portrait, to which Vincent added the landscape background ('c'.1818; Norwich Castle Museum and Art Gallery). Referring to the portrait, a Norwich newspaper reported: 'Mr [Alfred] Stannard says of him that his face was disfigured by small-pox, and that he was a very plain man. As to the latter point, we hardly think the recollection is confirmed by the portrait' ('Eastern Daily Press', 20 Jan 1885). 
In 1819 Vincent toured Scotland, and in the following year exhibited with the British Institution the large canvas 'View of Edinburgh from the Calton Hill, Evening' (Royal Bank of Scotland, London). Other Scottish subjects followed at intervals. His exhibited works won critical acclaim in Norwich and London, and in 1820 Sir John Leicester bought Vincent's painting 'London, from the Surrey Side of Waterloo Bridge' for his collection at Tabley House, Cheshire. In 1822 Vincent married the daughter of a Dr Cugnoni, wrongly believing her to be a woman of property. They moved to a grand house in Kentish Town, London. By 1824 he appears to have been heavily in debt. This was presumably the cause of the 'folly' that alienated him from his father and cut him off from his Norwich friends. Much of what is known of this period of his life is recorded in a series of letters written by Vincent from 26 Upper Thornhaugh Street, Bedford Square, London, to William Davey, a neighbour of Stark in Norwich, dated between 1824 and 1827 (BL, Add. MS 37030, fols. 1-20). On 27 July 1824 he wrote bitterly: 'so much infamy has been unjustly levelled at me, by those whose duty it was to protect, that I am not astonished a man, like my father, should express himself with severity upon my past folly', adding 'from the sufferings my mind experiences my stay in this world will not be for a very long duration'. Subsequent letters written during 1824 reveal Davey helping Vincent to sell paintings in Norwich at low prices. It was to no avail, because on 27 December 1824 Vincent wrote 'I am at this moment and have been for three weeks a prisoner in the Fleet... I can paint small pictures here but not any of size.' He begged Davey that apart from Stark, no one should know of his whereabouts, particularly his father. During his imprisonment he was allowed out with a keeper to visit Stark in Norwich. He was discharged eventually in February 1827. 
In the years surrounding these events, Vincent nevertheless produced some of his finest work, for example the large panoramic painting 'A Distant View of Pevensey Bay, the Landing Place of King William the Conqueror' (1824; Norwich Castle Museum and Art Gallery), probably his most ambitious work, and 'Trowse Meadows, Near Norwich' (1828; Norwich Castle Museum and Art Gallery). Vincent was the most accomplished of Crome's pupils, and in a short career produced a remarkable body of work. It shows a range of subjects and compositions with a breadth of handling and harmony of colour that exceeds that of his Norwich school contemporaries. Crome's influence is evident, and the crowded incident of Vincent's paintings of Great Yarmouth, for example 'Dutch Fair on Yarmouth Beach' (1821; Great Yarmouth Museum) may be compared with similar compositions by Crome. Many of Vincent's landscapes are of Norfolk, including views on the River Yare, while others are the result of visits around Britain. He often signed his work with a conjoined GV and dated some in the 1820s. Few drawings by him exist, but of his etched work twelve etchings dated between 1820 and 1827 and one mezzotint (all British Museum) are known. His work is well represented in the collection at Norwich Castle Museum and Art Gallery. Following his release from the Fleet, he received some commissions, including one from James Wadmore for another large canvas, 'Greenwich Hospital from the River' (1827). Although he continued to exhibit his work until 1831, nothing further is known of him until an obituary appeared in the Norwich press: 'Died lately at Bath, in his 36th year, Mr George Vincent, artist -- ' ('Norwich Mercury', 14 April 1832). 


@@@@@


doc= 28309


Vincent, Henry (1813-1878), radical, was the eldest son of Thomas Vincent (died 1829), a gold- and silversmith. He was born on 10 May 1813 at 145 High Holborn, London. When the family business failed in 1821, the Vincents moved to Hull. Henry received little schooling, though he was an avid reader. In 1828 he was apprenticed to a printer. During his apprenticeship, his early interest in radical politics ripened into activism with his election as vice-president of a local Paineite discussion group and as a member of the Hull Political Union. Upon the completion of his apprenticeship in 1833, Vincent's uncle helped him obtain a position at Spottiswoode's, the king's printers, in London. 
In 1836 Vincent became involved with a dispute at Spottiswoode's and left the firm with about sixty other employees. About this time his mother inherited an independent income, which freed Vincent of family responsibilities (his father had died in 1829, leaving a widow and six children). Vincent became more deeply involved in radical circles and in 1836 joined the London Working Men's Association. He became a very successful lecturer and travelled extensively promoting the 'People's Charter'. His greatest impact was in the west country and south Wales. His oratorical skills led to his selection as the chief speaker at the great Chartist meeting held in London in the autumn of 1838. So remarkable was his command over an audience that he was called by Sir William Molesworth 'the Demosthenes of the new movement'. 
In December 1838 Vincent further contributed to the Chartist cause through the founding of a weekly newspaper, 'The Western Vindicator'. His lecturing and writing activities were brought to an abrupt halt when he was arrested on 7 May 1839 at his house in Cromer Street, London. The warrant from the Newport magistrates charged him with having participated in 'a riotous assemblage' held in that town on 19 April 1839. He was taken to Bow Street, charged, and committed to Monmouth gaol to stand trial at the ensuing assizes. So great was the tumult outside the court that the mayor was obliged to read the 'Riot Act'. The trial took place on 2 August 1839 before Sir Edward Hall Alderson, baron of the exchequer. Serjeant Thomas Noon Talfourd conducted the case for the crown, and John Arthur Roebuck that for the defence. Roebuck showed clearly from the admissions of the chief witnesses for the prosecution that Vincent had told the people to disperse quietly and to keep the peace. Vincent, however, was found guilty and sentenced to twelve calendar months' imprisonment. He applied for the use of books and writing materials but was refused all but religious books. On 9 August 1839 Lord Brougham brought Vincent's case to the attention of the House of Lords. Vincent, though found guilty of a misdemeanour on one count only, was treated as a felon. Lord Melbourne was forced to promise an inquiry. The intense feeling among the Welsh miners about Vincent's treatment in prison helped spark an armed rising of the Chartists in south Wales. On the morning of 4 November 1839 large crowds, estimated variously at from eight thousand to twenty thousand, marched towards Newport, where they came into collision with the military. Ten of the rioters were killed and about fifty wounded. Frost, their leader, was arrested that night, with Williams and Jones, leaders of other divisions which had not reached the town in time for the riot. In March 1840 Vincent (along with Edwards) was tried a second time at Monmouth for 'having conspired together with John Frost to subvert the constituted authorities, and alter by force the constitution of the country'. A second count charged the men with having uttered seditious language. Again Serjeant Talfourd conducted the prosecution. Vincent having been dissatisfied with Roebuck's conduct of the defence at his first trial, now decided to defend himself. He did so with such skill and persuasion that the Monmouthshire jury, while finding both prisoners guilty, recommended clemency for him. He was sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment. Talfourd was so impressed by Vincent's defence that he indicated his regrets at having undertaken the case for the prosecution and became involved in the efforts to obtain better conditions for Vincent. His efforts, along with those of Francis Place and Thomas Slingsby Duncombe, and others, resulted in his transfer from Milbank penitentiary to Oakham gaol. There he did much to improve his education in French, history, and political economy with Place's help. On 31 January 1841 Vincent obtained a remission of the sentence through the help of John Cleave, a printer and bookseller in Fleet Street. 
After his release Vincent married Lucy Chappell, daughter of John Cleave, at the register office, St Luke's, Chelsea, on 27 February 1841. They settled in Bath, where Vincent resumed lecturing and publishing 'The Vindicator'. Following his time in prison, he espoused a more moderate political philosophy. He associated himself with teetotal Chartism and Joseph Sturge's Complete Suffrage Union. In July 1841 he stood as a radical candidate for Banbury in the first of what was to be a long list of unsuccessful attempts to gain a parliamentary seat: Ipswich (1842, 1847), Tavistock (1843), Kilmarnock (1844), Plymouth (1846), and York (1848, 1852). 
Afterwards, he lectured on a number of social and historical questions. Among his topics were 'The constitutional history of parliaments', 'Home life: its duties and its pleasures', 'The philosophy of true manliness', 'Cromwell and the men, principles, and times of the Commonwealth', and 'Human brotherhood'. In these later years he also spoke out in favour of popular education, free trade, and religious tolerance. In 1848 he lectured for the Peace Society. Vincent's own religious sympathies were with the Society of Friends, though he was never formally received into membership. In addition to his public lectures, Vincent frequently conducted services on Sundays in free church chapels as a lay preacher. His strong advocacy of the north in the American Civil War made him a welcome visitor when he arrived in the United States. He made lecturing tours in September 1866, October 1867, the winter of 1869, and again in the winter of 1875-6. On all these occasions he was enthusiastically received. His lecturing career drew to a close following a tour of the north of England in late 1878. Arriving home from Barrow in Furness, he endured three weeks of illness and died on 29 December 1878 at his house, 74 Gaisford Street, London. He was survived by his wife and several children. 


@@@@@


doc= 28310


John Vincent (1590/91-1646), heir of Thomas Vincent of Northill, Cornwall, and younger brother of Thomas Vincent (1634-1678). John matriculated from New College, Oxford, on 15 December 1609, and became a student at Lincoln's Inn in 1612. He was first beneficed in Cornwall, but was ejected from several positions in various parts of the country. After arriving in London in 1642, he was nominated by the committee of the Westminster assembly to the rich rectory of Sedgefield, co. Durham, and instituted in 1644, but died in 1646. His widow, Sarah Vincent, petitioned on 1 November 1656 and in April 1657 for $60 which her husband had lent to the parliament. 


@@@@@


doc= 28311


Vincent, John Painter (1776-1852), surgeon, was born at Newbury, Berkshire, the son of Osman Vincent, silk merchant and banker in Newbury, who lived at nearby Donnington. Richard Budd Vincent, naval captain, was his elder brother. John Vincent was apprenticed in 1793 to William Long, who was surgeon to Christ's Hospital and assistant surgeon to St Bartholomew's Hospital. While an apprentice he attended Leigh Hunt, then a boy at Christ's Hospital, who said that Vincent 'was dark, like a West Indian, and I used to think him handsome' (Hunt, 141). Vincent became a member of the Company of Surgeons on 20 March 1800, and of the newly incorporated Royal College of Surgeons two days later. He was assistant surgeon to St Bartholomew's Hospital from 1807, succeeding William Long and taking over his house in Lincoln's Inn Fields. He was full surgeon from 1816. Vincent married Maria, daughter of Samuel Parke of Kensington, on 28 May 1812; they had six children, of whom three sons survived him. One became a barrister, and two became clergymen. His wife died in October 1824, and he then married Elizabeth Mary Williams, who survived him. 
At the Royal College of Surgeons Vincent was a member of the council (from 1822), a member of the court of examiners (1825-51), Hunterian orator (1829), vice-president (1830, 1831, 1838, and 1839), and president (1832 and 1840). He was not in favour of establishing fellowships, but was one of the original 300 elected in 1843. 
'Old Vinco' was popular with the students. He always walked to the hospital, 'shuffling along with short steps, his hands never in his pockets, never behind him, but always clasped in front, as if ready to do handy work. He was very careful of his hands, and well he might be, for they were his best instruments' (Plarr, 462). Vincent was an 'able practical surgeon, shrewd in diagnosis... he never taught in the school -- never even, I think, gave a clinical lecture... disposed to avoid operations, unless obviously necessary' (ibid., 462). He wrote little, but published his Hunterian oration in 1829, and a work on surgical practice, in 1847. 
Vincent fell ill and resigned as surgeon to St Bartholomew's in 1847; he was made a governor of the hospital, but he kept his college offices until 1851. He died at Woodlands Manor, near Wrotham and Sevenoaks, Kent, on 17 July 1852, and was buried in the church he had built at Woodlands, where his youngest son was perpetual curate. 


@@@@@


doc= 28312


Vincent, Nathaniel (1637/8-1697), nonconformist minister, was the third son of 
Nathaniel was registered at Oxford as a chorister on 18 October 1648, aged ten. He matriculated from Corpus Christi College on 28 March 1655, graduated BA from Christ Church on 13 March 1656, proceeded MA on 11 June 1657, and returned as chaplain to Corpus Christi College. He was appointed by Cromwell as one of the first fellows of Durham College, but never lived there. About 1658, aged twenty, he was preaching at Pulborough, Sussex, and the following year he was ordained and presented to the rectory of Langley Marish, Buckinghamshire. 
After his ejection in August 1662, Vincent served for three years as chaplain to Sir Henry Blount and his wife, Hester, at Tittenhanger, Hertfordshire. Here, as he later recalled, 'the world was presented to me in the gayest dress: your house large, and bravely furnished; your gardens delightful; your park and walks hardly to be matched; your table abundantly and sumptuously furnished' (Vincent, 'The Spirit of Prayer', A2'r'- 'v'). According to Edmund Calamy, soon after the great fire in 1666 he went to London, where he preached to large crowds among the ruins of the city. In 1669 he was reported to be preaching at Wraysbury and Colnbrook in Buckinghamshire to '2 or 300 none of any quality, the most considerable is one Slocombe a mercer. They say they will uphold their conventicle in spite of the King or Bishop' (Gordon, 161). But in that year he was also active in London, at Farthing Alley, and in the Southwark parishes of St Saviour, where he preached a sermon published as 'The Day of Grace' (1669), and St Olave, where, 'in a house built on purpose' shortly after the great fire, he 'catechiseth the people and baptizeth children some privately some publicly in his conventicle' (ibid.), although periodically soldiers arrived to prevent his preaching. In the early summer of 1670 Vincent married Anna, whose other name is unknown. 
That July Vincent was arrested by soldiers who 'rudely pulled him out of the pulpit by the hair of the head, after they had planted four muskets at the four corners of his pulpit', but 'as they were carrying him through the narrow alley adjoining, the multitude crowded in between him and the soldiers, and rescued him'. However, within a few weeks he was recaptured and soon sent to the Marshalsea in Southwark, 'where the great number of people that came to visit him gave offence', so the prisoner 'was hurried away' (Calamy, 'Continuation', 1.137-8). His removal to the Gatehouse, Westminster, would have remained secret had not an acquaintance observed it by chance. On 28 September the council granted his wife's petition to visit him, as he was suffering from fever. Towards the end of November Anna petitioned for permission to attend her husband with a nurse, and for a physician to be admitted, 'he having been taken dangerously ill' ('CSP dom.', 'addenda', '1660-70', 546). His book 'A Covert from the Storm' was written in the Gatehouse, 'during his close confinement, when few could come at him but his God' (title-page). The date of Vincent's release is unclear, but Joseph Williamson noted on 31 December 1671 that he was again preaching in Farthing Alley and was 'very followed' ('CSP dom.', 'addenda', '1660-85', 341). Vincent was licensed as a presbyterian teacher there on 2 April 1672, following the receipt of a letter in his favour from his sister's husband, James Inness. Vincent's 'The Morning Exercise Against Popery' (1675) included sermons from other nonconformist ministers, but he continued to publish extensively on his own account. Works on conversion were complemented by 'The Little Childes Catechism' (1679) and several funeral sermons. 
In December 1681, according to the official record, Vincent's meeting-house was visited 'by three justices with constables and other officers'; he refused to obey their order to stop preaching, 'but proceeded in his discourse, till the noise was so great he could not well be heard' ('CSP dom.', '1680-81', 640). When the meeting broke up, the justices took a note of the names of those who were known and then departed. However, this account appears to do less than full justice to the incident. As the justices discovered, the meeting-house had both many exits and many peep-holes from which to view visitors: 'when the justices commanded his audience to disperse, they were drowned out with hymn-singing while the preacher made his escape' (Greaves, 92). On 4 January 1683 Oliver Heywood kept a solemn fast with Vincent at his meeting-house. The following Wednesday Vincent appeared at the quarter sessions at Dorking, Surrey, far from his Southwark friends, charged with conventicling under the statute of 35 Elizabeth. He was sentenced to three months in gaol, to be followed by banishment. Heywood took leave of him in the Marshalsea on 29 January 1683, but on Vincent's petition the privy council ordered on 14 February that a writ of error be issued by the attorney-general, returnable in the king's bench, and after the expenditure of $200, and many delays in which he was unable to secure a hearing, news reached Heywood on 26 May that Vincent was 'cleared in open court the solicitor saying there was more faults in the indictment than in the man, and so threw it out blessed be God' ('Autobiography', 89). In the aftermath of the duke of Monmouth's rebellion, some time before 26 January 1686 Vincent was arrested at Exeter on charges of involvement, and sent for by the king. 
Apparently for some time an admirer of Richard Baxter, in 1691 Vincent published 'An Elegy' upon his death. After 1689 he had been less troubled by official harassment, but in 1692 sixty members of his church departed to join the congregation of Richard Fincher at Unicorn Yard, in Southwark. This 'made a deeper impression upon his Spirit, than any of the Troubles he had met with for Nonconformity' (Wilson, 306). Also in 1692, he was nominated, but declined to serve, as a manager of the common fund of presbyterians and Independents. This may have been due to the illness which also gave rise to his 'A Present for such as have been Sick...' (1693). In November 1695 he preached a funeral sermon for Edward Laurence, a fellow minister, published as 'The Perfect Man Described' (1696). He was living at St Giles, Holborn, when he signed his will on 1 February 1697, and died suddenly on 22 June, aged fifty-eight, leaving a widow, Anna, a son, Nathaniel, and daughters Mary, Elizabeth, Hannah, and Judith. He was buried at Bunhill Fields. The funeral sermon was preached by Nathaniel Taylor, who provides evidence that the congregation had been plagued with contention even after the defections to Fincher. He recalled the deceased pastor's 'great zeal against bold intruders into the work of the ministry', who 'begin to swarm among us', warning against false friends whose aim was 'the tearing and dividing you in pieces' (Taylor, 25, 28). Taylor recalled of Vincent that 'His compassion to the poor was great, to whom he gave alms and holy advice at the same time' (ibid., 26). Anthony Wood's assessment of Vincent was also (and more surprisingly) positive: 'He was of smarter, more brisk, and florid parts than most of his dull and sluggish fraternity can reasonably pretend to; of a facetious and jolly humour, and a considerable scholar' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.617). 


@@@@@


doc= 28313


Vincent, Philip (bap. 1600?), author, may have been the Philip Vincent baptized on 23 November 1600 at Frisby in the parish of Conisbrough, Yorkshire, the second son of Richard Vincent (died 1617), a lawyer, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Rokeby of Hotham in the same county. This would make him the grandson of Richard Vincent, army officer and younger son of the family of Vincent of Braywell, Yorkshire. This Philip Vincent was educated at Peterhouse, Cambridge, and in 1625 was presented by Sir Francis Vincent to the rectory of Stoke D'Abernon in Surrey, which he resigned on 17 August 1629. At the church of St Bartholomew-the-Great, London, on 17 March 1625 he married Frances, daughter of Sir Christopher Hedon of Baconthorpe, Norfolk, and widow of Henry Draper of Bromley, Kent. They had three sons before her death on 30 November 1630. 
Vincent produced two known works, which appear to have come from his travels. The first, 'The lamentations of Germany, wherein, as in a glasse, we may behold her miserable condition, composed by Dr Vincent, Theo.', was signed P. Vencent, and appeared in London in 1638. The account describes his travels in Germany from 1633 to 1635, during which he was besieged in Heidelberg by the Spaniards. His accounts describe the horrors of the scene in great detail, graphically depicting the hardships of the inhabitants and the abuses of the soldiers. 
Vincent's second work, 'A True Relation of the Late Battell Fought in New England and the Salvages', also first appeared in London in 1638, and was signed P. Vincentius. The author states he had previously visited Guiana and describes the New England scene with such detail that he received his information either at first hand or from a reliable second-hand source. The account describes the 1637 war between the New England colonists and the Pequot Indians, whom Vincent describes as 'a stately warlike people, which have been terrible to their neighbours, and troublesome to the English'. Manipulated by the Pequot's Amerindian rivals, Connecticut sent an ultimatum demanding that the Pequot become a tributary. Not surprisingly, the powerful Pequot refused and braced for war. Vincent's account describes the destruction of the second largest Pequot village in May 1637. The Connecticut-led force of some ninety colonists, seventy Amerindians under the command of the Mohegan leader Uncas and 500 Narragansett warriors caught the village by surprise. Defended fiercely by 150 warriors, the colonists and their Amerindian allies feared that the delay in taking the village would allow the main Pequot force to engage them. The Connecticut commander, John Mason, ordered that the village be burned and the survivors killed. Despite his vivid detail of the action and estimate of 'not less that 700 slaine or taken prisoners', Vincent did not hesitate to endorse the slaughter, remarking that 'sever justice must now then take place'. The colonists lost only sixteen men. When the main Pequot force arrived, they were demoralized by the scene, and surrendered in large numbers. The destruction of the Pequot marked the rise of Connecticut and the changing face of colonial-Amerindian warfare to conflicts of total destruction and extermination. Nothing more is known of Vincent. 


@@@@@


doc= 28314


Vincent, Richard Budd (1770?-1831), naval officer, was born at Newbury, Berkshire, where his father, Osman Vincent, was a silk merchant and banker. John Painter Vincent was his brother. Richard entered the navy in 1781 on the 'Britannia', flagship of Vice-Admiral Samuel Barrington, and was present at the relief of Gibraltar and the encounter with the allied fleet off Cape Spartel in October 1782. He was, after the peace, for three years in the 'Salisbury' on the Newfoundland station, served for four years in the channel, and on 3 November 1790 was promoted lieutenant. In 1793 he went to the Mediterranean in the 'Terrible', was present at the Toulon operations, and in 1794 on the coast of Corsica. In October 1794 he was moved into the 'Victory', Lord Hood's flagship, then understood to be the prelude to certain promotion. But in April 1795 Hood was summarily ordered to strike his flag, and Vincent's chance was gone. It did not come again until 29 April 1802, when, after seven years' continuous service, mostly in the North Sea, he was promoted commander, and three weeks later was appointed to the 'Arrow', one of a class of sloops built and armed on a plan proposed by Samuel Bentham. She carried twenty-eight 32-pounder carronades, an armament heavier, in the weight of shot, than that of any frigate then afloat, but effective at only very short range. After nearly a year's anti-smuggling service in the channel, she was paid off on 28 February 1803, and recommissioned the next day, again by Vincent, for the Mediterranean, where for the next two years she was mostly engaged in convoying the trade up the Adriatic and around the Greek archipelago. 
By the end of 1804 the 'Arrow' was in need of a thorough repair; many of her timbers were rotten, and a survey at Malta decided that she was too weak to heave down; she must go home to be docked. She was accordingly ordered, with the bomb-vessel 'Acheron' in company, to take charge of the homeward-bound trade. They sailed from Malta towards the end of January, and on 3 February were seen and chased between Algiers and Cape Tenes by two French frigates, the 'Incorruptible' (38 guns) and 'Hortense' (40 guns), the only two ships of Villeneuve's squadron which had continued at sea when the squadron itself was driven back by bad weather on 21 January. Between these and the convoy Vincent interposed the 'Arrow' and the 'Acheron', hoping that he might at least be able to give the merchant ships time to escape. At about 7.30 on the morning of 4 February the French frigates brought them to action, and captured both after a brilliant defence of nearly two hours. Armed only with carronades the two vessels were outranged in a one-sided battle. The 'Arrow' sank almost immediately afterwards, before all her men could be removed; the 'Acheron' was set on fire and destroyed. The merchant ships had meanwhile escaped to the westward, and only three of them were captured. Officers and men were taken to Cartagena, whence in May they were sent in a cartel brig to Gibraltar. They arrived in England early in June. The court martial on Vincent, on 17 June, honourably acquitted him, and praised his conduct. 
Two days after the trial Vincent was advanced to post rank by a commission dated 8 April, and on 3 July the committee of the Patriotic Fund awarded him a sword of the value of $100, and a piece of plate of the same value. Four years later the merchants of Malta presented him with a handsome service of plate. In May 1806 he was appointed to the 'Brilliant' (28 guns) on the Irish station, but in October he was obliged by ill health to resign the command, nor was he able to accept any further employment until March 1808, when he was appointed to the frigate 'Cambrian' in the Mediterranean. From her he moved into the 'Hind' (28 guns), but in September 1808, being at Malta, he complied with the request of Sir Alexander John Ball to assist him in the duties of the port as captain of the 'Trident' (64 guns). With Ball and his successors, he remained in the 'Trident' until December 1815, when he was appointed to the 'Aquilon' (32 guns), in which he returned to England in April 1816. He was made a CB in June 1815. He had no further service and died at Deal, Kent, on 18 August 1831. 


@@@@@


doc= 28315


Vincent, Thomas (1634-1678), clergyman and ejected minister, was born in May 1634 in Hertford (where he was baptized on 18 October), the son of John Vincent (1590/91-1646) ['see under 'Vincent, Nathaniel]. The name of Vincent's mother is uncertain: John's widow Sarah petitioned in 1656 for repayment of loans that he had made to parliament but she may have been a second wife. His father was a puritan clergyman whose lack of conformity led to his being harried by the ecclesiastical authorities. Indeed, Thomas's childhood was unsettled, his father being 'so harrassed, and forc'd upon so many Removes for his Nonconformity' that, Calamy claimed, Vincent and his many siblings were each born in different counties (Calamy, 'Continuation', 1.30). Thomas's younger brother Nathaniel Vincent became a Presbyterian minister. 
Vincent was educated first at Westminster School, and then at Felsted School, Great Dunmow, Essex, the latter a strongly puritan institution under the mastership of Martin Holbeach. Admitted to Christ Church, Oxford, in 1648, he matriculated in February 1651, graduating BA in March 1652, and MA in June 1654. At this point, exceptionally for a junior member, he was elected catechist. He subsequently became chaplain to Robert Sidney, second earl of Leicester, and in 1656 was incorporated into the University of Cambridge. No surviving evidence indicates Vincent's formal ordination. In July 1657 he was nevertheless appointed rector by sequestration of St Mary Magdalen, Milk Street, London. Ejected in 1662 under the 'Act of Uniformity', he assisted Thomas Doolittle for the next few years at his nonconformist academy in Bunhill Fields, continuing to preach privately and opportunistically. Vincent's address at this time is unknown; he was certainly living in Spitalfields in 1671-2. 
Upon the outbreak of the plague in 1665 Vincent was among a number of silenced nonconformists who emerged, as conforming ministers fled the city, to attend to the congregations they left behind. Vincent preached in churches throughout London and, undeterred by the risk of infection, ministered to the sick and dying in their homes. 'Void of all fear of death' (Neal, 451), he won interdenominational respect; his sermons also accumulated a multitudinous following, their peculiar intensity honed by the extreme circumstances. His printed meditation on the plague, 'Gods Terrible Voice in the City' (1667), ran to sixteen editions within just eight years. 
After 1665 Vincent preached more openly without licence, and was thus regarded with suspicion by the Restoration authorities. He had gathered together a congregation, for which a large meeting-house, seating 500, was built in 1669 in Hand Alley, off Bishopsgate Street. This meeting-house was allegedly among those seized by conformists who had lost their own churches to the fire of 1666; while Vincent reclaimed his premises, he remained subject to harassment and prosecution, and in 1672 was fined $20 for preaching. He was nevertheless granted a licence under the declaration of indulgence in 1672, and ministered to a devoted congregation until his death. Throughout his final decade he published a number of writings, most notably the popular 'Explicatory Catechism' (1673). While his works were predominantly doctrinal and devotional, he also published polemical challenges to William Penn and William Sherlock. Towards the end of his life he moved to Hoxton, Middlesex. 
There are few extant details of Vincent's immediate family. At some point he married, and with his wife, Mary, who survived him, had at least four children. He died on 15 October 1678 in Hoxton, and was buried on 27 October at the church of St Giles Cripplegate. His funeral sermon, subsequently published, was preached by Samuel Slater. Vincent was apparently of comfortable means at the time of his death, leaving property and assets of unknown value to his family, and a number of monetary gifts to individual beneficiaries and the parish poor. While no visual likeness survives of him, a clear impression of his character and reputation emerges from the many eulogistic sketches of his life. A formidably eloquent and learned man, who reputedly knew the entire 'New Testament' and 'Psalms' by heart, Vincent was at once selfless and single-minded in his ministry, his 'Zeal and Diligence' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 3.95) unwavering in the face of both plague and persecution. He does indeed seem, as Slater states, to have been 'freely willing to venture his life for the salvation of souls' (Slater, 41). 


@@@@@


doc= 28316


Vincent, William (1739-1815), dean of Westminster and classical scholar, was born in the City of London on 2 November 1739, the fifth and youngest son of Giles Vincent of Lime Street ward and his wife, Sarah, daughter of Thomas Holloway of Newnham Murren, Oxfordshire. His father pursued the business of a packer and Portugal merchant, though the latter business was devastated by the Lisbon earthquake of 1755, which also killed William's eldest brother. 
Vincent was admitted to Westminster School in September 1748 and became a king's scholar in 1753. He remained associated with Westminster until his death and was only absent from its precincts during his years at Cambridge, where he entered Trinity College in June 1757. He was elected to a scholarship in April 1758, matriculated the same year, and graduated BA in 1761, MA in 1764, and BD and DD in 1776. In 1762 he was elected to a fellowship but in the same year he returned to Westminster School as usher, or assistant master. He was ordained deacon on 19 December 1762 and priest on 22 September 1765. 
In 1771 Vincent succeeded Pierson Lloyd as under-master at Westminster and was also appointed chaplain to the king. On 15 August at St Margaret's, Westminster, he married Hannah ('bap'. 1735, died 1807), fourth daughter of George Wyatt, chief clerk of the vote office in the House of Commons, and his wife, Hannah. They had three children: William St Andrew (1772-1849), who became a clergyman; George-Giles (1774-1859), who was appointed chapter clerk and registrar of Westminster Abbey in 1803; and Hannah-Elizabeth (1776-1777). 
In 1788 Vincent succeeded Samuel Smith as headmaster of Westminster School. In the same year he was appointed vicar of Longdon, in Worcestershire, but soon resigned that living to become rector of All Hallows-the-Great, in the City of London. He was appointed sub-almoner to the king in 1784, was president of Sion College in 1798, and acted as prolocutor of the lower house of convocation in 1802, 1806, and 1807. 
In 1792, when alarm at the potential consequences of the French Revolution was at its height, Vincent preached at St Margaret's, Westminster, for the benefit of the Grey Coat Hospital, a Westminster charity school. The sermon, in which he defended both the prevailing social order and the constitution, reflected his strongly held tory views, and the major part of it was published by the Patriotic Association in a print-run of 20,000 copies. 
Vincent was installed as a prebendary of Westminster on 21 April 1801. He consequently retired from his teaching at Westminster School but not before responding vigorously to accusations by Thomas Rennell, master of the Temple, and Thomas Lewis O'Beirne, bishop of Meath, that religious education was being neglected in the public schools. A pamphlet entitled 'A Defence of Public Education' (1801), in which Vincent refuted the allegations by drawing on his intimate knowledge of the curriculum at Westminster, occasioned some controversy and ran to three editions. It was the only one of his works from which he ever benefited financially (the profits were good-humouredly presented to his wife) and his subsequent installation as dean of Westminster on 7 August 1803 appears to have resulted from it. 
In 1805 Vincent obtained the living of St John's, Westminster, in the gift of the dean and chapter, and resigned his incumbency at All Hallows-the-Great. After two years he exchanged St John's for another of the dean and chapter's livings, the rectory of Islip, in Oxfordshire, thereby obtaining a country residence which he much enjoyed and where he regularly stayed. He attended diligently to parochial business, enquired into the antiquities of the parish, and repaired and enlarged the dilapidated rectory. Islip also brought him into close proximity with Oxford University, where he preached the annual sermon for the benefit of the Radcliffe Infirmary in July 1808. 
The first fruits of Vincent's classical scholarship was 'De legione Manliana quaestio ex Livio desumta' (1793), in which by means of an ingenious emendation he reconciled the seemingly contradictory accounts of Polybius and Livy respecting the Roman legion. This solution to a problem that had long perplexed classical scholars was well received both at home and on the continent. Two further pamphlets quickly followed, 'The Origination of the Greek Verb: an Hypothesis' (1794) and 'The Greek Verb Analysed: an Hypothesis' (1795), both concerned with the development of the Greek language and the inflection of its verbs. These works Vincent was required to defend against charges of plagiarism, conclusions of a similar nature having appeared in the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' about the same time. His views did not succeed in holding their ground. 
Vincent's chief study, however, was ancient geography and commerce, and his scholarly reputation rests on two major works. 'The Voyage of Nearchus from the Indus to the Euphrates' (1797) is a commentary on an expedition recorded by Arrian of Nicomedia in his 'Indica' that Vincent termed 'the first event of general importance to mankind in the history of navigation' ('The Voyage of Nearchus', 1.1). The voyage was conceived by Alexander the Great, about whom Vincent wrote with an admiration unusual for the time. His commentary drew on a wide range of sources and he was assisted by Samuel Horsley, dean of Westminster, who loaned two astronomical treatises, and by Alexander Dalrymple, hydrographer to the Admiralty, who prepared charts for him. More unusually for the period he made use of oral evidence from those who had recently visited the regions concerned. The subject was pursued further in 'The Periplus of the Erythraean Sea', issued in two parts, in 1800 and 1805, respectively. He argued against the prevailing view that this too was the work of Arrian, attributing it instead to an unidentified Alexandrian merchant of the first or second century BC. 
In 1807 these erudite commentaries were brought together as a second edition (in two volumes) under the title 'The Commerce and Navigation of the Ancients in the Indian Ocean'. The whole work was dedicated to Lord Sidmouth (to whom Vincent owed his promotion to the Westminster deanery), though the original dedication of each individual part to George III was retained. Vincent's own copy, annotated with his manuscript notes, survives in the library at Westminster Abbey. English translations of the original Greek texts of the 'Voyage of Nearchus' and 'The Periplus' followed in 1809. 
Vincent also published a number of other pamphlets and contributed articles on a range of geographical and classical subjects to the 'Classical Journal', the 'Gentleman's Magazine', and the 'British Critic'. Through the columns of the last of these he participated in the debates concerning the existence of Troy and the historical veracity of the Trojan War. A volume entitled 'Sermons on Faith, Doctrines, and Public Duties' was published posthumously in 1817 by Vincent's eldest son and prefaced with a biographical account by his friend Robert Nares, archdeacon of Stafford. A second volume of sermons appeared in 1836. 
At Westminster Abbey Vincent's most pressing task was the much needed restoration of Henry VII's lady chapel, but when a serious fire broke out in the roof of the lantern in July 1803 resources had to be directed instead to immediate and expensive repairs in the north transept. Under Vincent's leadership the dean and chapter successfully petitioned the House of Commons for public money to support the repair of the chapel, and between 1807 and 1822 a series of grants totalling more than $42,000 was received. Work proceeded under the direction of Thomas Gayfere and Benjamin Wyatt, and though the supervising parliamentary committee tried hard to restrict repairs to those that were necessary for the security of the building Vincent resisted by simply ordering the work to continue. 
Although as a master at Westminster School Vincent reputedly resembled Richard Busby in his love for the rod, in other respects he was warm-hearted by nature, wearing his erudition lightly and with modesty. With the learned he was 'ready to enquire and to communicate' and with the ignorant 'so very indulgent, that they hardly suspected their infirmity' (Nares, xix). Generous in spirit, as exemplified when, on his advancement as dean, he quickly obtained a living for the curate who had been his assistant at All Hallows-the-Great for twenty-two years, he was a zealous patron of the Society of Schoolmasters, even though its formation postdated his own departure from that profession. 
From an early age weakness of the eyes had prevented Vincent from reading or writing by artificial light but in other respects he had a robust constitution, in spite of taking very little exercise. He died, aged seventy-six, at the deanery, Westminster, on 21 December 1815, after a short illness of the stomach, and was buried in St Benedict's chapel in Westminster Abbey on 29 December. Mural monuments in the south transept (by unknown artists), with inscriptions composed by Vincent, commemorate both himself and his wife. His name is perpetuated by Vincent Square, which through his influence was preserved as a playing field for Westminster School. 


@@@@@


doc= 28317


Viner, Charles (bap. 1678, d. 1756), legal writer and university benefactor, was born in Salisbury and baptized there at St Mary's Church, on 3 November 1678, the son of Charles Viner ('fl'. 1660-1711) and his wife, Mary. His father was a prosperous draper, and perhaps a kinsman of Sir Robert Vyner, goldsmith and lord mayor of London. He matriculated at Hart Hall, Oxford, in 1695, but left without taking a degree. In 1699 he married the fifteen-year-old Ralegh Weekes (1684-1761) of Gloucester, a descendant of Sir Walter Ralegh. They lived together at Aldershot, Hampshire, until Viner's death. 
Viner entered the Middle Temple in 1700, and although he was never called to the bar he kept chambers in King's Bench Walk, Temple, from where he gave occasional legal advice. His real interest, however, was more in the literature of the law than in its practice. He began to collect notes of recently decided cases in 1703, but devoted the greater part of his life to the exhaustive arrangement of existing legal materials under alphabetical headings, based on the works of his predecessors Robert Brooke and Henry Rolle. His 'General abridgment of law and equity: alphabetically digested under proper titles, with notes and references to the whole' was published in 23 volumes between 1742 and 1757 (the final volume posthumously). This was printed, reputedly under Viner's direction at his own home, on paper watermarked with his monogram, published by him personally, and the earlier volumes sold from his chambers in the Temple. Though unwieldy to use, it was the most comprehensive attempt to render accessible the legal materials printed before his time, and it remains an invaluable key to these works. An 'Alphabetical Index' to the work was published by Robert Kelham in 1758, and incorporated into the second edition of the 'Abridgment' (1791-4). 
From the early 1740s Viner had it in mind to leave his estate to support the study of the common law in the University of Oxford, and he was encouraged in this by the university. He died at Aldershot on 5 June 1756; on his death Oxford received almost the whole of his estate, valued at $12,000, to endow a professorship of the common law -- whose first holder was Sir William Blackstone -- together with fellowships and scholarships. The Vinerian foundation formed the bedrock of common law studies at Oxford. Viner's correspondence reveals him as an irritable, at times exasperating, man, with a marked antipathy towards lawyers, booksellers, and printers. He was the most generous academic benefactor of the University of Oxford in the eighteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 28318


Vyner, Sir Robert, baronet (1631-1688), goldsmith and banker, was born in Warwick, the third son of William Vyner and his second wife, Susannah, 'nee' Fulwood. The Vyner family belonged to what their seventeenth-century contemporaries often called 'the middling sort', and their story illustrates the extent of social mobility: William's eldest son remained in the country and does not seem to have changed his status or radically improved his fortunes; the second son, Thomas, made a career in the church and ended his days as a doctor of divinity and dean of Gloucester. Robert was apprenticed to his father's half-brother Thomas Vyner (1588-1665) in 1646. He became free of the Goldsmiths' Company and his step-uncle's partner in 1656; a third member of the partnership conveniently died soon after this and Robert took over his share. He was involved in public finance under the protectorate, but on account of his relative youth less prominently so than his step-uncle. A year after Charles II's return he became the king's goldsmith supplying the royal jewel house (a branch of the royal household) over the next twenty-four years. In this way he must have enjoyed opportunities for patronage, being, through his office, in a position to commission silver plate and other gold- and silverware from master craftsmen in the Goldsmiths' Company. On the death of his step-uncle, Sir Thomas, in 1665, Vyner assumed sole control of the banking house, then at the Vine in Lombard Street, which had to be relocated after the great fire a year later. In addition he was made an overseer of Sir Thomas's will, but within eighteen months the latter's younger son and sole executor in turn died; Sir Robert then became executor of both their wills and was also effectively the heir to his cousin's estate. His wealth must have been very considerably increased as a result of this. During the years that followed, he came to be the crown's largest single individual creditor and one of the country's largest-scale private bankers. He suffered a liquidity crisis in 1667-8 because of the crown's growing indebtedness at the end of the Second Anglo-Dutch War; he made desperate appeals both to the king and to the leading minister of the time, Lord Arlington, the senior secretary of state, but it seems more likely that it was Edward Backwell who came to his help, returning his assistance provided two years earlier. By this time Vyner was one of the commissioners and farmers of the customs, and also the power behind the syndicate farming the unpopular hearth tax. 
Having weathered one crisis Vyner appears to have gone on increasing his advances to the crown, these presumably much exceeding any credit balance on the private deposits in his hands. The only fragmentary ledger of his banking transactions known to exist covers three weeks beginning a few days after the great fire in September 1666, and it obviously cannot be taken as representative of his banking activities over a longer period. None the less a few facts stand out: his clients included the other goldsmith-bankers who were to be involved with him in the so-called 'Stop of the exchequer' just over five years later. These apart, the largest individual transactions recorded were with the famous firm of scriveners, Robert Clayton and John Morris, and with the excise farmers, but all manner of men, from Arlington himself to those of modest circumstances, dealt with him. The amount of cash left in hand at the end of each day's dealing varied greatly, from under $2000 to nearly $13,000, the average figure being just below $5000 and the median $3858. 
Like bankers in all ages, the London goldsmiths aimed to charge higher rates of interest to borrowers than they themselves had to pay to depositors; likewise, to make use of the overall credit balance in their hands at any given time to make further loans or to invest in other projects. Again, as with all banks, this depended on confidence in their creditworthiness and on their not suffering either unexpected major withdrawals or unanticipated large-scale defaulting by 'bad' debtors. Lending to English monarchs, as to other rulers and governments, had always been a risky business. For Vyner and his contemporaries the risks were much increased as a consequence of the system of Treasury orders and assignments devised by Sir George Downing and implemented from 1665 to 1666. This attempt to establish a system of short-term royal paper credit was a success, but not in the precise way which Downing and the politicians who backed him had intended. They had hoped that large numbers of reasonably affluent private individuals would lend money to the crown on the security of hypothecated future revenues -- secured initially on parliamentary taxes, and latterly also on the crown's ordinary or 'regular' income from customs, excise, and the hearth money. In practice, however, most such lenders rapidly reassigned their orders for repayment to one or more of the goldsmith-bankers, whose exposure thus grew indirectly as well as by their own direct advances to the crown. So when the king's inner circle of advisers persuaded him to avert a general bankruptcy while preparing for the Third Anglo-Dutch War, by the Stop of the exchequer in December 1671 - January 1672, they were hit disproportionately hard. It is not the case that all issues of money were suddenly cut off: that would have been royal bankruptcy indeed. Some payments were actually made to Vyner immediately following the Stop. None the less the cessation of all hypothecated payments on orders either assigned or reassigned, initially for one year and later extended to two years, cut the ground from under the bankers and imperilled them with their own creditors. In the first series of calculations of how much was owing by the crown to individuals or syndicates among the goldsmiths, Vyner's total was omitted, presumably being too complicated to work out in the time available, but when these debts were first refunded in 1674 by establishing a 6 per cent annual payment (of the capital sums owing in January 1672 plus the interest which had accrued since then), he was reckoned to be owed over $400,000. This was a truly colossal sum for that date, equivalent to well over one-third of the total amount owing to all the bankers, or -- to give another measure of comparison -- more than one-third of the total annual income supposedly settled on Charles II by parliament in 1660-61 but not in fact attained (war taxation apart) until well into the 1670s. It was equivalent to the yield of five pre-civil war parliamentary subsidies, or to the entire unprecedented, once-for-all grant made to Charles I in 1641-2, levied on the whole of England and Wales. 
It is remarkable that Vyner remained technically solvent until 1684, though his surviving papers show him borrowing on bond like any other impecunious character of the day: under this system the debtor and/or his securities committed themselves to pay twice (or nearly twice) the sum being borrowed if this was not repaid by a fixed date, usually, though not invariably, one year ahead. The king, or rather his ministers, tried to get the letters patent under the great seal (originally of 1674, revised in 1677) for the 6 per cent repayment by annuity turned into an act of parliament in 1678, in order to put the bankers' own provisions for the repayment of their respective creditors beyond the possibility of challenge in the courts; but deadlock between the two houses prevented this. In his first general attempt to settle with his creditors made in 1681 Vyner offered to pay four-fifths of what he owed them by instalments out of the king's annuity to him; the remaining one-fifth was to be found out of his own estate within one year. By 1684 it appears that about 40 out of the original 158 creditors had agreed to this and the offer had still not been implemented. It seems to have been these forty who shared the costs of the proceedings leading to the commission of bankruptcy which was issued against him in that year. How much had been extracted from his estate by the time of his death in 1688 is not clear; the crown's annuity was then stopped, but pressure for a final settlement evidently continued, for in 1699, fifteen years after his bankruptcy and eleven after his death, a private act of parliament (modelled on that passed for Backwell's creditors the year before) was at last passed; under its terms, if two-thirds of the creditors, in numbers and in the value of their claims, agreed to settle, the minority would have to accept the same conditions or else forfeit any claim on the estate thereafter -- an interesting use of statute to override or prevent ordinary legal process at either equity or common law. 
Vyner was knighted in 1665; he was created a baronet in 1666, the year in which he also became an alderman. He was high sheriff of London in 1667, having to obtain a special pardon on account of his formal responsibility for the escape from one of the city prisons of a convicted counterfeiter of the royal seal. Notwithstanding the crash of 1672, he was chosen as lord mayor in 1674, and -- according to oral tradition -- entertained the king with embarrassing conviviality. He undertook more than one confidential mission overseas, on the crown's behalf, in order, so it was said, to evade his creditors at home. In 1665 he married Mary Hyde (died 1675), daughter of John Whitchurch of Walton, Buckinghamshire, and widow of Sir Thomas Hyde, bt, a wealthy Hertfordshire landowner (not related to the earl of Clarendon or the other Wiltshire Hydes); she was said to have brought him a very large additional fortune during her lifetime. 
What became Vyner's country seat, the mansion house of Swakeleys near Ickenham, Middlesex, had been built in the 1630s by a future royalist lord mayor. It was inherited by one of his daughters, who married the republican politician Sir James Harrington, bt, who added embellishments to the interior of the house. Although he was attainted, imprisoned, and degraded to plain Mr Harrington after the Restoration, his wife somehow retained this property, which was bought by Vyner in 1665, presumably with his own wife's marriage portion. The daughter of her first marriage, Bridget Hyde, was also a considerable heiress. In January 1675, during his mayoralty, Vyner became a trustee to enforce the proposed marriage settlement between her and Peregrine Osborne, Lord Dunblane, second son of the lord treasurer, the earl of Danby. This became an extraordinary and embarrassing 'cause celebre'. The bride was held to have already entered into a form of marriage, at the age of twelve, with a plebeian relative. The courts took until 1682-3 to reach a final decision, the rival claimant to Bridget Hyde's hand (and fortune) having even then, it was said, to be bought out by the father-in-law to be, though by then Danby himself was in the Tower and Vyner on the eve of his own bankruptcy. Meanwhile, his wife having died on new year's day 1675, Vyner's stepdaughter was living with him at Swakeleys when she was abducted at pistol-point by a gang headed by a minor functionary of the royal bedchamber acting on behalf of Dunblane's rival, the girl's alleged husband. She was rescued in east London and restored to her stepfather's care, but just as the length of the matrimonial case reflects on the legal system, so the virtual pardon of the page of honour involved seems a reflection on Charles II's way of conducting business, almost reminiscent of his relations with the notorious Colonel Thomas Blood. A further legal agreement between Vyner and Danby survives from 1680. While there is some evidence of their relations having been strained at times, the whole affair emphasizes that Vyner moved in court circles to an extent which marked him out from the other goldsmiths -- indeed, from most other financiers and merchants of his day. The only child of his own marriage, Charles Vyner (1667-88), predeceased him by a few months, Vyner according to hearsay dying of a broken heart in consequence of this loss. He died at Windsor on 2 September 1688 and was buried at St Mary Woolnoth in the City of London on the 16th. 
His son's death caused Vyner to make a new will. All his properties and possessions were to be sold by his executors to the best possible advantage. Out of the proceeds his creditors were to receive 30 per cent of what he owed them, provided they accepted this offer and remained bound by it; the other 70 per cent owing to them was then secured on the 6 per cent annuity, payable to him out of the excise revenue until the king's debt to him was fully discharged. Out of the overplus on the estate, however much or little that might turn out to be, one-quarter was reserved to his executors -- his nephew Thomas, son of the late dean of Gloucester (Sir Robert's elder brother Thomas (1629-1673)), and Francis Millington (1637-1693) (husband of Sir Robert's eldest brother Samuel's daughter, Martha), his one-time business partner and fellow customs commissioner; of the remaining three-quarters, $100 was reserved for each of his two nephews, the sons of his eldest brother, Samuel (the stay-at-home Warwickshire branch of the family), while each of the four great London hospitals was to receive one-tenth (that is, three-fortieths of the total); the residuary legatees in equal shares were his four nieces and his other two nephews. Any legatee going to law with the executors was automatically to forfeit the whole of her or his share. Assuming that the terms of the will were observed, this explains how the residue of the estate descended through the dean's son, Thomas, and negates the claim by a latter-day descendant of Vyner's elder brother that their line had been cheated of their inheritance; if the terms of the will were not carried out, then this must remain an open question. It was the dean's grandson, Robert (1685-1777), who became the owner of Swakeleys, which in 1741 was sold in order to enlarge the estate in Lincolnshire, where this branch of the family was very well established during the eighteenth century and into the nineteenth. Their descendants then moved from Gautby in Lincolnshire to Newby Hall in the West Riding of Yorkshire later in the nineteenth century. The family's funeral monuments remained at Gautby, whither they had been removed from the City; the famous equestrian statue, originally commissioned for the king of Poland whose agents were unable to pay for it and which was then bought by Vyner, who had it shipped back to England and altered to represent Charles II, having been removed from the City during the eighteenth century and then erected at Gautby, was taken to Newby when the family moved there. 
Sir Robert's place in the long-term development of banking is hard to assess. In one sense he was obviously the forerunner of those financiers of the 1680s and 1690s who made possible the establishment of the Bank of England and the national debt. It might equally be argued that the Stop of the exchequer, into which the crown was tempted by the vulnerability of Vyner and the other goldsmiths, served to delay such changes by twenty years. Whichever view is preferred, there can be no doubt of his pre-eminence as a financier of the Restoration era. 


@@@@@


doc= 28319


Vyner, Sir Thomas, first baronet (1588-1665), goldsmith and banker, was born on 15 December 1588 at North Cerney in Gloucestershire, the son of Thomas Vyner, of a Warwickshire family, and his second wife, Anne. The younger Thomas was apprenticed in London, first to his half-sister's husband, Samuel Moore, of the Goldsmiths' Company, in 1601 and then to William Terry in 1604, taking his freedom in 1611. He first came to notice in 1624, when he obtained a reversion to the comptrollership of the mint -- an appropriate investment for someone with his qualifications, though he never took up this office. In 1639 he sold $79 worth of plate to Edward Nicholas, the future royalist secretary of state, but his political sympathies are better indicated by his having advanced $100 for the parliamentarian army under the earl of Essex in October 1643. He was one of the contractors appointed to manage the sale of bishops' lands in 1646, and he was named to various London committees in the years following the civil war. His allegiances have been described as those of a political presbyterian in the years 1646-8. His attitude towards the Commonwealth seems equivocal: he became an alderman of the City of London in 1646 and remained one until 1660. He served as high sheriff of the City of London in 1648-9 but certainly achieved greater prominence under the Cromwellian protectorate (1654-9) after the repeal of the engagement, the republican loyalty oath which expressed explicit approval of the abolition of monarchy and House of Lords and implicit support for the regicide. Even so, in December 1649 he was asked by the council of state to collect Spanish pieces of eight and to meet the admiralty committee if his other commitments permitted, and the next day he offered 7000 ryals at 4's' 10died each, pointing out that he could have asked for and received more than this. In 1652 he gave security for the settlement of his penal fine by the Catholic peer Lord Petre; but this was less a pointer to religious sympathy than a disguised way of obtaining the equivalent of a bond or mortgage. He was elected lord mayor of London in 1653-4 and was knighted by the protector at his inauguration in February 1654. 
In 1623 Vyner had acted as a co-treasurer or accountant for the money received from the Dutch East India Company as compensation for the Amboyna massacre, to be paid to the victims if they were still alive or, more likely, to their heirs and executors. He served in the same capacity for the funds raised to relieve various groups of persecuted European protestants, and he was involved in the transmission of captured Spanish bullion to the mint for coinage. He may also have acted as a banker for private individuals. His apprentices during the 1630s and 1640s included Edward Backwell, who was acting as a financier in his own right by the 1650s, and his own stepnephew Robert Vyner (1631-1688), who entered into an informal partnership with him in 1656. 
Sir Thomas was married three times. His first wife was Anne, daughter of Richard Parsons of London, a merchant; they had five daughters, including Elizabeth who married Sir Henry Pickering, another Cromwellian knight who became a Restoration baronet, and Rebecca who married Sir Richard Piggott, a tax farmer and successor to his wife's stepbrother as an office-holder in chancery. Vyner's second wife was Honor Humble (died 1656?), daughter of George Humble, of London, citizen and stationer; their two sons were George Vyner (died 1673) and Thomas Vyner (died 'c'.1666). His third, who survived him, was Alice, widow of Alderman John Perryn; they had no children. 
There is little evidence of the activities of Thomas and Robert Vyner between the fall of Richard Cromwell and the Restoration. Along with all other Cromwellian titles, Sir Thomas's knighthood automatically lapsed with the return of monarchy in 1660, but within nine weeks he was reknighted by Charles II, though he did not recover his place as an alderman, which he lost to another returned royalist. In 1661 he petitioned unsuccessfully for the office of king's goldsmith. He was made a baronet on 18 June 1661 and despite his age took an active part in providing cash and credit for the government of the restored monarchy. On 11 May 1665 he died at his country house in Hackney (then a suburban village), Middlesex, and Samuel Pepys attended his funeral at St Mary Woolnoth in the City on 1 June. Sir Thomas certainly helped to lay the foundations for the achievements of later seventeenth-century goldsmith-bankers, notably his own apprentices Edward Backwell and Robert Vyner. 
At his death Vyner had already established himself as a landed gentleman besides having had a house and an office in the City. He was perhaps fortunate in not having lived to see the effects of the plague, the great fire, and the naval disasters in 1667 at the end of the Dutch War. The arrangements at his death were a little unusual. The baronetcy passed to his son, Sir George Vyner, who was married to Abigail, daughter and coheir of Sir John Lawrence. George was also a member of the Goldsmiths' Company and, according to one authority, was acting as a banker around 1670; but he does not seem to have been very prominent as such, having by then established himself as a landed gentleman, as intended by his father. As required by the custom of the City, after payment of Sir Thomas's debts the residue was to be divided into three equal shares: one to his two sons, one to his wife, and the third, about $7000, to charities and other named legatees. All his real property in Middlesex and Essex was to go to Sir George for his lifetime, then to his heir apparent, Sir Thomas's grandson, and then to the grandson's heirs, in default of which to Sir Thomas's second son, Thomas, a minor office-holder in chancery, and his heirs. Sir George was required within two years to lay out a further $7000 on additional landed property; if he failed to do so, the bond for that amount entered into by his brother Thomas and his cousin Sir Robert (by an indenture of 1663) was to be forfeit to Thomas. If Sir Thomas's wife outlived him, she was to be paid $4330 by instalments, according to the marriage agreement made between them in 1658. This sum and a further $2500 which was to be paid by Sir George to his younger brother (in addition to an outright legacy of $2000 for Thomas) were both secured on part of the existing Essex property. To effect these complicated arrangements, the younger son was made sole executor, with two of Sir Thomas Vyner's sons-in-law and his stepnephew Sir Robert (here called 'cousin') as overseers of the will. The omission of the elder son is very striking. In the event Thomas, the executor, died only about a year and a half after his father, having made over his interest in the estate and the executorship to Sir Robert, who had already assumed sole control of the banking business at the Vine in Lombard Street (temporarily relocated after the great fire). Sir George died in 1673. When his son, Sir Thomas, third baronet, died under age and without heirs ten years later, the baronetage became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 28320


Viner, William Letton (1790-1867), organist and composer, was born at Bath on 14 May 1790. He studied under Charles Wesley (1757-1834), and in 1820 became organist of St Michael's, Bath. While at Bath he wrote an overture for 'Rob Roy', which though very popular and constantly performed at the theatre there, was never published. He became better known for the religious music that he later published. In December 1835, on the recommendation of Samuel Sebastian Wesley, he was appointed organist of St Mary's Chapelry, Penzance, where he remained until he went to America in 1859. 
Viner was a prolific composer of church music, organ music, and songs, and was the author of the hymn tune 'Helston' or 'Kingston', sometimes described as an ancient Cornish melody. He edited 'One Hundred Psalm and Hymn Tunes in Score' (1838), 'A Useful Selection from the most Approved Psalms' (1846), and 'The Chanter's Companion' (1857). He was also an excellent teacher of the organ, harp, and piano. He died at Westfield, Massachusetts, on 24 July 1867. 


@@@@@


doc= 28321


Vines, Richard (1597/8-1651), colonist in America and the West Indies, was born in London. Nothing is known about his parents and very little about his early years, and his date of birth is derived from his statement that he was fifty in 1648, when he witnessed a will. Some time before 1630 Sir Ferdinando Gorges dispatched Vines to explore lands claimed by Gorges in New England. Vines lived for a time in London, where his son was born in 1626, but he had migrated to North America by the summer of 1630. He settled near the Saco River, and spent a decade and a half in Maine as an agent and deputy governor for Gorges. A leading promoter of colonization, Gorges held a series of grants from the British crown capped by a charter for the province of Maine in 1639. An operator of a trading post and a large landowner, Vines also explored the province he helped to govern. Although a frequent correspondent with Massachusetts Bay governor John Winthrop, Vines remained a conforming member of the Church of England. His biggest challenge was defending the Gorges' interests against the claims of George Cleeve, an agent for Sir Alexander Rigby, a member of parliament who had secured the title to lands within territory granted to Gorges. Because his own property was within the tract claimed by Rigby, Vines decided to leave Maine when it appeared that a parliamentary inquiry which began in 1643 would rule in Rigby's favour. Parliament did so in 1646, but by then he had sold his lands and had sailed for the English colony of Barbados. On that prosperous sugar-producing island he acquired about 50 acres. By summer 1647 he could report that he was making a profit from the cultivation of tobacco and cotton and from his medical practice. Within four years he was able to make the transition to sugar cultivation. This modestly successful planter died on the island on 19 April 1651 and was buried in St Michael's Church. His wife, Joane, and four children, named Richard, Margaret, Elizabeth, and Joan, survived him. Although he spent his last six years in the West Indies, Vines's most notable contribution was in the early development of Maine. 


@@@@@


doc= 28322


Vines, Richard (1599/1600-1656), Church of England clergyman, was born at Blaston, Leicestershire; his parents' names are unknown. In 1619 he matriculated sizar from Magdalene College, Cambridge, where he was an excellent Greek scholar, and he graduated BA in 1623 and proceeded MA in 1627. He was ordained deacon and priest at Peterborough on 23 and 24 May 1624. That year he became schoolmaster at Hinckley, Leicestershire, and married Katherine (died in or after 1656), daughter of Humphrey Adderley of Weddington, Warwickshire, and granddaughter of Humphrey Adderley (1512-1598). He was schoolmaster until 11 March 1628 when he was presented by his father-in-law to the rectory of Weddington, and on 10 June 1630 to the neighbouring rectory of Caldecote. When Thomas Jacombe preached Vines's funeral sermon twenty-six years later he had this comment on his schoolmastering phase: 'let this be no disparagement' [how else could it have been taken?], he could instance but 'rare instruments of Gods glory in the Church of Christ, who began with that employment' (Jacombe, 39). In that funeral sermon Jacombe alluded to two common criticisms that were levelled at Vines: that he was restless and covetous. Since he held both his livings, worth together $80 a year, while the parish register at Hinckley shows that he was still living there in 1640 and, in addition, conducted a well-attended fortnightly lecture at Nuneaton, these early career moves may have been the foundation of the later criticisms. However, at the time Vines was well regarded among the godly of Warwickshire and was, for instance, a close friend of the theologian George Abbot, stepson of the militant puritan William Purefoy of Caldecote. 
When the civil war broke out Vines left Hinckley and was presented as one of the 'orthodox divines' to be consulted by parliament 'touching the reformation of church government and liturgie'. Another sign of his rising status was the frequency of invitations from the Long Parliament for him to preach to them. They liked his message: a warning against liberalism to popery which could be a 'Trojan horse' ('Calebs Integrity', 1646, preached on 30 Nov 1642); a readiness (like Luther) to take on the sects even if they could be mobilized as allies against the Catholics ('The Impostures of Seducing Teachers', 1656, preached on 23 April 1644); a dismay at religion's being debased into 'a kind of Philosophy of Opinions' ('The Posture of Davids Spirit', 1656, preached on 22 Oct 1644); and a plea to Independent ministers to break with the sects ('The Authour, Nature, and Danger of Heresie', 1662, preached on 10 March 1646). They may also have liked the way that the message was delivered. The fast sermons are, in general, by their nature ephemeral, but some of Vines's phrases were made to last. In the latter sermon, for instance, he has this striking observation: 'to make conscience the final judge of actions, is to wipe out the hand-writing of the Word of God' ('The Authour, Nature, and Danger of Heresie', 45). There is also a certain equivocation, of having it both ways. Thus in the same sermon he does not condemn Calvin for the execution of Servetus, but quotes approvingly Calvin's comment that Servetus 'might have saved his life had he been but modest'. Still, it would have been better to have fought heresy by light, not fire -- leave the fire to the papists. Papists can join Jews, Turks, and other heretics by being given the right to live in the kingdom, but it is another matter to allow them liberty to trade, and open up shops, for the purpose of disseminating their 'destructive' ideas (ibid., 48, 50). 
From 1643, having been ejected from his livings, Vines joined other puritan exiles (including Cornelius Burges and Richard Baxter) in Coventry, and established a daily lecture there at St Michael's. He was nominated a member of the Westminster assembly of divines by the ordinance of 12 June 1643, was sent up to London, and was placed in the rectory of St Clement Danes; it was later alleged that he preached there only when the assembly was in session. One of his parishioners was the earl of Essex. Vines's funeral oration for him on 22 October 1646 was later published as 'The Hearse of the Renowned'. His respect for the godly magistrate comes out in his tribute to Essex: 'he was a Justice that would scatter the drunkards from the Ale-bench' ('The Hearse of the Renowned', 15). Death for Vines was not the great leveller. True, we rot equally in the grave, and yet 'honour will follow after worth and merit even into its grave'. Again the gift for the striking phrase comes out in his claim that 'we do not buy up the carkasse of every Cole-ship with that respect as that of Drakes was' (ibid., 16). This is more than a conventional defence of hierarchy; it is also a defence of the funeral sermon. Like other English puritans he championed the funeral sermon as a genre for education; the Scottish presbyterians shunned it because they knew that it elevated personal merit above the insight that all of us rot in the grave equally -- and deserve to do so. 
Vines's contributions to debate in the Westminster assembly are well brought out in the minutes. Vines defended on 13 September 1643 the right of a colleague (Cornelius Burges) to sit in the assembly, even though he had opposed the solemn league and covenant. A day later he expressed his worries about an over-rigid Calvinism, which might fall short of full-scale antinomianism but which could be equally dangerous. Although he made common cause with a like-minded ecumenical spirit in the Independent minister Philip Nye, he nevertheless reminded him that agreement had to be rooted 'in things that are well not only in terms and notions'. But the role of his Scottish presbyterian colleagues was equally firmly circumscribed: 'counsellors', not 'dictators' ('Minutes of the Westminster assembly', 1, 1.238'v'). Like his Erastian colleague John Selden he was sceptical of divine-right claims from any quarter -- episcopalian or presbyterian. The claims made for the Hebrew Sanhedrin were a 'fiction', he said on 13 December 1643 (ibid., 1, 2.268'v'). Vines's own position in that assembly came under scrutiny on 8 July 1644. He had been sought for the mastership of Pembroke College, Cambridge. The debate focused on whether he should be forced to leave Coventry by a parliamentary ordinance, even though he was reluctant to take up the Cambridge job. The presbyterian minister Herbert Palmer, commented: 'I have not heard any piece of newes that troubles me more than this' (ibid., 2.155'v'). In the event Vines showed administrative flair in his mastership of Pembroke College and his reputation in the assembly itself continued to rise. 
It was a mark of colleagues' esteem that Vines was placed on the parliamentary 'committee of accommodation' on 13 September 1644, and was chosen as chairman a week later of the acting subcommittee. Although himself episcopally ordained, he defended the validity of ordination by presbyterians while simultaneously deflating the excessive claims for 'a classical presbytery' from the Scots ('Minutes of the Westminster assembly', 2.43). He was one of the assisting divines at the Uxbridge conference (30 January-18 February 1645). He resigned St Clement Danes on being presented to the rectory of Walton, Hertfordshire, on 22 May 1645. He was placed on the assembly's committee (12 May 1645) for drafting the confession of faith produced in 1647. He recalled that time in a letter years later to Richard Baxter, arguing justly that his compromise proposals then had avoided the overemphasis on works which was to bring so much criticism on Baxter's head. That criticism had focused on Baxter's first published work, 'The Aphorismes of Justification' (1649), which he had (perhaps brashly) dedicated to Vines and Anthony Burgess. Burgess was so incensed by it that he wrote against it. Baxter claimed, in contrast, that 'Mr Vines wrote to me applaudingly of it' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.107). The actual letter is more opaque than that would indicate. Vines repeats a list of current criticisms that Baxter had gone soft on Arminianism under the cover of the honest reporter, using the phrase 'This is said'. He even said that it draws 'too near Socinianisme' in places (Keeble and Nuttall, 1.58). 
Nevertheless, Vines and Baxter were puritans who could work with 'moderate' episcopalians (that is, those who did not subscribe to Laudian 'jure divino' claims for the office). Baxter, Vines, and Cornelius Burges were among a group of ministers and parliamentarians who had met twice a week in the early 1640s and who were 'not one for total abolishing of all, or any, but usurped Episcopacy' (Keeble and Nuttall, 1.409). Vines had sympathized with Burges's scruples about taking the covenant. Vines had his own scruples about the selling of church lands. Vines told Baxter that this was sacrilege (of interest to Burges, who had purchased Wells deanery and part of the cathedral estates). He explained to Baxter on 21 July 1649 that was why 'I could not maintain the cause as on the parliamentary side' with reference to the debate between the parliamentary commissioners and Charles I on this issue at Newport, Isle of Wight, in 1648. At those crucial last-ditch negotiations for monarchy Vines struck up a personal rapport with the king. It is significant that, on the morning of the king's execution, Vines was one of the puritan divines who proffered religious services to Charles. 
It was logical then that Vines declined the engagement in 1649; in 1650 it cost him his mastership of Pembroke and the rectory of Walton. It was, perhaps, less logical that Baxter joined him on this issue. They debated the matter together by letter, and both thought that the Commonwealth was constitutionally improper. But there is a personal quality to Vines's support for monarchy which is lacking in Baxter's position. This is well brought out many years later. At the turn of the century Thomas Carte was trying to kill off the rumours -- and he blamed Baxter principally for purveying them -- that Charles I had been mixed up in a popish plot. He then played his master-card: 'you may remember the character which Mr. Vines after the Treaty in the Isle of Wight gave the King to Mr. Gilbert the Presbyterian of Coventry... Of all the Kings of Israel and Judah there was none like him' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 223, fols. 276-7). 
These sentiments did not hold Vines back for long. In 1650 the parishioners of St Lawrence Jewry called him to be their minister, and he was invited to hold the living. The parishioners rebuilt the vicarage-house for him at a cost of $500; a few years later his stipend was $180 per annum. With his propensity to acquire offices, he was also chosen as one of the weekly lecturers at St Michael Cornhill. Baxter later recalled an occasion when he preached at St Lawrence Jewry to a church so packed that 'Mr. Vines himself was fain to get up into the Pulpit, and sit behind me, and I to stand between his legs' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 1.111-12). 
Vines and Baxter had a common hero in Archbishop James Ussher, whose 1641 scheme for a 'reduced episcopacy' was pressed in the 1650s by both men. When Baxter recommended to the tireless ecumenist John Durie the setting up of a committee of four each of 'Episcopalian', 'Presbyterian', 'Independent', and 'Erastian' groups, he placed Vines in the presbyterian camp (Ussher in the episcopalian). Baxter (substituting for Ussher) and Vines were among the ministers assisting the committee of ten to advise Cromwell on articles 36-38 of the 'Instrument of government'. After Ussher's death Vines recommended Bishop Ralph Brownrig of Exeter to Baxter as his likely spiritual heir, but Brownrig was less flexible than Ussher and Baxter by then was himself moving to Cromwellian sympathies which would have shocked Vines. 
But Vines himself had died by then, at the age of fifty-six; he was survived by his wife and buried at St Lawrence Jewry. As Jacombe in his funeral sermon put it pithily: on 4 February 1656 'Vines died suddenly. He went well to bed, slept and died.' Jacombe deplored a contemporary cheap shot: 'since extempore prayer, more extempore death' (Jacombe, 43). Baxter read his death differently. By dying so soon after administering the sacrament of the Lord's supper, Vines had joined that select band for whom mortality struck 'in the midst of some holy exercise' (Keeble and Nuttall, 1.204). 
In another way Vines's was an appropriate end. The last work that he published was 'A treatise of the institution, right administration and receiving of the sacrament of the Lords supper' (1656). He took on in debate the Erastian lawyer, William Prynne, who had argued that qualifications for admission to communion were over-rigorous. Vines disagreed: he argued that it was better that those who could should be elevated to the ordinance than that the ordinance should be lowered to them (free admission). Vines's treatise had been approved by Baxter. Yet Vines's line of defence was that discipline was necessary when the help of the civil magistrate was withdrawn. Thus the church under a heathen emperor (or no emperor at all), had no other way of 'self-preservation from scandals of members, but purging them out'. The alternative way of preventing scandal -- a partnership between church and magistrate -- was what Baxter urged in his 'Holy Commonwealth' of 1659. At the time of Vines's death such a hypothesis would have been unthinkable for either man and -- given Vines's feelings for monarch and monarchy -- would have gone on being unthinkable for Vines. But when Baxter consulted three divines before publishing his Confession in 1654, such was then their unity that (Baxter said) none of them wanted him to change a word of it. Baxter brought the three together (in execrable verse) in his final obituary tribute to Vines: '
If but three such in all our times 

as USHER, GATAKER and VINES. 
('A Treatise of... the Lords Supper', 1656, preface)' 



@@@@@


doc= 28323


Frederick Vining (bap. 1790, d. 1871), a son, appeared as Young Norval at Gravesend in 1807, afterwards remaining on the Gravesend, Worthing, Hythe, and Brighton circuit. In 1809 he played Durimel in 'The Point of Honour' at Bath, and subsequently played at Norwich. On 17 September 1813 he made his London debut at Covent Garden as Frederick in 'The Poor Gentleman'; other parts there included Harry Dornton in 'The Road to Ruin', and the original Count Frederick Friberg in 'The Miller and his Men'. On 2 March 1814 he married Marian Jemima Bew, an actress, who died from breast cancer on 17 June 1853 at the age of sixty-one. A daughter, Marian, was baptized in Ipswich in 1817. In 1821 Frederick Vining was back in Bath, where, among other roles, he was the first Tressilian in 'Kenilworth'. In 1823 he opened at the Haymarket as Young Rapid in 'A Cure for the Heartache', and went on to play many more characters in comedy at that theatre, at which he was also stage manager for a short time. He died at Camberwell House Lunatic Asylum, Camberwell, on 2 June 1871. 
There appear to have been two actresses called Fanny Vining. 


@@@@@


doc= 28324


George James Vining (1824-1875), who also enjoyed a successful career on the stage. George James was educated at St Peter's Grammar School in Eaton Square, London, and subsequently in France, and spent six years working in a bank before making his professional theatrical debut in Newmarket on 4 December 1845 as Hamlet. In Jersey he met Macready (in whose company James Vining had been) and played with him in Bath and Bristol. He then joined Mary Amelia Warner for her opening season at the Marylebone Theatre, making his London debut there as Florizel in 'The Winter's Tale' (20 August 1847). On 31 August 1850 he married Sarah Mary Vertigan Stubbs ('b'. in or before 1828/9). In 1853 he was with Alfred Wigan at the Olympic, where he was the first Captain Hawksley in Tom Taylor's 'Still Waters Run Deep'. In 1856 he created the part of Frank Lauriston in 'Stay at Home', an adaptation by Slingsby Lawrence of 'Un mari qui se derange', and in 1857 created the part of Charles in 'Daddy Hardacre', an adaptation of 'La fille de l'avare'. When the Olympic management of Robson and Emden opened in August 1857 he spoke a prologue, and remained at that theatre for some years, creating numerous roles in farces and comedies, especially those of Tom Taylor and John Oxenford. He was initially stage manager for the winter season of 1861-2 at the St James's Theatre, but when Alfred Wigan withdrew as manager Vining took over. In January 1862 he appeared there as the hero in 'Self-Made', his own adaptation of 'Le chevalier de St Georges'. His management ended in September, when he joined Charles Fechter's company at the Lyceum. Vining's most popular creation was Badger the detective in Dion Boucicault's 'The Streets of London', which he first played on 1 August 1864 at the Princess's Theatre. He had taken on the lease of the Princess's in 1863, and continued to act there until he went bankrupt in November 1869, being discharged the following February. He was very successful in portraying Count Fosco in Wilkie Collins's 'The Woman in White' at the Olympic in October 1871. A good actor of the second rank, George Vining died at the Great Western Hotel, Reading, on 17 December 1875. 
The 


@@@@@


doc= 28325


James Vining (1795-1870) was another son of Charles and Mary Vining. He first appeared on the London stage at Covent Garden on 3 October 1828 as Tybalt in 'Romeo and Juliet'. He also played the prince of Wales in '1 Henry IV', Raymond in 'Raymond and Agnes', and appeared with Madame Vestris at the Olympic in 1831. Most appreciated in the parts of lovers and fops, he gave his last performance at the Lyceum on 30 January 1860 as Dr Manette in Tom Taylor's adaptation of 'A Tale of Two Cities'. The success of his career may be gauged by the proving of his will at under $6000 in 1870, following his death on 27 June that year at his home, 25 St John's Park, Upper Holloway, London. He left a widow, Caroline, 'nee' Johnes (1801/2-1876), whom he had married on 27 May 1823, and at least one son, 


@@@@@


doc= 28326


Vinsauf, Geoffrey of (fl. 1208-1213), poet and teacher of grammar and rhetoric, also called Anglicus, is best-known as the author of the 'Poetria nova' ('The new poetics'), the single most successful textbook on rhetorical composition written during the middle ages. It is not known what his name means. What little is known about his life comes chiefly from the 'Poetria nova' and a shorter poem, 'Causa Magistri Gaufredi Vinesauf', preserved in Glasgow University Library, Hunterian MS V.8.14. An Englishman, he studied at Paris and perhaps also at Bologna. While teaching at Northampton, he became involved in a legal dispute with his rival Robert, who had been his friend at Paris. When Bishop Adam of St Asaph (1175-81) ruled against him, Geoffrey wrote the 'Causa' to tell the archbishop of Canterbury his side of the story and appeal for help. He dedicated the 'Poetria nova' to Innocent III, during whose pontificate he had visited Rome in the English king's service. The king in question was John, and if the plea for reconciliation with which the 'Poetria nova' concludes is addressed to Innocent III, then the work must have taken its final shape between 1208, when England was placed under papal interdict, and 1213, when Pope Innocent was reconciled with King John. Nothing is known about Geoffrey's life after this date. 
In addition to the 'Poetria nova' Geoffrey almost certainly composed two prose treatises on rhetorical composition -- 'Documentum de modo et arte dictandi et versificandi' and 'Summa de coloribus rhetoricis' -- and a number of shorter poems. All of these works have been printed by Faral ('Arts poetiques'; Manuscrit 511), and many of the short poems by Harbert ('Thirteenth-Century Anthology'). The 'Documentum' survives in two versions, preserved in some twenty English manuscripts. The shorter version, printed by Faral, is probably authentic; the longer and still unprinted version is either the work of a later author or else underwent interpolation after Geoffrey's death. Geoffrey may also be the author of a 'Summa de arte dictandi' (1188-90), written at Bologna and printed by Licitra. 
None of Geoffrey's other works approached the 'Poetria nova' in popularity. It is preserved in nearly 200 manuscripts from all parts of Europe, and many copies are provided with glosses or accompanied by full-scale commentaries. The commentaries indicate that an important source of its appeal was the fact that it was not only about the art of poetry but also an example of that art, a poem of 2116 hexameter lines. In this respect it resembled one of its two main sources, Horace's 'Ars poetica', also known as the 'old poetics'. What made Geoffrey's 'poetics' new was in part its equal reliance on the pseudo-Ciceronian 'Rhetorica ad Herennium', often called the 'new rhetoric'. The five canons of rhetoric -- invention, arrangement, style, memory, and delivery -- provide the poem's structure, with arrangement (mainly the varieties of artificial order) and style (techniques for amplifying and abbreviating the subject matter, difficult and easy ornament, and so on) receiving fullest treatment. Concise yet comprehensive, the 'Poetria nova' combines the essentials of grammatical and rhetorical instruction, offering precepts equally applicable to the composition of prose and verse. The prose 'Documentum' covers most of the same and a few additional subjects, but without the economy, inventiveness, and technical virtuosity that made the 'Poetria nova' so popular. 
For at least three centuries Geoffrey of Vinsauf was considered the supreme authority on the art of poetry. Chaucer adopted his metaphor of poetic invention ('Poetria nova', trans. Nims, 43ff) in 'Troylus and Cryseyde' and mentioned him by name when parodying his rhetorical lament for the death of Richard I (ibid., 368ff.) in 'The Nun's Priest's Tale'. His influence outlived the middle ages: as late as 1489 Erasmus rated his value to students of poetry on a par with that of Cicero, Quintilian, and Horace. In modern times he is read by students of medieval literature rather than by apprentice poets, but his fame is sufficient to have justified three separate translations of the 'Poetria nova' and one of the 'Documentum'. 


@@@@@


doc= 28327


Vint, William (1768-1834), Congregational minister, was born at High Thrunton, near Whittingham, Northumberland, on 1 November 1768, the son of John Vint. He was educated at Alnmouth and at the grammar school of Warrenford. At about the age of fifteen he began to study theology at Northowram Academy with Samuel Walker, minister at Northowram. He soon gained fame as a preacher, and on 25 December 1790 was appointed minister at Idle in Yorkshire. 
In 1795 the academy at Northowram was dissolved, and several of the students were temporarily placed with Vint for theological instruction. It was felt, however, that more permanent arrangements should be made, and, chiefly through the exertions of Edward Hanson of London, a regular academy was founded at Idle in 1800. Initially Vint worked as sole tutor, and had only four students, but his energy and reputation led the establishment to grow and prosper. On 21 June 1826 it received the name of Airedale Independent College. Vint continued to direct it until his last illness. On 5 March 1834 the college moved to Undercliffe, near Bradford. 
Besides acting as tutor to Airedale College, Vint continued minister of Idle until his death. He married, on 17 June 1795, Sarah Sharp (died 1855) of Idle, with whom he had six sons and two daughters. A printing press was established at Idle in 1824 under the management of his brother, John Vint, at which some seventeen of William's publications were printed. Besides sermons, he was the author of two works on the millennium, and the editor of a five-volume 'Life and Works of Oliver Heywood' (1825-7), a hymn book (1834), and three selections of discourses, 'The Suffering Christian's Companion' (1830), 'The Active Christian's Companion' (1830), and 'The Privileged Christian's Companion' (1830). William Vint died in Idle on 13 March 1834, and was buried in the graveyard of his chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 28328


Violet, Pierre-Noel (1749-1819), miniature painter, was born in Flanders. He became a member of the Academie des Arts in Lille, in 1782, before moving to Paris, where he exhibited at the Salon de la Correspondance in 1782 and in 1787, and where he published his 'Traite elementaire de l'art de peindre en miniature' (1788). Although he had been miniature painter to Louis XVI, Violet joined the revolutionary committee in Paris before resigning and settling in London as an emigre in 1790. Forced at first to make a living by teaching watercolour painting and dancing, Violet soon established a successful practice as a miniaturist, exhibiting at the Royal Academy, and at the Society of Artists from 1790 to 1819. In this he may have been assisted by the circulation, by his friend Bartolozzi, of engravings of his portraits of Louis XVI and Marie Antoinette (1790), and of George IV when prince of Wales (1791). 
Violet and his wife, Marguerite Becret (died 1841), whom he married in or before 1771, had two daughters, Maria (1794-1868), later Mrs James Brook Pulham, a miniaturist who exhibited at the Royal Academy (1808-11), and Cecilia (1797-1880), who married the miniaturist Louis Ferriere. Violet died at his home, 1 Charlotte Street, Fitzroy Square, London, on 9 December 1819 and was buried at St Pancras Old Church. Examples of his work are in the British Museum and the Victoria and Albert Museum, London; the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool; and the Louvre Museum, Paris. 


@@@@@


doc= 28329


Violet, Thomas (d. 1662/3), goldsmith and writer on trade, registered his earliest goldsmith's mark in 1627 and came to the notice of James I when Sir Edward Coke, then secretary to the privy council, found that he had been playing the money market by exchanging English silver coin for French gold. Violet professed surprise at being thus 'discovered', claiming that his activities were well known. He was imprisoned, but as his account books showed that he had made a profit, thereby enriching the country, he was pardoned, the king demanding $2000 as his share of this profit. 
At this time there was a considerable traffic in coinage; goldsmiths and refiners were buying up overweight coins, leaving lightweight and clipped coin in circulation. The heavy coins were illegally exported, to circulate freely in France and Germany, or melted down for sale to the gold and silver wire-drawers, with whom Violet was closely connected. After his release Violet turned informer, a task he undertook with gusto, hiring agents at home and abroad to examine the books of merchants and traders, and ships' documents, and bringing numerous cases of alleged illegal export of coin to the Star Chamber. Successful prosecutions brought large fines to the state treasure; these, according to Violet, were subsequently misspent by Cromwell on the parliamentarian armies. 
On being pardoned for his own misdeeds, Violet endeavoured to make his peace with the Goldsmiths' Company, of which he was at that time a warden, saying that his accusations were made under duress; at the same time, he paid $1500 for the post of surveyor to the gold and silver wire-drawers. His duties were to inspect the wire which was made up into braids and lace for the extensive luxury trade, and he instituted a system of assaying each skein and sealing it with the craftsman's mark. He found that much of this wire was only a copper core lightly plated. He was empowered to confiscate such substandard wire, and he prosecuted many of the tradesmen involved with a zeal which brought him many enemies, among them Bradbourn, the queen's silk-man, though he wisely dropped proceedings in that case. He also sought to prosecute John Wollaston, a wealthy goldsmith and parliamentarian, who afterwards seized the opportunity to take his revenge on Violet. Between 1635 and 1640 Violet was involved in the attempts to set up the Wyre-drawers' Company, in the face of Goldsmiths' Company opposition. 
In the autumn of 1643 Violet, an admitted royalist, was recruited by Sir Basil Brooke, a Catholic who was endeavouring to win over the City to Charles's cause. Lord General Essex gave him a parliamentary pass to collect a letter from the king at Oxford for delivery to Wollaston, then lord mayor, and the common council of the City of London. On delivering it Violet was immediately arrested, charged with high treason, and in January 1644 committed to the Tower. His estates in Essex and Shropshire were sequestered, and bonds relating to the Shropshire property were seized from his sister. Officers went to his mother's house and took away various bills and bonds belonging to him, his business papers, and a document wherein the king acknowledged Violet's expenses of $19,068 in respect of the Star Chamber prosecutions. 
Violet was closely confined for 928 days without trial, being obliged to borrow at interest $800 for his subsistence; he was not released until 1652, when at some expense he regained possession of some of the confiscated bonds. He did not recover his post as surveyor of gold and silver wire, but, on successfully charging Wollaston with defrauding the king of revenue, was appointed to succeed him as melter at the Royal Mint. Violet later petitioned Richard Cromwell to mint farthing tokens, promising that a part of the profits should go to benefit maimed soldiers, but before this project materialized there was a change of government and all was forgotten. While in prison Violet had begun to set down his ideas for reviving trade. He supposed that the prosperity of certain foreign ports flowed from their equal treatment of merchants and traders of all nations, and their reduction of customs duties, and he urged that free ports should be established in England, which by drawing in cheap and plentiful raw materials, would benefit the working class. 
In 1652-3 Violet again investigated illegal transport of coin, accusing the masters of the ships 'Samson', 'Salvador', and 'George' of seeking to export silver. He claimed to have borrowed a further $675 to pursue his enquiries and to have refused a bribe from the Spanish ambassador to concede that the silver belonged to various merchants in the Spanish Netherlands, and to drop charges. The owners of the vessels were prosecuted in the court of admiralty and the value of the recovered bullion was over $300,000, but again Violet was unable to recoup his outlay. Over the years, he published numerous letters from himself and his supporters, also tracts, and narratives, seeking to defend himself from accusations of perfidy and to recover his seized assets and outlays, yet continuing to lay accusations against the wire-drawers, goldsmiths, and refiners, and all those who in his view deprived the nation of its rightful wealth by exporting gold and silver. 
These attacks inevitably drew responses, the most virulent of which was published anonymously in 1660, entitled 'The Great Treppaner of England'. Its author said of 'Thomas Violet, a name too sweet for so foule a carkass' that 'his birth was at sea... ingendred between a poor Dutch Fidler and a Moorish woman. How he came into England without the help of the Devil, or even got into the repute to be intrusted in any man's service as an Apprentice, and to become a member of this famous City of London, I am altogether ignorant.' These statements were said to be sworn, but are otherwise unsubstantiated. Certainly Violet's own writings, though prolix and much given to flowery metaphor, are not those of an ill-educated man. 
It is not known if Violet was married or what his relationship was with the William Violet mentioned in connection with his sequestered Essex estate. It seems possible that he died in debt, or at least without assets; his nuncupative will was proved in 1663. 


@@@@@


doc= 28330


Garrick, Eva Maria (1724-1822), dancer, is best-known as the wife of David Garrick (1717-1779), whom she married on 22 June 1749. She was born into a Roman Catholic family in Vienna, the daughter of Johann Veigel, a former valet, and his wife, Eva Maria Rosina, on 29 February 1724. She became the favoured pupil of the dancing-master Franz Hilverding. At the age of ten she danced the part of Psyche in Hilverding's ballet 'Amour and Psyche', and her talent and delicate manners brought her frequent invitations to entertain the Austrian aristocracy. It was rumoured that the empress Maria Theresa, jealous of the emperor's interest in the graceful young dancer, encouraged her to leave Vienna. In 1746, under her stage name, Violette, she contracted to dance with the Italian Opera Company at London's King's Theatre, and was at once the talk of the town. 
Violette's passage into London society was eased by the patronage of the earl and countess of Burlington, at whose artistically buzzing house in Piccadilly she lodged until her marriage to Garrick. The couple met socially, probably in 1747 when London society was pressing invitations on the city's two most celebrated performers, and they were mutually attracted, but the match was initially opposed by the countess of Burlington, who may have heard rumours of Garrick's earlier liaisons and who had higher aspirations for her protegee. In 1746-7, while Violette was dancing at Drury Lane, Garrick was at Covent Garden, and in the following season, when Garrick began his long association with Drury Lane, she was at Covent Garden. The marriage settlement, when it was reached, was a virtual guarantee of prosperity for Violette. Not only did she receive $10,000 from Garrick, together with $70 per year, but also the annual interest on Lady Burlington's estates in Lincolnshire. There followed thirty years of contented marriage and forty-three of dignified widowhood. Eva Maria was Garrick's constant companion at home and abroad, his supporter and adviser in theatrical affairs, a gracious hostess on social occasions, and a welcome guest in the grand houses the couple visited. Garrick's social aggrandizement is inconceivable without her. Her taste and intelligence are discernible in the books and paintings they bought, in the way they furnished their houses, and between the lines of Garrick's voluminous correspondence. The Garricks were childless, but there was maternal generosity in Eva Maria's quiet care for Garrick's difficult protege, Samuel Cautherley, and in her relationship with the children of Garrick's brother George. She was less at ease with her own siblings and with her widowed mother, all of whom were tempted to take advantage of her. Fluent in French and Italian, she spoke English with a trace of an Austrian accent, and wrote it stiltedly. 
After Garrick's death in 1779, Eva Maria maintained their house in Adelphi Terrace and the large house and estate in Hampton that was her summer resort. Perhaps to save her from exploitation by her family, Garrick had stipulated in his will that she would forfeit the greater part of his legacy if she ceased to live in England, but there is no evidence that she wished to do so. Widowhood gave her time to develop her interest in mesmerism and alchemy. She continued to purchase books and to worship according to the forms of Roman Catholicism. After refusing two proposals from the extraordinary Lord Monboddo in 1782, she settled into a semi-reclusive way of life, happiest with friends and acquaintances when speaking of her dead husband or displaying mementoes of their time together. She died suddenly, on 16 October 1822 and in her ninety-ninth year, in the Adelphi Terrace house, and was buried beside her husband in Westminster Abbey nine days later. Of a multiplicity of detailed bequests in her will, many were to charities. 


@@@@@


doc= 28331


George Virtue (1794-1868), publisher, was born on 20 April 1794 in Polwarth, Berwickshire, the third son of Robert Virtue, cart-hirer, and his wife, Hellen McDougal. He married Helen Sprent on 25 May 1826, having established himself at Ivy Lane, London, in the 'numbers trade', selling extensive works in parts by subscription. His first major success was Alexander Fletcher's 'Guide to Family Devotion' (1834) but it was as a publisher of illustrated books, employing the best artists and engravers, that he made his reputation. A series of steel-engraved topographical books, many illustrated by W. H. Bartlett, sold widely at home and abroad, notably William Beattie's 'Switzerland' (2 vols., 1836). As the market for expensive 'view books' declined during the 1840s, George Virtue turned his attention to art publishing. In 1848 he acquired the moribund 'Art Union' and transformed it into the lavishly illustrated 'Art Journal', which did much to promote the art of the engraver and raise standards of public taste. It was to prove one of the nineteenth century's most important art periodicals and has been an invaluable source of information for art historians of the period. At this time Virtue entered into partnership with Arthur Hall & Co. and founded his own printing works at 294 City Road, London. The firm became self-sufficient in printing, engraving, and bookbinding, and provided such services for other publishers. He was active in the City of London as a deputy for Farringdon Within, a member of the court of the Stationers' Company and a director of the Great Central Gas Consumers' Company. An attack of paralysis in 1855 led to his retirement from business to Oatlands Park, Surrey. He died on 8 December 1868 of an apoplectic fit while dining at 7 Porchester Square, London, home of his son-in-law James Cotter Morison, and was buried at St Mary's, Walton-on-Thames, on 14 December 1868. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 28332


Virtue, James Sprent (1829-1892), publisher, was born on 18 May 1829 at 26 Ivy Lane, Paternoster Row, London, the second of six children. His father, 
At the age of fourteen James Virtue was apprenticed to his father and in 1848 was sent to the New York branch of the business. By 1851 he was head of a firm with offices across North America. Apart from a visit to London in 1850 to be admitted a liveryman of the Stationers' Company, he remained in the United States until 1855, when he returned to England to succeed his father. Under his proprietorship the 'Art Journal' continued to prosper, distinguished by series of engravings of important collections such as the 'Royal Gallery' (1855-61) and the 'Turner Gallery' (1860-65), illustrated catalogues of international exhibitions, and monographs on contemporary artists. In 1862 the partnership with Hall was dissolved and Virtue established a second company with his elder brother George Henry at 1 Amen Corner, London. This closed after the latter's death in 1866 and the following year Virtue founded the monthly magazine 'St Paul's' with Anthony Trollope as editor. However it failed to meet commercial expectations and in May 1869 was transferred to Strahan & Co., where Virtue acted as printer and chief creditor. He eventually took control of the firm's management and in 1873, with Strahan's other creditors, formed the partnership Virtue, Spalding and Daldy. Two years later the firm became a limited company with Virtue as major shareholder and chairman of the board. 
Following his father's example, Virtue continued to publish illustrated books of distinction, particularly editions of the 'Bible', Shakespeare, and topographical works. However, his commitment to expensive production standards led to periodic financial problems and a difficult legacy for his successors. Virtue married Jane Elizabeth Shirreff ('b'. 1841/2) on 20 November 1867; she eventually survived him. A keen sportsman, he became a founder member of the London Rowing Club in 1856, serving as treasurer and vice-president. For several years he donated the annual prize of a sculler's boat for novice rowers. He died of heart disease on 29 March 1892 at his London home, 3 Prince's Mansions, Victoria Street, and was buried on 2 April at St Mary's, Walton-on-Thames. 


@@@@@


doc= 28333


Vittels, Christopher (fl. 1543-1579), religious separatist leader, was thought by John Rogers, a later adversary, to have originated in Delft, Netherlands, where he was in 1543. At some point he joined the Family of Love, a mystical religious fellowship founded in Amsterdam and Emden by 'H. N.' (Hendrick Niclaes) during the 1540s. He was resident in Southwark, London, as early as 1551, and his wife, of whom nothing is known, was still living there in 1579. He was a joiner by trade, though he is also listed in one source as a merchant who operated between England and the Low Countries. He was an elusive and charismatic figure, capable of remaining almost invisible to his enemies while generating and sustaining an enthusiastic English following. The sources available to the biographer are usually hostile in tone. 
During the middle decades of the century Vittels belonged to the radical religious underworld. His theology appears, at this stage, to have been loosely defined, but it included the following beliefs: that the true godly did not sin; that infant baptism was invalid; that the pope was not Antichrist; and, last, that God and Christ were not equal. He also believed that spiritual dissenters could, with a clear conscience, attend officially prescribed church services of which they disapproved. Vittels participated in a heated debate on some of these points at a Colchester tavern in 1555. A witness later recalled that Vittels had, on this occasion, also spoken of his intention to promote 'the doctrine of a man, who lived... beyond the seas an holy life and an upright conversation' (Wilkinson, fols. 3'v'-A1'r'). This was presumably a reference to Niclaes, whose teachings came to dominate the remainder of Vittels's shadowy life. Although in 1559 his opinions on the inequality of God and Christ led him to be called before the bishop of London, Edmund Grindal, at Paul's Cross, and to a possible public recantation, he was not silenced. 
During the 1560s and 1570s Vittels emerged as the leading member in England of Niclaes's sect, travelling the country and building a dedicated and secretive discipleship for Niclaes that may have extended to a thousand men and women. In 1574-5 Vittels put his bilingual skills to use in an ambitious scheme to translate, reprint, and distribute the works of his mentor. Eighteen of these were printed in Cologne, bearing titles such as 'Terra pacis', 'Evangelium regni', and 'The prophetie of the spirit of love'. The books were soon on their way to England in an operation that Vittels almost certainly masterminded. It was at this point, not surprisingly, that members of the Family of Love began to attract hostile attention from English magistrates and authors. The group's devotion to a foreign, self-proclaimed messiah with an allegorical attitude to scripture caused considerable anxiety in England. Niclaes taught that individuals who committed themselves to him could become 'godded with god', or inwardly transformed to the point at which their sins ceased or became meaningless. Between 1574 and 1580, a number of 'confessions' were extracted from Familists in Cambridgeshire, the Isle of Ely, and Devon, and at the court of Elizabeth I. Vittels proved typically slippery during these years, and does not seem to have been captured or examined. 
The first known reference to Vittels in print appeared in Stephen Batman's 'The golden booke of the leaden goddes' (1577), where he was described uncharitably as 'one altogether unlearned, savinge that he is somwhat erroniously, Bewitched'. This was merely a foretaste of the invective that Vittels was to encounter in 1578-9. John Rogers, about whom very little is known, was a particularly animated adversary, and deeply frustrated by Vittels's activities: 'What travell he hath taken, howe he hath trudged from countrie to countrie, and howe he will not once move his speech, if any learned or godly persons, that hath any true knowledge of the worde be present, is very wel known: but among the simple he is peerelesse, and in deede, the oldest Elder of our English Familie, amongst whome he hath his maintenance. (Rogers, 'The Displaying', fol. D3'r'- 'v')' Other prominent anti-familists included two Cambridge graduates, William Wilkinson, who later became chancellor of the diocese of Salisbury, and John Knewstub, a prominent puritan who was minister of Cockfield, Suffolk, in 1579. 
Rogers, Wilkinson, and Knewstub led the assault on the Family of Love in these years. The fellowship became the subject of privy council discussions, parliamentary debates, several books, and a royal proclamation. Still Vittels remained at large, and secretly delivered to Rogers a robust written defence of his beliefs and behaviour. Rogers printed it, with his own angry responses, in 'An answere unto a wicked and infamous libel' (1579). Pressure upon the Family was maintained into 1581, when it somewhat mysteriously eased. It appears that members of the Family at court successfully convinced some of the highest authorities that the danger was not as serious as had been suggested. By this date Vittels, who had evaded his enemies even when they were in the ascendancy, had disappeared and becomes virtually untraceable. 


@@@@@


doc= 28334


Vitelli, Cornelio (d. in or before 1554), humanist scholar, was among the first Italians to show in person to Oxford the levels reached in rhetoric and philology by the Italian Renaissance. By his own account a native of Cortona, Vitelli may have studied in Bologna and in Rome under Francesco Filelfo, Domizio Calderini, and perhaps Nicolo Perotti. Vitelli's first work may be his letter, or 'Commentariolus' (probably of 1473), to Perotti on the elder Pliny. It was printed with Perotti's commentary in Venice about 1482 as well as in the Aldine (1499) and some early sixteenth-century editions of Perotti's 'Cornucopiae'. In late August 1474 Federigo da Montefeltro was created a papal duke; probably hoping for patronage, Vitelli eulogized the creation in a Latin epigram. In 1478 he was certainly tutoring the son of Paolo Leoni of Padua. Within three years he was acting as tutor to the sons of Venetian patricians, and in 1481 gave a course of lectures, perhaps at the studium of Padua, perhaps in Venice. Vitelli attacked the scholarship of Giorgio Merula, professor of eloquence in Venice. His 'Defensio Plinii et Calderini', first printed at Venice in 1481-2 along with his tractate on Roman time measurement, was dedicated to Ermolao Barbaro the elder; his third essay in Plinian controversy, 'Enarratiuncula in C. Plinium', which seems to belong to this phase of his career, was first printed with Marino Becichemo's Pliny commentaries (Paris, 1519). 
Vitelli's polemic against Merula led to his securing the latter's post, which was probably its intention. From May 1483 he served the Venetian republic as state rhetorician, being replaced in that position by Giorgio Valla towards the end of 1484. From about January 1485 he was praelector of New College, Oxford, a position he occupied for two years, during which he taught Latin and Greek in Oxford; William Grocyn and Thomas Linacre may have been his pupils. It was most likely in 1486 that he made the Latin oration to which Thomas Chaundler is reported by Leland as having responded. 
From 1 February 1487 to the end of January 1488 Vitelli held the chair of poetics at Louvain. In the summer of 1488 he was in Paris, where he met two fellow Italian humanists, Giovanni Balbi and Publio Fausto Andrelini, and was authorized with them on 5 September 1489 to lecture publicly on the poets. Becoming involved in verse controversy in Balbi's interest against Andrelini, Vitelli lost Balbi's favour also. He left Paris at the end of 1489 or the beginning of 1490, and appears to have gone first to London, where he failed to win royal patronage by joining Giovanni Gigli, Bernard Andre, and Pietro Carmeliano in deriding the French humanist and ambassador Robert Gaguin, who had been successively his friend and rival in Paris. From autumn 1490 to summer 1492 Vitelli rented a room in Exeter College, as Grocyn did from 1491 to 1493. Competition for pupils from Grocyn may have been the reason for Vitelli's leaving Oxford, which he seems to have done in late summer 1492. In 1490 he ate Christmas lunch with the vice-president of Magdalen College, and he may have dined in New College in 1492. 
Thereafter little can be said of Vitelli. He may have been the 'cortonese' to whom Constantino d'Andrea hoped to give pleasure by his Italian 'Disticha Catonis', published in Venice 'c'.1493-4, and it is also possible that he tried to support himself by teaching in Florence. By 9 February 1508, however, he had become rector of Sant'Antimo in the diocese of Arezzo; he still held the benefice in 1525, and may have done so until 1554. 
The only work Vitelli wrote in England that is extant is his poem against Gaguin. A Greek epigram by Poliziano (died 1494) may be directed against him. No English or Scottish contemporary author mentions him, though he had a later reputation here for verbal fluency and as a teacher: Andre, about 1500, calls him the most eloquent of orators, and Polydore Vergil, after 1514, says that he was nobly born and Oxford's first instructor in good letters. In 1528 Erasmus refers dismissively to him among the ruck of Ciceronians. 


@@@@@


doc= 28335


Vivares, Francis (1709-1780), landscape engraver, was born on 11 July 1709 in St Jean-du-Bruel, north of Montpellier, the third son of Jean Vivares, who abjured his protestant faith to remain in France. At two years old Francis was sent to Geneva and then, aged eighteen, to London. According to George Vertue, who noted details of Vivares's career in 1741, his 'profession was originally a Taylor -- this he was brought up to did follow to mans estate, and in London was a Master Taylor faild -- or broke went away to Paris' (Vertue, 'Note books', 6.195). In France Vivares studied drawing and etching; he then returned to London where in the 1730s he worked in the Marlborough Street studio of the Venetian painter Jacopo Amigoni. The Swiss engraver Joseph Wagner lived with Amigoni and published his paintings, and Vivares presumably assisted Wagner with some of the prints that he engraved between 1733 and 1738. In 1739 Wagner and Amigoni left for Venice where Wagner established a print shop and published one set of prints signed by Vivares. 
In 1739 the Huguenot printseller James Regnier published a drawing book designed and engraved by Vivares. By this time Vivares had married Anne Charieux (died 1744?), and in September 1739 their first child, Marie, was born. Their sons Jacques and Jean followed in 1742 and 1743 and in 1743 Vivares stood godfather to the son of his close friend John Rocque at the Huguenot church of Spring Gardens. In 1740 he had begun to work for Arthur Pond and Charles Knapton, who were publishing an influential series of prints of picturesque landscapes by Gaspar Poussin, Claude, and other seventeenth-century masters, copied from paintings in British collections. Vivares undertook twelve of their earliest prints for 3 guineas a plate. His next association was with the landscape painter and printseller Thomas Smith of Derby. Fifteen large prints by Vivares after paintings by Thomas Smith were published between 1743 and 1749. In 1745 Vertue, who spoke of the pair as joint 'undertakers' (or publishers), noted '4 Views done at Derby of Dunington Cliffe Anchor church Hopping Mill Ware & Lym Park by Smith & Vivares' (Vertue, 'Note books', 6.201). It seems likely that this pioneering set of picturesque English scenes was literally 'done' at Derby, for in September 1744 his son Thomas Vivares ['see below'] was baptized in that town. Francis was the only parent named and it is possible that Anne died in childbirth. 
Francis Vivares took Peter Benazech as his apprentice in 1746, by which time he was probably back in London. He had married a woman named Elizabeth by spring 1748; their child David was baptized at St Anne's, Soho, in December. By March 1749, when he launched a subscription for his first solo publication, Vivares was established at the Golden Head in Porter Street, Leicester Fields. By 1752 he had a print shop in Newport Street, near Long Acre, and he remained in this house (subsequently numbered 13 Great Newport Street) until his death. Here he sold 'all sorts of Italian, French and Flemish Prints of the best Masters' as well as prints by himself and his pupils. In 1755 he took a second apprentice, William Hebert and, on 31 January, a third wife, Susanna Parker (died 1792). With her he had at least three children of whom the eldest, Elizabeth, proved to be a gifted artist. Vivares was elected a fellow of the Society of Artists but he only exhibited in 1766 and 1768. His children did extremely well in the competitions held by the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce, with Thomas, Mary, Francis junior, and Elizabeth all winning prizes for drawing or engraving. Theirs must have been a family business in the fullest sense. By the 1760s it was thriving. Vivares published drawing books, books of ornament, and swags and borders for use in print rooms, as well as his own landscape engravings. These were very highly esteemed and his prints were collected by contemporary connoisseurs (a two-volume 'oeuvre' compiled by Viscount Fitzwilliam survives in the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, for instance). He usually published a pair of major landscapes every year. Vivares was widely considered to be the best engraver of Claude, but he also interpreted a number of modern painters including George Smith of Chichester, Thomas Gainsborough, and the Venetian visitor Francesco Zuccarelli (a connection probably owed to Vivares's acquaintance with Wagner, Zuccarelli's publisher in Venice). 
When the poet Thomas Gray visited the picturesque landscapes of northern England in 1769, he noted that 'at the alehouse where I dined, in Malham, Vivares the landscape painter, had lodged for a week or more'. Vivares had published two prints after his own drawings of scenes around Malham in 1753, but it is possible that Gray was not mistaken about Vivares's occupation and that he painted landscapes as well. Nicholas Thomas Dall, who was the scene painter at Covent Garden Theatre, lodged with Vivares from 1764 to 1770, during which time he exhibited many northern views. In June 1763 Vivares visited the German engraver Johann Georg Wille in Paris: 'c'est un fort brave homme. Je l'aime', wrote Wille. A few months later Vivares supplied Wille with some English-made copper plates and burins. He visited Wille again in 1776 with his wife, 'et nous les avons vus avec plaisir'. Vivares continued to work until his death on 26 November 1780. A part of his stock of prints was sold by auction on 25 October 1781. The print on which Vivares had been working when he died, 'The Enchanted Castle' after Claude, was completed for his widow by William Woollett. Susanna Vivares had probably always run the shop and she continued to sell and publish prints from Newport Street until her death in 1792. 




@@@@@


doc= 28336


Thomas Vivares (bap. 1744), designer and landscape engraver, the son of Francis Vivares, was baptized at All Saints' Church, Derby, on 4 September 1744. He may have been named after Thomas Smith of Derby, with whom his father was collaborating at the time of his birth. He was trained as an engraver by his father and between 1760 and 1766 won a succession of prizes for drawing or engraving from the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce. He exhibited drawings and engravings with the Free Society in 1764 and 1782 and with the Society of Artists in 1782. He married first Hannah Allen on 18 June 1783 and second Sally Lucas on 1 January 1786, both at St Pancras Old Church. Some of his working life was spent in Paris, where he engraved landscapes after P. Royer and Adrian Zingg. 


@@@@@


doc= 28337


Vives, Juan Luis (1492/3-1540), scholar, was born in Valencia, Spain, on 6 March 1492, according to the traditional dating as inscribed on his tombstone, although recently published records of the Inquisition would indicate early 1493. He was born into a family of 'converso' Jews of Valencia who were forced to convert to Christianity after the uprisings of 1391 in that city. His father, Lluis Vives Valeriola (1463-1524), was a well-to-do cloth merchant. His mother, Blanquina March Almenara (1473-1508), was of a family of jurists and notaries from Gandia. 
Vives must have been raised as a Christian but it seems quite probable that his parents and many of his relatives secretly observed certain religious practices of Judaism, of which the young Vives could not have been unaware. The persecution and execution of many members of his family and his 'converso' origins remained a determining psychological factor throughout his life. As far as can be ascertained, his training in Latin both in primary school and at university was of the traditional kind, not yet influenced by the reforms instituted by Elio Antonio de Nebrija at Salamanca. At the estudi general of Valencia, formally elevated to the rank of university in 1500 by the Borgia pope Alexander VI, a native of neighbouring Jativa, he would have taken two years of grammar and three years of arts. 
In 1509, the year following his mother's death, Vives set out for Paris to complete his studies. There he joined many other students from Spain, especially Aragon, enrolled in the faculties of arts and theology. As was the practice at Paris at this time, the young Vives took courses at different colleges, probably beginning his studies under the Aragonese logician Juan Dolz de Castellar at the college of Lisieux. He must also have attended at the lessons of Nicolas Berault, who had come to Paris from Orleans and taught the classical authors at the College of La Marche. During these years the French humanist was giving lectures on authors not usually included in the arts curriculum, such as Quintilian, Juvenal, and Suetonius. These consisted of close readings of the classical texts with ample historical, mythological, and geographical commentary. It seems very likely that Vives was inspired by these examples to give his own lectures on authors and works that were the subjects of Berault's lectures, such as Cicero's 'De legibus' and Francesco Filelfo's encyclopaedic work, the 'Convivia'. At the College de Montaigu, Vives studied under the Aragonese Gaspar Lax de Sarinena, master of the intricacies of terminist logic, and Jan Dullaert of Ghent, commentator on the 'Physics' of Aristotle and interested also in astronomy. Among Vives's early writings published in Paris is a 'praelectio' on the 'Poeticon astronomicon' of pseudo-Hyginus and a brief life of Dullaert, who died at a very young age. During these Parisian years Vives published an impressive number of 'praelectiones' and dialogues on Christian themes in Roman dress, chief of which was a depiction of Christ's victory over death in the form of a Roman triumph. 
From 1512 Vives divided his time between Paris and Bruges, where there was a flourishing Jewish community. He was the guest of a relative of his from Valencia, Bernardo Valdaura, whose daughter Margarita (1505-1552) he married on 26 May 1524. In 1514 he left Paris definitively for the Low Countries, where he gave private lessons in Bruges and Louvain. One of his pupils there was the young Guillaume de Croy, nephew of the powerful lord of Chievres, who at the age of eighteen became bishop of Cambrai and at nineteen cardinal-archbishop of Toledo and primate of Spain. Through the patronage of his young ward Vives was licensed by special privilege to give public lectures at the University of Louvain without being on the official roster. Vives dedicated to him a book of meditations on the seven penitential psalms, which provide early evidence of the exceptional learning of the Spanish humanist. Besides the 'Septuagint' and 'Vulgate' version of the 'Psalms' he makes reference to a 'Chaldean' (that is Aramaic) version made by a certain Jonathan, son of Abenuziel. Even in these religious pieces Vives made use of a florid declamatory style that was to characterize his later writings. At Louvain he made contacts with members of Erasmus's circle, Marcus Laurinus and Jan van Fevijn, and with Frans van Cranevelt, member of the grand council of Mechelen, who became his most trusted friend. That Vives had attained a position of some authority at the court of Charles I is made evident in a letter of 13 November 1516 from the magistrates of the city of Valencia to Vives -- whom they address as 'most learned gentleman and philosopher, Master Luis Vives, resident at the royal court' (Vives, 116-18) -- in which they seek his intercession with the king concerning the affairs of the university. 
Vives must have made the personal acquaintance of Erasmus as early as October 1516, when Erasmus was resident in Brussels and referred to Vives as one with whom he was on quite familiar terms. By 1519 Erasmus was so impressed with his younger contemporary's learning that he wrote an effusive letter of praise to Juan de la Parra, personal physician of Archduke Ferdinand of Austria, brother of Charles V, recommending Vives as a tutor for the archduke. Vives chose not to desert his pupil, Guillaume de Croy, but in compensation dedicated a work to Ferdinand, the 'Sullan Declamations', an exercise in deliberative oratory and political philosophy, which once again drew extraordinary praise both from Erasmus and Thomas More. In this Louvain period Vives wrote several other works, including a short piece on the origins of philosophy, a piquant fable on man, which is a subtle parody of Pico della Mirandola's 'Oration on the Dignity of Man', and a commentary on Cicero's 'Dream of Scipio', preceded by a delightful dream of his own that ushers in the more serious discussion. 
The most important work to issue from Vives's pen at this time was the 'In pseudodialecticos', a spirited attack against the Parisian doctors at whose feet he had once sat. It is a brilliant diatribe, all the more effective, as Erasmus wrote to Thomas More soon after its publication, since 'No one is better fitted to break the serried ranks of the sophists, in whose army he has served so long' ('Correspondence', 7.295). As Erasmus had done before him in 'The Praise of Folly', Vives singles out for ridicule the absurd Latin used by the dialecticians, incomprehensible to all but themselves. He promises that one day he will demonstrate, not by argument but by deed, that all the arts can be communicated in normal speech without the use of jargon, as indeed he was to do in his monumental work on education, the 'De disciplinis'. Vives insists that too much time is dedicated to the study of logic, a subject that should be learned not for its own sake but as a tool and support of the other arts. 
Vives returned to Paris a few months later in the company of Guillaume de Croy and on his return was able to report to Erasmus that he was given a friendly reception by the very people who had been the object of his satire. It was during this visit that he met for the first time the foremost French humanist, Guillaume Bude, with whom he had already been in frequent correspondence, and with whom he retained friendly relations until the end of his life. Amid this newly won fame and success Vives suffered a serious set-back when his young patron fell from his horse and was killed on 11 January 1521. This turn of events left him in a state of great depression. He became ill and retired to Bruges, where he gradually recuperated. For several months he had to cease work on the formidable scholarly task Erasmus had set him: a commentary on St Augustine's 'City of God', which would form part of the complete edition of Augustine that Erasmus was preparing for Froben. The newly discovered letters of Vives to Cranevelt reveal that in his present quandary Vives was anxious to meet with Thomas More during his impending visit to the prinsenhof in Bruges in the company of Cardinal Wolsey. The meeting, arranged by Vives's good friend Cranevelt, would prove to be of great significance for Vives's future career. In the summer of 1522 he finally completed the commentary on Augustine at the cost of great physical and mental fatigue, but Erasmus was displeased with its excessive length and poor sales at the Frankfurt fair. The relations between the two humanists became noticeably strained after this. He dedicated the work to Henry VIII in a very florid preface, in which he exalts him above all the kings of the earth and congratulates him on the 'Defence of the Seven Sacraments', which had just appeared. The acknowledgement from the palace of Greenwich was polite and appreciative. 
Vives continued to give lessons at the University of Louvain at this time and to tutor private students, among whom were some notable English scholars: Nicholas Wotton, Giles Wallop, William Thale, and the physician John Clement. In May 1522 he was offered the prestigious chair of Latin philology at the University of Alcala, to succeed the famous Antonio de Nebrija. There is no indication of his response until a year later in letters written both to Erasmus and Cranevelt: he announces his intention to set out for Spain by way of England, since the land journey through France was rendered impossible by the hostilities raging there. Before his departure for England he wrote the first of his pacifist essays, an open letter to the newly elected pope, Adrian VI, who was from Utrecht. Vives was emboldened to write such a letter since he had been a good friend of Adrian Florensz when he was vice-chancellor of the University of Louvain. It is a plea for peace among Christian nations and for the peaceful solution of religious controversies, in which regard he urges the pope to call a general council of the church. Vives has no sympathy with the subtle distinctions made by theologians concerning the just and the unjust war but accounts all wars among brothers, united by the bond of baptism, as iniquitous and criminal. During these decisive months Vives was plagued by news concerning the fortunes of his family in Spain. In a letter of 4 January 1523 to Cranevelt he laments the death of his only brother, Jaime, and the pitiful conditions of his father, charged by the Inquisition of clandestine Judaizing. Vives often refers to the hated tribunal by the veiled term 'Fortuna'. In the face of these disastrous events he took for himself as a motto a phrase from Seneca: 'Sine querela' ('Without complaint'). Vives's worst fears were realized: his father was delivered to the secular arm and burnt at the stake on 6 September 1524. Vives never did return to Spain but must have felt great anguish over his powerlessness to help his family. 
Vives departed for England on 18 March 1523, and immediately won favour with Cardinal Wolsey, who appointed him his reader in humanity at Oxford in succession to Thomas Lupset; he delivered his lectures in Corpus Christi College. There is extant a fragment of a letter of his to Wolsey, in which he says that he has assigned to the students philosophical questions that elicit more pleasant as well as more fruitful debate, and has rid them of many corrupt opinions regarding dialectics. In the first year of his tenure the king and queen, breaking a long tradition of the English crown, entered the city of Oxford to pay him a visit. This event is recorded with some exaggeration in Brian Twyne's 'Antiquitatis academiae Oxoniensis apologia' of 1608. Vives also received a royal invitation to spend the Christmas and Epiphany holidays at Windsor Castle. 
Vives quickly made the acquaintance of all the famous English humanists of the day: Cuthbert Tunstall, William Linacre, William Latimer, and John Fisher, and was a frequent visitor at the home of Thomas More in Chelsea. At court Vives also exercised great influence in the role of friend and spiritual counsellor of Queen Katherine and tutor to Princess Mary. At the behest of the queen, Vives had begun a long treatise on the 'Education of a Christian Woman' while still in Bruges. It was ready for publication in April 1523 but did not appear until the following year. It was translated into English by Richard Hyrde, a tutor in More's household, under More's personal supervision. The work enjoyed enormous popularity in England and became the prototype of various conduct books for women during the Tudor period. For Princess Mary, Vives also wrote a practical plan of study and a collection of spiritual mottoes and devices entitled 'Satellitium animi', or 'Escort of the Soul', a predecessor to the popular emblem books of the later sixteenth century. This pamphlet was followed by yet another instructional book, the 'Introduction to Wisdom', directed toward a wider audience. 
Vives now turned from educational to political writing in an impressive series of works on affairs of state. In homage to the cardinal he produced translations of two famous speeches of the Greek orator Isocrates: his address to the Areopagus and his speech to Nicocles, both on the subject of government. The next work was a brief letter he wrote from Bruges to John Longland, bishop of Lincoln and confessor to the king. As in the letter to Adrian VI, he continually refers to Europe as a political entity and begs the bishop's intercession in the interests of peace. He has heard, he says, that even the ignorant savages in the New World honour a man of peace. He returned to England in September 1524 to resume his duties there but sailed back to Bruges in the following spring after an outbreak of plague. Just before his departure Vives addressed an earnest appeal to Henry VIII asking him to seek the release of Francois I, who had been captured by the imperial forces at the battle of Pavia and was held prisoner in Madrid. He exhorts the king and the emperor to make moderate and magnanimous use of their victory and refrain from devastating the most flourishing realm of Christendom. 
A few months after the battle of Mohacs in 1526, in which the Turkish forces of Sulayman the Magnificent defeated the Hungarians, Vives wrote a dialogue of the dead in the style of the Greek satirist Lucian. Mythological figures in Hades discuss the present European conflicts and their precedents both in more recent history and in antiquity. It is an ironic commentary on the disunification of Christian leaders in the face of the Turkish menace. In the same year Vives wrote a treatise, 'On the Relief of the Poor', solicited by the magistrates of the city of Bruges through their ambassador to England, Lodewijk van Praet. It addressed the thorny problem of poverty and beggars with concrete proposals to the civil authorities on how to remedy it. It is regarded as a very important document in the history of social welfare. His enlightened attitude, imbued with the principles of Christian charity, was far in advance of his time. 
In February 1526 Vives was again in England (his frequent crossings prompted Erasmus to call him an 'amphibious animal'), apparently still intent on persuading Henry to intervene on the side of peace. As the king's Great Matter became more and more complicated, Vives had no choice but to side with the queen, incurring Henry's and Wolsey's great displeasure. Through the machinations of the latter he was placed under house arrest from 25 February to 1 April 1528 -- together with the Spanish ambassador in London, Inigo de Mendoza, who was suspected of transmitting messages to Pope Clement VII and to the emperor. Upon his release Vives returned to Bruges but it seems that he was called back to England by the queen, together with two jurists from Flanders to counsel her. When Vives refused to defend her in the trial at Blackfriars before the papal legates, knowing that it would be a farce, she dismissed him and cut off his pension. So ended Vives's career in England. Actually, at the request of Wolsey, Vives had previously sent a rather long legal and theological opinion to the king some time in 1528, which for one reason or another did not reach him and which is no longer extant. Vives refers to this document in a letter he wrote to the king three years later and sent him another exemplar. He expresses his continued devotion and good wishes to the royal pair for the brief span of life that remains to them. He also gives some very sound advice to the king about the uncertainty that will surround the possible succession of a male heir from another marriage. 
With both royal pensions discontinued Vives was left in penurious conditions. He remained for the most part in Bruges with occasional trips to Louvain, Brussels, Antwerp, and Mechelen. During this last part of his life (1528-40), an extraordinary number of lengthy and important works poured from the pen of Juan Luis Vives. In 1532 he began to receive a pension from the emperor Charles V, which, he records, sufficed for half of his living expenses. In 1537 he became preceptor to Mencia de Mendoza, the wife of the duke of Nassau, and resided for a time at the ducal castle in Breda in North Brabant. Having failed in his mission of peace with Henry, Vives turned to Charles V in a long treatise entitled 'On Concord and Discord in the Human Race' (1529). In the dedicatory epistle Vives congratulates the emperor on his imminent trip to Italy, where he would be signatory to the treaty of Cambrai. He reiterates his appeal to leaders of the Christian world to rise above national interests and unite in the face of the common enemy. Discord is the monster that devours the human species. This was followed by a complementary piece, 'De pacificatione', addressed to the Spanish grand inquisitor, Alonso Manrique, a fellow 'converso' and a defender of Erasmists in Spain. 
Vives's 'magnum opus', the 'De disciplinis', an encyclopaedic survey of education in all its aspects, was published by the printer Michael Hillen in Antwerp in 1531. It was dedicated to Joao III, king of Portugal, a patron of the new learning. The first book gives the reasons for the corruption of learning, mostly to be attributed to the excessive importance given to dialectics by the scholastic philosophers. The second book is a complete reorganization of teaching and curricula at every level, embracing the entire domain of knowledge. Vives would have the child begin to learn through the observation of nature -- astronomy, geography, zoology, botany, even husbandry and gardening. Trades and crafts could be learned by visiting the workshops of the tradesmen. University education would begin with many years of intensive training in language and literature, chiefly Latin, then Greek, but not to the exclusion of the vernacular languages. Next would come rhetoric, dialectical reasoning, and lastly mathematics, to be followed by formal professional training in medicine and jurisprudence, the latter requiring a profound knowledge of history and moral philosophy. In the third book Vives concentrates on philosophy and gives a terse critique of individual classical, medieval, and humanist authors. The final goal of education is both practical and spiritual, the application of learning to the contemporary world and the acquisition of virtue. 
The 'De disciplinis' is a landmark in the history of education, which had great influence on such writers as Rabelais, Montaigne, Melanchthon, Comenius, and Descartes. Many other works followed, the most important of which is his 'De anima et vita' (1538), loosely derived from Aristotle's treatise on this subject. Rather than define the soul, Vives investigates its operations and functions. His shrewd observations on the passions or emotions earned him the title of father of modern psychology from nineteenth-century historians of philosophy. Vives's final work, 'On the Truth of the Christian Faith', a Christian apologetic in the form of a dialogue between Christians, Jews, and Muslims, was published posthumously by his friend Cranevelt. Worn out by his scholarly labours and suffering from kidney afflictions and the gout, he died on 6 May 1540 at Bruges, and was buried there in the church of St Donatian, now destroyed. 
Vives's works enjoyed great popularity throughout the sixteenth century and innumerable editions, both in Latin and in translation, were printed by the great publishing houses of Antwerp, Basel, Lyons, Paris, and Venice. His pedagogical innovations had great influence on English writers on education such as Roger Ascham, Thomas Elyot, and Richard Mulcaster. Numerous editions of his popular Latin dialogues for schoolboys, the 'Exercitatio linguae Latinae', were published in England. Tudor prayer manuals and devotional works borrowed heavily from Vives's 'Preces et meditationes diurnae' (1535) and books like John Bradford's 'Private Prayers and Meditations' (1559) and Richard Day's 'Book of Christian Prayers' (1578), based on Vives's devotional writings, achieved great popularity in protestant circles. Interest in Vives waned in the next two centuries but was revived again at the end of the nineteenth century and continues with great vigour at the present day, especially in Belgium and Spain. Juan Luis Vives is a towering figure of the Renaissance, a man of immense learning, integrity, and originality, whose worth has yet to be fully estimated. 


@@@@@


doc= 28338


Charles Crespigny Vivian, second Baron Vivian (1808-1886), son of Richard Hussey Vivian, first Baron Vivian (1775-1842), and his first wife, Eliza Champion de Crespigny (died 1831), was born at Truro on 24 December 1808, and educated at Eton College. He became cornet in the 7th hussars in 1825, and was subsequently promoted lieutenant (1826), captain (1829), and major (12 August 1834), after which he retired. He represented Bodmin in parliament from 1835 to 1842, when he succeeded to the title. He was appointed special deputy warden of the stannaries in 1852 and lord lieutenant of Cornwall in 1856, resigning the latter office in 1877. He died at Ventnor on 24 April 1886 and was buried at Glynn, leaving six sons and three daughters by his two wives: Arabella, 'nee' Scott, whom he married on 2 July 1833 and who died on 26 January 1837, and Mary Elizabeth, 'nee' Panton, whom he married on 21 September 1841. Tall, with a large nose and a monocle, he was known as 'Hook and Eye'. His widow died aged eighty-two on 23 January 1907. 


@@@@@


doc= 28339


Vivian, Henry Hussey, first Baron Swansea (1821-1894), industrialist and politician, was born on 6 July 1821 at Singleton, Swansea, the eldest son of John Henry Vivian (1785-1855), industrialist and politician, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Jones (died 'c'.1885). Richard Hussey Vivian, first Baron Vivian, was his uncle. He was educated at Eton College from about 1832 until 1840, and in 1838 went to Germany and France to study languages and metallurgy. When in France, Vivian shared lodgings for a time with Friedrich Engels. He went up to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1840. In 1842 he entered the family business as a partner, taking charge of the Liverpool office of Vivian & Sons, which dealt with the export trade. In 1845 he was appointed manager of the Hafod smelting works in Swansea, of which he took full control following the death of his father in 1855. Under his influence Swansea became 'the metallurgical centre of the world'. 
Vivian married three times. His first marriage, on 15 April 1847, was to Jessie Dalrymple, daughter of Ambrose Goddard, MP for Swindon. She died on 28 February 1848, shortly after the birth of their son, Ernest Ambrose. His second marriage, on 14 July 1853, was to Caroline Elizabeth (Flora), daughter of Sir Montague John Cholmely MP, and granddaughter of the duke of St Albans. She became crippled by illness after giving birth to their son, John Aubrey, and died on 25 January 1868. He married his third wife, Averil Beaumont ('c'.1840- 'c'.1935), on 10 November 1870. She was twenty years his junior and the daughter of Captain Richard Beaumont and granddaughter of Godfrey, third Lord Macdonald. They had two sons, Henry Hussey and Odo Richard, and four daughters, Violet Averil, Averil, Alberta, and Alexandra. 
As a businessman Vivian was an innovator, taking out several patents for improved metallurgical processes, and was largely responsible for the continued expansion of Vivian & Sons and the diversification of their interests. He was involved with introducing the manufacture of zinc in the 1840s. The firm began to extract gold from auriferous copper ores using Plattner's process in 1850 and silver from argentiferous copper ores in 1856. This same year they also began smelting nickel and cobalt. In 1883 a separate company, H. H. Vivian & Co., was established for nickel and cobalt smelting. In 1864 Vivian & Sons introduced Gerstenhofer furnaces, which facilitated the recovery of sulphur for the manufacture of sulphuric acid, which was used by the firm to manufacture chemical fertilizers and pesticides. This innovation also received favourable publicity because of the reduced emission of the polluting 'copper smoke'. In 1871 the firm erected works at White Rock, near Swansea, to treat poor silver-lead ores. The business became a limited liability company on 12 February 1883 under the style H. H. Vivian & Co. with Vivian as its chairman. Vivian also played an active role in the Second Copper Trade Association, a secret cartel of copper smelters which operated from 1844 until 1867. 
A man of remarkable energy and business capacity, Vivian's activities extended beyond metallurgy. As a coal owner he was involved in negotiating a settlement of the 1875 miners' strike, by which the sliding scale of linking wages to price fluctuations was introduced into the south Wales mining industry. He was also one of the chief promoters of the Rhondda and Swansea Bay Railway, which linked the coal mines of the Rhondda valley to the port of Swansea. 
Vivian was elected Liberal MP for Truro in 1852, joining his father in the House of Commons. Following the death of his father, he was elected MP for Glamorgan in 1857 and for the Swansea District in 1885. In parliament he served on the exchequer loan commission in 1861, the channel tunnel committee in 1882-3, the committee to establish an imperial institute, and the royal commission on tithe redemption. Although a supporter of Gladstone, Vivian openly disagreed with his leader over aspects of the 'Home Rule Bill', which apparently prevented him from accepting the chancellorship of the duchy of Lancaster in 1886. He also consistently voted in favour of disestablishment in Wales while a staunch member of the Church of England. Throughout his long parliamentary career he was a frequent speaker in the Commons. Locally, Vivian was a trustee of the Swansea Harbour Board, and was elected the first chairman of the newly formed Glamorgan county council in 1889. 
Like his father, Vivian maintained a strong interest in education, and together they were responsible for Vivian & Sons opening a school in Sketty. He became the first treasurer of the newly founded University College of South Wales and Monmouthshire in 1884, and was later its vice president, and he was involved in the founding of a technical school in Swansea, which opened after his death in 1895. He was a fellow of the Geological Society, twice president of the Royal Institution of South Wales, and president of the Cambrian Archaeological Association from 1861 to 1862. 
In later life Vivian devoted less time to the business and more to leisure interests. He frequently visited his house in Scotland for shooting holidays, and sailed on his yacht. He also farmed at Parc le Breos in the Gower, and was well-known locally as a stock-breeder. Vivian's lack of involvement may have contributed to the decline of the family business, and especially the firm's failure in a mining venture in Sudbury, Canada, though towards the end of the century British non-ferrous metal manufacturers faced increasing international competition. 
Vivian was created a baronet on 13 May 1882 on the recommendation of Gladstone in recognition of his long public service, and elevated to the peerage, also by Gladstone, as Baron Swansea on 9 June 1893. He was made a freeman of Swansea in the same year. Vivian died suddenly of heart failure at Singleton on 28 November 1894 shortly after returning from America; he was buried in Sketty churchyard, near Swansea, on 3 December. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 28340


Vivian, Hussey Crespigny, third Baron Vivian (1834-1893), diplomatist, born in Connaught Place, London, on 19 June 1834, was the eldest son of Charles Crespigny Vivian, second Baron Vivian, and his first wife, Arabella (died 1837), daughter of John Middleton Scott of Ballygannon, co. Wicklow. 
The father, 
Also educated at Eton College, the eldest son, Hussey Vivian, was appointed a clerk in the Foreign Office on 18 November 1851. He was attached to several important special missions, accompanying the earl of Clarendon to Paris in 1856 and the earl of Breadalbane to Berlin in 1861. In 1864 he was sent to Athens with the draft treaty for the annexation of the Ionian Islands to Greece. He became senior clerk in the Foreign Office on 3 July 1869. In 1873 he was appointed acting agent and consul-general at Alexandria, and the following year was transferred to Bucharest. He was again appointed to Egypt in 1876; while there he was made CB. 
Vivian was appointed resident minister to the Swiss confederation in 1879, and two years afterwards was raised to the rank of envoy-extraordinary and minister-plenipotentiary to Denmark. He was sent to Brussels with the same rank in 1884, and during his time there was made KCMG. He succeeded to his father's title on 24 April 1886 and was politically a Liberal. He was appointed British plenipotentiary to the slave-trade conference held at Brussels in 1889, and for his services was made GCMG. On 1 January 1892 he was appointed ambassador in Rome, where he remained until his death, from pneumonia, at the British embassy on 21 October 1893. At his funeral in Rome on the 25th the prince of Naples followed on foot with Lord Vivian's son. 
Vivian was a conscientious but not a brilliant diplomatist. 'He was certainly much fonder of horses than of chanceries... but he was a man who could always be relied on in an emergency' ('The Times', 23 Oct 1893). He was elected a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society in 1872. He married, on 8 June 1876, Louisa Alice (died 3 April 1926), daughter of Robert George Duff of Ryde; they had three daughters and one son, George, who succeeded to the title. Their daughter Dorothy Maud (died 1939) was maid of honour to Queen Victoria and Queen Alexandra and in 1905 married Douglas Haig (1861-1928), later first Earl Haig. 


@@@@@


doc= 28341


Vivian, Richard Hussey, first Baron Vivian (1775-1842), army officer, was born in Truro on 28 July 1775, the eldest son of John Vivian (1750-1826) of Truro, vice-warden of the stannaries, and Betsy (died 1816), only daughter and coheir of Richard Cranch, vicar of St Clement's Church, near Truro. Reportedly John and Betsy Vivian had thirty-two children; among the few who survived was Richard's brother John Henry Vivian. Richard received the name Hussey from his grandmother, a sister of Richard Hussey of Okehampton, attorney-general and MP for St Michael's. After attending Truro grammar school under Dr Cardew, a school in Lostwithiel, Harrow School, and Exeter College, Oxford (matriculated March 1790), where he spent only two terms, Vivian went in 1791 to France to learn the language. In 1793 he was articled to Jonathan Elford, a solicitor at Devonport, but he preferred a military career, and an ensign's commission in the 20th foot was procured for him on 31 July 1793. He did not join the regiment, and on 20 October he was promoted lieutenant in an independent company of foot; he exchanged into the 54th foot on 30 October. 
Vivian was promoted captain in the 28th foot on 7 May 1794, and joined Lord Moira's reinforcements for the duke of York's army in Flanders, disembarking at Ostend in June. He took part in the operations ending in York's withdrawal to Antwerp and the concentration at the end of July of his whole force at Breda for the defence of the Netherlands. He was in hot fighting at Nijmegen at the end of October, and after its evacuation and the return of York to England, he was in the action at Thiel under General Dundas in December, and at Geldermalsen under Lord Cathcart in severe weather early in January 1795, when his regiment greatly distinguished itself. 
Vivian returned to England in June 1795, and was stationed at Gosport. He embarked with his regiment in the autumn in the expedition under Sir Ralph Abercromby, but after some weeks at sea his transport was driven back by the weather, and in August 1796 he accompanied his regiment to Gibraltar. In August 1798 he exchanged into the 7th light dragoons, with which he took part in the expedition to The Helder, sailing from Deal on 13 August 1799 with the first division of the British army under Abercromby. He was present at the battles of Bergen on 19 September and 2 October, and at the battle of Alkmaar on 6 October. In December he returned to England with his regiment. On 9 March 1800 he was promoted major, and on 20 September 1804 lieutenant-colonel in the 25th light dragoons; he did not join the regiment, however, and on 1 December he exchanged back into the 7th light dragoons. 
In October 1808 Vivian sailed in command of the 7th light dragoons for Spain; after disembarking at Corunna in the following month he joined the army under Sir David Baird. On 5 December he marched with the rest of the cavalry under Lord Paget from Astorga and on 10 December he joined Sir John Moore at Toro. In the retreat to Corunna, Vivian was frequently engaged, as his regiment formed the rearguard from Astorga to Corunna. On one occasion during the retreat Vivian, accompanied by only one non-commissioned officer, collected some 600 infantry stragglers who had been attacked by French cavalry, formed them up, and repulsed the enemy; for this he received the thanks of Paget and Moore, who witnessed his success. After the battle of Corunna (16 January 1809) Vivian embarked with the army for England. He was awarded the gold medal for the actions of Sahagun and Benavente. 
Having recruited its losses in the Corunna campaign, Vivian's regiment was sent to Ireland in 1810. While there he was promoted colonel in the army (20 February 1812) following appointment as aide-de-camp to the prince regent (March 1811). In March 1812 he was appointed equerry to the prince. In the spring of 1813 he returned with his regiment to England, and in August he sailed with it for Spain, landing towards the end of the month at Bilbao. In September he joined Lord Edward Somerset's brigade at Olite. He was present at the battle of the Nivelle on 10 November, and was later made a colonel on the staff to command a cavalry brigade (consisting of the 10th and 14th light dragoons) of Hill's division, which was posted between Usterits and Cambo on the River Nive. Vivian was in command of Hill's cavalry at the passage of the Nive on 9 December and in the fighting that took place on the succeeding days, and in the battle of St Pierre on 13 December. 
On 1 January 1814 Vivian was transferred to the command of the cavalry brigade of General Alten's division (consisting of the 18th light dragoons and the German hussars) at Hasparren. He advanced with the army in the middle of February, attacked the enemy at the Gave de Pau on 23 February, and took part in the battle of Orthez on 27 February, where his brigade was with the 4th and 7th divisions on the height of St Boes. His conduct in this battle gained the approbation of Sir William Carr Beresford, and he was awarded a clasp to his gold Peninsula medal. 
On 12 March Vivian entered Bordeaux; soon afterwards he joined Wellington in his advance on Toulouse. On 8 April he attacked a superior force of cavalry at Crois d'Orade, took about 100 prisoners, and gained possession of an important bridge over the Ers. During the action Vivian was wounded. When the 18th light dragoons returned to England the officers presented Vivian with a sword of honour. Vivian's severe wound prevented him from taking further part in the campaign, and he returned to England in June, having been promoted major-general on 4 June. In January 1815 Vivian was made a KCB (military division). His promotion severed his connection with the 7th hussars, and the officers presented him with a valuable piece of plate. He was shortly afterwards appointed to the command of the Sussex military district, with his headquarters at Brighton. 
On 16 April 1815 Vivian embarked to take command of a cavalry brigade (7th, 10th, and 18th light dragoons) under Lord Uxbridge in Wellington's army in Belgium. He arrived on 3 May at Ninove, where his brigade was assembled. Towards the end of May the 7th hussars were transferred from Vivian's to Sir C. Grant's brigade and replaced by the 12th hussars of the King's German Legion. On 13 June Vivian, having personally ascertained that the French were concentrating, reported it to headquarters. On 15 June he was at the duchess of Richmond's ball at Brussels; he left to march on Enghien and thence to Quatre Bras, where he arrived after a 40 mile march over bad roads just too late to assist in defeating the French attack. On 17 June Vivian's brigade assisted to cover on the left the British retreat to Waterloo, encountering a tremendous rainstorm which, however, relieved them of some pressure from the enemy. Having bivouacked in the vicinity of the forest of Soignies on the night of 17 June, his brigade was drawn up next morning in rear of the Wavre Road. It suffered little until towards the close of the last attack, as the ground on the left was such that the cavalry could not advance. 
About six o'clock in the evening, ascertaining that the cavalry in the centre had suffered severely, Vivian moved his brigade from the left to the right centre of the British line, arriving most opportunely as Bonaparte was making his last and most desperate efforts. Wheeling his brigade into line close in rear of the infantry, Vivian was ready to charge directly they had retreated through his intervals. Lord Edward Somerset, with the remnant of the two heavy cavalry brigades (some 200 out of 2000), retired through Vivian's brigade, which was then for about half an hour exposed to a hot fire of shot, shell, and musketry. The presence, however, of Vivian's brigade, which was shortly afterwards followed by the brigade of Sir John Ormsby Vandeleur, inspired the infantry with fresh confidence. On the repulse of Bonaparte's two huge columns of attack by the fire of the allies, Vivian led his brigade to attack the French reserves posted close to La Belle Alliance. He charged with the 10th light dragoons (the 18th being in support and the King's German Legion in reserve), and as soon as the 10th were well mixed up with the enemy and the French making off, he galloped to the 18th. Vivian was attacked by a cuirassier, but he gave him a thrust in the neck with his left hand (his right hand was in a sling from his Peninsula wound), and his little German orderly cut the man off his horse. With the 18th light dragoons he charged the second body of cuirassiers and chasseurs, defeating them, and taking fourteen guns which had been firing at them during the movement. He then ordered the 10th to charge an infantry square, which was gallantly done, the French being cut down in their ranks, and Count Lobau, who commanded an army corps, taken prisoner. The pursuit lasted as long as it was possible to see, and Vivian bivouacked for the night at Hilaincourt. 
For his services at Waterloo, Vivian, who was mentioned in dispatches, received the thanks of parliament, a KCH (1816), and Austrian and Russian orders. During the occupation of France he was with his brigade in Picardy. He returned to England with the army in 1818, and was for a short time unemployed. On the disbandment of the 18th hussars on 10 September 1821 the soldiers presented him with a silver trumpet and banner purchased with part of the prize money for horses captured by the brigade at Waterloo. This trumpet was presented by the second Lord Vivian to the new regiment of 18th hussars in September 1880. 
In 1819 Vivian was sent first to Newcastle upon Tyne because of disturbances which had occurred there, and later to Glasgow, where serious riots were expected. In 1820 he was elected a whig MP for Truro, a town he continued to represent until 1825, and from 1825 until 20 July 1830 he was inspector-general of cavalry. On 22 June 1827 he was promoted lieutenant-general, and on the following day he received the colonelcy of the 12th or Prince of Wales's Royal lancers. From 1826 until 1831 he was MP for Windsor. He was a frequent speaker in the House of Commons, especially on military subjects. In January 1828 he was created a baronet. From 1 July 1831 until 1836 he was commander of the forces in Ireland; on taking up this appointment he retired temporarily from parliament, and was given the GCH. From 1830 to 1837 he was groom of the bedchamber to William IV, and from 1832 to 1834 he was again MP for Truro. In June 1834 he was awarded an Oxford DCL. In 1835 he declined the position of secretary at war. On 4 May 1835 he succeeded General Sir George Murray as master-general of the ordnance, and was sworn of the British privy council; he had become a member of the Irish privy council in 1831. Vivian's first marriage, on 14 September 1804, was to Eliza (died June 1831), daughter of Philip Champion de Crespigny of Aldeburgh, Suffolk; they had daughters and two sons. His second marriage, on 10 October 1833, was to Letitia (died January 1885), third daughter of the Revd James Agnew Webster of Ashford, co. Longford; they had one daughter. 
On 29 January 1837 Vivian was transferred from the colonelcy of the 12th lancers to that of the 1st (Royal) Dragoons, and on 30 May he was given the GCB (military division). In this year he was returned to parliament as member for East Cornwall; he continued to represent it until August 1841, when he was created a peer as Baron Vivian, and took his seat in the upper house. Vivian died suddenly from 'aneurism of the heart' (GEC, 'Peerage', 2.290) at Baden-Baden on 20 August 1842. He was buried in the family vault in St Mary's, Truro, and a cenotaph of white marble was erected in the church. 
Vivian was survived by his second wife. His sons from his first marriage were Charles Crespigny Vivian ['see under 'Vivian, Hussey Crespigny, third Baron Vivian] and John Cranch Walker (died 1879), captain, 11th hussars, MP for Truro, and permanent under-secretary of state for war. Vivian also had an illegitimate son, Sir Robert John Hussey Vivian. 


@@@@@


doc= 28342


Vivian, Sir Robert John Hussey (1802-1887), army officer, was born at Arundel, Sussex, an illegitimate son of Richard Hussey Vivian, first Baron Vivian (1775-1842). He was brought up as one of the family, and was educated at Dr Burney's academy, Gosport, and on the continent, in part at Beauvais and Dresden. He entered the Madras army as ensign on 12 June 1819, was immediately promoted lieutenant, and served in the 10th native infantry until 1824. That year he was posted to the 18th Madras native infantry for service in Burma under Sir Archibald Campbell. 
Vivian took part in the capture of Rangoon in May 1824, was made adjutant of the battalion on 4 June, and fought in several actions between 1824 and 1826 including the battle of Pagan (9 February 1826). He was promoted captain on 1 August 1825. At the end of the war he resigned the adjutancy, and went home on leave. 
When Vivian returned to India in July 1827 he was appointed assistant adjutant-general of the Nagpur subsidiary force, and in May 1830 was transferred in a similar capacity to the light field division of the Hyderabad subsidiary force at Jalna. After nearly four years' furlough at home he resumed this appointment until his promotion to major on 9 December 1836. On 18 January 1837 he took command at Madras of a battalion of the 10th Madras native infantry, and shortly after accompanied it to Belgaum. In February 1841 he captured Fort Napani and received the thanks of Sir Robert Dick, the commander-in-chief, and of the governor in council at Bombay. 
On 15 October 1841 Vivian was promoted lieutenant-colonel, and on 5 January 1843 was posted to the 1st Madras European regiment (later the Royal Dublin Fusiliers). From 1844 to 1847 he was on furlough, marrying in 1846 Emma (died 1887), widow of Captain Gordon of the Madras army. On his return to India he commanded several native infantry regiments in succession. On 14 August 1849 he was appointed adjutant-general of the Madras army. He was promoted brevet colonel on 15 September 1851, and resigned as adjutant-general in August 1853. 
Vivian returned to England in January 1854, and on 28 November was promoted major-general. In 1855 he became a director of the East India Company. Several British officers served with the Turkish army in the Crimea, among them Vivian, who was the most senior. He held the Turkish rank of lieutenant-general after joining on 25 May 1855, and during the winter of 1855-6 he occupied the Kerch peninsula with his troops. He received the thanks of the government and the first class of the Turkish order of the Mejidiye. While commanding the Turkish contingent Vivian clashed with Major-General W. F. Beatson, who was commanding bashi-bazouks. Beatson, an East India Company officer, went home angry, subsequently bringing an action against Vivian, which Vivian won. 
On 22 January 1857 Vivian was made KCB, and on 21 September 1858 he was appointed a member of the new Council of India. On 30 September 1862 he was given the colonelcy of the Royal Dublin Fusiliers, was promoted lieutenant-general on 24 October 1862, and general on 22 November 1870. He was made GCB on 20 May 1871. He retired from the army in 1877 and died on 3 May that year at his residence, 10 Eaton Gardens, Hove, Sussex, his wife having died four days earlier. 


@@@@@


doc= 28343


Frank Vizetelly (1830-1883?), journalist, who was born at 76 Fleet Street, London, on 26 September 1830, educated at Boulogne, along with Gustave Dore and Blanchard Jerrold, and first employed by Henry on the 'Illustrated Times', of which he became Paris correspondent until his appointment as editor of 'Le Monde Illustre' in 1857. Having returned to England in 1859 he served as war correspondent first for the 'Illustrated Times', then for the 'Illustrated London News', and later for other papers. He reported on the battle of Solferino (1859), Garibaldi's Sicilian and Neapolitan campaigns (1860), the American Civil War, the Austro-Prussian War of 1866, and the Carlist uprising in Spain in the 1870s. Finally, on 4 November 1883, he disappeared in the Sudan, near Kashgil, while covering the fighting between an Egyptian army under the command of William Hicks (Hicks Pasha) and the forces of the Mahdi. His name appears on a memorial to war correspondents in the crypt of St Paul's Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 28344


Vizetelly, Henry Richard (1820-1894), journalist and publisher, was born in London on 30 July 1820 and baptized at St Botolph without Bishopsgate. He was the son and grandson of printers who were members of the Stationers' Company. According to family tradition they were descended from a Venetian named Vizzetelli who settled in England towards the end of the seventeenth century. His father was James Henry Vizetelly (died 'c'.1838), a printer and engraver, and his mother was Mary Anne, 'nee' Vaughan, of Cheshire. From 1831 to 1835 he was taught by a Mr Wyburn at a 'classical and commercial academy' at Chislehurst. He was then apprenticed to the wood-engraver George William Bonnar. After Bonnar's death the following year he became a pupil of John Orrin Smith, another wood-engraver, and was formally apprenticed to his father at Stationers' Hall. He engraved several of John Leech's first successful drawings, 'Paris Originals', for 'Bell's Life' and sold sketches of the coronation of Queen Victoria to 'Bell's Life' and 'The Observer'. In 1841, after coming of age, he became a partner in the printing and engraving business established by his elder brother James Thomas (1817-1897) in Peterborough Court, London. The next year, inspired by the potential benefits to the business of a weekly newspaper 'more or less filled with engravings', he assisted Herbert Ingram in founding the 'Illustrated London News', for which he wrote the prospectus. Less than twelve months later, in partnership with Andrew Spottiswoode, the queen's printer, the two Vizetelly brothers set up their own weekly paper, the 'Pictorial Times'. The literary staff included the 'Punch' luminaries Douglas Jerrold, Mark Lemon, and Thackeray. Vizetelly sold his share to Spottiswoode at the end of 1844, ostensibly in order to devote himself to the expanding business of Vizetelly Brothers as printers, engravers, and publishers. The firm's most notable successes were achieved in the early 1850s, with engravings for David Bogue's editions of a number of Longfellow's poems and for the fifty or so volumes of the 'National Illustrated Library', published by Ingram, and with the publication of the first British edition of Harriet Beecher Stowe's 'Uncle Tom's Cabin' in partnership with Salisbury and Clarke. In 1848 Vizetelly established a short-lived illustrated weekly magazine, the 'Puppet Show', and in 1849 he scored a critical and commercial coup as an author with a fictitious diary, 'Four Months among the Goldfinders of Alta California', published by Bogue, that was almost universally assumed to be authentic. 
When the newspaper stamp was abolished in 1855 Vizetelly, again in partnership with Bogue, launched by far the most successful of his journals, the 'Illustrated Times', a twopenny weekly. Attracting the services of Frederick Greenwood, Robert Brough, Edmund Yates, George Augustus Sala, James Hannay, and many other up-and-coming journalists, it for a while boasted a circulation of over 200,000, double that of the 'Illustrated London News'; Vizetelly claimed to have made a clear profit of $1200 from the engravings for a single issue devoted to the marriage of the princess royal in January 1858. Herbert Ingram, still the proprietor of the 'Illustrated London News', reacted to the competition from the new paper by purchasing a one-third share in 1857 and buying Vizetelly out two years later for more than $4000, but retaining him as editor for a further five years on an annual salary of $800. In May 1858 Vizetelly had started a penny weekly, the 'Welcome Guest', edited by Sala and Brough, but after losing $2000 or $3000 on this he sold it to John Maxwell, also in 1859. Despite the undoubted profitability of many of his undertakings, Vizetelly's stock of capital may have been depleted by gambling and bohemian pleasures, in which he associated for some years with Sala, the acknowledged 'king' of literary Bohemia. Sala's 'Make your Game' (1860) presented a fictionalized account of their costly excursion to the roulette tables of Homburg in the autumn of 1858. 
From 1865, when the 'Illustrated Times' ceased publication, until the end of 1877 Vizetelly lived in Paris. For the first five years he was Paris correspondent and general representative on the continent of the 'Illustrated London News', with a salary of $800 per year, and he remained on the paper's staff for some time afterwards. He also contributed articles to the 'Pall Mall Gazette', 'All the Year Round', and 'Once a Week'. He published 'The Story of the Diamond Necklace', based on Carlyle's well-known historical essay 'The Diamond Necklace', in two volumes in 1867, and a free translation of 'The Man in the Iron Mask' in 1870. During the siege of Paris in 1870 both he and his seventeen-year-old son Ernest Alfred (1853-1922) were transformed into war correspondents, dispatching their sketches of the beleaguered city to the 'Illustrated London News' by 'balloon-post'; to ensure that at least one would reach its destination, several photographs of each were sent by successive posts. Vizetelly subsequently retreated to England for a time, but his son, who remained in France throughout the war, was created a chevalier of the Legion d'honneur for the gallantry he displayed. He later collaborated with his father on a two-volume account of the siege, 'Paris in Peril' (1882), and accompanied him on many of his assignments as the special correspondent of the 'Illustrated London News' in various parts of Europe after the war. One of these, to Berlin in 1872, bore fruit in the book 'Berlin under the New Empire' (2 vols., 1879). Both father and son made themselves authorities on wine during their long residence in France, Henry Vizetelly producing four monographs on the subject between 1875 and 1880 and serving as a wine juror at the Vienna Exhibition of 1873 and the Paris Exhibition of 1878. 
On his return to England in 1878 Vizetelly resumed his old business of publishing after a break of nearly a quarter of a century. Apart from relatively innocuous books by old friends such as Sala, the output of his new firm, Vizetelly & Co., consisted chiefly of translations of French and Russian novelists, including Flaubert, Daudet, Dostoyevsky, and Tolstoy. Many of them affronted Victorian notions of propriety, which Vizetelly also challenged explicitly by publishing George Moore's 'Literature at Nurse, or, Circulating Morals: a Polemic on Victorian Censorship' (1885), and by issuing cheap unexpurgated editions of 'The Best Plays of the Old Dramatists' (the 'Mermaid Series'). But it was above all his publication, between 1884 and 1888, of translations of seventeen novels by Emile Zola that brought him notoriety for the first time in his life and turned him into a reluctant martyr, one of the early heroes of the fight against oppressive literary censorship which culminated in the lifting of the ban on 'Lady Chatterley's Lover' in 1960. On 31 October 1888 he was fined $100 for publishing 'The Soil', a translation of 'La terre', which the solicitor-general Sir Edward Clarke branded a work of 'bestial obscenity'. To avoid a heavier penalty Vizetelly, on his counsel's advice, had pleaded guilty and promised to withdraw all his Zola translations from sale, although only a few weeks earlier he had issued a pamphlet, 'Extracts Principally from English Classics', to demonstrate that suppressing Zola's works would logically entail 'bowdlerising... the greatest Works in English Literature' (BL, private case 29'a'.45). By 30 May 1889 he had released the offending translations, minimally expurgated by his son Ernest, and was back in court. This time, again pleading guilty on counsel's advice, he was sentenced to three months' imprisonment and forfeited bail of $200. 'The Times' interpreted his plea of guilty as an admission that profit had been his only motive. By now he was sixty-nine and neither his health nor his finances recovered in the few years of life remaining to him after he had served his sentence. He died at Heatherlands, Farnham, on 1 January 1894. Just before his death he had the satisfaction of reading that Sir Edward Clarke's successor as solicitor-general, Sir Charles Russell, had led the applause for Zola when he read a paper at a meeting of the Institute of Journalists in September 1893. 
Vizetelly had married Ellen Elizabeth, 'nee' Pollard, the daughter of John Pollard MD, on 30 March 1844; she died about 1857. On 6 February 1861 he had married Elizabeth Ann, 'nee' Ansell, of Brompton, who died in 1874. The well-known author and lexicographer Frank Horace Vizetelly (1864-1938) was a child of his second marriage. Two of the sons of his first marriage, not only Ernest Alfred but also Edward Henry (1847-1903), won some fame as war correspondents, as did one of the sons of his elder brother James, Montague Vizetelly (1846-1897). But in this sphere the best-known member of the family was Henry's youngest brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 28345


Voelcker, (John Christopher) Augustus (1822-1884), agricultural chemist, was born on 24 September 1822 at Frankfurt am Main, the fifth son (in a family of seven sons and one daughter) of Frederick Adolphus Voelcker, a Frankfurt merchant. His father died in 1833 and early ill health postponed the commencement of his formal schooling until the age of twelve. However, with the energy which Voelcker evinced throughout his career, by the age of sixteen he was sufficiently well educated to gain employment as a pharmacist's assistant at Frankfurt; in 1842 he was appointed as a manager of a pharmacy business at Schaffhausen. In 1844 he entered the University of Gottingen where he studied chemistry under Professor Wohler; he also attended Liebig's influential lectures at Giessen. He was awarded the degree of doctor of philosophy at Gottingen in 1846, the subject of his doctoral dissertation being the composition of tortoiseshell. He then investigated compounds of manganese and other metals and published the results of his laboratory experiments in German and Dutch scientific periodicals. Wohler recommended him to Professor Gerrit Jan Mulder at Utrecht; Voelcker became an assistant and aided him in the preparation of 'Chemische Untersuchungen' (1852). Mulder was much interested in the study of physiological chemistry, especially in its relation to vegetable and animal production, and this work had a considerable influence on Voelcker's later career. 
In February 1847 Voelcker went to Edinburgh as assistant to J. F. W. Johnston, then chemist to the Agricultural Chemistry Society of Scotland. He lectured on Johnston's behalf at Durham University, a remarkable transition for a native German speaker. There was scarcely a trace of a foreign idiom in his writing, which was noted for its clarity, although this facility can have been gained only by great determination. While in Scotland he formed a close friendship with George Wilson (1818-1859), the regius professor of technology at Edinburgh. It was at this time that he first came into contact with farmers and their agricultural requirements. 
In August 1849 Voelcker was appointed professor of chemistry at the Royal Agricultural College, Cirencester (founded in 1844), where he began a series of field experiments and extensive laboratory investigations. In 1852 he married Susanna Wilhelm of Frankfurt; they had four sons and a daughter. The eldest son, George, died at the age of twenty-three in 1876 from diphtheria contracted while training in hospital as a medical student. In 1855 Voelcker was appointed consulting chemist to the Royal Bath and West Society and two years later he gained the same position at the Royal Agricultural Society of England. 
Voelcker left Cirencester for London in 1863 and commenced private practice as a consulting chemist at a laboratory which he established in Salisbury Square. His advice was in constant demand on technical and legal inquiries, especially those in connection with sewage, water and gas supply, river pollution, and agricultural holdings. He was one of the jurors of the international exhibition of 1862, of the fisheries exhibition of 1883, and of the health exhibition of 1884. In 1870 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. He was one of the founders and an early vice-president of the Institute of Chemistry of Great Britain and Ireland, established in 1877. 
It was through his work for the Royal Agricultural Society of England that Voelcker made his greatest mark. Every half-yearly volume of the society's 'Journal' between 1857 and 1884 contains one or more of his extensive contributions. He carried out a large range of agricultural investigations for the society and, between 1865 and 1884, completed 13,068 chemical analyses for its members. At a time when farmers were often sold substandard or adulterated samples of fertilizers or feeding-stuffs the publication of Voelcker's impartial and meticulous analyses -- which on occasion led to litigation -- was an important way in which quality guarantees could be achieved. The high regard in which he was held in the agricultural community was marked by his election to the chairmanship of the London Farmers' Club in 1875; no man, it was said, 'ever more happily united 'Science with Practice'' ('Farmer's Magazine'). 
Voelcker's experimental work and writings on agricultural chemistry were marked by analytical precision and thoroughness. Although he did not write a comprehensive textbook and made no revolutionary discoveries, his work on the composition of farmyard manures and fertilizers, soil processes, the feeding of animals, milk, and dairy practice contributed significant increments of knowledge to agricultural science. 
Voelcker took a considerable interest in religious movements and was an active participant in the affairs of the British and Foreign Bible Society. He died of heart disease on 5 December 1884 at his London home, 39 Argyll Road, Kensington and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. Two of his sons, John Augustus and William, continued the consulting practice that he had established. The former also succeeded him as the Royal Agricultural Society of England's consulting chemist and occupied the position until 1938. Indeed, a member of the Voelcker family continued to act in that capacity until 1976 -- an outstanding example of family continuity in professional service. 


@@@@@


doc= 28346


Vogel, Sir Julius (1835-1899), premier of New Zealand, was born on 24 February 1835 in London, the second of three children and the elder son of Albert Leopold Vogel, a Dutch Christian, and his wife, Phoebe, the daughter of Alexander and Sophia Isaac. His mother's Jewish merchant family had lived in England from at least the mid-eighteenth century. His father was estranged from the family after the birth of the third child, and, after his younger brother died in 1841, he moved with his mother and his sister, Frances, into the large, comfortable Isaac home in New Cross Road, south London. His education was typical of the commercial middle class. Until the age of eleven he was taught by governesses at home. This was followed by a year at the junior school of University College in Gower Street, two years boarding at a Jewish school in Ramsgate, and a final year back at Gower Street. In 1850 he joined the family firm, already overstocked with uncles and cousins, only too aware that his future as a young clerk was precarious. The death of his mother in August 1851 determined that he would have to seek his fortune elsewhere, and he began to attend lectures at the newly opened Government School of Mines in London. A year later, with some expertise in assaying, he sailed for the Victorian goldfields. 
Vogel was only seventeen when he arrived in Melbourne. He first set up as an assayer, and then went into goldfield storekeeping and gold purchasing. By mid-1854 he was based in Maryborough and travelled to the nearby goldfields with pharmaceuticals and other supplies. Two years later he pitched his tent in the main street of Dunolly and became a journalist. He began by contributing articles to the Melbourne 'Argus' and then became editor of the Dunolly 'Advertiser'. His career in newspapers collapsed with the decline of the goldfields in 1861, and he stood for a seat in the Victorian parliament. After being heavily defeated, he left for Otago, New Zealand, where gold discoveries had recently been reported. 
Vogel settled in Dunedin, and in November 1861 became co-founder and editor of the 'Otago Daily Times', New Zealand's first daily newspaper. With a staff including Ebenezer Fox, later secretary to the cabinet, and Benjamin Farjeon, a future novelist, 'The Times' became the leading newspaper in the largest and wealthiest town in the country. Vogel used it as a springboard first into community affairs and then into local politics. In June 1863 he was elected to the Otago provincial council and in November 1866 he became head of the provincial executive, occupying the post of provincial treasurer until May 1869. 
Election to the provincial council was followed in September 1863 by victory in a by-election to the house of representatives. In parliament Vogel quickly demonstrated his outspoken, argumentative nature and his financial ability. When William Fox took over the leadership of government in June 1869, he recruited Vogel as his colonial treasurer. 
On 19 March 1867 Vogel married Mary, the daughter of William and Emily Clayton, his Dunedin neighbours. William Clayton was a highly regarded architect. Mary Clayton was eighteen at the time of her marriage, a seemingly quiet but forceful young woman who bore four children between 1868 and 1875, and strongly supported her husband's political and social ambitions. Vogel adored her, as he did his sister who came to live with them, and always attempted to provide his family with the material comforts and domestic warmth that he felt he had missed through his youth and early career. 
The Vogels had planned to move to Auckland after the parliamentary session of 1869, and Vogel had arranged to become editor of the 'Southern Cross', having lost his control of 'The Times' in 1868. The colonial treasurership ended this plan, although he did for a while own the 'Cross'. Vogel won Auckland constituencies in the elections of 1871 and 1875, but henceforth was never really settled in New Zealand. The family lived in Wellington during the parliamentary sessions but spent long periods out of the country on political business until Vogel's appointment to London in 1876. Although he returned to New Zealand on business in 1882-3 and was back in politics between 1884 and 1888, most of the rest of his life after 1876 was spent in England. 
Vogel was at the height of his political powers in the first half of the 1870s. As a representative of Otago on the South Island, he had viewed the wars of the 1860s between Europeans and Maori as a northern matter. He had then advocated that the South Island separate from the North to pursue its economic development unencumbered by the disruption of fighting and war debts. However, by 1869 he recognized that European control and progress required a unified colony, increased migration and settlement, and a modern transport and communications infrastructure. His financial statement of 1870 revived the colonizing creed of rapid progress through public expenditure by outlining a ten-year plan for government-financed and -managed immigration and public works. During the following years 'Vogelism' brought more than 100,000 immigrants into the colony to settle on the land and work in construction and domestic service, and provided the country with a network of roads, railways, and bridges. Vogel became the dominant figure in politics. When the provincial governments, previously responsible for settlement and development, created political difficulties for the operation of his policy, he proposed the abolition of the provincial councils in the North Island. By 1875 parliament had agreed that all the provincial councils should go, making the central government supreme. Vogel held at various stages the offices of colonial treasurer, postmaster-general, commissioner of customs, telegraph commissioner, and minister of immigration. He was premier from April 1873 until July 1875 and then again from February to August 1876. 
Vogel recognized that New Zealand needed to increase its exports, and he worked to establish trade with Australia, the United States, and the Pacific islands. He spent many months in Australia, and visited the United States to negotiate steamship services to New Zealand. He also arranged contracts to link New Zealand and Australia by cable. He returned to England on political and financial missions in 1871 and 1874-5, assisted in raising loans for the colony, and discussed defence and British policy in the Pacific. In 1872 he was rewarded with a CMG and, in 1875, a KCMG. 
In August 1876, with the country on the verge of a financial recession and his own political support much eroded, Vogel resigned the premiership and accepted appointment as agent-general in London. He was in poor health and finances, and intended to use the colonial appointment to establish a career in business or politics in England. In the 1880 general election he stood as a Conservative for the borough of Penryn and Falmouth and shared in the party's massive defeat. His official duties provided him with valuable contacts, but when his private financial interests began to conflict with those of the government he was required to resign. 
Vogel spent the early 1880s promoting a range of speculative land, electricity, railway, and telecommunication companies. All were high risk and under capitalized and damaged his business reputation. In 1884 he returned to New Zealand and, hoping to save one of his companies through government intervention, contested a seat in parliament. The country, suffering badly from depressed export prices and government retrenchment, welcomed him back. He took a seat in the house as member for Christchurch North and became colonial treasurer in a government led by Robert Stout. Unable to effect a financial recovery, this government was thrown out of office in 1887. Vogel retained his seat and was leader of the opposition for a year. However, after the 1888 parliamentary session the Vogels returned to England for good. 
Although he believed that he had given the best years of his life to New Zealand, Vogel's real commitment was to the notion of a Greater Britain. He envisaged New Zealand as the Britain of the south seas and pursued colonial expansion in the Pacific, urging Britain to annex strategic and potential trading partners among the islands. He was an early advocate of imperial federation, and supported a federal parliament and collective responsibility exercised by states bound in an indissoluble union. 
Vogel published some thirty or more articles on the politics of New Zealand and the empire, most of which appeared in the 'Nineteenth Century' and the 'Fortnightly Review'. He edited the 1875 'Official New Zealand Handbook' and in 1889 published a novel, 'Anno Domini, or, Woman's Destiny'. The latter prophesied a united Anglo-American empire, ruled by women and free of poverty. 
Rather short in stature, Vogel was portly, even as a young man. His bachelor period on the goldfields gave him a penchant for pipes and cigars, alcohol, and oysters, which took their toll on his health. By his forties he suffered from gout and by the 1880s could barely walk. He wore big woollen slippers, travelled with a wheelchair, and always needed assistance. His increasing deafness made his participation in parliamentary debate difficult. Lines of pain are etched on his face in later photographs. 
Perhaps because of the rejections of childhood and youth, Vogel cherished an overwhelming desire for public success and recognition. He was an extrovert, impulsive, generous, and headstrong. Some of his contemporaries were repelled by his brash abuses of political power and his disregard for propriety, while they also recognized his ability and personal charm. Few could separate the man from his policies, and his reputation fluctuated with economic cycles. He was often blamed for the severity of the 1880s depression, and then, in the late 1890s, was seen as the man who had provided the country with the infrastructure necessary for an export-led recovery. The Keynesian view that depression could be cured by government expenditure cast Vogel as a visionary economic thinker. 
Vogel's life ended in disappointment and poverty. Confined to a book-lined room in his home, Hillersdon, in East Molesey, Surrey, from the early 1890s, he worried over his family and their future. In 1893 his second son was killed in action against the Matabele (Ndebele). Mary Vogel was so concerned by his depression and financial worries that she turned to New Zealand friends for help. In his last years the New Zealand government provided him with a small sinecure. He died at home of a heart attack on 12 March 1899 and was buried three days later at the Jewish cemetery at Willesden. 


@@@@@


doc= 28347


Vokes, Frederick Mortimer (1846-1888), actor and dancer, the son of Frederick Vokes, master of the wardrobe at the Surrey Theatre, and his wife, Sarah Jane, 'nee' Godden, was born in London on 22 January 1846. He made his first appearance at the Surrey in 1854, as the boy in the farce 'Seeing Wright'. Vokes and his two sisters Jessie and Victoria, subsequently joined by a third sister, Rosina, and by Walter Fawdon, who assumed the name of Vokes on joining the company, became known as the Vokes children, a name which they afterwards changed to the Vokes family. They made their joint debut on 26 December 1861 at Howard's Operetta House, Edinburgh. After playing at the Alhambra, they returned for six years to provincial theatres and music halls. In December 1868 the family made a great sensation at the Lyceum in the pantomime 'Humpty Dumpty'. It led to their engagement for the pantomime at Drury Lane, at which house the entire family appeared for the next ten years, playing always in the burlesque introduction and often in the harlequinade. In February 1870, in a farce at Drury Lane given by the Vokeses called 'Phoebus's Fix', Frederick Vokes sang a song by E. L. Blanchard, 'The Man on Wires'. The same year he visited Paris, but had to leave on account of the Franco-Prussian War. In August 1875 'The Belles of the Kitchen', a fanciful sketch that had previously been given at the Alhambra, was performed at the Adelphi with great success. In June 1876 the family produced at the same house Blanchard's 'Bunch of Berries', an altered version of which they presented at Brighton in April 1880. After the retirement of Rosina Vokes on her marriage, Frederick played with the remaining members of the family at the Aquarium Theatre in 'The Rough Diamond' and 'Fun in a Fog' in April 1879. The last appearance of the family in the Drury Lane pantomime was Christmas 1879. Most of its members were in the pantomime at Covent Garden in 1880. Vokes married Bella, the daughter of Thomas William Moore of the Moore and Burgess minstrels. She played occasionally as one of the family, particularly as a replacement for Rosina. Vokes made more than one visit with his sisters to the United States and Canada. In 1888 he was compelled by illness to forgo his engagements, and on 3 June he died of paralysis at the house of his sister Victoria. He was a fair comedian, a good dancer, and a wonderful pantomimist. With the rest of the Vokes family he was buried in Brompton cemetery. 


Another sister, 
A third sister, 


@@@@@


doc= 28348


Jessie Catherine Biddulph Vokes (1851-1884), played juvenile parts at the Surrey, as Teddy in 'Dred, or, The Dismal Swamp' and Florence in 'The Dumb Savoyard'. Most popular were her roles of Mamillius in 'The Winter's Tale' at Sadler's Wells and the prince of Wales in 'Richard III', performed with Barry Sullivan at the St James's. She shared the fortunes of her family, with whom she played in Edinburgh, London, Paris, and America. She was a sprightly and accomplished dancer and an acceptable actress. She died at 16 London Road, Marylebone, London, on 4 August 1884, and her death contributed to the break up of the family. 


@@@@@


doc= 28349


(Theodocia) Rosina Vokes (1854-1894), was born on 18 October 1854. She was the youngest, sprightliest, and most popular member of the Vokes family, and made her first public appearance at the Alhambra in 'The Belles of the Kitchen'. With the rest of her family she took part in the performance of 'Humpty Dumpty' at the Lyceum on 26 December 1868. The following Christmas she appeared under Chatterton at Drury Lane in the pantomime in which, in the small part of Fatima, she acquired a reputation for vivacity and witchery, which strengthened with each succeeding year. With her family she played at the Chatelet in Paris until the approach of the German army compelled them to take to flight. At Drury Lane, in February 1870, she was Albert to the William Tell of Thomas King in Sheridan Knowles's 'William Tell'. On 10 March 1877 she married Cecil Clay, the author of 'A Pantomime Rehearsal' and the brother of Frederick Clay, the composer of light operas. She then retired from the English stage. In October 1885, however, she was invited to America with her husband, and took over with her a small theatrical company, including Brandon Thomas, Weedon Grossmith, and other actors subsequently well known, and played in light comedy and burlesque. For nine consecutive years she made a tour of the principal cities of the United States and Canada, playing in G. W. Godfrey's 'The Parvenu', A. W. Pinero's 'The Schoolmistress', Grundy's 'The Milliner's Bill', and in 'The Circus Rider', 'Maid Marian', and 'A Pantomime Rehearsal'. Her last tour was completed in 1893, and she died at Babbacombe, Torquay, on 27 January 1894. She had remarkable gifts in light comedy and in burlesque. Though the Vokeses all died young, their father lived to the age of seventy-four, dying on 4 June 1890, and their mother survived them all, living until 8 February 1897. 


@@@@@


doc= 28350


Victoria Rosaline Sarah Vokes (1850/1853-1894), actress, sister of Frederick Mortimer Vokes, was born in London. She appeared at the Surrey under Creswick as Genevieve in 'The Avalanche' when scarcely two years old. She continued to share with her sisters all the child parts undertaken by the Vokes family, and became very popular as Albert in 'William Tell' and the duke of York in 'Richard III'; she played the latter part at the St James's Theatre with Barry Sullivan. Besides taking part in the performances of her family, she played, in February 1871 at Drury Lane, Amy Robsart in 'Kenilworth', owing to the illness of Lilian Adelaide Neilson. She had a good voice and sang effectively. Her performances in 'The Belles of the Kitchen' and as Margery in 'The Rough Diamond' were humorous and spirited. In November 1890 she appeared at the Shaftesbury, with a company organized by herself, in 'My Lady Help', a comedietta by Arthur Macklin. She died on 2 December 1894 at 16 Blenheim Road, Marylebone, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 28351


Vokins, Joan (d. 1690), Quaker preacher and traveller, was the daughter of Thomas Bunce (died 1682?), a yeoman farmer of Charney Bassett, Berkshire. Joan and her husband, Richard Vokins, a yeoman farmer of West Challow, Berkshire, had three sons and three daughters; one son predeceased her. Her first child, Richard, was born on 30 June 1654, suggesting that she herself was probably born about 1630. 
In 1663 Oliver Sansom, husband of her younger sister Jane, declared himself a Quaker and converted Joan Vokins along with the rest of his and his wife's families. Vokins became one of the leaders of the Quakers of north Berkshire, and an assiduous attender at the monthly meetings where administrative matters were discussed. The women's meetings in the Vale of the White Horse, which Vokins and Jane Sansom dominated, became a personal commitment. Such meetings came under attack in 1678 from supporters of the Wilkinson-Storey schism, which aimed to move the Quakers towards conventional nonconformist respectability, and in particular to abolish the women's meetings. Vokins participated in a stormy conference in Reading to ensure their continuance. 
About this time, Vokins felt herself called to undertake a visit to the American colonies, to which many Quakers were emigrating. After arriving in New York in May 1680 she began a comprehensive tour in which she preached, attended meetings, set up new local Quaker organizations, and joined in actions against a heretical Quaker sect, the 'ranters'. She returned to New York in late summer in the expectation of returning to England, but was inspired to go to Barbados instead. It was the hurricane season, and she found herself making an impromptu tour of the Caribbean islands, at the mercy of winds and the availability of shipping. She had no doubt expected to reach Barbados by December, in time for a meeting which was to discuss the Wilkinson-Storey controversy, but arrived too late. In Barbados she worked tirelessly, holding two or three meetings each day and preaching to both white and black people. She arrived back in Dover in June 1681 and prolonged her preaching tour with another three weeks in Kent before returning home. Another major journey, in 1686, took her to Ireland. How these journeys were organized and financed remains obscure. 
In line with Quaker ideology, Vokins saw herself as a servant, even a soldier, obedient unconditionally to the commands of the indwelling Christ. These commands came to her perception direct and unmediated. The tasks with which she would be entrusted might be difficult, but prophetic inspiration and providential occurrences would ensure success. She was particularly chosen because her own bodily weakness and insignificance emphasized the divine power which worked through her. In fact, her achievements are all the more noteworthy in that she was permanently in poor health, sometimes bedridden, and often in pain. During her American journey she was dependent on female companions met by chance and apparently persuaded to remain with her; on one occasion she had to be carried into a meeting where she was to preach. What she sought above all in her religion was an emotional communion with other believers, especially with fellow members of the women's meetings, and a feeling of the presence of the holy spirit among them. 
Vokins died on 22 July 1690 in Reading, having fallen ill on her way home from a meeting in London. Her husband survived her. Her writings were edited by Oliver Sansom into a volume of standard Quaker hagiography under the title 'God's Mighty Power Magnified' (1691). 


@@@@@


doc= 28352


Wilson, Florence (d. in or after 1551), humanist scholar, like other sixteenth-century Scots named Wilson, employed the form Volusene (Latinized as Volusenus) abroad. He was born early in the sixteenth century somewhere near Elgin on the banks of the Lossie, and was educated there with his schoolfellow John Ogilvie, later rector of Cruden and canon of Aberdeen, with whom he discussed Horace by the riverside. From Elgin he went to King's College, Aberdeen, where he took his MA and was friendly with the principal, Hector Boece, whose admiration for Erasmus he shared. This would be about 1519. He may have earlier crossed England on his way to France, but is first recorded in England in September 1526. A letter from Sir George Lawson to Thomas Cromwell asks Antonio Bonvisi (a rich merchant from Lucca who was a member of Sir Thomas More's circle) to write to 'Mr Florens' to ensure that Lawson's son is kept continually at school. In October a correspondent of Cromwell's writing from Paris mentions that Thomas Winter, Cardinal Wolsey's natural son, is being tutored by a Scot, described as 'a kind and very gentle person and well learned' in a house belonging to the lord of St John's ('LP Henry VIII', 4/2, no. 2545); this is presumed to be Wilson. Visiting England in October 1528, Wilson wrote from Richmond to Cromwell, sending regards to Bonvisi and Vincenzo Casale. By mid-March 1529 he was still in England, and Winter missed him; but in April he wrote to Cromwell thanking him for his horse, which he had sold in Paris. 
Wilson provided Cromwell with continental news, and in late April 1531 with word of French heretics, based on information from Guillaume du Bellay. He now had the living of Speldhurst in John Fisher's diocese of Rochester, and promised to visit London in May. In February 1532 he was reported to be visiting Italy, but in April one of Cromwell's correspondents had to subsidize him for books bought in Paris. He was again engaged in buying books for Cromwell a year later. At the end of May 1535, when his English patron John Fisher was about to be tried for treason, Wilson was reported to have brought news to Bonvisi that Fisher was being created a cardinal. None the less, on 19 September Wilson felt able to recommend John Borthwick to Cromwell for speaking favourably of Henry VIII's divorce in the presence of French notables. 
Wilson was then at Chaumont on his way to Italy, hoping for a university post. But on his journey he took ill at Avignon, and decided to present himself to Jacopo Sadoleto, the cardinal-bishop of Carpentras, and was offered a post as schoolmaster in that city. An English friend, Thomas Starkey, had commended the cardinal to him, and Wilson informed Starkey of his appointment in a letter written from Bonvisi's house in Lyons. In June 1536 he wrote again to Cromwell, saying that he had composed a defence of Henry VIII, and asking in return for Cromwell's help in retaining his Speldhurst benefice. Sadoleto, meanwhile, was paying 70 crowns a year to Wilson, who hoped for a quiet spell teaching Latin and Greek. With conditions uncertain in England, where not only More and Fisher but also Cromwell himself fell foul of Henry VIII, Wilson remained in Lyons, teaching, it seems, in its college where Sebastien Castellion was, who later taught in Geneva. The college principal, Barthelemy Aneau, in the preface he supplied to Alciati's emblem book (editions of 1549, 1558, and 1564) praised Wilson's proficiency in languages, namely Greek, Latin, Scots, French, Italian, and Spanish, as well as his natural goodness. Conrad Gesner, who met Wilson in Lyons in 1540, considered him still a young man. 
In 1546 Wilson exchanged correspondence with Sadoleto, with the latter advising continued loyalty to the Catholic church, while Wilson pointed out that it was hard for him to approve the burning of learned men; yet he wished to remain moderate, and cited his friendly 'causeries' with the archdeacon of Cavaillon. Through his contacts with Bonvisi, he became acquainted with others from Lucca, a town associated with Pietro Martire Vermigli and Bernardino Ochino, both refugees from Catholicism. Loyalty won, however, and he remained faithful to Sadoleto's religion. In 1551 he was appointed public orator by the municipality for Lyons's feast of St Thomas, and he just may have been the Lyons Scot who objected in writing to the burning of Servetus by Calvin in 1553, and supported Castellion who had fled from Geneva to Basel. Wilson died at Vienne in the Dauphine, south of Lyons, at a date which is unrecorded but presumably during the 1550s. 
Wilson's earliest publications were two slim commentaries on individual psalms, 'Psalmi quintidecimi enarratio' (1531), dedicated to the cardinal of Lorraine, and 'In psalmo nobis 50, Hebraeis vero 51, enarratio' (1532), dedicated to Bishop Stephen Gardiner; they show him to have been well read in Greek, and citing two rabbis, Abraham ibn Ezra and David Kimhi, and also praising More, not only for his literary talent but also for his integrity. He owed a greater debt to Fisher, however, and the Hebrew dictionary (1523 edition) he presented to George Buchanan before leaving Paris was dedicated to Fisher by Sebastian Munster. Wilson's 'Scholia, seu, Commentariorum epitome in Scipionis somnium' (1535?) is dedicated to Thomas Cromwell's son Gregory. He visited Scotland about this time, and borrowed a horse from his old friend John Ogilvie, to whom he sent Erasmus's 'Apophthegmata' (1533) as a gift, with a note referring in friendly terms to Hector Boece. In 1538 Gilbert Ducher published his 'Epigrammatum libri II' at Basel, with an epigram addressed to Wilson, and a long poem of Wilson's appears in Orgetorix Sphinter's 'Pii, graves atque elegantes poetae aliquot' ('c'.1550), confirming his Lyons associations. His poems appear at the end of the edition by Thomas Wilson (Volusenus) of Patrick Adamson's 'Poemata sacra' (1619); they include one for Antonio Bonvisi and another to a young man falling in love. 
Wilson's 'Commentatio quaedam theologica' (1539), dedicated to a citizen of Lucca, emphasizes points of belief common to Catholics and reformed, and is written in a style later to be typical of Castellion's bible translation, replete with Christianized Ciceronian expressions. It has been cited as an example of 'rhetorical theology'. His 'De animi tranquillitate dialogus' (1543) is dedicated to Francesco Micheli, later tried for heresy at Lucca and a fugitive to Geneva. It is an eclectic and attractively written work, showing influences from both ends of the theological spectrum, with friends like John Borthwick and Crichton of Brunstane quoted from the reformed side, and Fisher from the other. All in all, despite echoes of the young Calvin, it is an orthodox work, and was translated into Italian in 1574. His phrase 'beneficium Christi' echoes the 'Beneficio di Gesu Cristo' of Marcantonio Flaminio. A 'Latinae grammatices epitome' (1544) cites Melancthon and Despauterius as authorities. Calvin's burning of Servetus and criticism of the classicizing Castellion would not appeal to a man of moderation, and Calvin attacked the anonymous Scot whom he saw as Castellion's disciple, for attempting to publish a critique of himself in Paris, a work now lost. This was probably Wilson, for no other Scot in Basel or Lyons fits the bill. Buchanan wrote an epigram in Wilson's praise. 


@@@@@


doc= 28353


Holst, Theodor Richard Edward von (1810-1844), literary painter, born in London on 3 September 1810, was the fourth of the five children of Matthias von Holst ('c'.1767-1854), professor of music and composer, who was of Livonian descent, and his Russian wife, Katharina Rogge (died 1838). His precocious talent for drawing was quickly recognized by Henry Fuseli and Sir Thomas Lawrence, the latter buying the first of many drawings from von Holst when he was only ten years old. However, the subsequent commission of erotic drawings, of which some were purportedly destined for George IV, provoked posthumous criticism of Lawrence's patronage. Von Holst became a favourite pupil of Fuseli and spent some time copying from the antique in the British Museum before his admission as a student to the Royal Academy Schools in 1824. His early instruction by Fuseli exerted such a powerful influence on his artistic development that some of his work is almost indistinguishable from that of his master. 
As with Fuseli, almost all von Holst's subjects were derived from literature: Virgil, Dante, Shakespeare, Shelley, and Victor Hugo each inspired at least one major work, but it was the German Romantics, particularly Goethe, E. T. A. Hoffmann, and Baron de la Motte-Fouque, which provided the themes for almost half his output. Thus von Holst became the most prolific English illustrator of German Romance, making his exhibition debut with 'Witches Hastening to the Hartzgebirg' (exh. RA, 1827) from Goethe's 'Faust', his favourite source throughout his life. While his exceptional imagination and draughtsmanship were widely praised, his choice of subjects were out of step with the age and public taste. His penchant for the demonic, supernatural, and erotic led to a degree of neglect that was otherwise undeserved. 
Von Holst exhibited forty-nine paintings at the major London exhibitions and the most successful of these, his later romanticized female portraits, were bought by some of the leading aristocratic collectors of the day. He was awarded a premium of 50 guineas for 'The Raising of Jairus's Daughter' by the British Institution in 1841; this work was later engraved. In the same year, he married Amelia Thomasina Symmes Villard ('b'. 1820), at Marylebone on 17 August. Little is known about their relationship apart from a comment by William Bell Scott that von Holst desired an open marriage but his wife 'a wild creature... returned him an unconquerable jealousy' ('Autobiographical Notes', 1892, 163). 
Von Holst's greatest admirer was Dante Gabriel Rossetti, who considered him a significant link between the older generation of English Romantic painters, such as Fuseli and William Blake, and the Pre-Raphaelite circle. Early drawings by Rossetti show a considerable debt to von Holst, as does his poem 'The Card-Dealer', inspired by von Holst's portentous portrayal of 'The Wish' (exh. British Institution, 1841). His medievalism, jewel-like colours, and firm drawing were much admired by the Pre-Raphaelites, who patronized Campbell's Scotch Stores restaurant in Soho because it was adorned with von Holst's pictures. 
Von Holst was the first to illustrate Mary Shelley's 'Frankenstein' by contributing two designs for Henry Colburn's 'Standard Novels' edition of 1831. The following year Edward Bulwer-Lytton bought 'The Drinking Scene from 'Faust'' and later based his novel 'Lucretia, or, The Children of Night' (1846) on a close friend of von Holst's and fellow disciple of Fuseli, the infamous Thomas Griffiths Wainewright. Von Holst was attempting to finish a gratis portrait of Bulwer-Lytton when he died from disease of the liver at his home, 2 Percy Street, Bedford Square, London, on 14 February 1844; he was buried in Kensal Green cemetery on 21 February. He was a pipe-smoker and is also likely to have indulged in opium, a particular fad of the time. The sale of his remaining works took place at Christie and Manson on 26 June. His great-nephew was the composer Gustav Holst. 


@@@@@


doc= 28354


Vortigern (fl. 5th cent.), ruler in Britain, came to be regarded as responsible for inviting the Anglo-Saxons into Britain. The significance of this role was such that accounts of Vortigern became largely legendary at an early date, and are probably historically unreliable. It seems reasonable to assume that he was some sort of administrative or military overlord of the southern 'civitates' of Britain in the fifth century. That he was wholly or largely responsible for the 'adventus Saxonum', as later tradition would have it, is perhaps more difficult to accept, though it seems possible that he had some connection with early English mercenaries or settlers. Writing a century after the events he describes, Gildas states in chapter 23 of his 'De excidio Britanniae' that the Britons convened a council ('consilium') to determine how best to counter barbarian incursions from the north, and that the councillors and the 'superbus tyrannus' ('proud tyrant') agreed to invite 'Saxon' mercenaries to fight on their behalf and in return gave them the eastern side of Britain. Some manuscripts of the 'De excidio' explicitly name this 'proud tyrant' as Vortigernus or Gurthigernus; and, while it is not clear whether the name was included in the authorial text, the identification with Vortigern is strengthened by the fact that the Old Welsh form Guortigern meant 'high king', suggesting the phrase 'superbus tyrannus' was a typical piece of Gildasian onomastic word play. 
It should be stressed that Gildas offers no absolute chronology for these events. While, with the benefit of hindsight, Gildas thought the decision to hire the Saxon mercenaries was an error, in fact it reflects a policy also followed on the continent by other late-Roman leaders, such as Aetius, and was probably regarded as less erroneous by contemporaries. Archaeology suggests the presence of Germanic mercenaries in fifth-century Britain. Most subsequent accounts of Vortigern are derived ultimately from that of Gildas but add increasing layers of legendary and (no doubt) unhistorical details. The earliest definite named references to him occur in the works of Bede, where Vertigernus or Vurtigernus -- synchronized with the emperors Martian and Valentinian III (449-50) -- is styled king ('rex'), and his invitation is linked with the settlement in Kent of Hengist and his son Oeric (or brother Horsa). Subsequently, the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' records for 449 that Hengist and Horsa arrived at Ebbsfleet, Kent, at the invitation of Wyrtgeorn, king of the Britons, to fight the Picts; but that in 455 they fought against him at Aylesford, Kent, where Horsa fell. Here, it can be seen how Vortigern had become an essential element in the origin-legend of the kingdom of Kent. 
By the early ninth century the Welsh had gathered additional legendary material around the figure of Vortigern, bringing him into conflict with both St Germanus and Ambrosius Aurelianus. The 'Historia Brittonum', once attributed to Nennius, which also drew upon the English accounts, credits Vortigern with four sons: Vortimer, who for a time is said to have fought against the English; Cadeyn; Pasgen, said to have ruled the kingdoms of Buellt and Gwrtheyrnion; and lastly, St Faustus (fathered by Vortigern on his own daughter), who founded a monastery at Riez in France. The same source gives three different accounts of his death, including one in which he is burnt to death through the prayers of Germanus, and names his father as Vitalis. Welsh genealogies, of highly dubious value, record Severa, 'daughter of Maximus the king', as his wife. Furthermore, it seems Vortigern acquired the role of ancestor for some early medieval Welsh dynasties. The fragmentary 'pillar of Elise (or Eliseg)', erected in the first half of the ninth century by Cyngen ap Cadell, seems to connect Guarthigirn with the origin of the kingdom of Powys, contrary to the genealogical derivation from Cadell Deyrnllug. That a Welsh dynasty should associate its origins with the figure held responsible for the arrival of the Anglo-Saxons is perhaps surprising, and it is possible that rather there are two different individuals who became identified because of the common personal name Vortigern. Alternatively, it may have been Vortigern's bad reputation which compelled the rulers of Powys to claim a different ancestor. Either way, it seems unlikely that such legendary material can be employed to further illuminate Gildas's account of the 'proud tyrant'. It did, however, make a contribution to the long and circumstantial narrative of Vortigern's life and death which was much later provided by Geoffrey of Monmouth. 


@@@@@


doc= 28355


Vossius, Gerardus Joannes (1577-1649), humanist scholar and author, was born in Heidelberg, Germany, probably in March or April 1577, the son of Joannes Vossius 
(Alopecius; 1549-1585)
, Calvinistic minister, and Cornelia Van Buel (died 1584). In his autobiography and correspondence Vossius mentions that he was born in early spring, without giving a precise date. His parents came from Roermond, a city in the south of the Netherlands. After completing his theology studies at Heidelberg his father, then a merchant, became minister of a congregation in the vicinity of that city in 1573. After serving his office in the Palatinate he was then called to serve in Leimuyden, the Netherlands, in Veurne, Flanders, and finally in Dordrecht, the Netherlands, where Gerardus's mother died in 1584. His father married Anna Fransdochter de Witt, but died soon after. Gerardus attended the Latin school in Dordrecht and enrolled at Leiden University in 1595 as student on a grant in the Collegium Theologicum. In 1598 he obtained the degree of MA. He went on to study theology and also lectured in physics at the university. 
In April 1600 Vossius broke off his theology studies to become vice-rector of the Latin school in Dordrecht. Soon he became rector of the school, which flourished under his guidance. In February 1602 he married Elisabeth Van den Corput (1578-1606), the daughter of a Dordrecht clergyman. They had three children, of whom only the youngest, Joannes (1606-1636), survived. Elisabeth died on 12 February 1606, and on 28 August 1607 Vossius married Elisabeth Junius (1585-1659), daughter of the Leiden professor in theology Franciscus Junius, and sister of Franciscus Junius (1591-1677). Five more children were born in Dordrecht: Franciscus (1608-1645), Antonius (1609-1610), Matthaeus (1611-1646), Dionysius (1612-1633), and Cornelia (1613-1638). As a student, Vossius had been adding to his father's library and he continued to do so in Dordrecht, and eventually acquired a large collection. A catalogue which he kept until 1630 has survived as well as a little notebook in which he recorded loans in later years. In 1606 he published his first substantial work, the 'Oratoriarum institutionum libri sex' ('Lectures in eloquence'), a compendium summarizing all that had been published on rhetoric until the present time. 
During the twelve-year truce (1609-21) between the Netherlands and Spain, a fierce controversy broke out in the Dutch Reformed church between remonstrants and counter-remonstrants, respectively advocates of a more liberal interpretation of predestination theology and those who clung to the strict Calvinistic theology of divine predestination. Interwoven with this church conflict was a political conflict between the stadholder and the regents on the limitations of their power. The well-known scholar and diplomat Hugo Grotius invited Vossius to participate in this controversy, and from 1613 the two men were in busy correspondence. When Vossius was approached to fill the chair in theology at the Gymnasium Illustre in Steinfurt, Germany, Grotius procured him the post of regent of the Leiden Theological College in June 1615. The job proved a difficult one as the college was the training ground for future ministers for the church. Vossius himself steered a middle course in the theological conflict of those years and also tried to persuade his students to follow his example. But he nevertheless openly championed the cause of the remonstrants, who had been unjustly charged with Pelagian heresies by their opponents, with the publication of his study 'Historia Pelagianismi'. 
In 1618 the conflicts in the republic reached a critical stage. Stadholder Maurits took harsh measures, and had his foremost political opponents (among whom was Grotius) imprisoned. A national synod, held at Dordrecht, passed censure on the remonstrants. Vossius followed these events with an anxious mind. He tried not to issue provocative statements, but could not prevent his students from taking sides in the conflict. He did support his imprisoned friend Grotius and saw to it that he was regularly supplied with cases filled with books; Grotius in fact escaped prison in one of those cases in March 1621. But would Vossius himself escape unscathed? In Leiden a committee had been installed for the removal from the university of teachers and students who had supported the remonstrants. Vossius was dismissed as regent of the Collegium Theologicum, but he was allowed to continue as unofficial member of the academic community. His publications and the stand he had taken as regent had made him suspicious in the eyes of the now all-powerful counter-remonstrants, though apparently there were insufficient grounds for official censure. However, even after his dismissal, Vossius continued to be harassed by the church. Again and again in his career he had to defend himself against certain passages in his church-historical works. 
Fortunately Vossius was protected by the university board, which was averse to the church's interfering with its staff. Thus in November 1620 Vossius was allowed to lecture at the Collegium Oratorium, and in 1621 he published a 'Rhetorica contracta' ('A brief course in eloquence'). In November 1622 he was completely rehabilitated and appointed professor in eloquence and history. He enjoyed great esteem as professor, and was given a variety of responsibilities. When he was offered a chair in history at Cambridge in 1625, the curators of Leiden University made the counter-offer of the vacant chair in Greek language and literature in order to retain him. Vossius was also commissioned to refute Cardinal Baronius's monumental Catholic historiography. There were in addition ordinary executive chores: the educational reform of the Latin schools was particularly time-consuming, but as part of a committee of Leiden professors Vossius formulated an entirely new curriculum and edited new textbooks. 
While in Leiden, Vossius revised the old grammatical textbooks of Ludolphus Lithocomus and Nicolaus Clenardus for Latin and Greek, and his own 'Rhetorica contracta' for rhetoric. He also wrote elementary textbooks, such as the 'Elementa rhetorica' ('The first principles of rhetoric'), which together with the 'Latina grammatica' remained in use in Dutch schools through the nineteenth century. In the same period Vossius also published important scholarly works, such as his 'Ars historica' ('The science of history') in 1623 and the two lexicons of Latin and Greek historiographers in 1623 and 1627. His publications and his many pupils made him a much valued figure in the republic of letters. As the years progressed his correspondence grew: 1296 letters are known to have been written by him, and at least 2092 letters were addressed to him. Scholarly correspondence with students and scholars all over Europe forms a large part. Faithful letter writers included Hugo Grotius in France, Joannes Meursius in Denmark, Erycius Puteanus in Louvain, and the theologians Ludovicus Crocius and Matthias Martinius in Germany. 
Vossius had been informed by two English representatives at the Dordrecht national synod in 1618 that he had built a reputation for himself in England with his study on Pelagianism. There was considerable interest in his work in the circles of high-churchmen. Vossius for his part appreciated the Church of England because he felt that it remained close to the early church. Gradually the number of English friends and admirers grew. William Laud, later to become archbishop of Canterbury, especially exerted himself on Vossius's behalf, partly because the latter looked after Laud's interests in the Netherlands. Laud procured Vossius's son Joannes a fellowship in Cambridge and a prebend for Vossius senior in Canterbury. During the final months of 1629 Vossius was in England, where he was received by Charles I and was installed as a canon. 
Vossius had several connections in England. In 1624 Fulke Greville, Lord Brooke, offered him a chair in history in Cambridge. Vossius also entertained good relations with the English ambassadors in the Netherlands Sir Dudley Carleton and Sir William Boswell. James Ussher, archbishop of Armagh, and Vossius were in correspondence on the subject of their joint interest in church antiquity. Mericus Casaubon, fellow canon at Canterbury, maintained Vossius's interests there. Edward Herbert, Lord Cherbury, contacted Vossius in connection with his book 'De religione gentilium' ('The religion of the pagans'). Vossius was also in correspondence with the linguist Thomas Farnaby. For Vossius, England had thus become a second home. The civil war, which wrecked so much that was dear to him and ended in regicide, was to afflict him so deeply that he fell seriously ill as a result. 
In May 1631 Vossius exchanged Leiden for Amsterdam to lay the foundation for the Athenaeum Illustre, later the University of Amsterdam, as professor in history and political science. On 8 January 1632 Vossius officially opened the new educational institute with an inaugural lecture 'De historiae utilitate' ('On the usefulness of history'). The athenaeum was then not yet a fully-fledged university, and was intended mainly to prepare matriculants of the Latin schools for the academic curriculum, but it soon became an important scholarly centre in its own right. During his time in Amsterdam, Vossius managed to publish some important works. In 1635 he brought out his monumental Latin grammar, the 'Aristarchus, sive, De arte grammatica libri septem'. Another impressive work was his 'Theologia gentilis' ('The knowledge of God among the pagans'), a brilliant and exhaustive summary of everything published on the subject of the natural phenomena that had led many to a belief in a creator. A very modern study on three old creeds was his 'Dissertationes tres de tribus symbolis' of 1642. His last two major publications were the book on errors in Latin usage, 'De vitiis sermonis' of 1645, and the 'Poeticae institutiones' ('Lessons in the poetical art') of 1647. 
When Vossius came to Amsterdam he was the proud father of eight thriving and promising children: in addition to the five children born in Dordrecht, they were Isaac Vossius (1618-1689), Gerardus (1619-1640), and Joanna (1623-1640), all three of whom were born in Leiden. A few of the sons had already drawn attention to themselves with their scholarly publications, but the years in Amsterdam, which had started out so full of promise, were to become a period of intense sorrow. In 1633 the highly talented Dionysius died, and in the years that followed all but one of Vossius's children died (the last, Matthaeus, in 1646, leaving his parents two grandchildren). Isaac, the only child to survive his parents, accepted a post at the Swedish court and left his parental home in 1648. For Vossius himself, old and in ill health from a variety of causes, including a kidney complaint, the end came at home, Oudezijds Achterburgwal, after a brief and painful sickbed, on 17 March 1649. He was buried in the Nieuwe Kerk, Amsterdam, on 22 March. 
Elisabeth Vossius, who survived her husband by ten years, settled the estate. Vossius's large library was sold to Queen Kristina of Sweden. A number of his works were published posthumously, such as a book on the various academic disciplines (1650), a lexicon of Latin and Greek poets from antiquity (1654), and a large etymological dictionary of the Latin language (1662). Thanks to the efforts of his son Isaac and grandson Gerardus Joannes (1645-1717), the thousands of letters written by and to Vossius were preserved and are now to be found in libraries in Oxford, London, and Amsterdam. The last-named also became the depository of the many collections of Vossius's scholarly manuscripts. In 1690 Paulus Colomesius in London published some thousand letters in 'Gerardi Joannis Vossii et clarorum virorum ad eum epistolae' ('Letters by G. J. Vossius and by famous men written to him'). At the turn of the century Vossius's collected works were issued in Amsterdam in six folio volumes. 
After that, silence ruled. Vossius was one of the last of the great savants from the era of scholarly humanism and after him scholarship took a different direction. Organizing the rich heritage of the past was replaced by experimentation and progression, in search of new knowledge. Vossius, the great representative of late humanism, was the last one to stand in that older tradition. As an exceptionally erudite systematician, he summarized in concise manuals the achievements of the past. He was not a revolutionary thinker, though he did point the way to new methods for research for the future. Instead he was content that after him others would improve on his work. Serviceability was the cornerstone of his character: it was the driving force behind his scholarly work, and also prompted him to be ready for all who required his help. Next to his all-encompassing erudition, it was for this that he was justly admired by his contemporaries. 


@@@@@


doc= 28356


Vossius, Isaac (1618-1689), philologist and author, was born in the Collegium Theologicum in Leiden, the eighth of the nine children of Gerardus Joannes Vossius (1577-1649), a professor, and his second wife, Elisabeth Junius (1585-1659), daughter of Franciscus Junius sen. (1545-1602). In May 1631 Gerardus Vossius and his family moved to Amsterdam. Together with his younger brother Gerardus, Isaac was educated at home by his gifted elder brother Dionysius and by private tutors. A talented and precocious student, he was able to assist the poet Joost van den Vondel in 1639 with the latter's translation of Sophocles' 'Electra'. In November 1632 the French scholar Claude Saumaise (Claudius Salmasius) was invited by the curators of the university to settle in Leiden; five years later, in 1637, he was to take Isaac under his wing. Isaac never studied at the University of Leiden; he confined himself to his philological studies under Saumaise's personal tutelage. Stimulated and aided by his mentor, Isaac in 1639 produced an edition of a Greek text, the 'Periplus' by the Greek geographer Scylax (fourth century BC), with a Latin translation and notes. Early in 1640 his edition of M. Junianius Justinus appeared with the Leiden Elzeviers. 
In April 1641 Isaac Vossius set off on his 'peregrinatio'. First he went to England, where in London the presence of his uncle Franciscus Junius, librarian of Thomas Howard, earl of Arundel, stood him in good stead. While he was there he also met Patrick Young, librarian of the Royal Library, and James Ussher, archbishop of Armagh and primate of Ireland. After a brief visit to Cambridge, Vossius crossed for France, where he arrived in Dieppe on 14 August 1641. In Rouen he met the jurist Claude Sarrau, 'parlementaire' to the 'parlement' of Paris, and in Paris he presented himself to Hugo Grotius. Vossius was often to be found in the Cabinet Dupuy, where hosts Pierre and Jacques Dupuy daily welcomed scholars from Paris and elsewhere. He must have made the acquaintance of most of the regular visitors there during the three months he spent in Paris in 1641: Ismael Boulliau, the philologist-mathematician, the philosopher Pierre Gassendi, the bibliophile Jean de Cordes, the jurist Jerome Bignon, Henri de Valois, Francois Guyet, and Gilles Menage. On his travels, apart from associating with other scholars, Vossius spent most of his time in libraries, collating and copying manuscripts of classical texts, preferably Greek 'inedita'. Vossius left Paris for Italy in November 1641. Four months later he arrived in Florence where he began working in the Biblioteca Laurentiana towards the end of February 1642. It was there that he copied Arrian's 'Ars tactica' partly for the benefit of Saumaise, who had been commissioned by Stadholder Frederick Henry to write his 'Militia Romana', a work on military tactics. Later, during a second stay in Florence, Vossius also copied for Saumaise an extensive work on the same subject by Urbicius (both works are in the 'Codex Mediceus' LV, 4). He furthermore copied an important manuscript containing the authentic text of Ignatius, to which James Ussher in London had directed his attention. 
Vossius next visited Naples and its surroundings where he spent about two weeks, finding the city too beautiful to spend much time on study; from there he went to Rome about June 1642, where he worked mostly in the Barberiniana and in the Vaticana. In September 1642 Vossius returned to Florence, and at the end of December he travelled to Venice and to Padua, where he visited Gaspare Scioppio a few times. Although Venice did not have much to offer to a scholar, he stayed there some five weeks, during which time he also relished the famous carnival. He left Venice in March 1643 and barely managed to reach Milan, where he lay seriously ill for some time, as a result of which he was only able to work in the Biblioteca Ambrosiana for a limited time. 
Vossius was back in Paris in July 1643. Soon he was staying in the home of Grotius, where he replaced Grotius's secretary Coenraad van Beuningen, who returned to Amsterdam. A year later, in August 1644, much to Grotius's regret, he left Paris to go home again, though not before first picking up a licentiate in law at Orleans in June. He travelled home via Caen in order to make the acquaintance of the learned theologian Samuel Bochart. 
From October 1644 until December 1648 Vossius lived in the parental home in Amsterdam. In March 1646 his elder brother Matthaeus, historian to the provinces of Holland and Zeeland, died. Isaac succeeded his brother in this post in the same year and completed part 4 of the latter's 'Annales'. The title 'historian' Vossius came to regard more and more as an honorary title with an attendant allowance. Vossius now had the time to sort out and work up the material he had acquired on his travels. In 1646 he brought out with Blaeu in Amsterdam his edition of the letters of Ignatius as they had been transmitted in the 'Codex Mediceus' LVII, 7. (He had never delivered the transcript of this manuscript in the Laurentiana to Ussher as Ussher had hoped.) Interest in this new edition was great, as the letters of Ignatius formed an important document, to which both Roman Catholics and Anglicans appealed to vindicate the early Christian nature of episcopacy in the contemporary debate on the presbyterian and episcopal church order. The protestant party tended to believe that the Ignatius epistles had been forged. Vossius convincingly defended the authenticity of the letters edited by him in a private polemic with the French theologian David Blondel. Contemporary and later philologists had much to say against the text of Vossius's edition. Vossius was not an outstanding textual critic: he copied and collated too hastily. When John Pearson later collected material for a new edition of the Ignatius letters he had the text of Vossius's edition -- on the latter's own advice -- compared once more with that of the 'Codex Mediceus' LVII, 7, in Florence. 
In summer 1648, while on a brief tour of the Southern Netherlands, Vossius received an invitation on behalf of Queen Kristina to present himself at the Stockholm court. Should Vossius wish to remain in Stockholm, the queen would consider which duties to confer on him at court, as he was known not to wish to hold any professorship. Vossius arrived in Stockholm on Sunday 21 March 1649; the next morning he was received by Kristina. During his audience with her Isaac addressed her in Latin; she answered him in Dutch. 
Kristina and Vossius got on rather well together. Like the queen, Vossius was quick and witty in conversation, something which is borne out by a great many testimonies of people who knew him personally. On 28 May 1649 Kristina signed an order accepting her 'beloved, esteemed and highly learned Isaac Vossius' into her service against an annual salary of 2000 riksdaler. With it he became Kristina's Greek tutor, succeeding Johannes Freinshemius. 
The queen's library in the palace was continually enriched with war booty. In May 1649 for instance the art collections and books and manuscripts from the Hradcin in Prague arrived in Stockholm. Kristina also bought private libraries: after Grotius's death (he had died on his way back from Sweden, having been summoned there by Kristina) she bought his library from his widow, Maria van Reigersberch, for 24,000 guilders. In the meantime Vossius's father Gerardus Joannes had died on 17 March 1649. Isaac turned down the offer of succeeding his father at the Athenaeum Illustre in Amsterdam. His father's vast library he sold to Kristina for 20,000 guilders. Gerardus Vossius's library was placed separately in the royal library and remained under his son's supervision. Isaac's own library, too, was brought to Stockholm from Amsterdam. He did not place his library in his own room, but had it put separately in the court library so that the queen, too, might freely consult it. According to Isaac it was a fine library, not lacking in any classical author and counting more than 500 manuscripts. It was not, however, his entire library; he had left a collection of manuscripts at home. 
In spite of the many affairs of state demanding her attention, Kristina still managed to reserve time for her studies, but to the disadvantage of her health. In spring 1650 she fell seriously ill, and recovery was slow. This illness put an end forever to the period in which Kristina under Vossius's guidance studied regularly and intensively, a period which lasted roughly from April 1649 to April 1650. But the expansion of her library continued through acquisitions of libraries and transcriptions of 'inedita' of mainly Neoplatonic texts. During his travels Vossius had seen and noted down many 'inedita' in libraries. He knew where to find Neoplatonic texts which had not yet been published and had them copied for her. Vossius also assisted the queen with her reading of these texts. In 1650 a Swedish copyist, Petrus Nicolai Rezander, was sent to Paris to copy Greek 'inedita'. In summer that same year, Vossius himself also travelled to Paris to purchase manuscripts and printed books for the royal library. From Alexandre Petau he bought a proportion of his manuscripts -- probably around 2000 -- for 40,000 livres. 
A month after his return to Stockholm in September 1650 Vossius was appointed librarian. Freinshemius was reappointed 'professor eloquentiae' in Uppsala; a year later he requested and was granted honourable discharge and received permission to return to his native Germany. As it was Kristina's wish that the printed books should receive more attention than before, it was decided that Vossius should continue to look after the department of manuscripts, but that somebody else should be in charge of the printed books. For this post Vossius recommended Gabriel Naude, whom he had first met in 1643. 
The Amsterdam rabbi Menasseh Ben Israel was a friend of the Vossius family. Unlike Isaac's father, who not only had a high personal regard for Menasseh but also esteemed his great learning, Isaac Vossius did not rate him very highly as a scholar: he considered Menasseh's views to be too speculative. In 1650 Menasseh came into contact with Queen Kristina through the diplomat Michel le Blon, who acted as her agent in Amsterdam. Menasseh requested le Blon to send the queen a copy of each of the works he had written. After consultation with royal librarian Isaac Vossius, Menasseh furthermore sent a collection of Hebrew books for the royal library. This collection, which the rabbi had valued at 900 guilders, fell into the wrong hands in Stockholm. Menasseh received not a single response nor any payment from the queen, and being a man of little means got into difficulties as a result. Isaac Vossius eventually paid Menasseh 900 guilders out of his private funds, an amount which he hoped to recover from the queen. In 1655 Menasseh dedicated his 'Piedra gloriosa' to Vossius, as a token of gratitude for the generosities received from the Vossius family. 
Among the foreign scholars whom Isaac Vossius had brought to the queen's attention were Nicolas Heinsius and Claude Saumaise. Both had been invited by the queen to come to Stockholm, but Saumaise greatly resented it that Vossius had recommended his enemy Nicolas Heinsius to the queen. As a result, he and Vossius became embroiled forever. Heinsius entered the queen's service about the beginning of March 1650, but when Saumaise arrived in Stockholm at the end of August, the queen granted him permission to be of service to her elsewhere, in Italy, buying books. Saumaise left Stockholm again for Leiden on about 9 September 1651. Earlier, in October 1649, Rene Descartes had arrived in Stockholm by royal invitation, though prompted by the French envoy Pierre Chanut. The queen turned out to have little affinity with the Cartesian philosophy, while the French philosopher for his part had scant appreciation for the Greek which Vossius taught her. Descartes died in Stockholm on 11 February 1650, probably of a form of influenza. 
Another arrival from Strasbourg, as Freinshemius before him, was Johannes Boeclerus. He accepted a professorship in Uppsala in May 1649, but soon came into open conflict with his colleagues and students. About July 1650 he took refuge in Stockholm, where in obedience to the queen's wishes he stayed until the beginning of 1652, when he was allowed to return to Strasbourg. From the beginning of September 1650 until that time, Vossius and Boeclerus were thrown together in Stockholm. Boeclerus disliked Vossius; virtually all accusations of theft of books and atheism levelled against Vossius find their origin in the slanders of Boeclerus and his friend Herman Conring, professor in Helmstedt. 
At the end of January 1652 Vossius received permission to go to Amsterdam on leave. While in Holland he came into open conflict with Saumaise, who passed one of Vossius's seasoned letters to him on to Queen Kristina. On 4 May 1652 the unsuspecting Vossius returned from Amsterdam to Stockholm. At the Swedish border near Halmstad, Vossius was denied entrance by a messenger of the queen in retribution for his insulting behaviour towards Saumaise. His exile in Amsterdam lasted until the middle of August 1653, during which time he prepared an edition of Catullus containing text and commentary (this edition appeared in England only in 1684). 
In August 1652 Vossius's close friend Coenraad van Beuningen was sent to Sweden by the states general as a special envoy. He was to keep the exiled Vossius informed about the events at the court in Stockholm. Like his friend, van Beuningen was a libertine, but one who opposed atheists. He informed Vossius about the then most offensive form of libertinism, atheism in the true sense of the word, to which Queen Kristina and Bourdelot had abandoned themselves. For Vossius this news was remarkable enough to pass on to Nicolas Heinsius almost verbatim. 
Meanwhile Kristina had sent for Gabriel Naude from Paris to replace Isaac Vossius. When Naude arrived about the middle of September 1652, the library was reasonably ordered and usable. But then the queen had the rooms of the library vacated to afford accommodation to some ladies. All books were heaped together in one large room; the private library of Vossius and that of his father, which until then had been placed separately, became absorbed in the chaos of the large royal library. 
Naude and Bochart left Stockholm in June 1653. Naude died on his way home. Pierre Bourdelot also left Sweden that same month, while Du Fresne alone remained behind at the queen's request. She had imparted to Du Fresne her decision to abdicate, and entrusted him with the task of secretly selecting collections from the royal library and the royal art collection which she wanted to take with her abroad following her abdication. At the same time she recalled Vossius to Stockholm, where he arrived about the middle of September 1653. Kristina allowed him to select a collection of books from the royal library as a first compensation for the loss of his own library and salaries due. This collection arrived in Amsterdam in two shipments, and included the 'Codex Argenteus', published by his uncle Franciscus Junius in 1665, as well as Hugo Grotius's 'Historia Gotthorum', which Vossius published with Louis Elzevier in 1655. Vossius left Stockholm together with van Beuningen in June 1654, before Kristina's abdication in Uppsala. In Amsterdam he was to await her further orders. 
About the middle of August 1654 Kristina, then in Antwerp, sent for Vossius. He brought order to the collection of books which had arrived there packed in sixty large cases. Two catalogues were compiled under his guidance: the first containing the printed books and one category of manuscripts, the second catalogue exclusively manuscripts. They are kept in the Vaticana in one manuscript (Codex Vaticanus Latinus 8171, fols. 1'r'-171'r'; fols. 174-404'r'). This library was transported to Rome, where Kristina eventually settled. She would have been happy to take with her her librarian; Vossius, however, preferred to take his leave of her. This he did in September 1655; they were never to meet in person again thereafter. In 1655 Vossius moved to The Hague, where he lived together with his mother Elisabeth Junius and his uncle Franciscus Junius jun. 
Vossius now turned his attention to chronology. As the basis of his scheme he took the chronology of the 'Septuagint', the ancient Greek translation of the 'Old Testament', which differed in its chronology from the Hebrew original. In 1659 he published 'Dissertatio de vera aetate mundi, qua ostenditur natale mundi tempus annis minimum 1440 vulgarem aeram anticipare'. A defence of the original Hebrew text and computation was at once undertaken by George Horn, whose treatise elicited 'I. Vossii castigationes ad scriptum G. Hornii'. Other tracts on the same subject followed, and the views of Vossius were further contested by Bircherod in his 'Lumen historiae sacrae veteris' (1687), and by John Milner in his 'Defence of Ussher Against Cary and Vossius'. Vossius returned to the subject in his 'De Septuaginta interpretibus eorumque translatione et chronologia dissertationes' (1661, appendix 1663; new edition 1665). Hulsius proceeded to vindicate the Hebrew text in his 'Authentia S. textus Hebraei', while Schook (followed in 1663 by Schotanus, and much later by Patrick Cockburn) attacked his theory of a local and partial deluge in 'Diatriba qua probatur Noachi diluvium toti terrarum orbi incubuisse' (1662). The Royal Society, to whom Vossius sent several communications, thought highly of him; he was elected a fellow on 20 April 1664. The society's secretary, Henry Oldenburg, included him 'among the most ingenious and famous philosophers' ('Correspondence', 6.423). Among his more scientific tracts were 'De lucis naturae et proprietate' (1662), in which he attacked Descartes' ideas on the nature of light, 'De motu marium et ventorum liber' (1663), and 'De Nili et aliorum fluminum origine' (1666). 

'De motu' attracted considerable attention among his contemporaries. With the growing importance of maritime trade and exploration there was considerable speculation about the cause of tides. Vossius rejected the influence of moon, stars, or occult forces, arguing that the sun's heat was the single cause of tides, winds, and ocean currents. He explained that between the tropics the tides followed the sun, and winds blew in the same direction. But the continents formed a barrier to this movement and so the water was deflected north and south, which accounted for the ocean currents. The high tide on the side of the earth opposite the sun was the result of water rushing in to fill the hollow caused by the rise elsewhere. He explained that tides occurred 48 minutes later each day due to the lag following the rise, and that the same afface accounted for the bi-monthly maximum. In 'De lucis' he relied on the readings of the mercury barometer to assess the likely height of the atmosphere, and he concluded 'De motu' with a brief argument on its usefulness to predict storms at sea. In 'De Nili' he attributed the Nile floods to the rains in Ethiopia, a controversial idea at a time when it was believed that there was insufficient rainfall on the continents to account for river flow. Archibald Lovel's translation of 'De motu' as 'A Treatise Concerning the Motion of the Seas and Winds' (1677) was intended to make Vossius's text available to a wider seagoing and mercantile community. 
In 1666 and 1669 Vossius saw through the press the amusing collection of table talk called 'Scaligerana', and the similar collection entitled 'Perroniana, sive, Excerpta ex ore Cardinalis Perronii'. In the early 1660s Vossius spent a good deal of time in Geneva and Paris, and in 1663 he received from the French king a handsome 'gratification', and a flattering letter alluding to his own and his father's services to learning. It was in Paris that Vossius first met Charles de Saint-Evremond, the famous man of society, sceptic, and soldier. Saint-Evremond sent enthusiastic reports of their meetings in his correspondence. In 1671 he wrote to Francois, mareschal de Crequi: 'I know one of the most learned men in Europe, of whom one may learn a thousand things, curious or profound; in whom, nevertheless, you will find a foolish credulity in every thing extraordinary, fabulous, or exceeding belief' (Katz, 156). 
In 1670 the states of Holland finally refused to pay Vossius his salary as historian to the provinces of Holland and Zeeland (he had written nothing on the subject during the previous twenty years in the post). Offended at their lack of understanding, Vossius went to England in 1670 as a protege of John Pearson, master of Trinity College, Cambridge, and later bishop of Chester. Their common interest was the vindication of the authenticity of the 'Eusebian' epistles of Ignatius, in opposition to the views of Daille, Saumaise, and Blondel, and when Pearson's 'Vindiciae' appeared at Cambridge in 1672, 'Isaaci Vossii epistolae duae' formed an appendix, together with his 'Responsio ad Blondellum'. What is perhaps the most original of Vossius's works appeared anonymously at Oxford in 1673, under the title 'De poematum cantu et viribus rythmi', dedicated to Lord Arlington. The author retraces the ancient alliance between poetry and music, and insists on a strict adherence to the rules of prosody as opposed to the intuitive method. 
Having previously embraced Anglicanism as most congenial to his beliefs (and doubts) Vossius was created DCL at Oxford on 16 September 1670 and was presented by Charles II to a vacant prebend in the royal chapel of Windsor (he was installed on 12 May 1673, in place of Thomas Viner). He was now frequently to be seen about the court. Evelyn met him at the lord chamberlain's at supper with the bishop of Rochester, at the houses of other prelates, and at Monmouth House. But it was not until 1675 and the arrival of the duchess of Mazarin in London that Vossius gained entry to the sort of intellectual centre he had known in Sweden. Saint-Evremond visited the duchess at Windsor, St James's, or her house at Chelsea almost every day, and Vossius frequently attended with him. It was frequently observed of him that he knew all the languages of Europe, but did not speak one well, and that he was intimately acquainted with the manners and characters of all ages but his own. His style was held to be too disputatious, and his epithets were thought too erudite for the drawing-room. Mazarin's circle was known for freethinking, and anecdotes about Vossius's own scepticism, such as his habitual reading of Ovid during services, circulated widely. Yet he was by no means free from credulity, and Charles II echoed Saint-Evremond's opinion when he remarked that Vossius would believe anything, if only it were not in the 'Bible'. 
Vossius next turned his attention to the highly controversial subject of the sibylline oracles, in 'I. Vossii de sibyllinis aliisque quae Christi natalem praecessere oraculis' (1679). The oracles were ancient Greek prophetic verses which were thought to have predicted the coming of Christ, and thus provided a link between the biblical and classical worlds. The status of the verses -- whether true prophecies or forgeries of Greek or early Christian origin -- was much debated, and Vossius's conclusion that they were of ancient Jewish origin met with great hostility. Along with his controversial championing of the 'Septuagint' over the Hebrew 'Bible' (the latter was deemed infallible in England, as in other protestant countries), this work consolidated his reputation as a thorough, and in some cases, dangerous sceptic. He was answered first by Reiskius's 'Exercitationes' (1688), and later by Fontenelle; meanwhile his position on the chronology of the 'Septuagint' was being challenged by Richard Simon ('R. Simonis opuscula critica adversus I. Vossium', 1685). 
In 1685 Vossius published 'Variarum observationum liber', which contained a dissertation of interest, 'De triremium et liburnicarum constructione', which Graevius inserted in the twelfth volume of his 'Thesaurus antiquitatum Romanorum', a treatise, 'De origine et progressu pulveris bellici', and another opuscule, 'De antiquae Romae magnitudine'. Throughout this work Vossius gave free rein to his capricious imagination and to his love of paradox. He passes an extravagant eulogy on the Chinese civilization, and tries to prove that the population of Rome was 14 million, and that its area was twenty times greater than that of Paris and London combined. (He also introduces some flattering remarks about Charles II and on the country of his adoption, but his alleged depreciation of the size of London elicited several replies, notably 'London Bigger than Old Rome Demonstrated... Against Vossius, by De Souligne', 1701 and 1710.) Evelyn, who was delighted with their ingenuity, mentions several other short works, notably one ''Peritachyploia'', on the subject of tacking in navigation, which was never published; he was also greatly diverted by a note of Vossius on a certain harmony which was produced in the East by the snapping of drivers' whips (Evelyn to Pepys, 23 September 1685). 
Among the labours of Vossius's last years were some annotations on the works of his father, particularly the 'Etymologicon'. Some corrections by him were included in the 1695 edition of Anacreon, 'Variae lectiones ex notulis I. Vossii' appeared in the Lucretius of 1725, and some notes by him were embodied in the edition of Hesychius of Alexandria, published at Leiden in 1746. He also made some notes on Arrian, which were included in the large edition of 1842. 
Vossius fell ill during winter 1688-9. According to the story told by Des Maizeaux and Niceron, he obstinately refused to conform to the usages of religion and receive the sacrament until two of his fellow canons urged that if not for the good of his soul he should comply for the honour of the chapter. He died at Windsor on 21 February 1689 and was buried there in St George's Chapel. 
According to Wood, Vossius had accumulated 'the best private library, as it was then supposed, in the whole world' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3rd edn, 2.323). It included 762 manuscripts which his enemies described as 'spoils'. A catalogue of these was drawn up by Paul Colomies; $3000 was offered by the University of Oxford for the library in September 1710, but on 10 October it was sold to Leiden for 36,000 florins. Evelyn bitterly deplored the loss to the country. 'Where are our rich men?' he asked. 'Will the Nepotismo never be satisfied?' ('Diary and Correspondence', 3.306, 308). Some of Vossius's correspondence, included in the d'Orville collection, was purchased by the Bodleian in 1805. The same library has the 'Codex Vossianus', a Latin psalter of the tenth century, in Anglo-Saxon characters. The British Museum has a Greek 'Testament' (1620, fol.), with manuscript notes and readings by Vossius. Most of his books were included in the 'Index librorum prohibitorum', some of them, it is said, against the advice of Mabillon, the usual referee in such matters between 1680 and 1705. Vossius's correspondence with Heinsius comprises the third volume of the 'Sylloges epistolarum' of Burmannus (1727), and other letters to the same correspondent are in the British Library (Add. MS 5158). 


@@@@@


doc= 28357


Benjamin Lewis Vulliamy (1780-1854), who succeeded his father as head of the firm and clockmaker to the king, was born on 25 January 1780, probably at 75 Pall Mall. Although his formal education is unknown, he evidently received a thorough training in both the theoretical and practical aspects of the business. By 1800 he was already helping to run the firm and after he became a partner in 1801 his involvement rapidly increased, so there was little immediate change in the firm's direction when he took over in 1811. He was assisted from 1810 by his younger brother 


@@@@@


doc= 28358


George John Vulliamy (1817-1886), and Lucy Sarah Frances (1819-1872), none of whom joined the family firm. The occupation of Benjamin Lewis junior is not known but he was in financial difficulties and living in Rome when his father died; George became an architect and civil engineer; and Lucy married the cleric and schoolmaster S. J. Rigaud, son of Benjamin Lewis Vulliamy's friend, the Oxford professor of astronomy S. P. Rigaud. 
Benjamin Lewis Vulliamy died from bronchitis at 68 Pall Mall on 8 January 1854 and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. With his death, the firm came to an end. Much of the equipment was left to Vulliamy's leading craftsmen, the Jump family, who set up their own business in Bond Street, London, but the goodwill was bought by another leading London clockmaker, Charles Frodsham, who subsequently obtained Vulliamy's post as superintendent of the royal clocks at Buckingham Palace. 
George John Vulliamy was born on 19 May 1817, educated at Westminster School from 1826 to 1833, then articled to Joseph Bramah & Sons, engineers. In July 1836 he entered the office of his father's friend Sir Charles Barry, leaving in 1841 to travel through France, Italy (where he made drawings for Henry Gally Knight's 'Ecclesiastical Architecture of Italy', 1842-4), Greece, Asia Minor, and Egypt. Returning to England in 1843, he commenced practice as an architect, briefly assisting his uncle, the architect Lewis Vulliamy, on Dorchester House. Among the buildings for which George John Vulliamy was responsible were a mansion at Dyffryn, Monmouthshire, the Swiss church in Endell Street, Westminster, and St Mary, Greenhithe, in Kent. He was a fellow and member of council of the Royal Institute of British Architects, a member, and for a time secretary, of the Royal Archaeological Institute, and he exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1838 and 1845. On 2 April 1851 Vulliamy married Eliza King ('nee' Umfreville); they had five children. 
Elected superintending architect to the Metropolitan Board of Works in March 1861, Vulliamy thereafter devoted all his time to this work, designing various buildings, several fire-brigade stations, and the pedestal and sphinxes for Cleopatra's needle on the Embankment. He resigned in 1886 due to ill health and died at his home, Ingress House, Greenhithe, on 12 November 1886; he was buried on 17 November at Stone, near Dartford. 


@@@@@


doc= 28359


Vulliamy, Lewis (1791-1871), architect, was born on 15 March 1791 at 68 Pall Mall, London, the third son of Benjamin Vulliamy (1747-1811) ['see under 'Vulliamy family], clockmaker, and Sarah de Gingins (1758-1841); Benjamin Lewis Vulliamy (1780-1854) ['see under 'Vulliamy family] was his eldest brother. Articled at the age of sixteen to Robert Smirke, Vulliamy entered the Royal Academy Schools in March 1809 and won the silver medal in 1810 and the gold medal in 1813 with a design for a nobleman's country mansion. On leaving Smirke's office in 1814 he commenced his own practice: one of his first commissions, obtained in 1815 through a family recommendation, was to oversee the repair and enlargement of Syston Park in Lincolnshire for Sir John Heyford Thorold, bt. Vulliamy was to add a notable library wing there in 1822-4. In 1818 he was awarded the Royal Academy's travelling studentship, which enabled him to spend four years on the continent, chiefly in Italy, although he also ventured as far as Greece and Asia Minor. His study of classical and Renaissance buildings, together with an equal familiarity with English domestic architecture, formed a firm foundation for his subsequent career as a country house architect. 
On his return to England Vulliamy established himself in London at 361 Oxford Street and in 1822 submitted as his first entry to the Royal Academy a 'design for the court of a palace' (Graves, 'RA exhibitors', 8.94). His commissions were initially rather more humble, and included speculative housing in Tavistock Square and Gordon (later Endsleigh) Place in Bloomsbury in 1827. Vulliamy's very considerable output was itemized in 'The Builder' in 1871, an account which was based on a list drawn up by the architect himself. He established a reputation for his Gothic churches, such as St Bartholomew's, Sydenham (1826-31), St Barnabas's, Addison Road, Kensington (1828-9), St Michael's, Highgate (1830-32; design exhibited at the Royal Academy, 1831), and Christ Church, Woburn Square (1831-3; design exhibited at the Royal Academy, 1833; dem.). Other churches built by Vulliamy were: at Wardle, Worsthorne, at Burnley (Holy Trinity, Accrington Lane), and at Habergam Eaves, all in Lancashire; St Paul's, Burslem, and Christ Church, Cobridge, in Staffordshire; Christ Church, Todmorden, Yorkshire; and in Dorset, Norfolk, and elsewhere. He was also responsible for works at Rochester Cathedral in the mid-1840s. Vulliamy's non-Gothic churches included the Norman Glasbury church in Brecknockshire (1836-7), and the Italianate All Saints', Ennismore Gardens, Westminster (1848-9). 
Vulliamy was also responsible for a number of diverse public buildings across the country, including a grandstand at Wolverhampton racecourse (1828), the Epping union workhouse (1837), and the Lock Hospital, Paddington (1842-9). His most prestigious London commissions were the Law Society's premises in Chancery Lane (1828-32), with later additions; designs exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1830 and 1832; and the re-fronting of the Royal Institution in Albemarle Street in 1838, to which he added a screen of giant Corinthian half-columns (designs exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1837 and 1838). On 16 January 1838 Vulliamy married Elizabeth Anne, only child of Frederick Papendiek, vicar of Morden, Surrey; they had four sons and a daughter. 
Vulliamy is best remembered for his domestic work. A number of Lincolnshire commissions followed on from his work at Syston Park, including Boothby Pagnell Hall (1825), and he was soon engaged across the country carrying out alterations to gentlemen's seats, besides designing numerous rectories. Vulliamy's mastery of classical, Gothic, Renaissance, and Tudor idioms enabled him to respond to the period's eclectic requirements. His most important patron was the multi-millionaire Robert Stayner Holford, who in 1839 engaged Vulliamy to carry out work at his Gloucestershire seat at Westonbirt. Having commenced with alterations to the extant house he was subsequently commissioned to design a totally new house in an opulent English Renaissance idiom; this was commenced in 1864 and was unfinished at Vulliamy's death. Westonbirt was one of Vulliamy's two most important works. The other was Holford's London residence: Dorchester House, on Park Lane. This replaced John Vardy's house of the 1750s and was completed in 1857. It was a massive palazzo based on Peruzzi's Villa Farnesina, with a magnificent staircase and sumptuous internal decoration by Alfred Stevens. Until it was demolished in 1929 to make way for the eponymous hotel, Dorchester House was one of the grandest residences of Victorian London. 
Vulliamy's extremely successful career was 'due equally to his ability and his industry... He was well known to be peculiar in his notions, and many odd anecdotes are related of him' ('The Builder', 142). His best-known pupil was Owen Jones; his nephew George Vulliamy assisted him on Dorchester House. Never regarded among the first rank of architects, he was, with Charles Barry, one of the outstanding practitioners of the Italianate style in early Victorian England. Vulliamy published two works: 'The Bridge of the SSa. Trinita, over the Arno at Florence' (1822) and 'Examples of ornamental sculpture in architecture, drawn from the originals in Greece, Asia Minor, and Italy in the years 1818, 1819, 1820, 1821' (1823). His drawings of the castle at Newcastle were published in 'Vetusta monumenta' vol. 5 (1835) as plates 10-18. He died at his house on Clapham Common on 4 January 1871: despite having suffered from chronic bronchitis for several years, he worked until the end. He was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. He left an estate valued at about $60,000. 


@@@@@


doc= 28360


Richard Vyse (1746-1825), army officer, born at Lichfield on 11 July 1746, was the younger son of William Vyse (1710-1770), canon residentiary and treasurer of Lichfield, and younger brother of William Vyse (1741-1816), canon residentiary and chancellor of Lichfield. His mother, Catherine, was daughter of Richard Smalbroke, bishop of Lichfield. He was appointed cornet in the 5th dragoons on 13 February 1763. He attained the brevet rank of colonel on 7 January 1781, received the command of the 1st dragoon guards on 28 May 1784, and during the Revolutionary War served in Flanders in command of a brigade under the duke of York. He distinguished himself on several occasions, particularly at the battle of Le Cateau on 25 April 1794, where, at the head of two brigades of heavy cavalry, he significantly contributed to the victory, and at the evacuation of Ostend, which he superintended on 1 July. Vyse was promoted major-general on 2 October 1794, and lieutenant-general on 1 January 1801. In 1799 he became the duke of Cumberland's comptroller. Frustrated in attempting to further his military career, he became MP for Beverley in 1806; he supported Cumberland and his faction, but made way for his son in 1807. He became general on 1 January 1812, and died at Lichfield on 30 May 1825. 


@@@@@


doc= 28361


Vyse, Richard William Howard (1784-1853), army officer and Egyptologist, born on 25 July 1784, was the only son of General Richard Vyse and his second wife, Anne (only surviving daughter and heir of Field Marshal Sir George Howard), whom he married on 20 May 1780. 
The father, 
His son, Richard William, assumed the additional name of Howard by royal sign manual, dated 14 September 1812, on inheriting the estates of Boughton and Pitsford in Northamptonshire through his maternal grandmother, Lucy, daughter of Thomas Wentworth, second earl of Strafford. Vyse entered the army as cornet in the 1st dragoons on 5 May 1800, and was promoted lieutenant in the 15th dragoons on 17 June 1801 and captain on 29 June 1802. In 1809 he acted as aide-de-camp to his father on the staff of the Yorkshire district, and on 5 July 1810 received the honorary degree of DCL from Oxford University. He married, on 13 November 1810, Frances, second daughter of Henry Hesketh of Newton, Cheshire. They had eight sons and two daughters. Like his father, he enjoyed the duke of Cumberland's patronage, being his equerry 1813-37. He attained the brevet rank of major on 4 June 1813, and was made captain in the 87th foot on 31 August 1815 and in the 2nd Life Guards on 5 July 1816; he was appointed major in the 1st West India regiment on 4 January 1819, and in the 2nd Life Guards on 4 February in the same year. On 13 May he attained the brevet rank of lieutenant-colonel, and was placed on half pay on 10 September 1825. On 10 January 1837 he was raised to the rank of colonel, and on 9 November 1846 to that of major-general. 
Vyse was returned to parliament for Beverley on 8 May 1807. He voted against Catholic emancipation and parliamentary reform. In October 1812 he was elected MP for Honiton in Devon, which he retained until the dissolution of 1818. In 1824 he was high sheriff for Buckinghamshire. 
In 1835 Vyse visited Egypt and Syria, and became very interested in the excavations being undertaken at Giza. He then spent over a year excavating and exploring the pyramids. In January 1837 he obtained the assistance of John Shae Perring, and, although he returned to England in August, he provided the funds for Perring's subsequent explorations to the south of Giza and at Abu Roash. The researches of Vyse and Perring were important in surveying and measuring the pyramids. Vyse published 'Operations Carried on at the Pyramids of Gizeh in 1837' (2 vols., 1840), followed in 1842 by a third supplemental volume devoted to Perring's researches at Abu Roash. Vyse died at Stoke Poges, Buckinghamshire, on 8 June 1853. 


@@@@@


doc= 28362


Vyvyan, Sir Richard Rawlinson, eighth baronet (1800-1879), politician and philosopher, was born on 6 June 1800 at the family home at Trelowarren, in the parish of Mawgan in Meneage, Cornwall, the eldest of seven children of Sir Vyell Vyvyan, seventh baronet ('bap'. 1767, died 1820), and his wife, Mary Hutton (1777-1812), only daughter of Thomas Hutton Rawlinson of Lancaster. Vyvyan was educated at Harrow School from 1813 to 1816 or 1817 and matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 22 May 1818 but he did not proceed to a degree. Upon his father's death on 27 January 1820 he succeeded to the title and estates of Trelowarren and in September that year became lieutenant-colonel commandant of the Cornwall yeomanry cavalry. 
Vyvyan's political career commenced in 1825 when, at a by-election on 27 January, he was returned to parliament for the county of Cornwall; he was re-elected in 1826 and 1830. 'Although unswerving in his attachment to the principles of toryism, he was far from being a subservient supporter of his party' ('Annual Register', 212). He disapproved of the concession of Roman Catholic emancipation, and early in 1830 announced his intention of weakening the Wellington administration as much as possible. In that year he was a member of the select committee on the East India Company's charter. In the previous October he had explained his views to Palmerston, and invited him to lead the House of Commons in a tory administration without the duke of Wellington, but with the inclusion of a few young Liberals. He voted for Sir Henry Parnell's motion for referring the civil list to a select committee, which caused the resignation of the Wellington ministry, but he and the other high tories would not support the new whig ministry. Although Vyvyan recognized the need for change in the electoral system he strongly opposed the 'Reform Bill'. On its second reading on 21 March 1831 he was put forward by the tories as their spokesman to move that it should be postponed for six months. When the boom of cannon announced the approach of William IV to dissolve parliament on 22 April 1831 Vyvyan was engaged in moving the rejection of the 'Reform Bill' so vehemently that it was only 'by pulling him down by the skirts of his coat' that he was compelled to take a seat ('Annual Register', 212). He was then at the height of his fame and had a well-earned reputation for eloquence. 
A severe contest for the representation of the county of Cornwall ensued. However, after the poll had been open for five days Vyvyan and his tory colleague Lord Valletort lost to their whig opponents, Mr Pendarves and Sir Charles Lemon (Courtney, 408-10). Vyvyan became MP for Okehampton in Devon on 14 July 1831. At this time he purchased the ruins of its old castle as he was the rightful heir to the ancient but dormant barony of Courtenay of Okehampton. However, Vyvyan never attempted to revive the title in his favour. At the general elections in December 1832 and February 1835 he was returned, after expensive victories, for the city of Bristol, but he did not seek re-election in 1837. After the 'Reform Bill' his interest in politics seems to have declined, and he spoke little, though he strenuously opposed the third reading of the 'Municipal Corporations Bill'. From 1837 to 1841 he was without a seat, and in 1840 became high sheriff for Cornwall. At the general election on 1 July 1841 he was returned for Helston, a few miles from Trelowarren, and he continued to sit for it until 1857. A protectionist, opposing free trade doctrines and the introduction of income tax, he addressed, in June 1842, a letter on the subject to his constituents pointing out the pitfalls of the commercial and financial policy of Sir Robert Peel's administration. Macaulay, in July 1843, wrote of the tory party as split into three or more factions, one being represented by Vyvyan and the 'Morning Post'. Vyvyan continued to oppose reform and voted against Peel on the repeal of the corn laws and against Disraeli's budget of 1852. 
Vyvyan was a philosopher and a metaphysician. His scientific writings commenced in 1825 when he printed for private circulation 'An Essay on Arithmo-Physiology', which purported to be 'A Chronological Classification of Organised Matter'. In 1826 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. Vyvyan was engaged for many years with Dr Charles T. Pearce of Durleston Park, Swanage, in scientific experiments and research on light, heat, and magnetism. He purchased a section of the library of M. Libri which formed a part of his 'most choice library' (H. N. Pym, ed., 'Memories of Old Friends: Journals and Letters of Caroline Fox', 1882, 1.26). Vyvyan also published several letters and speeches. His letter to the magistrates of Berkshire on their practice of consigning prisoners to solitary confinement before trial, and ordering them to be disguised by masks, passed into a second edition in 1845. His account of the 'fogou', or cave, at Halligey, Trelowarren, is in the 'Journal of the Royal Institute of Cornwall' (1885), 8.256-8. Unpublished writings include night journals in Italian kept by Vyvyan from 1841 to 1846 and the outline of a Maratha novel about the fortunes of an attendant in a foreign country. 
As a metaphysicist he published a volume entitled 'Psychology, or, A Review of the Arguments in Proof of the Existence and Immortality of the Animal Soul', but it was recalled immediately after publication. Two volumes on metaphysical subjects, entitled the 'Harmony of the universe' (1842) and 'Harmony of the comprehensible world' (1845), were written but never published. Nevertheless, perhaps by private drafts and discussion, his views and activity were sufficient to make him a suspect as author of 'Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation' (1845). 
After 1857 Vyvyan lived in complete retirement until his death at Trelowarren on 15 August 1879. He was buried in the family vault in the north-west corner of Mawgan in Meneage church on 21 August. In the event of his death not taking place at Trelowarren, Vyvyan had made provision in his will to be buried at Kensal Green cemetery close to his friends Mr Broderip and Robert Browne; the will also ensured that his domestic servants and paid agents would receive one year's salary after his death. Vyvyan never married and was succeeded by a nephew, the Revd Vyell Donnithorne Vyvyan, the son of his brother Vyell Francis Vyvyan. 


@@@@@


doc= 28363


Waad, Armagil (c.1510-1568), government official, was stated in his grant of arms in 1547 to be a native of the northern parts of England. His date of birth is deduced from his date of graduation and may err by several years. The address he gave at his graduation was Kilnsey, near Coniston, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, where no other Wades are known at this early date. However, there were many others nearby at Leeds, Bolton upon Dearne, and at Aldingham, where one William Wade was assessed at $10 5's'. in 1524. Although not apparently armigerous, William and subsequent Aldingham Wades were the wealthiest of the Yorkshire family, all of whom appear to have been materially prosperous. All those Wades from this area recorded from 1522 in a dozen wills, numerous fines, and deeds seem to boil down to no more than two enduring dynasties and may indeed all have been interrelated. Richard Wade of Bolton upon Dearne mentioned that his son Richard Wade was studying at Cambridge in 1522. Given how well these wills crossmatch, it is surprising that none of them even mentions Armagil, an unusual name. Perhaps he had already left home and lost contact with his Yorkshire kin. Is it possible that he had changed his name to Armagil, perhaps at university? In short, it seems unlikely that Armagil hailed from the lowest ranks of society: it was most probably education locally and family support that enabled him to study at Oxford University, where he graduated BA in 1532, perhaps at Magdalen College, and he may have studied at an inn of court. He seems to have been an adventurous young man. It was presumably by unrecorded foreign travel that he developed his later proficiency in both French and Spanish. The notion that a Holderness childhood introduced him to the sea is speculative and unlikely; however, Armagil was among thirty young gentlemen from the inns of court and chancery who voyaged for six months in 1536 (April-October) with Captain Hore's two vessels to Cape Breton, Newfoundland, and Penguin Island in what is now Canada. With 'divers others of great account' Armagil Waad embarked from Gravesend on the second ship, the 'Minion'. The crew were reduced by shortage of food to eating herbs and roots and even perhaps to cannibalism. Had they not captured a well-provisioned French ship, they would have perished. Returning to St Ives, the survivors were feted all the way to London. Waad was not the captain or even an officer. Hence he did not deserve the title 'the English Columbus' which his son, as family aggrandizement, posthumously bestowed upon him and which earned him inclusion in the 'Dictionary of National Biography'. Any narrative that Waad may have written is lost; William Butt's surviving account is extremely cursory. 
There is also no supporting evidence that it was Sir Richard Gresham, the post-dissolution lord of Kilnsey, who recommended Waad to Henry VIII, but it definitely was Henry, Lord Maltravers, deputy of Calais and later earl of Arundel, who proposed him as assistant clerk of the council at Calais in 1540 and further recommended him to the French secretaryship there in 1543. By then Waad had married, at the church of St Leonard Eastcheap on 29 May 1541, Alice (died 1557/8), daughter of the London tradesman Richard Patten (died 1536) and widow of Thomas Searle, another Londoner. She had numerous offspring with Waad, and she also brought him London connections -- two merchants wrote warmly of him -- and no doubt the resources on which he founded his career. He was appointed a customer of Calais in 1545. He was replaced in 1546, when he proceeded to London, where he reported to Secretary of State Paget. Next year he became one of the four clerks of the privy council, all of whom secured seats in the parliament of 1547: Waad's seat at Chipping Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, may have been arranged by John, Lord Russell. A grant of arms in the same year confirmed his genteel status. Initially supernumerary and unpaid, Waad was formally appointed third clerk of the privy council in 1548 at 50 marks a year and chief clerk in 1551 on a salary of $50; an annuity of 200 marks for services to Henry VIII and Edward VI was added in 1550. Among several responsible services was that of deputy clerk of parliaments, in which capacity he four times read out the commission of prorogation. He seems to have been committed to the Edwardian regime, both its protestant and socially reformist character, penning a celebration of Protector Somerset's victorious return from Scotland in 1548, which was printed by his brother-in-law William Patten, and nine lines of Latin verse in 'Lives and Deaths of the Two Brothers Henry and Charles Brandon [Dukes of] of Suffolk' by Thomas Wilson, who died in 1551. 
The accession of Mary Tudor seems to have resulted in Waad's dismissal, most probably on religious grounds, and his annuity was reduced to a still substantial $100: he was pardoned on 3 November 1553. Despite composing an elaborate unpublished treatise entitled 'The distresses of the commonwealth, with the means to remedy them', which was submitted to the government and remains among the state papers, Waad was not restored to his clerkship on Elizabeth's accession, but was employed instead in various 'ad hoc' capacities. He was sent to the duke of Holstein in 1559 to negotiate about commercial relations; to Rye in Sussex in 1562 to muster 600 men for service at Le Havre and to collect information on Huguenot plans; and to the Tower in 1566 to examine Cornelius de Lannoy, an alchemist who had failed to manufacture gold for the queen's service. There survive several reports dated at Somerset House from Armagil Waad to the secretary of state Sir William Cecil. The previous year he had secured a thirty-year monopoly of making sulphur and growing plants for oil (linseed) for cloth manufacture. On a number of occasions Waad advised Cecil on the use of new patents to provide monopolies for new industrial processes. 
Although only briefly in government service and never in a senior capacity, Waad evidently made his fortune. His marriages and his annuity must have helped. Waad also seems to have had an eye for commercial possibilities and surely dealt on a large scale, since in 1555 he was summoned to account for $800 paid to him by the London skinner and Calais stapler Alderman Sir Andrew Judde. As late as 1565 he was advocating his brother-in-law Marbury as a supplier of French wines to the queen's household: it is not clear which of his brothers-in-law was meant. Described in 1553 as of London and Soulbury, Buckinghamshire, where the connection has not been traced, Waad was granted Milton Grange in Oxfordshire in 1554, and in 1557 was assigned the lease of the manor of Belsize in Hampstead, Middlesex, a property of the dean and chapter of St Paul's, where he was resident when his first wife died and which was named as his address in his pardon of 1559. He was named to the commission of the peace for Middlesex from 1561, and served as a commissioner for the benevolence for the rebuilding of St Paul's in 1564 and as a commissioner of sewers in 1564 for Kent and Sussex. He had secured by royal grant a substantial area (several thousand acres) of salt marshes near Lydd in 1562. Following his first wife's death, he had married almost at once Anne, 'nee' Marbury, widow of Edward Bradley (died 1558), a London haberdasher from the same social circle as his first wife. She already had two young daughters whom Waad remembered in his will. According to his epitaph, his two wives Alice and Anne between them had with him no fewer than twenty children, fourteen of whom predeceased him: all the survivors were offspring of his first wife. Waad had amassed a considerable estate by his death, when he held the rectory of Horton Kirkby, Kent, the leases of Belsize and of Lowden in Kentish Town, Middlesex, his own house in London, tenements in Golding Lane, and chambers at Gray's Inn that he himself had constructed. It is a measure of how far he had come that 100 marks was assigned as portion for his unmarried daughter Joyce: other daughters unprovided for in his will were presumably already married, even perhaps Anne, to whom he gave nothing because of her disobedience. Waad died at Belsize on 20 June 1568 and was buried in the chancel of Hampstead church. It was his eldest son with his first wife, Sir William Waad, also clerk of the privy council, who proudly concocted his epitaph on the elaborate alabaster monument, now lost, in Hampstead church. In his will Waad acknowledged his godson Armagil Corkoram, on whom he had presumably bestowed his name. A much later descendant, Armengilda Wade, evidently took her name from him in recognition of his role in establishing their family. 


@@@@@


doc= 28364


Waad, Sir William (1546-1623), diplomat and administrator, was the son and heir of Armagil Waad (d. 1568), clerk of the privy council, and his first wife, Alice Patten (died 1557/8). He attended Gray's Inn in 1571. Waad's entree to Elizabethan officialdom was his father's old friend and patron, William Cecil, who provided support, patronage, and, by 1572, a place in his household for the young William. In return for Cecil's help, which included the vicarage of Hynton, Chester, and sponsorship of his continental travels in the 1570s, Waad gave unstinting allegiance to the Cecilian faction. While he travelled, he functioned as a key correspondent of the lord treasurer. He visited most of Europe, including a long stay in Italy, and then became for a time in 1576-7 a part of Sir William Paulet's embassy at Paris. In what capacity he served is indeterminable, but he seemed to have had a quasi-secretarial role. Later, at Sir Henry Cobham's insistence, Waad joined Cobham's residency in Paris, where he served from 1580 to 1581 as the ambassador's contact with the French court and did 'accomplements' with other ambassadors for Cobham. It was ideal diplomatic training. But while Paulet had praised the younger man's 'discretion, honesty and many good parts', Cobham was less eulogistic -- there was seemingly a personality conflict between them -- and Waad, though he stayed in Paris, separated himself from the entourage ('CSP for.', 11, no. 1162; 15.133). He did, however, continue both to gather intelligence for the government and to pursue schemes involving the various Portuguese pretenders, an interest that earlier contacts had cultivated. He was to remain a key Elizabethan gatherer of foreign intelligence throughout the reign. 
Languages, including French, Italian, and Latin, extensive travel abroad, associations with serving ambassadors, and an apparent negotiating skill led to repeated employment overseas for Waad. It was as an independent diplomatic agent that he served Elizabeth most distinguishedly and certainly most arduously. His key assignments were about as unpalatable as any in the reign. In 1584, for instance, he was the one designated to go to Spain to explain to King Philip why his ambassador, Bernardino de Mendoza, had been expelled from England. Not only was Waad treated with scant courtesy in Madrid, but the Spanish king, perhaps in retaliation for Elizabeth's two-year isolation of Mendoza in London, refused Waad an audience. Instead, Philip's secretary, Idiaquez, requested the envoy's letters to his master, which Waad refused to surrender except in person to the king. The king arbitrarily resolved the impasse by immediately issuing Waad his return passport. With this curt dismissal the ambassador left, having been prevented from explaining Mendoza's machinations, Elizabeth's great forbearance in the face of the Spaniard's provocative actions, and the English desire to preserve amity with Spain. As had often been the case before, the king gave as his excuse for refusing audience that he wanted nothing to do with an ambassador reputed to be a 'great heretic, being a Puritan, even worse than a Calvinist' ('CSP Venice', 7, no. 87). The religious characterization of Waad, judging from his will, seems entirely accurate. It was, at any rate, such mutual intolerance, the breakdown of communications, and the continuation of what could only be characterized as diplomatic warfare that led ultimately to more open hostilities. 
In January 1587 Waad travelled as a special ambassador to France to explain to the French court why Mary, queen of Scots, had just been executed. Again, it was a trying mission. Waad, however, was as sound a choice as any: he was familiar with France, and he had been the one sent by Elizabeth to Chartley to seize Queen Mary's papers, which contained the ultimate proof on which her conviction was based. He thus had inside information about the case and could be uniquely persuasive in his presentation. He did in fact mute French objections to this treatment of a former French queen by demonstrating that Mary had unequivocally, in her last years, cast her lot with Spain. A secondary aspect of his mission -- to resolve mutual shipping seizures -- saw some progress. Thus what began as another diplomatic fiasco -- the ambassador was barred from court, and blamed for harsh feelings engendered by the unwelcome news he bore -- ended on a modestly successful official note for the English. Waad was personally misused on his return journey by the Catholic duc d'Aumale, who detained him and seized his letters, diplomatic immunity notwithstanding. 
Waad had substantial preparation for his challenging diplomatic assignments. Besides touring the continent in the 1570s and his service with the English legation in Paris, he performed several minor diplomatic chores. He was joined, in June 1581, by Lord Willoughby in a mission to bestow the Garter on the Danish king. In this embassy he was but a minor functionary and the ambassador's mouthpiece, commuting frequently between the Danish court and the ambassador's lodgings to settle various points of disagreement before the investiture ceremony on 14 August. In April 1583, now a clerk of the privy council through the joint sponsorship of Burghley and Walsingham (whose secretary he had briefly been in 1581), Waad went to Vienna to protest at the withdrawal of English trade privileges by the Hanse towns. He was received most courteously by the imperial court, but the mission was fruitless, apparently both because the emperor considered the dispute beyond his jurisdiction and because of German distaste for the English Merchant Adventurers. In yet another mission, in March 1585, Waad required of the French king the surrender of the English conspirator, Thomas Morgan, whose treasons in England made him a much sought felon. He received kind words from Henry III, but the king apparently did not return Morgan. For his efforts, Waad was beaten by Catholic sympathizers in France during his return journey to England, again in contravention of international law. 
A potentially much more important assignment had been proposed in early 1580, immediately after the death of Cardinal Henry of Portugal, which had thrown open the question of the Portuguese succession. While Waad's official instructions exist, there is no evidence that he ever undertook this mission to the two pretenders to the throne, the duke of Braganza and Dom Antonio. Waad nevertheless continued his involvement with Portuguese affairs throughout the rest of his life, especially schemes involving Dom Antonio, and he became in fact the recognized Elizabethan expert on the area, succeeding Thomas Wilson in that role. 
In all Waad conducted four independent missions, but this aspect of his career concluded after 1587. He remained at home, where his clerkship increasingly involved him in the pursuit of dissidents and subversives. He became the terror of the English recusants, and particularly of the foreign Jesuits sent into England. 'Lord Chief Justice Popham is in circuit', a Mr Cordale commented in 1595, 'but William Waad keeps the papists in line' ('CSP dom.', '1598-1601', 253). His was the unsavoury but diligently executed task of ferreting out and then examining, often under torture, men suspected of treasonous intent. No major conspiracy after 1585 -- whether the Lopez plot, the Babington plot, the Essex rebellion, the trial of Ralegh, the Gunpowder Plot, the Main plot, the Bye plot, or others -- failed in some way to involve his investigations. He was also involved with many rather more minor interrogations and committees of inquiry. 
Besides serving as something of the English counterpart to the Spanish grand inquisitor, Waad also had responsibilities for provisioning the English army in the Low Countries and in Ireland. Here he was the successor of his diplomatic colleague, Sir Thomas Wilkes, but soon found himself involved in massive controversy over both alleged speculation and incompetence. As with almost any Elizabethan official, Waad claimed, in 1593, that the Cecilian connection had borne little fruit and that his official services were negligibly rewarded; but a variety of farms, grants, and licences associated with his name argue otherwise. Probably his most notable patent was the monopoly to manufacture sulphur, brimstone, and oil. Certainly his wealth in an inflationary age would suggest that the niggardly Elizabethan reward system had not unduly slighted him. 
Waad served in parliament for the duchy of Lancaster boroughs of Aldeburgh (1585), Thetford (1589), and Preston (1601), and he also represented the Cornish borough of West Looe in 1604, undoubtedly all through the influence either of the Cecil faction or Walsingham. He made little mark on parliamentary proceedings. He was also a justice of the peace for both Middlesex, from 1591, probably until his death, and Kent, by 1592, and served on various county commissions. 
Strongly allied with Robert Cecil, and indispensable to the government as an intelligencer and in his covert operations, Waad remained active when King James acceded to the throne. Knighted almost immediately (20 May 1603) after the king arrived in England, he also received, in a particularly apt appointment, the lieutenancy of the Tower. In this capacity he continued to pursue interrogations, and was, perhaps most famously, the gaoler of Sir Walter Ralegh, with whom he had repeated misunderstandings. In 1613, however, having lost Cecilian protection when Salisbury died the previous year, and in the face of the attacks of the many enemies his past activities had earned, Waad was forced to surrender his position. The charge against him, probably specious, was that he had both embezzled jewels belonging to his charge, Lady Arabella Stuart, and that he had allowed too much freedom while guarding her. He retired thereafter to the patrimonial Belsize House in Hampstead to pursue his private interests, which, like his father's, included a sizeable interest in the New World. He was, for instance, a member of the governing council for the Virginia Company and an investor in the purchase of the island of Bermuda. 
Despite Waad's prominent involvement in state affairs, his personality -- hard-edged and querulous as it must have been to pursue his interrogation tasks so successfully and repeatedly -- precluded him from attaining anything more than modest stature in the realm. In his correspondence he is certainly periodically at odds with various colleagues, and the enemies, some well placed in the realm, that his interrogations created may be imagined. He nevertheless profited by his activities, and in a moralistic will giving clear evidence of his puritan inclinations he left a sizeable estate to his son James (a godson of the king) and to his second wife, Anne, whom he married probably in 1599, a daughter of Sir Humphrey Browne. He had previously married, in 1586, another Anne (died 1589), a daughter of Owen Waller of London. He died in October 1623 at Battles Hall in Essex, another of his estates, and was buried in nearby Maunden church, where his noteworthy tomb was restored in the late nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 28365


Wace (b. after 1100, d. 1174x83), historian and poet, was born soon after 1100 on Jersey. Some have considered Wace to have been of noble birth, following a suggestion by Gaston Paris that Toustain, chamberlain of Duke Robert (I) of Normandy, was Wace's maternal grandfather; this has not been substantiated, nor has the misnomer Robert Wace, which dates back to the eighteenth century. According to autobiographical passages in his last work, the 'Roman de Rou' ('c'.1160-74), Wace was taken to Caen as a young boy for religious training. He continued his studies in the Ile-de-France, later returning to Caen where he devoted himself to a literary career; in the 'Rou', he refers to himself as a 'clerc lisant' (a reading or teaching cleric), a role whose definition has generated debate among scholars. Although none of the 'sirventes' (lyric poems, often of a satiric or political nature) which Wace says that he wrote appears to survive, three saints' lives are extant from the earlier part of his career: the 'Vie de Sainte Marguerite' ('c'.1130-40), the 'Conception Nostre Dame' ('c'.1130-40, but probably after the 'Marguerite'), and the 'Vie de Saint Nicolas' ('c'.1150). 
In 1155, Wace completed the 'Roman de Brut', the oldest extant Old French chronicle of the early kings of Britain. Although Wace called the 14,866 line 'Brut' a translation, it is more than a translation of a single work. Based largely on the vulgate and first variant versions of Geoffrey of Monmouth's 'Historia regum Britanniae' ('c'.1138), the 'Roman de Brut' contains material from oral sources and possibly from other written sources as well, including the earliest extant reference to King Arthur's round table. In his Middle English adaptation of Wace's 'Brut' ('c'.1200), Layamon reports that Wace offered the 'Roman de Brut' to Eleanor of Aquitaine, consort of Henry II; however, no other evidence has yet been found to support Layamon's claim. 
Wace's chronicle of the Norman dukes which he dedicated to Eleanor of Aquitaine and Henry II, the 'Roman de Rou' ('The Romance of Rollo'), was less popular than his Arthurian chronicle, less stylistically homogeneous, but more synthetic and original. In the 'Rou', Wace drew on Latin sources, including the Norman histories of William of Jumieges, William of Poitiers, and Dudo of St Quentin, and the English histories of William of Malmesbury and Eadmer of Canterbury, as well as on oral sources. Unlike Wace's 'Brut' and the saints' lives which are continuous narratives in octosyllabic rhymed couplets, the 'Roman de Rou' contains four parts, the first two in alexandrines and the last two in octosyllables. The first part, known as the 'Chronique ascendante des ducs de Normandie' (315 lines), traces the projected scope of the history in reverse chronological order, from Henry II back to Rollo; the second (4425 lines) describes the founding of the duchy by Rollo, and the history of the early dukes to the peace of 965; the third (11,440 lines) continues the narrative from 965 to the imprisonment of Robert Curthose by his brother, Henry I, following the battle of Tinchebrai in 1106. The fourth part (750 lines), dedicated to the career of the pirate Hasting, is thought to have been the first draft of the poem, later abandoned, and not part of the final poem as Wace intended. Early in the third part of the 'Rou', Wace records Henry II's gift of a prebend in Bayeux, which he may have received in payment for the 'Brut' or as incentive to work on the 'Rou'; documentary evidence suggests that Wace received the prebend between 1165 and 1169. At the end of the 'Rou', Wace reports that the monarch had grown less generous, and that he was removing Wace's commission in favour of a poet named Maistre Beneeit, most often identified as Benoit de Ste Maure, author of the 'Roman de Troie' ('c'.1160) and the 'Chronique des ducs de Normandie' ('c'.1174-80). The transfer may have taken place in or around 1174, since the last recorded event in the 'Chronique ascendante' can be dated to 1174, but Henry II's son, Henry, the Young King (died 1183), is mentioned as still alive. 
Wace played an important role in the development of the French language through his use of an especially large and varied vocabulary and in the development of Old French narrative, primarily Arthurian romance. 


@@@@@


doc= 28366


Wadd, William (1776-1829), surgeon, the eldest son of Charlotte and Solomon Wadd (died 1821), a surgeon who had lived and practised for more than half a century in Basinghall Street, London, was born on 21 June 1776. He entered Merchant Taylors' School late in 1784 and then served as apprentice to James Earle in 1797, becoming one of the privileged class of surgeon's pupils at St Bartholomew's Hospital. He was admitted a member of the Royal College of Surgeons on 18 December 1801, and set up practice in the West End of London. On 5 July 1806 he married Caroline Mackenzie. They had two children. 
Wadd was a member of the council of the Royal College of Surgeons in 1824, and he was appointed a member of the court of examiners in succession to John Abernethy on 3 August 1829. He was appointed one of the surgeons-extraordinary to the prince regent on 19 August 1817, and surgeon-extraordinary to George IV on 30 March 1821. 
Wadd was killed on 29 August 1829 when he jumped from a runaway carriage on the road from Killarney to Mitchelstown, while he was on holiday in Ireland. At the time of his death he was a fellow of the Linnean Society and an associate of the Societe de Medecine of Paris. His wife survived him. 
A man of high talents, Wadd had a rich fund of anecdotes. He was an excellent draughtsman, and his etchings were so skilled that he illustrated all his works himself. Wadd was the author of several medical texts, including 'Comments on Corpulency, Lineaments of Leanness, Mems on Diet and Dietetics' (1829), which is illustrated by his own caricature etchings. He is, however, best known for 'Nugae chirurgicae, or, A biographical miscellany illustrative of a collection of professional portraits' (1824). The nucleus of the collection of portraits was presented to him about 1814 by Henry Fauntleroy, the banker, who was hanged for forgery. The catalogue is arranged under two alphabets -- one of anecdotal biographies, the other of memorabilia. It is interesting reading but contains many errors. Both 'Nugae canorae, or, Epitaphian mementoes (in stone-cutters' verse) of the Medici family, by Unus Quorum' (1827) and 'Mems, Maxims, and Memoirs' (1827) contain a miscellany of things medical, and of the history of medicine and surgery in England. 


@@@@@


doc= 28367


Waddell, Peter Hately (1817-1891), Presbyterian minister and author, son of James Waddell of Balquhatston, Stirlingshire, and his wife, Alice Hately, was born at Balquhatston House, Slamannan, on 19 May 1817. His father soon afterwards disposed of the property and moved to Glasgow, and Waddell was educated at the high school and the university in Glasgow. He was a probationer for ordination at the time of the Disruption in 1843, and joined those who soon formed the Free Church of Scotland, outlining his thoughts in his 'Orthodoxy is not Evangelism' (1843) and several other pamphlets published that year. Having been licensed as a preacher, in 1843 he was ordained as minister of Rhynie, Aberdeenshire, and in the following year he moved to Girvan, Ayrshire, to the pastorate of a small Free Church congregation. In 1845, while at Girvan, he married Helen Halcro Wardlaw, second daughter of Walter Wardlaw, a Glasgow merchant and descendant of Ebenezer Erskine, founder of the Secessionist church in Scotland. They had four sons and two daughters. 
Waddell's attachment to the Free Church was loosened when he found that its members intended to retain in their entirety the rigid doctrinal definitions contained in the Westminster confession of faith. When in 1847 he refused to subscribe to the confession his licence was withdrawn. Waddell then founded an independent chapel at Girvan called the Church of the Future, whose objectives he defined in a pamphlet with the same title (1861). His 'Sojourn of a Sceptic in the Land of Darkness and Uncertainty' (1847) is a somewhat tedious allegory modelled on 'The Pilgrim's Progress'. Many of his congregation left the Free Church and joined him. Waddell remained at Girvan until 1862, when he went to Glasgow and began preaching in the city hall as an independent minister. He soon gathered a large congregation, and in 1870 a church was erected for him in East Howard Street. Financial difficulties led to the abandonment of this building, and Waddell once more gathered a congregation by preaching in the Trades Hall. In 1888, encouraged by friends and adherents, he joined the Church of Scotland. 
Waddell was an orator of very exceptional power. In his early years his lectures in London and in Scottish cities had attracted much attention. His skill as a dialectician was displayed in a series of lectures on Renan's 'Vie de Jesus' delivered in Glasgow City Hall before large audiences in 1863, and afterwards published. His profound admiration for Robert Burns led to his issuing a new edition of the poems, with an elaborate criticism (2 vols., 1867-9). He presided at the meeting held in Burns's cottage on 25 January 1859 to celebrate the centenary of the poet's birth, and then delivered an impassioned eulogy on Burns. His chief historical work was a volume entitled 'Ossian and the Clyde, Fingal in Ireland, Oscar in Iceland, or, Ossian Historical and Authentic' (1875), in which he sought to confirm the authenticity of the Ossianic poems by the identification of topographical references that could not have been known to James Macpherson when he edited Ossian in the eighteenth century. His book was an important stimulus to the Celtic revival at the end of the nineteenth century. Waddell also contributed a remarkable series of letters to a Glasgow journal on Ptolemy's map of Egypt, arguing that the discoveries of Speke and Grant had been foreshadowed by the classical geographer. He took a keen interest in educational matters, and was a member of the first two school boards in Glasgow. His most original contribution to literature was a translation of the 'Psalms' of David from the Hebrew into the Scottish language, under the title 'The Psalms: frae Hebrew intil Scottis' (1871). This work was followed in 1879 by a similar translation of 'Isaiah'. He also wrote a verse tragedy, 'Behold the Man' (1872). Between 1882 and 1885 he edited a people's edition of Walter Scott's Waverley novels with notes and an introduction. Advancing years compelled Waddell to retire from the ministry in October 1890, and he then began to make selections from his published works to form a volume. The task was not completed when he died at 9 Ashton Terrace, Dowanhill, Glasgow, on 5 May 1891. 
The Waddells' third son, 


@@@@@


doc= 28368


Waddilove, Robert Darley (1736-1828), dean of Ripon, was born on 5 November 1736, the son of Abel Darley of Boroughbridge in the West Riding of Yorkshire, who moved later to Scoreby in the East Riding. He was educated at Westminster School and Clare College, Cambridge, where he was admitted as a pensioner on 6 January 1755, before graduating BA (sixth optime) in 1759 and proceeding MA in 1762. Darley was academically able but, standing in line to inherit landed property at Boroughbridge from his uncle Robert Waddilove (1698-1762), president of Bernard's Inn, he was not considered for a fellowship on graduation. Instead, having taken holy orders (deacon, 1759) Darley began a career in the church's parochial ministry. He was curate at Winwick, Northamptonshire, from 1759 to 1760, then moved to be curate of Wotton and Abinger in Surrey (to 1766) in the gift of the Evelyn family, and finally curate of Ockham from 1766 to 1771. Meanwhile, he had succeeded his uncle in 1762 and had adopted his surname from as early as the previous year, according to Wotton parish registers. It may have caused him to consider following his uncle's example and switch from the church to the law. Waddilove, as he was now known, was admitted to the Middle Temple on 25 March 1766, but went no further in a legal career. Instead, he was instituted on 2 March 1767 to the perpetual curacy of Whitby by Archbishop Drummond of York. The move raised his income and status and induced him to stay in the ministry. 
Waddilove's frustrations in the 1760s were partly due to lack of a patron. That want was supplied by Thomas, second Baron Grantham, of Newby Park, near Boroughbridge, who was British ambassador to Spain from 1771 to 1779 and took Waddilove with him as embassy chaplain. This was the most exciting point in Waddilove's career. His scholarly gifts flowered and he also contentedly acted as an antiquarian courier for several British friends. He had access to the library of the Escorial, where he collated the manuscript of Strabo for Thomas Falconer's edition (2 vols., 1807), and obtained much useful information for William Robertson's 'History of America' (1777), despite what Waddilove called 'the Difficulty of getting for him any really useful information in this country' (Waddilove to Frederick Robinson, 8 Nov 1776, Lucas MSS, L30/15/66/5). Waddilove also wrote remarks on the pictures in the Spanish royal collection formerly owned by Charles I of England, translated A. R. Mengs's 'Essay on Painting' (2 vols., 1796), and was a friend of the Abbe Bayer, preceptor to the eldest son of Carlos III. 
While in Spain, Waddilove exchanged Whitby for the vicarage of Topcliffe (and the curacy of adjacent Dishforth) in 1774, and appointed himself rector of Cherry Burton on 9 March 1775, both in Yorkshire. He held both until death. Once back in England, Waddilove married on 3 April 1781 Anne Hope (1746/7-1797), daughter of Sir Ludovick Grant of Grant, seventh baronet. He also obtained additional ecclesiastical preferment. On 25 July 1780 he was collated prebendary, canon residentiary, and treasurer of Ripon, positions he retained on the vote of the chapter after Dean Francis Wanley's return from the continent the next year. In 1782 Waddilove was appointed prebendary of York (prebend of Osbaldwick, exchanged for Wistow in 1783), and archdeacon of the East Riding in 1786. He acted as chaplain for Archbishop Drummond from 1775 and was reappointed in that post to Archbishop Markham. Waddilove finally secured for himself the deanery of Ripon following Dr Wanley's death in July 1791. Grantham's premature death in 1786 deprived Waddilove of his main patron. He thereafter looked to Thomas, Lord Pelham (later second earl of Chichester) and the first earl of Malmesbury (Grantham's relation by marriage) for support when required, but it was insufficient to achieve exchanging the deanery of Ripon for the more lucrative equivalent at York in 1802. He was awarded the Lambeth LLD by Archbishop Moore in 1804. 
Waddilove was an energetic, dedicated dean. Ripon Minster was well maintained during his long involvement in its affairs, in part a reflection of his own antiquarian learning. In 1775 he was elected FSA, and he contributed several papers to 'Archaeologia'; 'An Historical and Descriptive Account of Ripon Minster', his most important work of scholarship, appeared in 1810. The dean was an active magistrate in the liberty of Ripon from 1771 to his death, and was a popular figure in local society. He was president of the Society for the Relief of the North Riding Clergy and gave generously to several other charities, as well as from his own funds increasing the endowments of parishes either in his own gift or that of the Ripon chapter. His wife died on 21 May 1797, aged fifty. Waddilove died at the deanery, Ripon, on 18 April 1828, leaving a large family. He bequeathed to the library of York Minster a magnificent copy of Falconer's edition of Strabo and the rare work 'Bibliotheca arabica del Escurial'. 


@@@@@


doc= 28369


Wadding, Luke (1588-1657), Roman Catholic priest and historian, was born in Waterford, Ireland, on 16 October 1588 and baptized on 18 October, St Luke's day. 
Wadding was the eleventh of fourteen children of Walter Wadding (died 1602), merchant, and Anastasia Lombard (died 1602). The family, originally from Wexford, had land near Tramore Bay and a tomb in the Franciscan friary in Waterford; they were Old English, and three of them became mayors of the city in Luke's time. Other forms of the surname are Waddy and Wotton. Luke is sometimes confused with his first cousin, Luke Wadding SJ (died 1651) of Salamanca, and with Luke Wadding, bishop of Ferns from 1683 or 1684 to 1687. His brother Ambrose became a Jesuit lecturer, as did his first cousins Peter Wadding and Michael Wadding, the latter being better known in Mexico as Miguel Godinez. Other famous relatives included six bishops, Peter Lombard (Armagh, 1601-25), Thomas Walsh (Cashel, 1626-54), David Rothe (Ossory, 1618-50), John Roche (Ferns, 1624-36), Patrick Comerford (Waterford, 1629-52), and Nicholas French (Ferns, 1645-78). The Jesuit Peter Sherlock, rector of Irish colleges in Spain, and Andrew Wyse, grand prior of the knights of Malta, were also related to Wadding. Two of his nephews, Francis Harold and Bonaventure Baron, followed him into the Franciscans; the former became his biographer and successor as chronicler of the order, while the latter (brother of the lawyer Geoffrey, an important envoy for the confederate Catholics) was a lecturer and writer of copious output. 
There is some confusion about Wadding's early teachers. Peter White in Kilkenny ('c'.1560s) was too early; a Mrs Barden, a Father Dermot O'Callaghan, and fugitive priests have been suggested; another possibility is John Flahy, that 'famous and very fortunate schoolmaster' in Waterford, 'to whom especially the province of Munster is beholden for good breeding' (Comerford, 19). Wadding himself said that his father watched over his Catholic training and his education; and Harold recorded that Luke's brother Matthew tutored him in elementary logic and physics, and that he received a good grounding in Latin (the language of the family prayer book, the 'Pius Quintus'), and could write Latin when he was thirteen. Later he learned Hebrew and Greek, and quickly became fluent in Portuguese, Spanish (Castilian), and Italian. A poem in Irish, eight lines in honour of Nicolaus Claudius Fabricius Peyresius, was published in Rome in 1638, but this may be a translation by another friar in St Isidore's of a short eulogy in Latin by Wadding. 
Luke's parents died in 1602 -- his mother of the plague, and she was not buried in the family grave. The following year Matthew, a merchant, brought Luke to Lisbon and placed him with his cousins under the Jesuits in the Irish College, where he continued his studies for six months. He left it to join the Franciscans in September 1604 at the friary of the Immaculate Conception, Matozinhos, near Porto. He was given the name Francis in religion, and sometimes used the title Luke of St Francis. He made his profession on 23 September 1605; he studied the philosophy of Duns Scotus and his school for two years at Leiria, and theology first at Lisbon and then, from 1609, at the University of Coimbra under various professors including the Jesuit Francisco Suarez. He had begun to edit the writings of St Francis of Assisi when he was ordained in Vizeu in 1613. He preached in Portuguese and Spanish, and compiled two manuscript volumes of quotations from the 'Bible', the fathers, and others. His talents attracted attention, and the vicar-general of the Franciscans, Antonio de Trejo, brought him to the Franciscan province of St James in Spain, of which he became a member. He studied Hebrew in Alba de Tormes, and taught theology at Leon and at the University of Salamanca while he was director of the Franciscan students and chaplain to the Poor Clares. In 1614 he was asked to publish the summa of cases of conscience by the Franciscan Manoel Rodrigues, and in 1618 the spiritual talks of the Franciscan Luis de Miranda. When the Salamanca friary was redecorated for the general chapter of 1618, he provided 268 lines of Latin verse for a long series of paintings there of Franciscan popes, cardinals, martyrs, and writers, which were published later. Here it can be added that he did not write the Christmas poem (two verses) repeatedly attributed to him; it is from a Wexford carol collected or written by Father William Devereux (died 1771). 
Antonio de Trejo became a bishop in July 1618, and as King Philip III's special 'orator' was sent to Rome to plead before Pope Paul V for the defining of the doctrine of the immaculate conception of Mary, 'in order to remedy the grave scandals [concerning the doctrine] which were threatening the public peace of his kingdom' (Balic, 474); he took Wadding with him as his theologian and secretary. They arrived on 17 December 1618 and stayed with Cardinal Gabriel de Trejo, the bishop's brother. Wadding moved to the friary of San Pietro in Montorio in Trastevere, where Hugh O'Neill, earl of Tyrone, had been buried in 1616 beside his son, the baron of Dungannon, and his brothers-in-law, Ruairi and Cathbharr O'Donnell. Through the Franciscans in Spain and Rome the Old English Wadding made contact with Old Irish persons and ideas. He was asked to save the writings of Angelo del Paz (died 1596), who had lived in San Pietro, and, with the help of Anthony Hickey, edited some of his scripture commentaries in 1623-8; he was to follow Angelo's example as a fervent Franciscan, writer, editor, and founder of a library. Wadding moved between the friary in Trastevere and the head house at Aracoeli, and finally to San Isidoro (see below). His collection of discussions, orations, and reports for the 'legatio' of Philip III and Philip IV to Paul V and Gregory XV he sent privately to Florence Conry in Louvain; but it was printed there without Luke's permission in 1624, and a folio edition appeared in Antwerp in 1641. This work established his fame in Rome; and about it Charles Balic OFM wrote, 'side by side with his [Wadding's] tenacity, there stand out his profound theological learning, his vast erudition, his prudence, and his uncommon tact' (ibid., 475). Wadding continued to work for this ongoing commission, and much later (when illness had restricted his activities) published three further volumes in Rome, 'Immaculatae conceptioni B. Mariae virginis non adversari eius mortem corporalem' (1655), 'De redemptione B. Mariae virginis' (1656), and 'De baptismo B. Mariae virginis' (1656). 
Such work in speculative theology entailed the study of scripture, and Wadding knew Hebrew. In 1621 he edited by papal request four large volumes of concordances of the Hebrew 'Bible' by Friar Marius (died 1620) from Cajazzo, with whom he had lived. This entailed his making special printing arrangements at Aracoeli, and writing under various pseudonyms all the preliminary articles. In 1624 Wadding enlarged and edited a Latin concordance of the 'Bible' (concerned with virtues and vices) then attributed to St Anthony of Padua but in fact the work of several Franciscans (Kleinhans). He appended to it a 'Promptuarium sacrae scripturae', a preachers' aid, by an anonymous Irish Franciscan. His work for the Spanish delegation also entailed a study of the teaching of John Duns Scotus. Eager to free him from the ignominious title of 'dunce' and the myths repeated by the Dominican Abraham Bzowski (Bzovius), Wadding began to prepare an edition of the Scotsman's writings, with an account of his life that included a tactful discussion of the question of his country of origin and commentaries by other Irish friars (see below). Written in twelve tomes, some in two parts, it was eventually published in sixteen volumes in 1639. Collecting everything that was thought to be by St Francis, Wadding had the first edition of his works printed at Antwerp in 1623. It included commentaries and a preface wherein Wadding explained what inspired the work: his resolve to answer the attacks of others on the saint and his followers as ignorant and unlettered men. This explains, too, his two printed refutations of Augustinian theories about St Francis; it explains his labours on the writings of Scotus and on his 'magnum opus', the 'Annales minorum', a history of the Franciscan order from 1208 to 1540, in eight folio volumes (1625-54), begun when he was in the friary of San Pietro in Montorio, and compiled from material gathered also by Bartolomeo Cimarelli, Jakob Pohl, and others. His collection of papal bulls appended to each volume inspired the 'Bullarium Franciscanum'. It explains, too, his very useful 'Scriptores ordinis minorum', with a list of martyrs (1650), and his books and essays on Franciscans, as well as work in progress on the general chapters, rules, and constitutions of the order, and the contents of old Franciscan libraries. As he said: 'My research-work [on St Francis] intensified my purpose, while the joy at what I found aroused the desire to find still more' (Mooney, 'Writings of Father Luke Wadding'). His 'B. P. Francisci Assisiatis opuscula' appeared in many small editions. 
As the Franciscans were then being persecuted in Ireland, Wadding wished to set up a house for Irish candidates in Rome. The minister-general asked him to make use of a new Spanish Franciscan foundation, an unfinished and debt-laden friary and church (between Ludovisi and Barberini properties) dedicated to the recently canonized farmer St Isidore of Madrid (1622), to whom King Philip III was devoted. Wadding took responsibility for the building in June 1625, and it is presumed that he became a member of the Irish Franciscan province about this time. With the help of his generous neighbours and others, he completed the church, and over the years famous artists such as Carlo Maratti, Pier Naldini, Andrea Sacchi, and Gianlorenzo Bernini decorated its side-chapels for wealthy patrons. The friary became a house of prayer as well as a famous school. There the students defended theses in philosophy and theology in the presence of distinguished guests, cardinals, and even a pope, Innocent X, in 1649. Many of them went on to lecture on Scotist philosophy and theology in Franciscan and other schools throughout Europe. 
There, too, the students of the Irish College attended lectures from 1628 to 1635. The cardinal protector of Ireland (from 1623), Ludovico Ludovisi, nephew of Pope Gregory XV, having taken the advice of Luke Wadding and John Roche (then made bishop of Ferns), had begun to provide for six students chosen by Wadding. They first attended the Collegio Romano under the Jesuits, whom the cardinal favoured. Then a house was rented for them across the street from St Isidore's so that they could attend lectures there. It was referred to in some early account books as the seminary of St Patrick (other Irish colleges on the continent were dedicated to him), and was also known as the Collegium Ludovisianum. The cardinal, who died in 1632, supplied the necessary ongoing financial support, which was doubled in his will and a large vineyard with fruit trees in Castel Gandolfo donated; but his testament revealed that he wanted the education of the students to be in the hands of the experienced Jesuits. This was a blow to Wadding, who had inspired the project and drawn up the statutes for the college, and was its first president. He contested the provision with the support of the cardinal's brother, Prince Ludovisi, but the case went against him, and the ruling in favour of the Jesuits came into effect in January 1635. Wadding was consulted about the problems involved in founding Irish friaries in Prague and Wielun (Poland); in 1648 he was instrumental in having erected necessary accommodation at the head friary (Aracoeli) for the Franciscan representatives of some northern European provinces of the order, including Ireland; and in the year before his death he was given permission to make his final foundation, a noviciate house for the Irish friars, attached to the church of Santa Maria del Piano at Capranica, north of Rome, near Viterbo. Apart from visits to Umbria and Naples in particular, it seems that Wadding stayed mostly in Rome. It was at Viterbo in 1656 that he arranged for the printing of 'De oculo morali', moral and spiritual applications for prelates and others of the current scientific knowledge of the eye. Wadding tried hard to prove that the author was the Franciscan John of Wales, but it is now attributed to Pierre de Limoges (Petrus de Seperia, known to Wadding as La Cepiera). He had already printed in Rome in 1655 a combined 'Florilegium de vita et dictis illustrium philosophorum et breviloquium de sapientia sanctorum' by the same author. About two dozen of Wadding's works were published, and about six more prepared for the press; besides these he had planned to edit further works by Angelo del Paz and John of Wales, a history of episcopal sees, and the lives of six recent popes and the cardinals they had appointed. 
There is some evidence for a Carmelite influence on Wadding's spirituality. In 1637 he published a book on the life and deeds of Blessed Peter Thomas of Aquitaine (died 1366), a Carmelite patriarch of Constantinople; in his preface he explained the Franciscan connections that had induced him to print it, 'out of gratitude for the most holy order, which I venerate highly'. In Spain Wadding had studied Hebrew at Alba de Tormes where Teresa of Avila, who reformed the Carmelites, had died in 1582, only six years before Wadding was born. She was canonized in 1622 together with Isidore of Madrid, the patron of the church taken over by Wadding, which had been founded by Alcantarine Franciscans in 1621. Peter of Alcantara, counsellor to Teresa, had been beatified in that same year (he had died on the feast of St Luke). Wadding would have been impressed by the ceremonies; thirty-five years later his attendance at a sermon in honour of Blessed Peter brought on pneumonia and his death. He left an annotated notebook that contains spiritual exercises based on a Discalced Carmelite source. 
Wadding was a much respected consultant to some Roman congregations and commissions, and he planned to edit selected material from such sources. By the early 1630s archbishops and bishops in Ireland were seeking his help in the matter of appointments to vacant sees and other offices. The Holy Office and the Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith (founded in 1622) consulted him on matters relating to the church there; in 1634 on recovering some of the places in the Holy Land; in 1637-9 on the theological problems of missionaries in China; in 1640 on an Armenian union with the Holy See; and in 1644 on a revision of the Arabic 'Bible' and the ritual of the Greek church. He assisted the Congregation for Rites in the reform of the breviary ordered by Pope Urban VIII in 1629, compiling new readings when he could, and taking the opportunity to have the feast of St Patrick inserted into the calendar for the universal church. As a consultor for the Holy Office and the Congregation of the Index he was involved in the controversy concerning the doctrine of grace, opposing the Jesuit leniency; but he failed to detect the denial of free will in Cornelius Jansen's 'Augustinus', and thought that the propositions taken from it could be given an orthodox interpretation, but he accepted their condemnation. In his writings he appears 'an upright and unbiassed man' (Ceyssens). 
Nevertheless Wadding was bitterly attacked, even by a minister-general of his order. From the beginnings of the Irish College in Rome the perpetual dissensions between Old Irish and Old English arose among the students. After the death of Cardinal Ludovisi in 1632 a list of complaints against Wadding was sent to the new cardinal protector of Ireland by a disgruntled person in Rome (possibly a Jesuit student from Connaught), who claimed some backing, but whose statements were suspect. He said that for about four years Wadding had been practically the only one in the city supplying information for appointments in Ireland even though he had been out of the country since he was a child ('ab infantia fere'); and that he favoured his own province (Munster) and class (Old English merchants), and impeded the applications made for other candidates, even by the earls of Tyrone and Tyrconnell 'who had fought against Queen Isabella of England for nearly twenty years'! He asked that a special inquiry be made into the abuses that he listed by the secretary of the Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith, Francesco Ingoli, who, incidentally, knew Wadding very well; it seems that nothing came of the request (Jennings, 'Miscellaneous documents', 184-7). Twenty years later the old brew of rivalries boiled over again, and a previous friend of Wadding's, the Franciscan Pedro Manero, who had become minister-general, complained bitterly to the king of Spain about his activities in 1653-4 which were thought to be pro-French and anti-Irish. The Spaniards had lost influence in Rome and the French party was predominant. The Old Irish clung to the dream of Spanish help for Ireland, while the Old English there favoured the French connection with the king of England. Internal Franciscan politics, Irish and European, were mixed into the brew, and Wadding had to drink a bitter draught of provincial jealousies. In 1654 a clique wanted him out of St Isidore's, and Francis Magruairk poured out his venom in a memorial presented to the king of Spain in the autumn of 1656. He said that Wadding, the Barberini, and others in Rome were to blame for the Cromwellian devastation in Ireland; that Wadding had been a secret agent of the marquess of Ormond, and had got Old English bishops appointed; that the money he collected went not to the Old Irish but to English Youngs, Dutch Harolds, and Jewish Waddings; that he possessed diabolical powers and succeeded where others failed in driving the Irish out of Ireland. Magruairk exhorted King Philip IV to make a name for himself by attacking the Barberini, Mazarin, and Wadding; he accused his fellow friar of ambition, hypocrisy, and calumny, of being harsh and unjust, of refusing to obey the pope, and of causing the deaths of certain persons. In 1665 it was reported that Magruairk had 'died a heretic in Dublin' (Mooney, 'Was Wadding a patriotic Irishman?' and 'Father Francis Magruairck'). 
Wadding had done his best to help the Catholic cause in the war years from 1641, when neither the Spanish king, nor the French, nor the popes Urban VIII and Innocent X wanted to intervene overtly. The Thirty Years' War was still on, and the great powers were watching each other warily. Then the Old Irish rebelled, and the 'Act of Adventurers' of 24 February 1642 branded all Irish Catholics rebels, and forced the Old English and Old Irish to unite at Kilkenny on 24 October. Even before the confederate Catholics there appointed him agent and procurator in Rome and Italy in December 1642, Wadding put pressure on pope, princes, and others to support his people. He saw the need for sending someone from Rome to get accurate information, to unite the Catholics, and co-ordinate their efforts. He got Pope Urban to send the Oratorian Pierfrancesco Scarampi as special envoy in July 1643, bringing money and arms. Wadding was so highly thought of in Europe that the confederates wished to see him made a cardinal (he blocked that), and votes were cast for him in the papal conclave of 1644. He persuaded the new pope, Innocent X, to send a well-briefed nuncio to Ireland, Archbishop Giovanni Battista Rinuccini, in October 1645. Wadding had earlier helped Owen Roe O'Neill, Thomas Preston, and other Irish officers on the continent to go to Ireland with arms and men; and after the victory at Benburb in 1646, he sent from St Isidore's, by Dionisio Massari, the sword of Hugh O'Neill, earl of Tyrone, to Owen Roe. Others took offence at what was said about this, and Ormond somehow got the sword. It is because of the relatively small amount of money and arms obtained for the confederates in those years that Wadding was called a gun-running priest. But he was caught in the cross-fire between the Irish Catholics, who were split over the question of a foreign protector, and again over the truce of 1643 and 1646 that did not guarantee freedom of religion and conscience, and over the Inchiquin treaty (1648). Wadding was accused of being an Ormondist; the marquess of Ormond (representative of the embattled Charles I) had in fact written to him, as had Queen Henrietta Maria, expecting him to side with the Old English friars who, urged on by Ormond, sought separation from the Old Irish in a divided Franciscan Ireland. For Wadding the important thing was concord among the friars. He tried to pour oil on a very troubled sea, a veritable storm of conflicting interests, English and Irish, French and Roman, Catholic and protestant, clerical and lay. In the end he was bypassed in Rome, and some influential men on the scene held conflicting views about him. The Capuchin Francis Lavalin Nugent (Old English) thought him too Irish; while the pro-Irish nuncio Rinuccini suspected Wadding of turning against him. It was true that he realized how divisive the nuncio's excommunication of the Ormondist Catholics could be; but in May 1649 the friar wrote to congratulate the cardinal on his safe return from Ireland, and said among other things: 'I confess that every time I hear mention of that infamous peace and the way of acting of that country, or even recall it to my mind, I am ashamed, and regret that I was born among such a people.' Was he thinking of his Old English heritage? Wadding said he would not be sorry to see them punished by God, if he did not fear 'it might mean the complete extirpation of the Catholic religion' (Mooney, 'Was Wadding a patriotic Irishman?', 53). Three months later Ireland was struck by the plague in the west and by Cromwell in the east; the Waddings in Waterford lost their lands and were banished to Connaught. It is clear that Wadding was working only for the Catholic religion in Ireland, not for a party; there were Catholics on both sides of the political divide (which was not always strictly Old English versus Old Irish). Wadding wanted to keep them united, and he paid the price of the man in the middle, being attacked by both. He was replaced as guardian of St Isidore's by an ungrateful Paul King, whom he had once ransomed from pirates, one of the Aracoelitani (Irish friars at Aracoeli) who fought to oust Wadding. 
Wadding's life's work was, of course, in the service of the Franciscan order, as an observant religious, a lecturer in theology and preacher, a guardian (four or five times) of a student house with all its problems of administration and discipline, a vice-procurator (1633-4) and vice-commissary of the order (1645); he avoided becoming a definitor or a minister-general. Wadding is best-known as a historian and chronicler, a collector of manuscripts and books, a writer, and an editor of Franciscan texts. He was urged to write an ecclesiastical history of Ireland, but the sources were beyond him, and his confreres in Ireland and Louvain were trying to bring them to light. When one takes into account as well his constant work for Roman congregations and voluminous correspondence, one can understand why he was compared with the mythical Briareus of the Hundred Hands; he himself had applied that name to another indefatigable worker for the church, Anselm the younger, bishop of Lucca (1071-86), friend of Pope Gregory VII, whose life and minor spiritual works he published in 1657 as a model for prelates; it was dedicated to Cardinal Marco Antonio Franciotto, a former bishop of Lucca, to whom he felt particularly bound and had already dedicated his 'Scriptores'. Wadding was not alone; he had helpers, learned companions, and paid copyists, such as Jean Claude Thierry from Besancon. John Punch helped with the works of John Duns Scotus, and good use was made as well of the earlier commentaries by Maurice O'Fehily and Hugh MacCaughwell. Most notably Anthony Hickey (died 1641), one of the best theologians in Rome at that time, joined his confrere in his labours for the immaculate conception, for the revision of the breviary, for the church in the East, and for the honour of Scotus. Wadding's nephew Francis Harold was at hand to assist him, especially in his last years. Wadding needed all the help he could get; Harold recorded that sickness laid him low for a total of two months in every year. From his student days in Lisbon he suffered at times from severe headaches and vomiting; he had chronic nasal problems and bronchitis, but the worst pain of all for him was not being able to get on with his work. We are told he was of medium height and had fair hair. A portrait (now in Killiney, co. Dublin), dated 1645, when he was fifty-seven, shows him round-faced, almost clean-shaven, with a shiny pate; not at all like the ascetic, bearded Father Luke seen in later portraits by Ribera (disputed) and Maratti. When he was sixty-three Wadding became very ill, and was not expected to live. Thereafter, for the last seven years of his life, he was unable to go out without transport; but he continued to write and to meet people. He probably met the young Oliver Plunket, who was ordained on 1 January 1654 in Rome by an Irish Franciscan, Anthony MacGeoghegan, bishop of Clonmacnoise; Plunket had been ten years in Rome by the time of Luke Wadding's death. In his last illness he was visited several times by Pope Alexander VII, by cardinals, princes, prelates, and courtiers. As famous for sanctity as for learning ('Acta sanctorum', Maii, 3.546), Wadding died at St Isidore's Friary, Rome, at 10 a.m. on Sunday 18 November 1657. An autopsy revealed diseased lungs, one kidney destroyed, a large gallstone, and an enlarged heart. In view of his many painful illnesses, the amount of work he did was most remarkable. It was said of him, 'No man ever served so successfully and so faithfully so many causes with so few resources' (see McClean, 'Bethlehem', 11). Wadding was buried in St Anthony's chapel in St Isidore's three days later, when the church was filled to overflowing. A Dominican preached the funeral oration, and Wadding's epitaph was written by a lawyer friend, Hercule Ronconio. A new tomb was erected in 1890, but the remains were later placed in the crypt. So well known worldwide was the name of Luke Wadding that, about two years after his death, an Irishman condemned to death in Mexico, wishing to make a good impression on his judges, claimed to be related to him. The man was William Lamport from Wexford, whose extraordinary escapades probably gave rise to the story of Zorro. 


@@@@@


doc= 28370


Wadding, Peter (1583-1644), Jesuit and theologian, was born at Waterford in Ireland, the son of Thomas Wadding and Mary Walsh (died before 1601). Both parents belonged to prominent Roman Catholic families of whom many members entered religious orders. Five of Peter Wadding's brothers and many of his cousins were ordained priests, mostly Franciscans or Jesuits, among whom was his cousin, the well-known Franciscan Luke Wadding, later founder of St Isidore's College, Rome. Thomas Walsh, archbishop of Cashel from 1626 to 1654, was related to Peter Wadding on his mother's side. 
Wadding studied humanities for seven years in Ireland, probably at the local grammar school in Waterford, before he left for the continent, where he studied for some time at the Irish College, Douai. He entered the Jesuit noviciate on 24 October 1601 at Tournai. There he studied and subsequently taught theology, philosophy, poetry, and rhetoric. On 18 October 1609 he was ordained priest. In 1611 one of his superiors described him as 'a man of remarkable talent, judgment and virtue, and fit for all offices in the Society; he will be a good preacher, and good superior, and he is gifted with conversational powers. As he is a man of great promise, it seems desirable that he should complete his theological studies at Louvain, before he is sent to Ireland or destined for anything else. (Hogan, 183ff.)' There were several requests from Ireland for his return, but his superiors decided otherwise and he continued his studies at Louvain, where he became professor of theology in 1615. He also taught for some time at the Jesuit college at Antwerp. He was certainly active in Antwerp in 1621, when he had a public dispute about theological questions regarding predestination and grace with the Dutch Arminian Simon Biscop or Episcopius. A Latin manuscript relating to this dispute is preserved in the Bodleian Library. An account of it was later published in Dutch under protestant auspices as 'Twee brieven van den gelerden Peter Wading in sijn leven Jesuit tot Antwerpen' (1649). 
Wadding continued to work at Louvain until 1629 when he was transferred to Prague. There he became chancellor of the Fernandean Academy, a university newly founded by the Jesuits next to the old Karl or Caroline University. His position involved him in disputes with the archbishop of Prague and the Franciscans concerning the authority of conferring degrees and the relations between the two universities. The correspondence between the cousins Luke and Peter Wadding illustrates the resulting conflict between Irish Jesuits and Franciscans. While at Prague, Peter Wadding wrote, besides several minor treatises, 'Tractatus de incarnatione', a solid theological work of more than 600 pages. It was published at Antwerp in 1636. 
In 1641 the general of the society decided to move Wadding in view of controversies relating to the university chancellorship. In July 1641 he left for Graz, where he also became chancellor of the university and the first professor of canon law. He died there on 13 September 1644. 


@@@@@


doc= 28371


Waddington, Charles (1796-1858), army officer, fifth son of William Waddington of Walkeringham, Nottinghamshire, and his wife, Grace Valentine, daughter of Henry Sykes of London, was born at 124 Sloane Street, Brompton, London, on 24 October 1796. After Addiscombe College he was commissioned second lieutenant in the Bombay Engineers on 3 April 1813, and arrived in India on 22 May 1814. He accompanied Colonel Kennedy's force to the Konkan, and his services at the assaults of Madanghar (80 miles south-east of Bombay) and of Jamba were favourably mentioned (general orders, 15 February 1818). Towards the end of 1819 he went home on furlough, and was promoted lieutenant on 16 November 1820. 
In 1822 Waddington married Anne Rebecca, daughter of John Pinchard of Taunton, Somerset, and they had six sons and two daughters; she survived him. Their eldest son, William ('b'. 1823), colonel in the Bombay staff corps, served in Persia (1856-7), and became JP for Wiltshire. Another son, Thomas ('b'. 1827), was major-general of the Bombay staff corps. 
On his return to India in 1823 Waddington acted as executive engineer at Baroda. He was promoted captain on 29 July 1825, and appointed in October executive engineer of the Baroda subsidiary force. In November 1827 he was moved to Bombay as civil engineer at the presidency, and in August 1828 acted also as superintending engineer. He was appointed to the command of the engineer corps and to take charge of the Engineer Institution in October 1830. In September 1834 he commanded the engineers at Sirur, returning to the presidency as superintending engineer in January 1835. 
On 28 June 1838 Waddington was promoted major, and in May 1839 was appointed superintending engineer of the southern provinces. In September 1841 he went to Sind as commanding engineer. He accompanied Major-General Richard England in his march through the Bolan Pass in the autumn of 1842, and was mentioned in dispatches. On 4 November 1842 he was appointed commanding engineer in Baluchistan as well as Sind. He accompanied Sir Charles Napier as commanding engineer of his force in the celebrated march of 82 miles from Dijikote on 6 January 1843 to Imamgarh, where they arrived on 12 January. Instructed to demolish the fort, Waddington fired his mines on 15 January. He himself lit the fuses of three mines, and was bending over the train of one when his assistant called upon him to run as the other mines were about to explode. But he deliberately ensured that the fuse was well alight before he walked away amid a storm of bursting mines. Napier mentioned him in his dispatch of 22 January 1843 for his bravery. He called it a grand action, but advised Waddington that he would have done better to appreciate his own worth and reserve his heroism for an occasion where it might turn the crisis of a war. 
Waddington took part in the battle of Miani on 17 February 1843, where he acted as aide-de-camp to Napier, and was mentioned in dispatches. He was also at the battle of Hyderabad, or Dabo, on 24 March, and was again mentioned in dispatches. He was promoted brevet lieutenant-colonel and made a CB for his services in Sind. 
After a furlough in England, Waddington was employed in special duty at Poona until October 1847, when he was appointed superintending and executive engineer at Aden, altered to chief engineer in April 1851. He was promoted colonel on 24 November 1853, and major-general on 28 November 1854. On 4 May 1854 he was appointed chief engineer in the public works department, Bombay, and his services in preparing the Persian expedition received official acknowledgement. In November 1857 he was appointed to the command in Sind. He contributed to the 'Professional Papers of the Corps of Royal Engineers'. In September 1858 he was compelled by ill health to leave India, and he died at Cox's Hotel, 55 Jermyn Street, St James, London, on 22 November of that year. 


@@@@@


doc= 28372


Waddington, Edward (1670/71-1731), bishop of Chichester, was born in London. He was a scholar of Eton College, and was admitted to King's College, Cambridge, in 1687. He was a fellow at King's from 1691, and proceeded BA in 1692, MA in 1695, and DD in 1710. He was a fellow of Eton from 1720, and was, by all accounts, a very generous benefactor, bequeathing his entire library (valued at $2000) to the college at his death. He was presented by the crown to the living of Wexham, near Eton, in Buckinghamshire, in 1702, and was the incumbent of All-Hallows-the-Great, Thames Street, London, from 1712 to 1726. He became chaplain to Henry Compton, the bishop of London, and then, in 1717, to George I. In 1724 he succeeded Thomas Bowers as bishop of Chichester, a position he held until his death. He is said to have found the bishop's palace in very poor condition, and set about renovating it at his own cost. Waddington married Frances, daughter of Jonathan Newey of Worcestershire, who predeceased him in 1728; they had no children. 
Waddington seems to have walked a very narrow path between low- and high-churchman. He was a zealous protestant, like his patron, Bishop Compton, and was firmly committed to the Hanoverians as well as to the duke of Newcastle's whig interest in Sussex. There is an anecdote told about him that he was such a partisan of the Hanoverians that, when George II acceded to the throne, Waddington provided the gunpowder for the celebrations in Chichester at his own expense and had a kite flown from the spire of the cathedral. He seems, in addition, to have created a stir in Chichester Cathedral with his whig determination to wrestle the tory dean and chapter into submission (Curtis, 13-16). But he also had the religious sensibilities of a high-churchman. In a sermon preached in the House of Lords on 30 January 1729 he decried the regicide of the martyr Charles I (without, it should be added, overstressing the king's piety or prerogative), and blamed puritan religion because its 'enthusiasm' (ungoverned religious zeal) had so carried away the murderers and warped their sensibilities that they were able to commit the heinous crime. This was an indictment, in his mind, against dissent, because dissenters were all subject to 'enthusiasm'. Further, he vigorously advocated punishing deists and freethinkers, and objected when anyone maintained that they should be tolerated or treated humanely. Toleration was not one of Waddington's virtues. A number of his sermons were published between 1718 and 1729. He died in Chichester on 7 September 1731 and was buried in Chichester Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 28373


Waddington, George (1793-1869), traveller and church historian, son of George Waddington ('bap'. 1753, died 1824), vicar of Tuxford, Nottinghamshire, and his wife, Anne, youngest daughter of Peter Dollond ['see under 'Dollond family], optician, was born at Tuxford on 7 September 1793. He had a younger brother and two younger sisters. His paternal grandfather was Joshua Waddington (1710-1780), also a clergyman, and the family was long established in the Halifax area. Waddington was educated at Gainsborough School, at Charterhouse from 1808 to 1811, and then at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he matriculated in 1811 and was admitted scholar in 1812. His career at the university was distinguished. He was Browne medallist in 1811 and 1814, Davies's university scholar in 1813, and chancellor's English medallist in 1813. He graduated BA in 1815, being senior optime in the mathematical tripos and the first chancellor's medallist, and in 1816 he was member's prizeman. He was admitted minor fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1817, and major fellow in 1818; he proceeded MA in 1818. 
Waddington turned to travel in the east and in 1822, in conjunction with the Revd Barnard Hanbury, published 'Journal of a Visit to some Parts of Ethiopia' describing a journey from Wadi Halfa to Merawe and back and illustrated by Waddington. This included some entertaining adventures on a journey which took them further up the Nile than Burckhardt had reached and resulted in the publication of some useful maps and the presentation of some valuable artefacts to the Fitzwilliam Museum in Cambridge. Waddington's 'Visit to Greece in 1823 and 1824' (1825) passed into a second edition in the same year after having been well reviewed. In 1829 he published 'The present condition and prospects of the Greek or oriental church, with some letters written from the convent of the Strophades'. The letters were addressed to 'T.', probably Connop Thirlwall, his contemporary at school and at college. 
About 1826 Waddington was ordained. His college presented him to the perpetual curacy of St Mary the Great, Cambridge, on 1 February 1833, and to the vicarage of Masham and Kirkby Malzeard in Yorkshire on 17 June 1834. On 1 October 1834 he was appointed commissary and official of the prebend of Masham and did valuable work in the parish, improving secular and Sunday schools, founding a library, and commuting tithes. From 1833 to 1841 he was prebendary of Chichester Cathedral. He was installed dean of Durham on 25 September 1840, graduating DD from Durham in that year. His attentions to the cathedral fabric were intended to encourage people into the church, although some were later regretted. An ardent Liberal, he was active in local politics. Although he opposed the appointment of outsiders to examine the state of Durham University, he was ready to give money for the improvement of teaching there, became warden of the university in 1862, and oversaw several important reforms. 
Waddington died, unmarried and widely mourned, at Durham on 20 July 1869, and on 23 July was buried on the north side of the cathedral yard. He was a rich man, his will being proved at 'under $60,000', and was a generous subscriber to charities and individuals. He left the cathedral library a small but good collection of Greek vases. In 1870, in memory of him and his brother Horatio (1799-1867), his sisters Anne and Clara founded the Waddington classical scholarship at Cambridge. His best-known works were those on ecclesiastical history, especially 'History of the Church from the Earliest Ages to the Reformation' (2 vols., 1833) and 'History of the Reformation on the Continent' (3 vols., 1841). Each got mixed reviews, as was unsurprising in such wide-ranging texts. 
A founder member of the Athenaeum in 1824, Waddington 'could never have been fairly charged with any tendency to asceticism, but rather the reverse' (Klottrup, 3). His dinners were abundant and convivial and he enjoyed asking Puseyite undergraduates to dine on Ash Wednesday. He was a keen advocate of education for children and adults and gave generously to support local schools. Jovial and well intentioned, he was long remembered in Durham with affection. 


@@@@@


doc= 28374


Waddington, John (1810-1880), Congregational minister and historian, born at Leeds on 10 December 1810, was the son of George and Elizabeth Waddington. As a boy he was deeply religious and began to preach at the age of fifteen. He trained for the ministry at Airedale College under William Vint from 1830 to 1833 and was ordained and inducted as minister of the Congregational church in Orchard Street, Stockport, on 23 May 1833: here he pioneered the introduction of Sunday schools to his own and other Congregational churches. He also assisted in a government inquiry into distress in the town which had been hard hit in the 'hungry forties': a blue book followed. In 1846 Waddington moved to Union Street Chapel, Southwark, which was then in dire straits and faced with possible dissolution. The crisis was overcome, and in 1864 a new building was opened as a memorial to the Pilgrim Fathers, some of whom had come from this historic church. These associations stimulated Waddington's interest in church history, especially that of his own denomination, to which he now gave thirty years' intensive study. In 1854 he published 'John Penry, the Pilgrim Martyr', and in 1861 a larger work on Congregational martyrs. In 1862 an essay on Congregational church history from the Reformation to 1662 won him a special prize from the Congregational Union. In 1866 he wrote the history of his own church, and in 1869 he began his great five-volume 'Congregational History' which was completed in 1880. For this he received an honorary DD from the University of Williamstown, USA. The 'History' relates chronologically the story of English Congregationalism from 1200 to the author's own day, the last volume dealing with the 1850-80 period. Though now largely redundant it was a pioneering venture and served as a source book for a generation or more of Congregational historians. 
Apart from his historical works Waddington wrote 'Emmaus, or, Communion with the Saviour at Eventide' (1846), 'The American Crisis in Relation to Slavery' (1862), 'The Track of the Hidden Church' (1863), and a number of smaller works. He also edited Josiah Basset's autobiography, 'The Life of a Vagrant' (1850). Waddington was a rather shy and self-effacing man, nervous and intense in speech. Apart from his work as a historian he was not prominent within his denomination. He died at his house in Surrey Square, Old Kent Road, London, on 24 September 1880. He was apparently unmarried. 


@@@@@


doc= 28375


Waddington, Samuel Ferrand (b. 1759, d. in or after 1824), radical, was born at Walkeringham, Nottinghamshire, on 18 May 1759, the son of Joshua Waddington (1709/10-1781), vicar of Walkeringham, and his wife, Ann, daughter of Thomas Ferrand, vicar of Bingley. He was educated at a German university and trained for a life in commerce. He engaged in the hop trade, and resided near Tonbridge, Kent. He married, at Margate on 20 April 1788, Sarah, 'nee' Jarvis, with whom he had at least eight children. 
On the outbreak of the French Revolution Waddington strongly espoused the cause of the republicans, and in 1795 was chairman of several meetings in London held for the purpose of petitioning the crown and parliament to make peace with France. In consequence of his views he was expelled from the Surrey troop of light horse. In 1796 he attacked Edmund Burke in a pamphlet, 'Remarks on Mr Burke's two letters 'on the proposals for peace with the regicide Directory of France'', censuring him for applying the term 'regicide' to the Directory. In 1800 he was brought to trial for forestalling hops, having entered into contracts with hop growers in Kent and Worcestershire to buy up large quantities of their produce, with a view to creating a scarcity. Waddington believed that he had committed no crime, as the statutes against forestalling, regrating, and engrossing had been repealed in 1772. Proceedings against him were heard in the court of king's bench, where the lord chief justice, Lord Kenyon, in particular, reaffirmed the criminality of such activities. Kenyon and others of the judges regarded Waddington as a dangerous radical who was likely to welcome the popular discontent aroused by shortages of basic commodities. Early in 1801 he was sentenced to one month's imprisonment and a fine of $500 for the Worcestershire offence, followed by another period of three months in prison and a fine of $500 for his trading in Kent. In all he spent twenty-seven weeks in the king's bench gaol. He wrote a number of pamphlets during his trial, attacking the court and depicting the hop merchants and brewers bringing the prosecution as themselves monopolists, who exploited the hop growers. The growers celebrated his eventual release from imprisonment. He seems to have been financially ruined by the legal cost of his trials, and between 1811 and 1814 petitioned the prince of Wales and members of the government, seeking employment in the customs service to alleviate his plight (Hay, 150n). Labelled by satirists as Little Waddington on account of his being only 4 feet 2 inches tall, he lived in Southwark and in Kent until 1812, when he published 'An Address to the People of the United Kingdom', which he had written under the pseudonym Algernon Sydney. He was a member of the Union for Parliamentary Reform, set up in the same year, the later Committee of Two Hundred, and stood trial in 1820 for his support of the soldiers who mutinied during the Queen Caroline affair. He was tried in 1822 for publishing blasphemous literature from a shop in the Strand, London. By early 1824 he was reportedly employed as the manager of a gang of placard bearers advertising the wares of a City of London coal merchant. Details of Waddington's death are unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 28376


Wade, Sir Claude Martine (1794-1861), army officer in the East India Company, son of Lieutenant-Colonel Joseph Wade (died 12 Sept 1807), Bengal army, from Ireland, and his wife, Maria Anne (1774/5-1863), eldest daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel Robert Ross RM, was born in Bengal on 3 April 1794. He was named after General Claude Martine, the French soldier of fortune, a friend of his father. Wade was appointed a cadet in the Bengal service in 1809, and immediately went to India. On arrival he joined the institution at Barasat, near Calcutta, where cadets were instructed in Indian languages and military duties. After the shortest possible period -- six months -- Wade passed out, receiving the sword of honour. 
After serving with the 1st battalion 15th regiment of native infantry as a cadet, Wade was commissioned ensign in the 45th regiment of native infantry on 20 July 1812. With the 45th he served in 1813 in a field force on the Gwalior frontier, and was afterwards stationed at the cantonment of Kunch. Through the unhealthiness of the station he presently found himself in command of his own corps and of a detachment of artillery and acquitted himself successfully. 
Wade was promoted lieutenant on 21 October 1815, and served during that year in operations caused by aggressive movements of the forces of Sindhia and Holkar against Bhopal, which was friendly to the British government. From 1816 to 1819 he served in the Pindari campaigns, being also employed with the 5th division, under General Sir J. W. Adams, at the siege and capture of the fortified town of Chanda. At the end of hostilities in 1819 he was stationed at Lucknow. 
In 1820-21 Wade officiated as brigade major to the troops in Oudh, and in 1822 he was deputed on political duty to Calcutta, as bearer of a letter from the king of Oudh to the governor-general. He was next appointed an extra assistant in the office of the surveyor-general of India, and completed the examination, arrangement, and analysis of the many maps and surveys long accumulated there. So satisfied was the governor-general, Lord Hastings, with his performance that he wanted to appoint him to the political department, and recommended him to his temporary successor, John Adam. 
Adam appointed Wade on 28 February 1823 to the office of political assistant at Ludhiana, an important post as there was no regular British representative in the Punjab proper and from Ludhiana, in British-controlled territory, were maintained British relations with Maharaja Ranjit Singh (1780-1839), ruler of the powerful Lahore-based Sikh Punjab state with its Westernized army. Wade's principal duty was at first the charge of Shah Shuja-ul-Mulk, the exiled ruler of Afghanistan. Shortly after his appointment important negotiations devolved on him, as the alarm and excitement caused in India by the ill success of British early operations in Burma endangered the northern frontier. Ranjit Singh, then at the height of his power, suspended his operations against the Afghans, and, assembling his whole force about Lahore, was apparently ready to avail himself of any British reverse by joining the insurgent raja of Bharatpur and other rulers disaffected from the British government. Wade, promoted captain on 13 May 1825, was in constant communication with Ranjit Singh throughout this critical period, and gradually succeeded in convincing him of the power and sincerity of the British government. In 1826 the end of the First Anglo-Burmese War and the capture of Bharatpur convinced Ranjit of British ascendancy; and in 1827 Wade conducted a complimentary mission from Ranjit Singh to the governor-general, Lord Amherst, who in return sent presents by Wade's hand to the court of Amritsar. Amherst shortly afterwards (autumn of 1827) entrusted him with responsibility for dealings with Ranjit. Wade did this for seventeen years, and was largely instrumental in maintaining harmony between the British and the Sikh governments; he gained Ranjit's confidence such as to be permitted freely to visit the Punjab at a time when it was closed to British officials. Wade was a short, fat man fond of eating and sleeping; prickly, capable, and knowledgeable, he became an acknowledged expert on the Punjab and Afghanistan, and influential in shaping British policy in the north-west. In 1831 he was instructed to correspond directly with the governor-general, and in 1832 was given the title of political agent, Ludhiana. He was instrumental in arranging the historic interview at Rupar in October 1832 between Ranjit Singh and Lord William Henry Cavendish-Bentinck, an important event. 
In 1833 Wade mishandled and delayed negotiations for Bentinck with Ranjit, who was very suspicious, on the Indus navigation: an agreement was signed in August 1833. He built up a network of unofficial agents in Tibet, Peshawar, Kabul, Kandahar, Herat, and Bahawalpur, and in 1835 was put in charge of all political relations with Lahore and the states beyond the Indus. In 1837 he advised Lord Auckland to give priority to alliance with the Punjab rather than with Afghanistan. The success of Wade's diplomatic dealings with Ranjit Singh was repeatedly officially acknowledged by governors-general, but he received no other official reward. However, he was probably corrupt and gained illicitly. 
Wade opposed the policy of uniting Afghanistan, arguing that it would 'play into the hands of our rivals and... deprive ourselves... of the powerful means which we have in reserve of controlling the present rulers of Afghanistan' (Macrory, 66-7). However, the determination of the British government to depose Amir Dost Muhammad Khan from Afghanistan and to replace him by the exiled shah, Shuja-ul-Mulk, gave Wade his opportunity. The main advance of the invading army on Kabul was to be made through the Bolan Pass, and thence through southern Afghanistan; but it was decided to make a converging attack through the Punjab and the Khyber Pass. This subsidiary movement was entrusted to Wade, who was promoted major on 28 June 1838, and was given the local rank of lieutenant-colonel, 'while serving beyond the Indus', on 29 September of the same year. Arriving at Peshawar, his base, in March 1839, he set to work energetically to collect and organize an army, and negotiate with the various Afridi groups of the Khyber region, whom it was desired to propitiate. Wade was assisted by a small but capable staff of eleven officers, of whom the most distinguished were Lieutenant Frederick Mackeson, Dr Percival Barton Lord, and Lieutenant Joseph Davey Cunningham. He first attempted to win over the Afridis, but, though partially successful, he eventually found it impossible to satisfy the greed of all parties, and was obliged to try to force the Khyber Pass. His troops were most unpromising as regards discipline, though individually of good fighting material. They consisted of 5000 Punjabi Muslims from Ranjit Singh's regular army, about 4000 of Shah Shuja's untrustworthy Afghan levies (led by Shazadeh Muhammad Timur), and 380 of the company's regular troops. 
The object of Wade's operations being to aid the advance of the army of the Indus by compelling Dost Muhammad Khan to divide his forces, it was necessary to penetrate the Khyber Pass as early as possible. So he attacked Fort Ali Masjid on 22 July 1839, little over four months from when the formation of his force was begun. The fall of Ghazni compelled Dost Muhammad to recall his son Muhammad Akbar Khan from Jalalabad, and thus deprived the Afridis of Afghan assistance. Despite the enemy's numerical superiority, Wade captured Ali Masjid after four days' fighting; and, distributing his Afghan levies in positions commanding the road to Kabul, he continued his march to the Afghan capital, which he shortly afterwards entered unopposed at the head of the Sikh contingent. For his success Wade was promoted lieutenant-colonel, and awarded a knighthood (11 December 1839), a CB on the same day, and the Durani order (1st class). Lord Auckland stated in an official dispatch that 'it was not upon record that the celebrated Khaibar Pass had ever previously been forced'. 
After the fall of Kabul and the flight of Dost Muhammad Khan, Wade returned to resume his political duties in India, and soon after, at the beginning of 1840, was removed from his Ludhiana post at the request of the Sikhs, who complained of his behaviour. From 31 March 1840 until his retirement on 1 May 1844 he was resident at Indore, an important post. During his service in Malwa, Wade, among other achievements, effected the settlement of the Bhil people, who at that period gave much trouble; and throughout his long political employment he was successful in dealing peacefully with the most turbulent peoples. 
When he left India Wade had served continuously there since 1809, longer than any of his contemporaries except Lord Metcalfe. Wade married at Bath on 7 August 1845 Jane Selina, eldest daughter of Captain Thomas Nicholl (1796-1842), Bengal horse artillery, distinguished by his gallant services in Afghanistan, and killed in action in the Jagdalak Pass on 12 January 1842, during the disastrous retreat from Kabul. 
From his retirement on the Isle of Wight, in 1848 Wade opposed British annexation of the Punjab. He was promoted colonel on 28 November 1854. He died at 16 Queen Square, Bath, on 21 October 1861. His widow married in 1864 Dr Edward Deane MacDermot of Bath. His only son, Claude FitzRoy Wade (1849-1917), was a Middle Temple barrister and associate of the north-eastern circuit. 


