@@@@@


doc= 2783


Boit, Charles (1662-1727), miniature painter, was born on 10 August 1662 in Stockholm, the son of Charles Boit, a French silk merchant and salt manufacturer, and his wife, Marie, daughter of Noak Creveleur of Calais, France. Boit served an apprenticeship to a goldsmith in Stockholm from 1677 to 1682 and then spent three months in Paris before heading to Goteborg. There he married his first wife, 'nee' Flitzberg, with whom he had a daughter who died in infancy. 
By the time that Boit had returned to Stockholm, in 1685, he had become fully versed in the French art of enamelling. Reynolds suggests exposure to the work of Jean Petitot and Jacques Bordier in Paris and a previous connection with Pierre Signac, a French enamellist working at the Swedish court, as important early influences. Boit came to England in 1687 and soon became the protege of the Swedish artist Michael Dahl, some of whose portraits, like those of Godfrey Kneller, he copied in miniature. He also worked from life and appears to have travelled around the country at this early stage of his career in search of work. Two of his earliest miniatures, of Sir Gervase and Lady Scrope (1693), were painted in Lincoln. He also worked in Coventry at about this time teaching drawing to Humfrey Wanley, library-keeper to Robert Harley, earl of Oxford, one of Boit's most influential patrons. The hallmark of his style, already distinctive at this early stage, was the application of rich colours to the enamel with very smoothly blended brushstrokes which became invisible on firing. He usually signed his work on the reverse 'C. Boit pinxit' and often with the initials C. B. in monogram on the obverse. Boit's life was beset by crises and Walpole records the anecdote that, during his travels, he was unjustly imprisoned for conducting an affair with one of his pupils. This does not seem to have impeded his success for on his return to London he was appointed court enameller to William III (1696). 
Boit left England to visit the Netherlands (1699), Dusseldorf (1700), and Vienna (1700-03). In Vienna he produced his most impressive work to date, a huge enamel of Emperor Leopold I and his family, measuring 38 cm by 46 (Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna). Though this miniature was flawed by severe cracks Boit undertook an even more ambitious commission for Queen Anne on his return to England in 1703: an allegorical enamel, measuring approximately 60 cm by 40, commemorating the battle of Blenheim. Boit's assistant, Otto Peterson, gave Vertue a detailed account of the technical and financial difficulties that dogged the project over almost ten years. Eventually, in 1714, Boit was asked to return the money that had been invested in the failed scheme and he was subsequently forced to flee in debt to France. He visited Dresden in 1719-20 but settled in Paris and at first appears to have prospered, receiving a salary of $250 per annum and lodgings from the king according to Vertue. He was made an 'agree' of the Academie Royale and enjoyed the patronage of Peter the Great, tsar of Russia, whom he had first encountered in London in 1698, and of the regent, the duke of Orleans. However, he was once again in debt by the time of his death, at his lodgings in the rue de la Petit-Bourbon, quartier du Luxembourg, Paris, on 6 February 1727. He left three children by his second marriage, to Anne-Marguerite Williart, who predeceased him: Alexandre ('b'. 'c'.1712), Anne ('b'. 'c'.1714), and Charlotte ('b'. 'c'.1720). 
Examples of Boit's English work can be seen in the Victoria and Albert Museum and the National Portrait Gallery, London, and in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford. Of his largest surviving enamels one represents Queen Anne and Prince George of Denmark (1706; Royal Collection), another John Manners, second duke of Rutland ('c'.1714; Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge). Examples of Boit's work in France can be seen in the Musee du Louvre, Paris, and in the Musee Conde, Chantilly; other enamels are in the National Museum, Stockholm, and the Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam. A portrait of Boit, engraved by A. Bannerman, was published in Walpole's 'Anecdotes of Painting in England' (1763). His career was important not only for the transcendence that it gave enamel painting in England over the more traditional method of painting miniatures in watercolour on vellum but also for the transmission of the enamelling skills he had learned to his pupils Otto Peterson, John Milward, and Christian Frederick Zincke. 


@@@@@


doc= 2784


Boitard, Louis-Philippe (fl. 1733-1767), engraver and designer, was the son of Francois Boitard (1667-1719), designer. Louis-Philippe Boitard's place of birth is unknown although he was generally considered to be a Frenchman: his father, born in France, was based in London from at least 1709 to 1712 but probably died in Amsterdam. Francois Boitard was employed by Jacob Tonson to illustrate his editions of Shakespeare and the plays of Beaumont and Fletcher. He drew in the style of Raymond Lafage and, according to Horace Walpole, he made frequent trips to Holland to buy curiosities for the renowned collector Richard Mead. Louis-Philippe Boitard first attracted notice from George Vertue in 1742: 'Boitard engraver, lately come from Paris -- some merit -- good stock of assurance &c' (Vertue, 'Note books'). In fact Louis Boitard's earliest known work, 'drawn from the Life at London April 1733', was a print of an 8-foot German, so it would appear that he had been working in London for some years before Vertue noticed his presence. Six plates that he had engraved after Canaletto for the fan painter Joseph Baudin were published in April 1736; he designed the frontispiece to George Lillo's 'London Merchant' in 1737, and he engraved and published the 'Inside of the Pantheon', after a painting by Pannini in the collection of Lord James Cavendish, in 1738. Shortly after this Boitard visited France: in 1742 several sets of prints of birds, animals, hunting scenes, and Turkish ambassadors that he had engraved were published in Paris by the printseller Michel Odieuvre. It would seem that George Vertue first noticed him on his return. In 1744 Boitard advertised in the 'Mercure de France' and it seems that he may have envisaged a cosmopolitan career like his father's. However, most of his work was done in London. During the 1740s he worked as a journeyman in the studio of the engraver William Henry Toms, where the hard-working John Boydell remarked disdainfully that 'Boitard had such a habit of 'taking snuff' that He was perpetually having recourse to His Box and actually lost Hours every day from the indulgence of this practice' (Farington, 'Diary', 4.1415). In 1747, however, Boitard supplied forty-one large plates for Joseph Spence's 'Polymetis'. He had also established himself by then as a designer (more rarely engraver) of satirical prints, illustrations to books, topical and theatrical portraits, watch-papers, and anatomical prints. A number of political satires, including several mocking the duke of Cumberland, have also been attributed to his hand. He worked on John and Paul Knapton's English edition of Albinus (1747- ) and Walpole says that he was also employed by Dr Woodward and Dr Douglas on other anatomical figures. Walpole further reveals that he married an Englishwoman and that they had a son and a daughter. In 1753-4 he supplied designs, which were engraved by Robert Hancock, to the Battersea enamel factory, and his designs were also transferred to Worcester porcelain. He engraved the illustrations to Paltock's 'Peter Wilkins' (1750), the 'Scribleriad' of Richard Owen Cambridge (1751), and Cambridge's 'Description of Ranelagh Rotundo and Gardens' (1762). His social satires are lively and interesting, preoccupied with a critique of luxury, the consumption of French goods, and the riotous confrontation of poverty with affluence. A number of surviving sketches and drawings record his observant fascination with the street life of the metropolis. For Robert Sayer he produced 'The cries of London, for the year 1766, being a collection of humorous characters in 86 prints, done under the direction of Mr. Boitard'. His last recorded work was for James Anderson's 'The Constitutions of the Antient and Honourable Fraternity of Free and Accepted Masons' (1767). His illustrations to two earlier books on freemasonry suggest that he might possibly have been a mason himself. The date of Boitard's death is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 2785


Bokenham, Osbern (b. 1392/3, d. in or after 1464), poet and Augustinian friar, was born on 6 October 1393, or possibly 1392. He was a friar at the convent of Stoke by Clare in Suffolk. Most of the little that is known about his life is derived from his best-known and most substantial work, 'Legendys of Hooly Wummen'. There he ends his life of St Faith by remarking that he was born on her feast day, and in the life of St Margaret of Antioch (begun on 7 September 1443) he says that his mortal thread has lasted 'ful yerys fyfty'. His birthplace was, he says, 'even by' an 'old priory of black canons': it was most probably Old Buckenham (Bokenham) in Norfolk, just north of the Suffolk border. He says himself that he was an Augustinian friar, and that he brought his translation of the life of St Margaret back to Clare. The 'explicit' in the manuscript of the 'Legendys' describes the translator as 'a doctor of dyuinite clepyd Osbern Bokenham frere austin of the convent of Stokeclare' (and a later hand has added 'a suffolk man'). His degree of DTh may have been obtained at Cambridge. He seems to take a quiet pride in being 'a Suffolk man' -- he ends an apology for his lack of rhetorical skill with the words: '
perfore spekyn & wrytyn I wyl pleynly 

Aftyr pe language of Suthfolk speche; 

And who-so-euere lyke not per-by, 

Whereeuyr he lyst he bettyr do seche. 
(Bokenham, 'Legendys', 111, ll.4063-6)' Yet he was something of a traveller, it seems. He was in Italy at least twice. In 1423 he was granted permission to visit by the prior-general, and he was there again in 1438 -- the date is established by his remark in the prologue (begun in September 1443) that five years earlier he had been in Venice. On this occasion ('the laste tyme I was in Itayle') he learned the story of St Margaret and her relics. On his way back from Rome he was delayed by heavy rain at Montefiascone ('Mownt Flask'), where he visited the virgin. (Relics of St Margaret had been brought from the East to this part of Italy in the twelfth century, and were later taken to Venice.) Elsewhere in the 'Legendys' he tells us that he went on pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela (1445). That his name continues to appear in the registers of the order in 1461, 1463, and 1464, twice as one of the vicars-general for the provincial chapter, disproves the earlier belief that he died in 1447. Bokenham seems to have been widely read, especially in hagiographical literature. He refers in passing (usually in asseverations of his lack of eloquence) to a few ancient authors, and several times expresses admiration for the work of Chaucer and Gower, 'and now' Lydgate. He also mentions John Capgrave's 'St Katharine'. 

'Legendys of Hooly Wummen' survives in one manuscript, BL, Arundel MS 327 (copied in Cambridge in 1447 on the instructions of his 'son' Friar Thomas Burgh, probably a member of the convent at Cambridge), which was composed between 7 September 1443 and 1447. It is an ambitious work of 10,616 lines, and relates thirteen legends (adapted from various Latin sources), a number of them dedicated to a special friend and patron, usually from the area around Clare: St Margaret (written at the request of Thomas Burgh); St Anne (for Katherine Denston and her husband, John, of Melford, who had a daughter of that name); St Christina; the 11,000 virgins; St Faith; St Agnes; St Dorothy (for John Hunt and his wife, Isabel); St Mary Magdalen (at the request -- on twelfth night 1445 -- of Lady Isabel Bourchier, countess of Eu, the sister of the duke of York); St Katherine (for Katherine Howard, probably the wife of John Howard of Stoke Neyland near Clare, who later became duke of Norfolk); St Cecilia; St Agatha (for Agatha Flegge); St Lucy; and St Elizabeth (at the request of Lady Elizabeth de Vere, countess of Oxford, who was related to John Howard). The poem shows that Bokenham was a noted local writer and offers a glimpse into East Anglian patronage of devotional literature, and it has other points of interest -- as a collection of the lives of women saints (although it is not clear that it was consciously planned as such), as an example of translation and adaptation of sources, and as a hagiographical work. In general literary historians have not rated it highly, except for its interesting and attractive personal passages. However it is an eloquent work, which often does justice to the marvels of the legends. 
A number of other works can be attributed to Bokenham with some confidence. The 'Mappula Angliae' (probably composed before 1445, surviving in BL, Harley MS 4011) is a prose translation of the section on England in Higden's 'Polychronicon'. The initial letters of the chapters spell out Bokenham's name. He is probably the author of a translation into long unrhymed lines of part of Claudian's 'De consulatu Stilichonis' (BL, Add. MS 11814) made at Clare in 1445, and dedicated to the duke of York. A dialogue 'betwix a Seculer... and a Frere', which demonstrates 'the lyneal descent of the lordis of the honoure of Clare' from 1248 to 1456, a genealogy of the house of York in both Latin and English verse preserved by Dugdale (Dugdale, 'Monasticon', 6.1600) has been attributed to him on stylistic grounds, and would again suggest strongly Yorkist connections. If he is the Bokenhamus of the Latin 'Liber de angelis, annuli characteribus et imaginibus planetarum', a tract on astrology in CUL, MS Dd.9.45, it would indicate that he also had a scientific interest. There are two clear references to works that have been lost. In the 'Mappula Angliae' he speaks of 'the englishe boke the which I have compiled of legenda aurea and of other famous legendes at the instaunce of my specialle frendis' (mentioning specifically Ceadda, Felix, Edward, Oswald, and 'many oper seyntis of Englond' ('Mappula', ed. Horstmann, 6) to which his translation is to provide a geographical guide. It has been claimed that a remark in his legend of St Anne indicates that he wrote a Latin poem in praise of the Virgin Mary. He refers the reader to Lydgate's English 'Life of Our Lady' and to a Latin work in ten books 'Of pe Weddynge Dytees', although he does not there claim that as his. But at the end of the legend he does speak of a Latin poem he had composed: he remarks that Anne had three daughters all called Mary: '
but wheper be oon husbonde or ellys be thre, 

At pis tyme I wil not determyne, 

For in pis mater what best plesyth me 

I haue as I can declaryd in latyn 

In balaade-ryme. 
(Bokenham, 'Legendys', 57, ll. 2078-82)' This could have been a poem on the childhood of Mary or a life of St Anne. 


@@@@@


doc= 2786


Buckingham, John (c.1320-1399), administrator and bishop of Lincoln, was born on 23 June about 1320; his family was of much less than gentry rank. Earliest references link him to Thomas Beauchamp, earl of Warwick (died 1369). Buckingham's arms, gules a cross bottonny or, were closely based on the Beauchamp arms, and he was instituted to both Compton Murdack prebend in St Mary's College, Warwick, in 1344, and to Sutton Coldfield rectory in 1346 at Warwick's presentation. In April 1347 Warwick, the hereditary chamberlain, appointed him deputy chamberlain of the king's exchequer of receipt, and thereafter Buckingham's rise in royal service was steady; on 14 February 1350 he was appointed keeper of the great wardrobe, on 5 January 1353 controller of the wardrobe, and keeper of the wardrobe from 23 February 1353 to 26 February 1357; on 4 April 1357 he became an exchequer baron. With Robert Herle, another Beauchamp adherent, Buckingham was co-lieutenant of Brittany for a year from 29 September 1358, the only clerk to be appointed lieutenant of a duchy during the Hundred Years' War. When Edward III led an expedition to France in the autumn of 1359 Buckingham became keeper of the privy seal of the regent, Thomas of Woodstock (died 1397), his duties running from 28 October for 204 days. On 1 July 1360 he was promoted keeper of the king's privy seal and continued in this position until 9 June 1363. Buckingham thus held a senior government position during the negotiations leading to the treaty of Bretigny, and was present at Calais on 24 October 1360 to witness ratification of the treaty. 
Meanwhile, Buckingham's ecclesiastical career was prospering. An acolyte by 1344, he was ordained priest by the bishop of Worcester in 1346, by virtue of a letter dimissory from the bishop of Lichfield. In 1348 he was presented to Olney church, Buckinghamshire, by Warwick's son-in-law Ralph Basset, and by Edward III to a prebend in St Stephen's College, Westminster. In 1349 he was briefly archdeacon of Nottingham but resigned in November, preparatory to promotion to the deanship of Lichfield in early 1350, in which post he proved energetic and conscientious. In 1351, following a dispute over prebends in Lincoln Cathedral, he obtained that of Gretton. His election as bishop of Ely during the autumn of 1361 was set aside by the provision of Simon Langham (died 1376) on 10 January following; Buckingham, apparently consoled at first by promotion to several lucrative prebends, was subsequently elected bishop of the major see of Lincoln, by 4 October 1362, in succession to John Gynewell. However, Urban V ('r'. 1362-70) was unwilling to confirm the election until Buckingham had been examined to prove his educational fitness for the position; this examination, along with the support of both Edward III and the captive Jean, king of France, was successful in persuading the pope of Buckingham's suitability. He was provided on 5 April 1363 and consecrated at Wargrave, Berkshire, on 25 June, two days after receiving his temporalities from the king. 
After becoming bishop of Lincoln, Buckingham ceased at once to hold any formal position in government or to undertake diplomatic missions. He was replaced as keeper of the privy seal on 10 June 1363. His itinerary shows that he was a resident, working diocesan whose favourite residence was Lyddington, Rutland; most journeys outside the diocese can be accounted for by attendance at parliament or convocation. Nevertheless, Edward III appointed him an executor on 7 October 1376. Granted life exemption from attending parliament on account of age and infirmity in 1384, he attended two later parliaments in 1390 and 1394. From autumn 1390 he became much less active, staying almost entirely at his three Lincolnshire manors, and he remained continuously at Stow Park, Lincolnshire, for six months during the winter of 1395-6. 
Buckingham was a strong supporter of the Carthusian order. He founded a cell in both the London and the Coventry charterhouses, and was a visitor to (in August 1386), and benefactor of, the Hull charterhouse. At Lincoln he left his mark on two works undertaken in his episcopate, the cathedral choir stalls and the entrance range of the vicars' court, both decorated with his arms. He is, however, best known as the bishop in whose diocese John Wyclif (died 1384) lived and wrote, and in which Lollardy first took root. As a man without university education, and the bishop who in 1367 had seen episcopal authority over Oxford finally quashed by the papacy, Buckingham was in no position to discipline members of the university, but he took action against a number of other heretics, notably William Swinderby of Leicester, John Corringham, vicar of Diddington, Huntingdonshire, Thomas Compworth of Thrupp, Oxfordshire, Sir Thomas Latimer, lord of Braybrooke, Northamptonshire, and the Lollards of Northampton, especially the anchoress Anna Palmer. He attended the Blackfriars Council in May 1382, where the issue of heresy was taken firmly in hand. Beset on one side by heresy, Buckingham battled on the other against superstition, especially in Lincolnshire; the veneration of trees and the apparent substitution of bacon and eggs for the elements at Easter mass were among his concerns. 
Walsingham's assertion that Buckingham was a political ally of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, is unsubstantiated; the two had extensive contacts but only of a formal nature. Both were executors of Edward III's will and trustees of that property which eventually came to three religious houses, notably the abbey of St Mary Graces, London. Buckingham, the last surviving trustee, on 1 March 1399 released to St Mary Graces his rights in seven Kentish and two Surrey manors. 
By then Buckingham had only a short time to live. He was not permitted to end his days at Lincoln, for on 27 February 1398 he was translated to the see of Coventry and Lichfield to make way for the promotion of Henry Beaufort (died 1447) to Lincoln. Walsingham regarded the move as the responsibility of Beaufort's father, John of Gaunt. But Buckingham refused to move to Lichfield, and continued to rule Lincoln diocese until 12 July 1398. His movements then are obscure until around 25 August, by when he had arrived at Canterbury, where he spent the last few months of his life in Meister Omers, a house (still standing) which was part of the infirmary of Christ Church Priory. He died on 10 March 1399. His will, dated 9 February 1399, directed his burial in Canterbury Cathedral where his damaged memorial brass was seen by William Somner before 1640. Buckingham died a wealthy man. Precise bequests totalled upwards of $530, and his executors gave Canterbury Cathedral a further $1200 to found a chantry for his soul. Though he evidently had a large collection of vestments (but only declared two books, both psalters), Buckingham nevertheless directed that his funeral was to be conducted without worldly pomp. 


@@@@@


doc= 2787


Bolckow, Henry William Ferdinand (1806-1878), ironmaster, was born at Sulten, Mecklenburg, Germany, on 8 December 1806, the son of Heinrich Bolckow, of Varchow, Mecklenburg, and his wife, Caroline Dussher. He had at least five sisters and a brother. About 1821 his parents placed him in a merchant's office at Rostock. He made the acquaintance there of Christian Allhusen, who soon migrated to Newcastle upon Tyne, where, in 1827, Bolckow joined him in a corn merchant's business. After twelve years of dealings Bolckow had accumulated more than $40,000; he then severed his partnership in Newcastle, and instead entered into one with a practical ironmaker, John Vaughan. Bolckow became naturalized in 1841, and that year he and Vaughan opened an iron and engineering works on the Tees at the small coal-shipping port of Middlesbrough. In 1846 they started blast furnaces to produce iron at Witton Park in co. Durham, and in 1850 Vaughan began to exploit the Cleveland ironstone near to Middlesbrough. By 1855 the partners had a dozen blast furnaces making iron on Teesside and the spectacular growth of the district's industry and population was proceeding: from 8000 in 1851, the population of Middlesbrough increased to 40,000 in 1871. 
The success of the partners' business enabled them to multiply their possessions: besides ironworks, they acquired collieries, limestone quarries, additional ironstone workings, and brickfields. Middlesbrough received a charter of incorporation in 1853 and Bolckow was elected the first mayor. He married Miriam Hay 'nee' Poole, widow of C. Hay, about 1840, but she died in 1842. In 1851 he married Harriet, the only daughter of James Farrar of Halifax. She died on 13 August 1890. 
In 1864 the partnership of Bolckow and Vaughan was formed into a limited liability company with a capital of $2,500,000, Bolckow becoming chairman of the company on 1 January 1865. In 1868 he presented to the inhabitants of Middlesbrough the Albert Park, at a cost of more than $20,000. In the following year he spent $7000 in the erection of the St Hilda's schools. When the town was granted parliamentary representation Bolckow was unopposedly elected the first member on 16 November 1868, and held that position until his death. In the election of 1874, when he was returned as a Liberal, he was opposed. 
Bolckow built up a fine collection of pictures, mainly by contemporary artists. A JP, and sometime deputy lieutenant for the North Riding of Yorkshire, he was also a knight of the order of the Wendish Crown. He died at Ramsgate, Kent, on 18 June 1878, and was buried in Marton churchyard, near Middlesbrough, on 22 June. He left an estate valued at under $800,000. The major part of this passed to a nephew, Carl F. H. Bolckow, who assumed the chairmanship of Bolckow, Vaughan & Co. Ltd. One of his sisters, who predeceased him, was the wife of the Teesside ironmaster W. R. I. Hopkins. 


@@@@@


doc= 2788


Henry Bold (d. 1677) graduated BD from Christ Church, Oxford, on 5 July 1664, while chaplain to the earl of Arlington, by whose influence he subsequently became a fellow of Eton College and chanter in Exeter Cathedral. Wood reports that he died at Montpellier in late September or early October 1677. 


@@@@@


doc= 2789


Bold, Henry (1627-1683), poet, was born in Hampshire, the fourth son of Captain William Bold of Newstead in Hampshire, a descendant of the ancient Lancashire family of Bold of Bold Hall. He was educated at Winchester College, before proceeding to New College, Oxford, where he was elected a probationer fellow in or about 1645. From this position he was removed three years later by the parliamentary visitors, later settling in London and becoming a member of the examiner's office in the court of chancery. 

'Wit a Sporting in a Pleasant Grove of New Fancies' (1657) was the first work to appear under Bold's initials but the volume is a comprehensive piracy. The portrait placed before the title-page, for example, professes to represent Bold but in fact depicts Christian Ravus, or Ravius, whose likeness had originally prefixed his 'Discourse of the Oriental Tongues' (1649). The text itself also appropriates the work of others. Much of the first fifty pages is taken 'verbatim', but in a reordered sequence, from the secular section of Thomas Beedome's 'Poems Divine and Humane' (1641); Robert Herrick's 'Hesperides' (1648) is the source for many more items scattered throughout the rest of the volume. In making those poems his own, Bold regularizes Beedome's spelling and changes the names of the addressees (and, thus, the titles), lineation, and even the wording of Herrick's verse. 
Bold's second collection was 'Poems Lyrique, Macaronique, Heroique, &c.' (1664), dedicated to Colonel the Hon. Henry Wallop, of Farley Wallop in Hampshire. The first half is devoted to lyric verse self-consciously Cavalier in its idiom '
(Tush! Love or say thou 'wilt not'


I'me 'content!'


'Tis, but an 'hour', idely 'spent.') 
('Song XXVIII', p. 38)' The second half contains a more various selection of occasional verse and longer poems, as well as a number of epitaphs, elegies, and translations from Latin, and, further, a series of poems on the Restoration first published as separate pamphlets or single sheets and including 'To his Sacred Majesty Charles the Second, at his Happy Return' (1660), 'On the Thunder Happening after the Solemnity of the Coronation' (1661), and 'Satyr on the Adulterate Coyn Inscribed the Common-Wealth, &c.' (1661). The volume concludes with the words 'Expect the second Part' (p. 236), but no second part is known; the final title to be published under Bold's name was 'Latine Songs, with their English, and Poems' (1685), a posthumous gathering of the poet's papers collated by his brother William. The collection offers Latin versions of a number of English songs in facing-page translations, including a spirited run through 'Chevy Chace' composed at the request of the bishop of London, and an elegant rendering of Suckling's song 'Why so pale and wan, fond lover?'. The contents of the rest of the volume are similar in both matter and manner to the work Bold published during the Restoration. 'Song XXIV: an Ode', for instance, is a simple statement of first principles: '
The Royal line, 

Heaven doth dispose of. 'Tis not theirs or mine, 

But his by whom Kings Rule, and are Divine. 
(p. 108)' Bold died in Chancery Lane on 23 October 1683 and was buried at West Twyford, near Acton. 
Another 


@@@@@


doc= 2790


Bold, John (1679-1751), Church of England clergyman, was born at Laughton, near Welford, Leicestershire, the son of John Bold, also an Anglican clergyman. Educated first of all at a school in Kibworth Beauchamp, he entered St John's College, Cambridge, in 1695, and received his BA in 1699. He returned to Leicestershire and was master of a small school at Hinckley from 1698 to 1732 (which brought him an annual salary of $10). He was ordained deacon in 1701, became a priest in 1703, and was curate of Stoney Stanton, near Hinckley ($30 p.a.), from May 1702 until his death. 
Bold wholly devoted himself to the religious welfare of his parishioners, and, although without private means, lived frugally and was able out of his small income to help parishioners in need, and to make several charitable bequests at his death. 
Bold was the author of three pious works: 'The Sin and Danger of Neglecting the Public Service of the Church', which appeared in 1745, and was frequently reissued by SPCK; 'Religion the most Delightful Employment'; and another which praised the pleasures of holy living, 'The Duty of Worthy Communicating Recommended and Explained'. Bold died on 29 October 1751, and was buried in the churchyard at Stoney Stanton. 


@@@@@


doc= 2791


Bold, Samuel (1648x52-1737), Church of England clergyman, is of obscure origins. He was brought up and educated in Chester by William Cook (1611/12-1684), curate of St Michael's parish there. Cook was ejected in 1662 and served as nonconformist minister in the city thereafter. Bold later paid tribute to Cook's widow, Mary, for her 'great love' and 'motherly affection' from his infancy through childhood and youth (Bold, 'Man's Great Duty', sig. A2'r'). A Samuel Bold, according to the university register, matriculated from Jesus College, Oxford, on 3 November 1671, aged nineteen; if this is our subject, he was the son of Edward Bold (1603/4-1654/5), rector of Hawarden, Flintshire, and was born in 1651 or 1652 rather than 1648 or 1649, the dates derived from his reported age at death. However, Bold's name does not appear in the college's admission records, and there is no evidence of his graduation in either the college or university archives. Bold is notable principally on three counts: as an advocate of religious toleration, for his defence of John Locke, and for his later views on human nature and immortality. 
In 1674 Bold was instituted vicar of Shapwick in Dorset, from which pulpit in March 1682, following the required reading of a brief on behalf of persecuted protestants in France, he preached against intolerance and persecution, in support of the French protestants in particular and condemning persecution in general. He decried both the repulsive nature of persecution and its perpetrators with equal clarity and zeal. The sermon was shortly published as 'A Sermon Against Persecution', specifically for 'the consideration of violent and headstrong men' (Bold, 'Sermon', title-page). It aroused much local indignation, particularly in view of Bold's defence of dissenters personally known to him as men 'of great learning, exemplary piety, strict devotion, and extraordinary loyalty' and his denunciation of those responsible for persecution as the 'devil's agents' (ibid., sig. A2'v', 4) inflicting on the church 'unspeakable injury' (ibid., 23, 28) and who, having 'a great affection for Popery, are hastening towards Rome as fast as they can' (ibid., 6). Given the political climate -- of the failure to exclude the Catholic James, duke of York, from the succession and the intensified persecution of dissenters during the tory reaction -- it was, to say the least, injudicious. 
Bold sought to justify his position and avert retribution with 'A Plea for Moderation towards Dissenters' (1682) but the damage had already been done. He only succeeded in further alienating popular and ecclesiastical opinion. 'A Plea for Moderation', although couched initially in more conciliatory language, deploring 'mutual animosities and contentions' and pleading for 'mutual forbearance', did so in view of the perceived papal threat and the fear 'that Hannibal [Rome] is at our gates' (Bold, 'Plea', 5, 6). Bold concluded by protesting again at the 'immoderate heat and peevishness of those fatuous and headstrong bigots' who attacked dissenters (ibid., 36). At a time when English gaols, particularly in the west country, were filled with dissenters on account of the efforts of local informers and magistrates it was more than the authorities, civil and ecclesiastical, could take. Bold was presented to the assizes in Sherborne in August 1682 and shortly afterwards to the court of William Gulston, bishop of Bristol, accused of 'scandalous libel' and sedition. The civil court imposed fines, and Bold was imprisoned for seven weeks until the fines were fully paid. The ecclesiastical prosecution was terminated following Gulston's sudden death. 
Bold resigned from Shapwick later that year, possibly on account of the furore raised by his defence of dissenters, but probably also because he had already accepted the more comfortable living at Steeple in the Isle of Purbeck. To the chagrin of his successor at Shapwick, Obadiah Beane, Bold remained popular with former parishioners and was frequently requested to officiate at marriages and baptisms. Beane recorded such events in the parish registers as married or baptized 'by an unlawful priest' (Sparkes, 19). Bold's views on sovereignty and allegiance and his advocacy of toleration may all have derived from his early association with William Cook, a 'zealous royalist' who before coming to Chester about 1651 had been deprived of the living of Ashby-de-la-Zouch for refusing to take the engagement, thereby withholding his allegiance from the Commonwealth, and had been charged with treason in 1659 for his support of Sir George Booth's royalist rising, only at the Restoration to become a victim of persecution under the so-called Clarendon code ('Nonconformist's Memorial', 1.327). 'Besides[,] many of those you prosecute', Bold reminded his audience: 'have given greater demonstrations of their loyalty, having suffered more in the late times of usurpation, for the king, than many, if not all of you have, and contributed much more to the bringing of him back to his crown and his just right. (Bold, 'Sermon', 27)' In 1688 Bold published anonymously 'A brief account of the first rise of the name protestant... by a professed enemy to persecution', a tract urging protestant unity in the face of the popish threat perceived in the policies of James II. In 1690 Bold took issue with Thomas Comber in 'An Examination of Dr. Comber's Scholasticall History' which he perceived, probably mistakenly, had been written to justify persecution of dissenters. 
Bold was installed as rector at Steeple, also in Dorset (from 1721, Steeple-cum-Tyneham), in April 1682, through the influence of William Churchill. It was from there, in 1697, that he commenced the work for which he is chiefly remembered, his defence of John Locke. Locke's 'The Reasonableness of Christianity' had appeared in 1695 and was immediately attacked as Socinian by the Calvinist John Edwards in 'Socinianism Unmasked' (1696). Locke's own 'Vindication' (1695) and 'Second Vindication' (1697) of the 'Reasonableness of Christianity' against Edwards were supported by Bold who, in 1697, entered the field with 'A Short Discourse of the True Knowledge of Christ Jesus' in which he contended with Locke that Christ and the apostles considered it sufficient for a Christian to believe that Jesus was the Christ. Bold published two further works in that year, contra Edwards, in defence of Locke and his own 'Short Discourse', and in 1698 added 'Observations on the animadversions... on a late book entituled, the Reasonableness of Christianity', again in defence of Locke. 
In 1699 Bold turned his attention to the vindication of Locke's other great work, the 'Essay Concerning Humane Understanding' (1690) which by then was already in a second edition but which had attracted unfavourable comment. Bold's 'Some considerations on the principal objections and arguments... against Mr. Locke's essay of humane understanding' (1699), together with his earlier work in support of 'The Reasonableness of Christianity' drew the comment that Bold was 'one of the ablest advocates of Mr. Locke' (Hutchins, 1.612), as well as Locke's own unstinted gratitude. Bold was frequently mentioned in Locke's correspondence with great regard and Locke wrote to him in 1699 'everything must be welcome to me that comes from your pen' ('N&Q', 137), although in 1703 when Bold visited Locke at Otes (or Oates) he was dissuaded by Locke from further publication. 
In 1706, however, after Locke's death, Bold's earlier publications in defence of Locke were republished, together with some of his more recent works, in 'A collection of tracts publish'd in vindication of Mr. Locke's Reasonableness of Christianity'. One of these later works, 'A Discourse Concerning the Resurrection of the Same Body' (1705), seems to have been generated by Bold's assimilation of Locke's views on human existence, resulting in a major shift in Bold's own thinking regarding the nature and destiny of man. In 1696 Bold had published 'Meditations Concerning Death' in which he had upheld the traditional view of the soul's immortality and immediate felicity in heaven after death. 'We have immortal souls', he had declared. Death is 'the departure or separation of the immortal soul from the body' to receive either eternal 'happiness or misery' (Bold, 'Meditations Concerning Death', 4, 6). 
But there are already hints of a move away from this traditional eschatology in the 'Observations' of 1698 and 'Some Considerations' of 1699, where in defending Locke's mortalist views Bold asserts that 'the truth of the case' is that immortality, lost by all through Adam's transgression, is restored by Christ 'in that he will raise them all from death' (Bold, 'Observations on the Animadversions', 86), and that 'after the Resurrection man will be immortal' (Bold, 'Some Considerations', 25). In the 1705 'Discourse Concerning the Resurrection', contra Daniel Whitby and Samuel Parker, who had opposed Locke's view of human nature, contending that death means only the death of the body, Bold predicated a more defined mortalist view, arguing that death 'happeneth to the [whole] man' rather than to the body alone, and confessing that the belief that after death 'man is not dead' was beyond his comprehension. Bold otherwise appears to have been doctrinally orthodox, despite later inclusion in Wallace's 'Antitrinitarian Biography' where the author concedes that there was 'no ground for suspecting his orthodoxy' concerning the Trinity (Wallace, 315). 
Most of Bold's more than twenty published works appeared during his years at Steeple and in addition to his appeals for tolerance, his defence of Locke, and his own modified theology of the soul and immortality, included a number of sermons and devotional pieces, notably 'Man's Great Duty' (1693), 'The Duty of Christians' (1717), and 'Help to Devotion' (1736), the latter containing a short prayer on every chapter in the 'New Testament'. Bold died at Steeple in August 1737 after a ministry there of more than fifty-five years, aged eighty-eight, and greatly respected. 


@@@@@


doc= 2792


Boldero, Edmund (1609-1679), college head, was born at Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, the seventh of the eleven children of John Boldero and his wife, Mary, daughter of Raygnall Tillot of Rougham. He was educated at Ipswich School and at Cambridge University, where he matriculated from Pembroke College in 1626, graduated BA in 1629, was awarded a fellowship on 4 February 1631, and proceeded MA in 1632. He became a curate of St Lawrence, Ipswich, and rector of Westerfield, Suffolk, in 1643. 
During the civil war Boldero strove to defend the established church. Besides challenging William Dowsing's iconoclasm in Pembroke College chapel (unsuccessfully), he co-authored with John Barwick, Peter Gunning, William Lacy, Isaac Barrow, Seth Ward, and William Quarles a tract against the solemn league and covenant, 'Certain Disquisitions and Considerations Representing to the Conscience' (1644). He was ejected from his fellowship in 1644. John Walker, in the 'Sufferings of the Clergy' (1714), claimed that Boldero was sent in captivity to London, where he was 'detained under a long and chargeable confinement' (p. 162). The committee for plundered ministers sequestered him, as rector of Westerfield, for drunkenness on 1 July 1647. He was also charged from St Lawrence, at an unspecified date, with scandalous living and doctrinal misdemeanours which consisted of administering the sacrament only at the rails and obliterating from the church wall the final clause of '1 Corinthians' 3: 17, which specified the temple of God to be situated in people, rather than buildings. 
According to Boldero's later claim, he then became a chaplain in Scotland under the marquess of Montrose and subsequently 'was released from prison only by banishment' ('CSP dom.', '1660-61', 117). Roger North, whose brother was a colleague of Boldero's in the 1660s, suggested that 'between the ladder and the rope, [Boldero] had narrowly escaped hanging' ('The Lives of... the Norths', 1826, 3.278-9). 
In 1661 Boldero was created DD at Cambridge by royal mandate. He was restored to Westerfield in 1662. Bishop Wren of Ely, to whom he was chaplain, presented him to the Suffolk rectories of Glemsford, on 15 February 1662, and of Harkstead. He was successfully nominated by Wren master of Jesus College, Cambridge, and admitted on 27 May 1663; he left Harkstead when Wren also presented him to the rectory of Snailwell, Cambridgeshire, on 13 July 1663. Life at Jesus under Boldero was generally undistinguished, but he seems to have transformed the college library. He was vice-chancellor of the university in 1668 and 1674. Boldero died at Cambridge on 5 July 1679, and was buried in Jesus College chapel. Most of his goods were bequeathed to his niece Jane Colman and his kinsman Daniel Boldero, and all his books went to Jesus Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 2793


Boleyn, George, Viscount Rochford (c.1504-1536), courtier and diplomat, was the only son of Thomas Boleyn, earl of Wiltshire (1476/7-1539), and Elizabeth Howard (died 1538), eldest daughter of Thomas Howard, earl of Surrey and later second duke of Norfolk (1443-1524). He first appears in the public record participating in the Christmas revels of 1514, and he signalled his father's success when he became a royal page in 1516. His earliest recorded grants resulted from his father's service to the crown and his sister Mary's relationship with the king. With his father in 1522, he was granted various offices at Tonbridge, which had belonged to the fallen duke of Buckingham. He received the manor of Grimston, Norfolk, in 1524 and was admitted to the king's privy chamber, perhaps about the same time. 
Early in 1526 Cardinal Thomas Wolsey pushed through the Eltham ordinances, designed to reduce the size of the king's household and to reduce the privy chamber's potential as a source of political opposition to his ascendancy. George Boleyn was one of the gentlemen removed by Wolsey, who recognized that the Boleyns had become his most serious rivals at court. Boleyn suffered little personal damage from Wolsey's actions. Shortly after his dismissal he married Jane Parker (died 1542) ['see 'Boleyn, Jane, Viscountess Rochford], a daughter of Henry, Lord Morley and Monteagle, and Alice St John of Bledsoe, herself a maternal half-niece of Henry VIII's grandmother the countess of Richmond. The king granted Boleyn an annuity of $20 to support the newly wed couple at court. As his sister Anne became firmly established as Henry's favourite, Boleyn's career accelerated rapidly. By 1528 Henry was actively seeking to divorce Katherine of Aragon, and the Boleyns were entrenching themselves at court. 
In September 1528 Wolsey, trying to placate his powerful new challengers, helped George Boleyn secure an income of 50 marks, payable by the chief butler of England out of the prizes for wines. On 26 September he was appointed esquire of the body (Ives, 128n.; 'LP Henry VIII', 4, no. 4779). The next year proved particularly lucrative for him. Wolsey's situation had deteriorated further, and Thomas Cromwell, the cardinal's chief lieutenant now in control of his patronage, arranged for Boleyn an annuity of $200 from the lands of the bishopric of Winchester and another 200 marks from the temporalities of St Albans. Also in 1529 Boleyn secured the chief stewardship of the honour of Beaulieu, Essex, and the office of the New Park there. In addition he was appointed to the office of master of the buckhounds and to the governorship of the hospital of St Mary of Bethlehem, near Bishopsgate, London. 
In the autumn of 1529 Boleyn was knighted and began his diplomatic career, heading an embassy to France. It was well understood that the ambassadorial appointment of such an inexperienced young man reflected the new realities of power. This point was amplified when his father was promoted to the earldoms of Wiltshire and Ormond, and George Boleyn became Viscount Rochford. He carried out further diplomatic missions in France in 1530 and 1532, but seemed primarily concerned to secure favourable opinions about the divorce. By 1533, having acquired some ambassadorial experience, Rochford was sent to the court of Francois I to tell him about Henry's marriage to his sister and to secure the French king's support in the struggle against papal denunciation of the divorce. He was accused of bragging and ignoring proper diplomatic forms, but these charges came primarily from defeated opponents of the Boleyn marriage and the religious reform carried in its train. 
More embassies to France followed in 1533 and 1534. Rochford spent much time trying to plan a meeting between Francois and Henry that neither monarch wanted. Diplomatic service, however, promoted valuable rewards. In June 1534 Rochford was made warden of the Cinque Ports, and in April 1535 the crown granted him the manor of South, in Kent, formerly held by Sir Thomas More. Rochford then served on the commission that tried and condemned More on 26 June 1535. 
Under his sister's factional leadership Rochford played an important role on behalf of religious reform in England. Eustache Chapuys, the imperial ambassador, characterized Rochford as a Lutheran, a charge with some merit. His advocacy of reform was particularly open. He worked with other crown officials in 1531 in support of Henry's claim to be supreme head of the Church of England and was charged to argue the crown's position in convocation. He was widely regarded as one of the king's principal advisers in backing efforts to secure the submission of the clergy, and he served as a member of the group of leading councillors and courtiers who met with the upper house of convocation to handle the final stages of the submission. 
Rochford's motivation for reform carried beyond loyalty to his sister's cause. His interest in reformed religion was a guiding light in his life. About 1534 he gave two manuscript texts, written by French reformers, to Anne. He commissioned the translations of these books, both deeply committed to putting scripture in the hands of laymen. His final public utterances spoke to his devotion 'to the true word of God' and his hope that listeners would both observe and set it forth. He desired that his audience would trust in God especially and not in the vanities of the world, and blamed his own travails on his lack of perfect understanding of this important lesson. 
Rochford's eclipse might have been signalled as early as the spring of 1536. On 23 April, St George's day, he and Sir Nicholas Carew were competing candidates to fill a vacancy among the knights of the Garter. Henry had already promised Francois I that he would promote Carew at the earliest opportunity; nevertheless, when Carew was selected, many interpreted the king's choice as a defeat for the Boleyns. 
As Anne began losing her grip on the king's affections, Rochford too inevitably began to slip. Opponents of the Boleyn faction at this point realized that any attempt to overthrow Anne Boleyn had to destroy her brother as well. Rochford had ability and energy and could be expected to mount a vigorous defence of his sister if left free. The plot was developed accordingly, and, it is said, with the active involvement of Jane Parker, his wife. Lady Rochford, according to Chapuys, was the source for the story that Henry's declining sexual capacities had become a matter of discussion in the queen's household. Even more damaging was the charge, raised by Bishop Burnet, that Lady Rochford had intimated that there was an incestuous familiarity between George and Anne. 
The trap was sprung on 1 May 1536. Rochford participated in a royal tournament in Greenwich from which the king precipitately withdrew. The next day he was arrested and imprisoned in the Tower, accused with four other men of having committed adultery with Queen Anne Boleyn, his sister, an act 'most detestable against the law of God and nature also', and of conspiring to cause the king's death. No one has ever suggested that the charges against Rochford were sustainable. He was formally accused on one occasion of spending a long time in Anne's room and on another of claiming that the king was not Elizabeth's father. Rochford defended himself at his trial with energy and eloquence, blaming his wife for the accusation of incest. He denied all the articles brought against him, and his demeanour drew praise from many. People on the streets, it is said, offered long odds against his conviction. It was, however, a foregone political conclusion. 
Rochford was tried and convicted on 15 May 1536 and beheaded at Tower Hill two days later. Before he died he was allowed to speak. He did not say anything about the specific charges, but submitted himself to the law and the king's will. In a loud voice, it was reported, he said, 'I am come hither not to preach and make a sermon, but to die.' This he did, and his remains were buried, probably on the same day, in the chapel of St Peter ad Vincula at the Tower. 


@@@@@


doc= 2794


Boleyn, George (d. 1603), dean of Lichfield, is often said to have been the son of Jane Boleyn, nee Parker (d. 1542), and George Boleyn, Viscount Rochford, executed in 1536 on a charge of incest with his sister, Queen Anne Boleyn. In his will of 1603, George Boleyn refers to Sir William Knollys, grandson of Mary Boleyn, Queen Anne's sister, as his kinsman, but the fact that Rochford's inquisition post-mortem names Mary, rather than George, as his heir throws doubt on the supposition that George was his son, or at any rate on George's legitimacy. Considering the Boleyn family's difficult political position in the years after the queen's execution, it is perhaps not surprising that George's ancestry should have remained unacknowledged, and that he seems to have been bitter about the loss of his inheritance. 
George Boleyn may have been born in London; he matriculated at Cambridge in November 1544. That he was a sizar suggests an impoverished background. A member of Trinity Hall, he graduated BA in 1552, proceeding MA in 1560, BTh in 1567, and DTh in 1576. On 29 September 1559 he obtained his first significant ecclesiastical appointment, being presented to the prebend of Ulleskelf, in York Minster. He was subsequently named rector of Kempston, Nottinghamshire, and was installed as a prebendary of Canterbury Cathedral on 21 December 1566. Here his career was marred by his 'chollerick' nature and his admitted tendency to swear when provoked. In 1573 he was charged with threatening to nail the dean to the wall, thrashing a lawyer, and attempting to strike a fellow canon, Anthony Rushe. Two years later he attacked one of the six preachers with a dagger and was suspended for four months, against which sentence he appealed to the queen. Nevertheless the dean and chapter presented him to the rectory of St Dionis Backchurch, London, in February 1575. He resigned this living in 1592, and in 1595, not without difficulty, was appointed to the rectory of Bangor, Caernarvonshire. 
On 22 December 1576 Boleyn had been installed as dean of Lichfield. He remained a prebendary of both Canterbury (where, although non-resident, he attempted to secure a better house for himself) and of York. Always argumentative, he became involved in a dispute with the bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, William Overton, who was said to have been poor and 'laboured all he could to supply himself from his clergy' (Strype, 'Whitgift', 1.201). Boleyn resisted Overton's demands, eventually appealing to the privy council, which asked the archbishop of Canterbury to resolve the matter, and also writing to Lord Burghley for assistance. Boleyn was clearly concerned about his own emoluments. In addition to his stipend as dean of Lichfield, he continued to receive about $40 a year from Canterbury and $34 from York. A schedule of fees payable at Lichfield adopted during his tenure shows that he was to be paid $20 on the occasion of the burial of a bishop and $10 for the burial of a residentiary canon. But the surviving records suggest that he did not make a great impact on the cathedral establishment. The fact that there is no continuous chapter act book for his years as dean may imply inefficiency or lack of concern about record keeping. 
At court Boleyn attempted, sometimes wittily, to use his relationship with the queen to secure a bishopric. It was later said that she offered to appoint him bishop of Worcester, but that he declined. In an engaging letter to Burghley, dated 10 June 1589, Boleyn asked for help in persuading John Still, master of Trinity College, Cambridge, to grant a scholarship to a poor boy whom Boleyn had befriended and educated. Both the Martin Marprelate tracts and John Manningham's diary contain references to Boleyn's dog, which accompanied him to church and occasionally interrupted the services. 
It is disappointment and anxiety, however, rather than cheerfulness and wit, which are principally conveyed by Boleyn's will, drawn up on 12 January 1603 (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/101, fol. 1'r'). He names seven men and women as his executors, including Archbishop Whitgift, 'because that he onely spake for me to her maiestie to give me my preferments'; Sir Thomas Egerton and Lord Hunsdon, because they had helped him retain his living of Bangor when he had looked likely to lose it; and Sir John Fortescue, because he had prevented 'the ruine and downfall of this our church of Lichfield'. Later in his will Boleyn refers darkly to 'machivils' who 'make more accompte of private gaine then of the good of the church'. But the most remarkable of his proposed executors is the first, Queen Elizabeth herself, 'because that her maiestie gave me all that ever I have and subiectes gave me nothing and therefore knowe no cause wherefore I should be beholden to anie of them'. It was in keeping with this resentful frame of mind that Boleyn should have made no individual bequests whatever -- all his movable goods were to be distributed among his menservants. He had died, in Lichfield, by 25 January 1603 and was buried in Lichfield Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 2795


Boleyn, Thomas, earl of Wiltshire and earl of Ormond (1476/7-1539), courtier and nobleman, was probably born at Blickling, Norfolk. The second son of Sir William Boleyn ('c'.1451-1505), landowner, of Blickling, and his wife, Margaret (died 1539/40), second daughter and coheir of Thomas Butler, seventh earl of Ormond ('c'.1424-1515), he described himself as aged fifty-two in 1529. The MP James Boleyn ('c'.1480-1561), was his younger brother. His grandfather Sir Geoffrey Boleyn had been lord mayor of London in 1457. In 1497, aged twenty, Thomas was in arms with his father against the Cornish rebels and in 1501 he attended the wedding of Prince Arthur and Katherine of Aragon. Two years later he accompanied Margaret Tudor to Scotland. 
By 1500 Boleyn had married Elizabeth (died 1538), first daughter of Thomas Howard, second duke of Norfolk (1443-1524), and his first wife, Elizabeth. The couple had three children, Anne (c.1500-1536), queen of England, Mary Stafford (c.1499-1543), and George Boleyn, Viscount Rochford (c.1504-1536). Eager for court advancement and expecting to inherit half the Ormond fortune, Boleyn had to exist on an annuity of $50 and the occupancy of Hever Castle in Kent in the meantime. His father's death gave him a landed base in Norfolk as well as Kent -- he was sheriff of the latter county from 1510 to 1511 and from 1517 to 1518. 
Already Henry VIII's squire of the body, Boleyn was made a knight of the Bath at the coronation of 23 June 1509. He was also appointed keeper of the exchange at Calais and the foreign exchange in England. In the early years of Henry's reign he was one of the sympathizers with the ambitions of the young warlike king against the more cautious counsel of Henry VII's bureaucrats. He also was a valued participant in royal entertainments, especially tournaments. He was the king's opponent at Greenwich Palace in May 1510 and among his answerers at the great Westminster Palace challenge of February 1511, appearing in the guise of a pilgrim from Santiago de Compostela. At Christmas 1514 he was involved in a fancy dress dance and indoor melee, and at Princess Mary's baptism on 20 February 1516 he was one of a select group holding the canopy. With his linguistic skills, his charm, and his knowledge of horses, hawks, and bowls, Boleyn made an ideal courtier. 
Boleyn was of most service to the king as an outstanding diplomat, chosen as an English pioneer of the resident, rather than extraordinary, ambassador. A sophisticated and cultivated man, he was employed for his fluency in French. He spent a year from 1512 to 1513 with Dr John Young, Sir Richard Wingfield, and Sir Edward Poynings at the court of Margaret of Savoy, regent of the Low Countries, and on 5 April 1513 concluded an enlargement of the anti-French holy league to include the empire. Boleyn found favour with the regent as a quick and incisive negotiator, and won a courser from her by concluding the league negotiations within ten days. He joined in the invasion of France in summer 1513 with a retinue of 100 men. 
From early 1519 Boleyn spent a year in France as resident ambassador to Francois I, arranging the interview at the Field of Cloth of Gold and discussing a marriage for Princess Mary. In June 1520 he returned to France to attend the Field of Cloth of Gold and Henry's subsequent meeting with Charles V at Gravelines. He was involved in the Franco-imperial conferences organized by Cardinal Thomas Wolsey in 1521. In 1522 he was assigned to accompany the king to meet the emperor at Canterbury in May and in October was sent with Richard Sampson to Spain on a further mission promoting an offensive alliance against France, from which he returned in May 1523. Boleyn was one of ten English pensioners of Charles. On 18 June 1525 at Bridewell Palace he was elevated to the peerage as Viscount Rochford. He went again to France in May 1527 as a commissioner with Sir Anthony Browne to receive Francois's oath to a new treaty with Henry, and was rewarded with a French pension. Back in England at the end of June, he assisted in discussions pursuing the project of Mary's French marriage. In 1530 Henry said that there was no skilled negotiator to equal him. 
Henry's high opinion of Boleyn encouraged hopes of substantial reward. He promised him the comptrollership of the household, but during his French embassy in 1519 Wolsey informed him he would not have it, instead extending the prospect of the higher household office of treasurer on the anticipated ennoblement of Sir Edward Poynings. Boleyn, having enquired whether the cardinal perceived some fault in him, was ostensibly reassured. It has been debated whether he held a grudge against Wolsey from this point, but he was apparently comptroller in September 1520 and then, some time between October 1521 and April 1522, treasurer. Reliability was assumed by his presence on the special commission of 1521 that indicted Edward Stafford, third duke of Buckingham. Meanwhile, Henry also sought to induce Piers Butler, who claimed the earldom of Ormond as heir male, to surrender it to Boleyn. Boleyn's brother-in-law Thomas Howard, earl of Surrey (1473-1554), then lord lieutenant of Ireland, suggested that the dispute could be resolved by marrying Butler's son to Anne Boleyn, but Butler probably baulked. Both Surrey and the king had to strike a balance, as Butler was useful and in fact succeeded Surrey as lord deputy. 
There is no doubt that Boleyn advanced in royal favour when he unleashed his precocious daughters, Mary and Anne, on Henry's court. In 1513 he had secured from Margaret of Savoy an invitation for Anne to join the schoolroom of her four wards, the grandchildren of Maximilian I. Anne wrote to him from Brussels professing her love and obedience and promising to become fluent in French. Next year the two girls went to the French court; Anne acted as interpreter for Henry's sister Mary Tudor and then remained for seven years in the household of Francois's queen, Claude, the most exclusive finishing-school for young ladies in Europe. By 1522 both of Boleyn's daughters were at the English court. Mary was soon the king's mistress, assisting Boleyn's elevation to the peerage as Viscount Rochford in 1525; he had already been made knight of the Garter (and was falsely reported a baron) in 1523. The ambitious father was, however, to benefit yet further when it looked as if Anne, maid of honour to Katherine of Aragon, might come to replace the queen. 
There was a more intellectual side to Rochford the courtier, if one not unconnected to his ambitions. He read Latin and owned a printed copy of Martial's 'Epigrams'. He employed a humanist scholar, Gerard Phrysius, who commissioned on his behalf from Desiderius Erasmus three works which established the Boleyn family's humanist and pietistic credentials: 'Enarratio triplex in psalmum xxiii' (Basel, 1530), 'Dilucida et pia explanatio symboli' (Basel, 1533), and 'De praeparatione ad mortem' (Basel, 1534). The last ironically was used to fortify Katherine of Aragon on her deathbed, but her supporters criticized Erasmus for his dedications. In further partisan humanist patronage Rochford took up the Hebraist Robert Wakefield once he had abandoned his support for Katherine, and housed Thomas Cranmer and John Baker, a fellow of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, much engaged with the question of the royal divorce. 
The imperial ambassador Eustache Chapuys claimed in 1531 that Anne and her father were more Lutheran than the Lutherans, and a year later he said both were considered true apostles of the new sect. Chapuys was probably concerned with their anti-clericalism, not with solifidian theology. John Foxe too was of the opinion that Wolsey feared the king's marriage to Anne as she and her family would exert their influence to abolish the whole power of the papacy. 
The marriage of Henry and Anne initially seemed, not only to the king but also to Rochford, most likely to be brought about through Wolsey. However, once it was obvious that the cardinal was failing to make headway with Clement VII, Rochford's resentments and the increasing power of his family contributed to Wolsey's fall in June 1529. In 1527 it was reported to Wolsey that the king usually took supper with Surrey (now duke of Norfolk), Charles Brandon, first duke of Suffolk, and Rochford. Foreign ambassadors made clear that in the period just before and after Wolsey's dismissal Rochford, unlike the other two, was in constant attendance on the king. Jean du Bellay, the French ambassador, indeed accused him of seeking a monopoly of influence and of leading 'the dance against the dukes and Wolsey' ('LP Henry VIII', 4, no. 2665). The newly arrived Chapuys too thought Rochford's influence was dominant; the viscount also participated in framing the parliamentary charges against the cardinal. Soon after Wolsey's death in November 1530 Rochford had a tasteless farce of the cardinal's descent into hell performed for the French ambassadors. 
Rochford's profits included a grant of the revenues of the see of Durham and Durham House in London; it was now clear that he was one of Henry's small inner ring of councillors and that his daughter was Henry's intended queen. On 8 December 1529 he was promoted earl of Wiltshire and earl of Ormond. Piers Butler had been forced to resign the latter title, to which the Boleyn claim as representing only the younger of two sisters was hardly strong. On 24 January 1530 the new earl replaced Cuthbert Tunstall, bishop of Durham, as lord privy seal as part of a significant laicization of the great offices of state brought about by Henry's impatience with clerical restraint on his personal power. Following the example of Wolsey, Norfolk, and Suffolk, Wiltshire was named to every commission of the peace. Whitehall Palace was rebuilt for Anne, and in 1531 her father was allocated a set of rooms there. 
Thanks to Anne, Wiltshire had risen faster than Sir William Fitzwilliam, another courtier-diplomat who became earl of Southampton in 1537. Unlike Fitzwilliam, Wiltshire was still used as a diplomat after his promotion. Selected in 1530, with Cranmer, for a tour of Germany, Italy, and France to canvass academic opinion on Henry's divorce, he represented in his own person, being Anne's father, the king's commitment to the policy. Wiltshire also found Charles at Bologna, for his coronation by Clement, and raised the embarrassing question of Henry's divorcing his aunt. Reportedly, Charles told him 'that he was not to be believed in this case, as he was a party, and several other things' ('LP Henry VIII', 4, no. 2827). According to Foxe, Wiltshire declined to pay the pope the accustomed reverence of kissing his toe -- an affront perhaps premature when diplomatic channels for the divorce had not yet been exhausted, but a testimony to the family's subsequent anti-clerical reputation. When Cranmer was appointed archbishop of Canterbury in 1533 the king told him he had Anne to thank. 
Wiltshire naturally became an outspoken supporter of the divorce and the Henrician Reformation. In the parliament of 1532 he was one of the first to declare that neither pope nor prelate had the right to make laws and pursued his attack on ecclesiastical jurisdiction by visiting convocation with Norfolk to browbeat the clergy into submission after the supplication against the ordinaries. He canvassed for the bill in restraint of appeals (24 Hen. VIII c.12), reportedly hectoring Thomas Manners, first earl of Rutland, until he voted for it. In 1534 he was sent to Mary to seek an acknowledgement of her own illegitimacy, but without actually threatening her with death by proffering the oath of succession. On the death of Katherine of Aragon in January 1536 Wiltshire showed his self-seeking ruthless nature by remarking that it was a pity Mary had not died too. However, his and his daughter's influence was already being overshadowed by that of Thomas Cromwell. In 1534, for instance, the reliance of Gerald Fitzgerald, ninth earl of Kildare, on Wiltshire to maintain him as lord deputy of Ireland -- both wanted to keep out Piers Butler -- was unavailing in the face of Cromwell's inclination to 'reform' the government. 
Once Anne fell in 1536 the whole Boleyn family followed. There is no evidence that Wiltshire tried to communicate with his daughter in the Tower of London; he was named to the commission of oyer and terminer to try several of her alleged lovers, Mark Smeaton, Henry Norris, Sir Francis Weston, and William Brereton. Anne and her brother George Boleyn, Viscount Rochford, were executed in May; on 29 June their father lost the office of lord privy seal to Cromwell, agent of their fall, thus becoming the only nobleman dismissed from one of the great offices of state 'by the mature Henry VIII apart from those who were also condemned as traitors' (Miller, 178). He was removed from the commission of the peace even in his native Norfolk and retained only in Kent, and was forced to provide annuities from estates given him by the crown (as late as April 1536) for new favourites. Wiltshire attended Prince Edward's baptism on 15 October 1537, but this did not represent sufficient rehabilitation to end his troubles. Piers Butler reasserted himself, and by early 1538 he had been recognized as earl of Ormond. Wiltshire supposedly sought comfort in the claim that there might be two earls of Ormond as there were two lords Dacre in England. The countess of Wiltshire died at the London residence of Hugh Faringdon, abbot of Reading, on 3 April and was buried on 7 April 1538 in Lambeth church. Whether or not Wiltshire's own service as well as his daughter's rise had helped secure his remarkable gains, all but his English earldom (now without an heir) were irretrievably lost before he died at Hever Castle on 12 March 1539 and was buried in St Peter's Church there. A papal report of 1538 might well call him 'wise' but 'of little power' ('LP Henry VIII', 13/2, no. 280). Cranmer stood by him in his last, broken years and attempted to untangle his affairs, but disputes over Wiltshire's estates continued until the archbishop's arrest in 1553. 


@@@@@


doc= 2796


Bolingbroke, Henry (1785-1855), author, was born at Norwich on 25 February 1785, the son of Nathaniel Bolingbroke. He sailed for Demerara, in British Guiana, on 28 November 1798, returned to England on 21 October 1805, but set out for Surinam, in Dutch Guiana, on 3 March 1807 to become deputy vendue master, with charge of public sales and auctions, for six years. He returned to Plymouth on 25 June 1813. On 7 October 1815 he married Ann Browne of Norton. Latterly he was in business in Norwich, where he died on 11 February 1855. He published 'A Voyage to the Demerary' (1807), revised and edited by William Taylor (1765-1836), of Norwich. The book went to two editions and contained a statistical account of the settlements on the Demerara and other rivers of Guiana, a little-known area. 


@@@@@


doc= 2797


Bolland, Sir William (1772-1840), lawyer and book collector, was born on 21 August 1772 and baptized at St Olave, Southwark, on 13 September, the eldest son of James Bolland of Southwark, and his wife, Mary. He was educated under Dr Valpy at Reading School where he wrote several prologues and epilogues for the school's annual dramatic performances. He then went to Trinity College, Cambridge, matriculating on 26 September 1789 at the age of seventeen. He graduated BA in 1794, proceeded to his MA in 1797, and won the Seatonian prize for poems on miracles (1797), the Epiphany (1798), and St Paul at Athens (1799). These prize-winning poems were printed separately, as well as being published in the 'Seatonian Prize Poems' (1808). 
After leaving Cambridge, Bolland trained as a lawyer, and was called to the bar by the Middle Temple on 24 April 1801. He practised at the Old Bailey with great success, built up a good commercial practice, and was one of the four city pleaders (1804-29). On 1 August 1810 he married his cousin Elizabeth, the third daughter of John Bolland of Clapham, Surrey. 
From April 1817 until he was raised to the bench Bolland was recorder of Reading. He was a candidate for the common serjeantcy (or office of circuit judge of the criminal court) of the City of London in 1822, but was defeated by Lord Denman. In November 1829 he was created a baron of the exchequer, resigning in January 1839 on grounds of ill health. 
In 1800 Bolland issued an anonymous satire, 'The Campaign, to his Royal Highness the Duke of York, Britannia in the Year 1800 to C. J. Fox', which was circulated privately among his friends. Although he did not publish much, he was an enthusiast for early English literature and assembled an impressive library. Called 'Hortensius' by his friends, Bolland was remembered for his dinner parties as well as his scholarship. It was at one such party at the Adelphi Terrace that the Roxburghe Club was formed. Its first publication was 'Certain bokes of Virgiles Aenaeis turned into English meter. By the right honorable lorde, Henry, earl of Surrey', reprinted in 1814 (though the dedication was signed 17 June 1815), which presented the 1557 translation (held at Dulwich College) of books II and IV of the 'Aenaeis' to a wider public. Bolland died at Hyde Park Terrace, London, on 14 May 1840. His library, which included some three thousand volumes, was sold for a total of about $3000. 


@@@@@


doc= 2798


Bollard, Nicholas (fl. 1427), Dominican friar and writer on botany, was assigned by a provincial chapter after 1427 to Oxford convent as a 'friar ministerialis'. He was the author of a work on arboriculture headed 'A tretee of Nicholas Bollard departid in 3 parties: of gendrying of trees; 2 of graffynge; the third forsooth of altracions', of which several copies are known. A treatise entitled 'Experimenta naturalis', seen by Dr John Bale at the house of Thomas Caius at Oxford and attributed to Bollard, is now lost. 


@@@@@


doc= 2799


Bolron, Robert (fl. 1665-1682), informer and perjurer, was born in Newcastle upon Tyne. Apprenticed to a jeweller in London, he left after a year to become a foot soldier at Tynemouth Castle. During the Second Anglo-Dutch War (1665-7) he served on a frigate. In 1674 Sir Thomas Gascoigne of Barmbow Hall, Yorkshire, appointed Bolron manager of his colliery. Bolron wed Mary Baker, Gascoigne's former servant, in July 1675, and leased the farm of Shippon Hall (in Barwick in Elmet) from him. Retrospectively depicting himself as a gentleman in 1680, Bolron then claimed to have an annual income of $30 from a coal farm, $10 from a lime kiln, and $7 from his farm. He embezzled $240 from Gascoigne and falsified his accounts, for which Sir Thomas dismissed him in 1678 and obtained bonds for repayment of some of the money. Bolron allegedly endeavoured to persuade one of Gascoigne's servants to steal the bonds as well as his money, but without success. Sir Thomas ejected Bolron from Shippon Hall in June 1678 when his rent was in arrears. 
Seeking revenge as well as relief from his debts, Bolron, inspired by the tales of the Popish Plot, went to a local cleric and then a justice of the peace with accusations that Gascoigne had schemed to assassinate Charles II. Bolron repeated his story to Sir Robert Clayton on 3 July 1679 and the earl of Shaftesbury the following day. On 30 May of that year, he claimed, the priest William Rushton and Sir Thomas had tried to enlist him in their plot, promising him $1000. For material considerations, he averred, he had converted to Catholicism in 1675 and had often attended Catholic meetings at which Sir Thomas insisted that the Catholics were resolved to overthrow Charles. Around early 1676, Bolron charged, Gascoigne had sent $3000 to Jesuits in London and $50 to Catholics on the continent. He also accused Sir Thomas of holding a meeting at his house in the spring of 1677 to establish a nunnery near Ripley in preparation for the reconversion of England to Catholicism. Bolron implicated numerous priests as well as such laity as Sir Miles Stapleton and Viscount Molyneux. The council dispatched Bolron and several messengers to Yorkshire to arrest some of the accused. For the necessary second witness Bolron recruited Lawrence Mowbray, who had been dismissed as Sir Thomas's servant after allegedly stealing from his daughter, Lady Tempest. Both men testified at the trial of Gascoigne, now deaf and unwell, in February 1680, but their credibility was successfully impugned and the jury acquitted Sir Thomas. 
Bolron publicized his accusations in a narrative the same year and, with the approval of the House of Commons, in a sensational account of an oath to murder Charles and root out protestantism in England, reputedly administered to Bolron in February 1677 by Rushton. Bolron's testimony against Stapleton and Lady Tempest was also insufficient to procure convictions, but the priest Thomas Thwing was not so fortunate, and was executed in October 1680. In the pay of Titus Oates and the whig attorney Aaron Smith, Bolron testified on behalf of Stephen College in August 1681. He also accused the JP Edmund Warcup of attempting to suborn him to accuse leading whig peers of having solicited him to charge the duke of York and the queen with complicity in the Popish Plot. 
By 1 September 1681 Bolron had placed his services at the disposal of the tories after being charged with falsely accusing the crown witnesses Warcup and John 'narrative' Smith of subornation, the latter in College's trial. He now accused assorted whigs of attempting to suborn him, including Aaron Smith, Peter Norrice, John Ayloffe, Edward Norton, Edmund Everard, and Robert Murray. As a crown witness, Bolron received an allowance of 40's'. per week, but when this ceased in the latter part of 1682, Lawrence Mowbray charged that Bolron was claiming the court had urged him falsely to accuse Shaftesbury and his supporters of conspiracy. No more is known of him after 1682. Described by Sir Robert Southwell in 1679 as 'a young yeomanlike fellow' ('Ormonde MSS', 4.530), Bolron had learned from Oates, whom he personally knew, how to profit by selling his inventive, malicious tales. 


@@@@@


doc= 2800


Bolton, Edmund Mary (b. 1574/5, d. in or after 1634), antiquary and historian, was born in 1574 or 1575, according to an impress in his own hand styled 'Edmundus Maria Boltonus, aetatis 47, 1622' (BL, MS Harl. 6521, fol. 152). His parentage is unknown, but he speaks of himself as having descended from the Basset family. Elsewhere he refers to himself as a poor kinsman of George Villiers, duke of Buckingham, so it may be speculated that his family originated in the north midlands, perhaps even in Leicestershire. 
Like several antiquaries of the early seventeenth century, Bolton was a practising Roman Catholic, having been raised in that religion from birth. He took the name Mary as a middle name, and although he did not suffer persecution until near the end of his life, Bolton's adherence to Rome undoubtedly had a negative effect on his literary career and prosperity. Bolton's early education is unclear, but autobiographical details in his surviving letter-book (MS Harl. 6521) record that he lived for several years at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, as a free commoner. He is known to have matriculated -- presumably disguising his Catholicism -- in 1589 (Venn, 'Alum. Cant.'; MS Harl. 6521, fol. 247) before moving on, about 1600, to the Inner Temple in London. In one of his earliest works, 'The Elements of Armories' (1610), a dialogue on the conventions of heraldry, the character of Sir Amias, who may represent the author himself, also refers to university life. It was probably while at Cambridge and then the Inner Temple that he began to make the many acquaintances mentioned in his letter-book, for instance the great antiquary John Selden. Bolton married, about 1606, Margaret Porter, the sister of Endymion Porter, future servant to the duke of Buckingham and Caroline courtier; a letter of 1625 to Secretary Sir Edward Conway refers to Bolton's 'wife and family', but the names of any surviving children are unknown. 
Bolton first appears as a public figure near the end of Elizabeth I's reign, when he joined Sir Walter Ralegh and other poets in contributing to the anthology 'Englands Helicon' (1600). He also penned Latin verses prefixed to Camden's 'Britannia' (1600), Thomas Andrewe's 'Unmasking of a Feminine Machiavell' (1604), and Ben Jonson's 'Volpone' (1605). In addition, Bolton may previously have been the 'E. B.' who wrote a sonnet to Lucy, countess of Bedford, printed in Michael Drayton's 'Mortimeriados' (1596), though this has not been verified. 
Bolton's true vocation, however, lay not in verse but in history (especially English and ancient Roman history), and in antiquarian and philological erudition. Although somewhat exaggerated claims for his stature have been made by earlier biographers, he was certainly an important English antiquary of the second rank, well acquainted with William Camden, John Selden, Sir Robert Cotton, Henry Howard, earl of Northampton, and the London historian John Speed. A lifelong friend was the future secretary of state, Sir John Coke. There is no evidence that Bolton was directly connected with the Elizabethan Society of Antiquaries that met, off and on, from 1586 to 1614, but his participation in that body cannot be ruled out since he was known to many of its members, and his interests in antiquities, numismatics, genealogy, and heraldry reflect the subjects covered in the society's extant discourses. Bolton's first full-length work to be published, 'The Elements of Armories', is among the several works to be produced in late Elizabethan and Jacobean times dealing with heraldry and coats of arms, a subject in which the gentry of the period had a fervent interest; the book appeared in the same year as the better known 'Display of Heraldrie' by John Guillim. 
His various writings, and his largely unsuccessful career, reveal Bolton to have been a man of great ambition but scant financial means, who pressed his causes on his friends and prospective patrons with a persistence that sometimes caused ill will. Among his earliest supporters was the antiquary and manuscript collector Cotton, whose great library was the central meeting-place of antiquaries throughout the first third of the seventeenth century. In 1608 Bolton attempted to secure the patronage of Robert Cecil, earl of Salisbury, for a 'litle Latin work', without success. Through Cotton, he then approached the earl of Northampton, who as a Catholic may have been more sympathetic; even Northampton, however, soon grew weary of Bolton's apparently endless requests for assistance and told him henceforth to contact him only indirectly, through Cotton. It must have been a severe disappointment to Bolton when, in 1614, Northampton died and left him nothing. 
It must also be said, however, that Bolton was equally indefatigable in promoting the interests of less fortunate friends and relatives, without reference to creed. In 1610 he asked Northampton, through Cotton, to provide an impoverished cousin with some appointment, in lieu of such a reward to Bolton himself who, as a Catholic, was unable to hold public office. In 1617 he again sought help for the same cousin, this time at the hands of Edward Alleyn, the famous actor. 
About the same time that Bolton published his 'Elements', Cotton found him employment as a kind of research assistant to the tailor turned historian John Speed, himself a client of Fulke Greville. Speed was at this point compiling materials for his 'History of Great Britaine' (1611) and the accompanying volume of maps, 'The Theatre of the Empire of Great Britaine'. Although Speed wrote most of this himself, he made extensive use of the researches of others. Bolton provided the life of Henry II, but on review it was found to be too favourable to Thomas Becket, and Bolton's work was replaced by a piece by John Barcham or Barkham, prebendary of St Paul's. It was probably about this time that Bolton conceived one of his lifelong ambitions, the writing of a new, scholarly history of England that went beyond both the Elizabethan chroniclers, such as John Stow, and Speed's own patchwork history. 
Bolton set off on his own plans again in 1617, when he approached the rising favourite, Buckingham, to enlist his support in the establishment of an 'academ roial'. Unlike France, England had no official learned or literary body, outside the universities, and several schemes were afoot to remedy that in the early seventeenth century. Bolton's went beyond the usual goal of setting up a finishing school for gentry and nobility; his academy was to be dedicated to the study of history, antiquities, heraldry, and literature in general. More than simply a revived Society of Antiquaries, however, this was to be an elaborate, tripartite structure chartered and endowed by the crown with $200 per annum. Its members were to be tutelaries (knights of the Garter, the lord chancellor, and the two university chancellors); auxiliaries (select members of the aristocracy); and essentials, the heart of the body, leading gentlemen of prominent families, of independent means, and of scholarly interests. Upon the academ were to fall great privileges and the role of cultural police, licensing non-theological books and reviewing translations of learned works. The names that Bolton selected for the original membership of eighty-four included some of the leading poets and scholars of the period -- his friends prominent among them -- including John Selden, Sir Henry Spelman, Sir Kenelm Digby, Sir Edward Coke, Endymion Porter, Sir Henry Wotton, Sir Robert Cotton, Ben Jonson, and Michael Drayton. Various versions of Bolton's proposal survive, and the scheme continued to enjoy Buckingham's support until 1624, but appears to have died with James I in the following year. 
Bolton was at the same time developing the groundwork for the writing of a new history of England, and as a prolegomenon to this he authored one of his best-known works, an essay entitled 'Hypercritica, or, A Rule of Judgement, for Writing or Reading our Histories'. Although this has often been dated as early as 1610, he began it no earlier than 1618, and it is referred to in a translation of the Roman historian Lucius Florus that Bolton published the following year, when William Camden also saw it. It cannot have been finished before 1621, since it refers to Francis Bacon by the title of Viscount St Albans. Unpublished in his lifetime, the 'Hypercritica', in contrast to other 'artes historicae' ('arts of history') of the period, stressed the writing rather than the reading of history. In particular, it emphasized the need to found any new history of England on rolls, manuscripts, and other materials to be found in the Tower and other archives as well as the more traditional chronicle sources. Although he was not nearly as dismissive of medieval chroniclers as his older contemporary Sir Henry Savile, Bolton was also among the principal exponents of the view that the chronicle was an outdated genre; he distinguished, however, between the value that medieval chroniclers retained as sources and the unsatisfactory character of Elizabethan historians (such as Raphael Holinshed or Richard Grafton) and their 'vast vulgar tomes'. Like his contemporary Francis Bacon, and many French writers, he believed that proper scholarship would produce a perfect history of the kingdom that would eventually need no further revision, a definitive 'Corpus rerum Anglicarum'. The manuscripts to the 'Hypercritica' also shed light on Bolton's flexibility: an early version refers to a work by Fulke Greville, 'Mustapha', as 'impious'; by 1621, when he may have been in receipt of some assistance from Greville, he had changed that word to 'matchless' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Wood F.9, fols. 37, 29; MS Rawl., D.1, fol. 15). 
Roman history was another of Bolton's preoccupations, and he did his most original work in this field, admiring Polybius above all other ancient authors. In addition to the above-mentioned translation of Florus, and a work, which has not survived except in notes, on the reign of Tiberius, Bolton made a special study of the sources for the reign of Nero Caesar, and this became the subject of a full-length history, 'Nero Caesar, or, Monarchie Depraved', first published in 1624. This may have been produced in haste, since at many points blank spots appear where images of coins were intended to be placed, a fault remedied in the second edition of 1627. 'Nero Caesar' appears on the one hand to be a shamelessly sycophantic plea for patronage from Buckingham and Charles I, stressing the virtues of strong rule. Bolton's purpose, however, was not to apologize for Nero's reign but to compare its severity with the benefits of Stuart government, and to argue that even the most despotic rule must not be resisted by rebellion; the consequences of Nero's deposition, monster though he may have been, were endless successive rebellions and depositions throughout the remainder of Roman imperial history. The language of the preface suggests that the work was encouraged by James I himself, perhaps through Buckingham, and Bolton may have intended it as a working out of some of the king's own ideas on monarchy. The real originality of 'Nero Caesar', however, lies less in what it says than in its use of sources. Unlike many contemporaries, Bolton adduced non-literary evidence such as coins and inscriptions (published in collections by Camden and by European scholars such as Janus Gruter and Jacopo de Strada) in proof of his assertions and as a corrective to the accounts of the ancients themselves. It is thus one of the earliest English attempts to synthesize humanist narrative history with advanced philological and antiquarian scholarship. 
Bolton's livelihood was never secure -- he complained, as many authors, of the rapacious character of booksellers and did not grow wealthy from his publications. The last of these was 'The Citties Advocate' (1629), an enquiry into the question of whether commercial activity, and especially apprenticeship, extinguished gentility. This turn of interest reflects the close connection with the London city elite that Bolton developed in his last years, a shift away from the intellectual aristocracy he had cultivated in the years of the 'academ roial' scheme. In part this turn to a municipal patron arose from necessity. By 1628 Buckingham had abandoned Bolton -- as early as 1623 the duke had failed to appoint his impecunious client to an unnamed educational post, perhaps the vacant provostship of Eton College. 
Meanwhile, the new king, Charles I, had embarked upon a more vigorous persecution of Catholics than his father. In 1628 Bolton was fined as a recusant and, being unable to pay, confined to Fleet prison, whence he was moved to the Marshalsea, probably within a year or so. Requests to friends and relatives for assistance produced little: Endymion Porter tore his brother-in-law's letter up in disgust. As a means of reducing his debts, he proposed to the London aldermen that he undertake a complete chronological history of London, with maps, entitled the 'Vindiciae Britannicae'. This was to be published in Latin and English, and was intended to improve on John Stow's 1598 'Survay of London', which Bolton thought reliable but badly written. Several months of work on the project and some encouragement from the city led to profound disappointment when the aldermen, faced with his estimate of $3000 to $4000 pounds as the cost of publishing the book, backed out of the project and refused to reimburse him for expenses incurred. In an early example of an appeal to academic referees, Bolton suggested that his manuscript be sent out to learned readers such as Ben Jonson, John Selden, Sir Henry Wotton, Kenelm Digby, Sir Edward Coke, Sir Dudley Digges, and Degory Whear, the Camden professor of ancient history at Oxford (and fellow student of both Lucius Florus and the 'ars historica'). There is no evidence that this occurred, but in 1632 Bolton gave the manuscript of the 'Vindiciae', which has not survived, to Selden, his long-time neighbour in Whitefriars, for delivery to the aldermen. Unknown to Bolton, the city had already contracted with the better known Jonson to provide a more modest chronology at no charge. In 1634 Bolton contacted his old friend Sir John Coke, sending him the unpublished life of Tiberius that he had written as a companion to 'Nero'. Since this is his last known letter, it may be presumed that Bolton died at Marshalsea soon thereafter. 


@@@@@


doc= 2801


Bolton, Sir Francis John (1831-1887), army officer and electrical engineer, was the son of Dr Thomas Wilson Bolton, surgeon, of London and Manchester. He enlisted in the Royal Artillery and soon became a non-commissioned officer. He was commissioned ensign in the Gold Coast artillery corps on 4 September 1857, and served in the expedition against the Crobboes in 1858, being promoted lieutenant on 9 November. In 1859 he was adjutant in the successful expedition against the Dounquah rebels. 
On his return to England Bolton was transferred to the 12th (East Suffolk) regiment, and promoted captain on 21 September 1860. For several years he co-operated with Captain P. H. Colomb RN, in developing a system of visual signalling, which was adopted by the authorities. He also invented an oxy-calcium light for night signalling. The 'Army and Navy Signal Book' was compiled by Bolton and Colomb, assisted by an officer of the Royal Engineers, and was used effectively during the Abyssinian expedition. Bolton married in 1866 Julia Maria, second daughter of R. Mathews of Oatlands Park, Surrey; she survived him. 
From 1867 to 1869 Bolton was deputy assistant quartermaster-general and assistant instructor in visual signalling at the School of Military Engineering, Chatham, under Captain Richard Hugh Stotherd, instructor in telegraphy. He was promoted on 8 July 1868 to an unattached majority for his services to army signalling. 
Bolton was largely instrumental in 1871 in founding the Society of Telegraph Engineers and Electricians, of which he became honorary secretary. He edited the journal of the society, and was afterwards vice-president. In 1871 he was appointed by the Board of Trade under the 'Metropolis Water Act' as water examiner to the metropolis, and in 1884 he published 'London Water Supply'. He was promoted lieutenant-colonel on 15 June 1877, and retired from the army with the honorary rank of colonel on 1 July 1881. He was knighted in 1884. 
Bolton interested himself in electrical matters, and a beautiful display of coloured fountains and electric lights at the exhibitions at South Kensington from 1883 to 1886 were designed by him and operated from the central tower under his personal superintendence. Bolton died on 5 January 1887 at the Royal Bath Hotel, Bournemouth, Hampshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 2802


Bolton, Sir George (d. 1806), tutor and inventor of gun-locks, was the son of David Bolton. He was schooled in military tactics and mathematics preparatory to a career in the army, but was instead appointed instructor to the royal princesses in writing, geography, and arithmetic. Being of independent means, he indulged his interest in firearms by seeking to improve the musket gun-lock, which in both military and sporting firearms was so defective that accidents were frequently caused by guns going off at half-cock in the heat of battle or when forging through dense vegetation. The self-acting and detached bolting lock that he designed was constructed by mathematical instrument makers (whom he found more obedient to his orders than the gun makers), and patented in 1795 (no. 2041). The Board of Ordnance had several examples made for trial at Woolwich, but although their performance was deemed admirable, cost ruled out their general adoption. Bolton designed a simpler version, both models being described in his 'Remarks on the present defective state of fire-arms, with an explanation of a newly invented patented gun-lock' (1795); the locks were obtainable from the gunsmith Fisher of High Holborn. 
Bolton married at Marylebone, London, on 2 October 1794, Catherine Bannatyne, a widow; she was the daughter and heiress of John Lawley and had at least one daughter from a previous marriage. The marriage produced two daughters and a son. Through this marriage Bolton inherited the Upper Diamond estate in St Vincent and at least fifty-three enslaved people who lived on it. In March 1799 Bolton let it be known in court circles that he was about to depart for the West Indies and would be much assisted in his intended business (which was not disclosed) by a knighthood. George III duly knighted him on 3 April 1799. Bolton described in a codicil to his will, written in 1805, that the estate had been 'laid waste' by the slave revolt of 1795, and it was to rescue this inheritance that he sailed to the West Indies on 7 December 1800. He received a loan of $5700 from the commissioners of the St Vincent and Grenada relief funds, and borrowed large but unspecified sums from his father; by 1805 he claimed to have invested $20,000 in his St Vincent property. These actions appear to have brought about a disagreement with his wife, and he specified that in the event of his death she was to have no influence on the education of their children. In 1805 he purchased and completed the building of Tutshill House in Tidenham, Gloucestershire. The burial at Tidenham of Dido, 'a female negro belonging to Sir George Bolton' was recorded in November 1805. News of Bolton's death in St Vincent, where he was collector of customs, reached England at the end of December 1806 and his will was proved by his father in London in January 1807. 


@@@@@


doc= 2803


Bolton, James (bap. 1735, d. 1799), natural history artist and mycologist, was baptized on 23 November 1735; he was probably born on a farm in the Calder valley, Yorkshire. He was the younger son of a weaver, William Bolton (or Boulton). His elder brother, Thomas (1722?-1778), was also a competent botanist, and this has frequently given rise to confusion in attributing their respective or joint role in botanical recording. It is not known if James received any formal education; a self-taught artist, he acquired some of his techniques indirectly, or perhaps directly, from Georg Ehret, whom he may well have met through their mutual patron, the duchess of Portland. Bolton was employed in his early adult life as a weaver but later became a respected art teacher, as well as an author and illustrator of works on plants, fungi, and birds; in the late 1790s he became the landlord of a public house in or near Luddenden Foot. In 1768 he married Sarah Blackburn 
(or Blakeburn; 'b'. 1749)
, who probably predeceased him; they had three sons, Virgil, Thomas, and John, and probably a daughter, Sally, who died in childhood. 
Bolton was one of the foremost eighteenth-century mycologists. His talent as a botanical artist and portrayer of taxonomic detail, and as author of the first British book devoted to fungi, is widely recognized. His role in natural history recording is less widely understood, but his illustrations show his prowess in field observation, and manuscript material exists which shows that he made numerous field records, often noting important ecological details. The published catalogue of plants in John Watson's 'The History and Antiquities of the Parish of Halifax in Yorkshire' (1775), often attributed to him, was in part compiled by his brother Thomas and probably other local naturalists. 
Bolton lived for his entire life in the Halifax area, which provided a rich source of material, particularly fungi, for his drawings, but he also travelled and collected in the Craven district of Yorkshire, neighbouring counties, and north Wales. He communicated with key botanists of his day, including Jean Bulliard, James Dickson, John Lightfoot, and Carl Willdenow, but it is not clear if mentions by other important correspondents and visitors to 'Bolton' refer to him or to his brother. He was elected an honorary member of the Natural History Society of Edinburgh, and in 1788 the genus 'Boltonia' (Compositae) was named by Charles L'Heritier de Brutelle in his honour. 
Bolton is best remembered as the author of three major works, 'Filices Britannicae' (2 vols., 1785-90), 'An History of Fungusses Growing about Halifax' (3 vols., 1788-90; supplement, 1791), and 'Harmonia ruralis' (2 vols., 1794-6), the illustrations to all of which he drew and etched himself. His 'History of Fungusses' was republished in German in four volumes, with inferior plates, as 'Geschichte der Merkwurdigsten' (1795-1820). He also provided the illustrations for Richard Relhan's 'Flora Cantabrigiensis' (1785). 
Bolton died in Yorkshire on 7 January 1799. His estate (paintings, microscope, printing equipment, and personal effects) was auctioned in the following June. 


@@@@@


doc= 2804


Bolton, James Jay (1824-1863), Church of England clergyman, was born on 11 February 1824 at Southdown College, near Weymouth, the fifth son of Robert Bolton, nonconformist minister, and his wife, a daughter of the Revd William Jay of Bath. His early years were spent at Henley-on-Thames, where his father was a minister. At the age of twelve he went with his parents to America, where circumstances placed his father in charge of an episcopal congregation at Christ Church, Pelham, New York. He was educated at Dr Muhlenburg's, College Point, New York, after staying for some time at Brook Farm, New Rochelle, and Pelham. He returned to England, and entered Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, in 1844. He obtained a scholarship in his first year, and took a BA degree in 1848. After taking orders in 1848 he was curate of Saffron Walden from 1849 to 1851, and of St Michael's, Chester Square, Pimlico, from 1851 to 1852. In 1853 he was appointed to the incumbency of St Paul's Episcopal Chapel, Kilburn, where he remained until his death. On 30 June 1853 he married Lydia Louisa, third daughter of the Revd W. W. Pym, rector of Willian, Hertfordshire. 
Bolton's faith was strongly evangelical, and he excelled as a children's preacher. His brother, W. J. Bolton, arranged and published two series of his 'Selected Sermons' in 1863 and 1866. Bolton also contributed extensively to the 'Family Treasury', the 'Sunday Scholars and Teachers' Magazine', and similar children's publications. He published several other religious works, not all for children. Among the most significant were 'Fragments of the Great Diamond Set for Young People: being Addresses to Children' (1856) and 'Life Lessons, or, Scriptural Truths Illustrated' (1862). Bolton died at the parsonage, Kilburn, on 8 April 1863. 


@@@@@


doc= 2805


Bolton, Sir Richard (d. 1648), lawyer and politician, was the son of John Bolton of Fenton, Staffordshire. Having attended the Inner Temple in London, he practised for a time as a barrister in England. It is possible that he married his first wife, Frances, daughter of Richard Walter of Stafford, with whom he had one son and several daughters, before he left for Ireland with the object, it has been alleged, of avoiding the results of a censure passed on him by the court of Star Chamber. At the close of 1604 he obtained employment as temporary recorder of Dublin. In the following year he was appointed recorder of that city -- 'during good behaviour' -- at an annual salary of $25. As counsel in the famous case of tanistry, Bolton defended the ancient Gaelic custom of partible inheritance, a key obstacle to the legal assimilation of Ulster into the English imperium in Ireland. He was dispatched in 1608 to London as law agent to the municipality of Dublin in connection with suits relating to its customs and privileges. Sir Arthur Chichester, lord deputy of Ireland, in a letter dated 15 October 1608, commended Bolton to the earl of Salisbury. 
Bolton was admitted to the Society of King's Inns, Dublin, in 1610. Through government influence he was elected on 27 April 1613, in opposition to the Roman Catholic candidate, one of the representatives of the city of Dublin in the parliament of which Sir John Davies became the speaker. He resigned the recordership of Dublin in the same year. He received a knighthood on 4 July 1618 from Sir Oliver St John, lord deputy of Ireland. Under privy seal dated Westminster 31 December 1618, and patent of the 10th of the following February, Bolton was appointed solicitor-general for Ireland. In 1621 he published at Dublin, in a folio volume, a selection of statutes passed in parliaments held in Ireland, dedicated to his benefactor, Sir Oliver St John, who had encouraged him to undertake it. 
Bolton became attorney-general to the court of wards at Dublin in 1622, and was appointed chief baron of the exchequer in Ireland by privy seals dated 13 April and 29 May, and patent dated 29 June 1625. To his printed volume of the statutes an addition containing those of the tenth and eleventh years of Charles I was published in 1635. Bolton published in 1638, at Dublin, a folio volume entitled 'A Justice of the Peace for Ireland', setting out the duties of JPs out of session and detailing the form of their proceedings during sessions. By this time he was closely associated with Richard Boyle, earl of Cork. However, he aligned himself with Wentworth and played a leading role in the lord deputy's commission for defective titles. By privy seal dated at Westminster 6 December 1639, and a patent given at Dublin on 15 January 1640, Bolton was appointed to the chancellorship of Ireland, in place of Sir Adam Loftus, with a moiety of the profits derivable from chancery writs, together with $500 per annum, during his tenure of office. As chancellor he presided in the parliament which began at Dublin in March 1640. On 11 February 1641 the House of Lords acquitted him from a charge of having endeavoured to prevent the continuance of the existing parliament. With a letter dated 18 February Bolton transmitted to the committee of the house attending the king in England a schedule of grievances of Ireland voted by the lords at Dublin on the same day. He was regarded as a chief adviser of Strafford in his attempts to introduce arbitrary government. On 27 February 1641 a committee was appointed by the House of Commons in Ireland to draw up charges against the chancellor, Bolton, and against Bramhall, bishop of Derry, Sir Gerard Lowther, chief justice of the common pleas, and Sir George Radcliffe, to impeach them of high treason. The chancellor, as chairman of the house, had to receive the articles against himself. The wrath of his accusers was heightened when he suggested that Poynings' Law restricted the Irish parliament's powers of impeachment. On 1 March 1641 the house ordered that the lord chancellor should enter into recognizances to appear when the articles should be exhibited. After some further debate the peers left it to the lords justices to do as they saw fit, as there were no precedents. They further declared 'the sense of the house that the lord chancellor was not fit to execute that place, nor to sit at the council board, and that they desired a new speaker'. Sir William Ryves, justice of the king's bench, appointed by letters patent speaker of the House of Lords in Ireland, during pleasure, in the absence of the chancellor, took office on 11 May 1641. In the following July the lords justices communicated to the House of Commons the king's desire that they should forbear proceeding further with the impeachment. The ensuing struggle to continue with the prosecution was of great constitutional significance, giving rise to the debates from whence transpired Darcy's 'Argument' in assertion of Irish independence under English law. 
Bolton, as member of the privy council at Dublin, signed the dispatch of 25 October 1641 announcing to the earl of Leicester, the lord lieutenant, then in England, the start of hostile movements in Ireland. He took part in the preparation of an elaborate statement, transmitted to the House of Lords in London in November 1641, in relation to the English administrative system in Ireland. By a resolution of 21 June 1642, that no members should sit or vote until they had taken the oath of supremacy, the House of Commons excluded the Roman Catholic representatives, among whom were those who had been most active in the proceedings against Bolton and his associates. On the same day Bolton and Lowther petitioned the house, and it was unanimously resolved to proceed no further upon the articles of accusation against them. On the following day Bolton was restored by the Lords to his place as chancellor, and on 2 August 1642 resumed his position in their house. 
Bolton was actively engaged in negotiations connected with the cessation of hostilities between England and the Irish in 1643. In 1643-4 he was a principal counsellor of the lord lieutenant, Ormond, in negotiating with the Irish confederation concerning peace. His name appears first among those of the privy council who signed the proclamation issued at Dublin on 30 July 1646 announcing the conclusion of a treaty of peace between Charles I and his Roman Catholic subjects in Ireland. In writings condemnatory of the terms of that peace Bolton was represented as more devoted to the parliament of England than to the king, and much opposed to concessions to the Roman Catholics of Ireland. A contemporary answer to some of the allegations against Bolton is extant in an unpublished manuscript in the British Library. Bolton signed the instructions on 26 September 1646 to those who were commissioned to treat with the English parliament for succours after the peace had been rejected by the Irish. He joined in the statement on the condition of Ireland of 19 February 1647 submitted by Ormond to Charles I, and preserved in the twentieth volume of the Carte papers in the Bodleian Library. 
Bolton died in November 1648. His second wife, whom he married at an unknown date, was Margaret (died in or after 1663), daughter of Sir Patrick Barnewall. In 1661 the peers at Dublin ordered that the books of their house for 1640 and 1641 should be expunged 'where they contained anything that did intrench upon the honor of the late Earl of Strafford, the late Bishop [Bramhall] of Derry, the lord chancellor Bolton, and several others'. In the archives at Kilkenny Castle is a petition in which Lady Bolton, widow of Sir Richard Bolton, applied in 1663 to the duke of Ormond, then viceroy, for the arrears due to her late husband. Bolton's son Edward succeeded him as solicitor-general in Ireland in 1622, and as chief baron in 1640. On the death of Charles I, Edward Bolton was by Charles II reappointed chief baron. He was removed from that office by the parliamentarian government, which, however, employed him in 1651 as commissioner for the administration of justice in Ireland. 


@@@@@


doc= 2806


Bolton, Robert (1572-1631), Church of England clergyman, was born at Blackburn, Lancashire, on Whitsunday, 25 May 1572, the sixth son of Adam Bolton (died 1593) of Brookhouse, Blackburn, a yeoman and governor of the free grammar school there in 1567, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1610). Much of what is known about him is to be found in the 'Life and death of Mr. Bolton' prefixed to various editions of Bolton's works by Edward Bagshawe, who, having been one of his first students at Oxford, became a lifelong friend. His parents, finding in their young son 'a great towardliness for learning, destinated him to be a scholar, and struggled with their estate to furnish him with necessaries in that kind' (Bagshawe, 5-6); he studied at Blackburn School under its master, Yates (perhaps Lawrence Yates), becoming 'the best scholler in the schoole' (ibid.). 
In 1592 Bolton was admitted to Lincoln College, Oxford, where his tutor was John Randall. Here Bolton's school work, and comparative maturity, gave him an advantage over others in his cohort, and he progressed well in the study of logic and philosophy. Within a few months, however, the death of his father (himself a younger son) reduced him to penury. From the need to return books borrowed from his tutor and others he learned the habit of summarizing them extensively in notebooks. He became especially expert in Greek, and, according to Anthony Wood, could write it better than English or Latin. 
Bolton transferred to Brasenose, perhaps hoping to resolve his financial difficulties by securing a fellowship, and graduated BA there on 2 December 1596. By 2 December 1597 he held a Nowell scholarship, a foundation designed for the support of Lancashire men. Yet lacking well-placed friends and connections a fellowship initially eluded him; it seems possible that his religious outlook may have been a factor. During this difficult period he depended greatly upon another Greek scholar, Dr Richard Brett, of Lincoln College, 'most bountifully to contribute to his relief' (Bagshawe, 10). Eventually in 1602 he became a fellow of Brasenose and proceeded MA on 8 July. Appointed lecturer in logic and moral and natural philosophy, he was subsequently chosen by George Abbot, then vice-chancellor, to hold a dispute before the king on natural philosophy on the occasion of James's visit to the university in 1605. 
Throughout his university career up to this point, according to Bagshawe, Bolton had been exceptionally hard-working yet he had developed sympathies with Roman Catholicism, a fault akin to atheism: 'he was a very mean scholar in the school of Christ, he drew no religious breath from the soil he came'. Having travelled to Cambridge to hear William Perkins, possibly the most eminent puritan of his generation, Bolton rejected his plain style of speaking and its content, calling the great man 'a barren empty fellow, and a passing mean scholar' (Bagshawe, 11, 13). Bagshawe, himself a zealous puritan, tells us that Bolton also enjoyed 'stage plays, cards and dice, he was a horrible swearer and sabbath breaker, and boon-companion', a character which may have been coloured to contrast with his subject's later piety (Bagshawe, 12). An attempt by the Jesuit Lawrence Anderton, formerly of Blackburn School and then of Christ's College, Cambridge, to persuade Bolton to take ship for a seminary in Flanders failed when Anderton did not himself appear at the rendezvous. Bolton shortly afterwards returned to Brasenose, where he proceeded BD on 14 December 1609, and where the vice-president, Thomas Peacock, was instrumental in his conversion to the austere form of protestantism which he was to follow for the rest of his life. Bolton soon decided to become a minister, for, as he explained, he observed in the university 'many reverend and learned men, full of the light of divine truth, and of the water of life, able gloriously and comfortably to enlighten many dark places and dry souls in the bosom of this their famous nurse, not brought up by her to die at her breasts', but ready instead 'to enlarge Christ's kingdom abroad, and to oppose with all their power, against the bloody torrent of popery and rage of antichrist' (Bolton, 'Discourse', sig. A3). 
On 12 February 1610 Bolton was inducted to the rectory of Broughton, Northamptonshire, on the presentation of Sir Augustine Nicols, sergeant in the household of Prince Henry, and on 22 June he was granted a preaching licence. He resigned his fellowship on 2 March 1611 and soon afterwards married Anne or Anna, the youngest daughter of Thomas Boyse of Eythorne, Kent. Their first child was buried, unbaptized, at Broughton on 21 March 1612. 
Bagshawe describes the vigorous programme of daily prayer and spiritual reflection followed by Bolton and his growing family. His mental outlook was transformed by the pains of his spiritual rebirth, in which God came 'not by any soft and still voice, but in terrible tempests and thunder, the Lord running upon him as a giant, taking him by the neck and shaking him to pieces as he did Job; beating him to the very ground, as he did Paul, by laying before him the ugly visage of his sins' (Bagshawe, 15-16). From many months of temptations and suffering Bolton emerged with unshakeable convictions, but he never forgot the torment his conscience had suffered. Thus it was that 'though in his preaching he was a 'son of thunder', yet unto bruised reeds and those that mourned in spirit, he was as sweet a son of consolation as ever I heard' (ibid., 20). Indeed, conceded Anthony Wood, 'he was sought to far and near, and divers beyond the seas' came to him for relief from the doubts that afflicted their consciences (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.515). Several of Bolton's works reflect a deep preoccupation with the inner life of the saint, not least in their titles: 'Some General Directions for a Comfortable Walking with God'; 'Instructions for a Right Comforting Afflicted Consciences'; 'A Cordiall for Christians in the Time of Affliction'. There is no doubt that Bolton's ministry was directed at a minority of that minority who conventionally saw themselves as good people in the sight of God: there was 'no hope for the drunkard, the swearer, the liar, the usurer, the unclean person, the sabbath breaker, the sacrilegious, simonical, and sinners of such infamous rank', though he spoke with grief rather than anger of the sins of his flock. Yet 'many thousands' of others falsely supposed that, being free 'from gross and notorious sins', and having 'civil honesty, a formal profession of Christianity, outward performances of religious seriousness, that then their case is good enough for heaven, though there be wanting the... saving power of inward sanctification, and the truth of a sound conversion'. And he pointed instead to 'a paradise of Christian comforts, a royal peculiar, a victorious simplicity, a neglected innocency, a marvellous light, an invisible kingdom, an heaven upon earth; which I call the state of grace' (Bolton, 'Discourse', sig. A3). Such a standpoint was perhaps not best calculated to strengthen the religious unity of the people of Broughton. 
Bolton was a patriotic puritan minister, remarking upon 'the mighty workings of King James his works upon the adversaries' (R. Bolton, 'Instructions for a Right Comforting Afflicted Consciences', 1631, 4). The vigour and frequency of his diatribes against popery probably reflect Bolton's still unquiet conscience about his own record. He makes much of Catholic encouragement to 'furious assassins and incendiaries, for murdering of princes, butcheries of people, and fiering of states', stressing that in English protestantism, there was no warrant for the popular deposition of kings (R. Bolton, 'Two Sermons Preached at Northampton', 29). Here and in other such passages the Gunpowder Plot figures largely, and in his will Bolton provided that his bequest to the poor of Broughton should be paid on 5 November following his death and on that date in two subsequent years. His works are often prefaced by dedications to leading gentlemen of Northamptonshire such as Edward Montague and Erasmus Dryden. 
Bolton favoured a magistracy which would deal firmly with evil-doers (including usurers and enclosers), but saw popery and profanity as its chief enemies, and the godly preaching ministers as its chief allies. He attacked on the one side the 'negligent and unconscionable minister, which never goes about to stir the devil in the ignorant, profane and those that hate to be reformed' and on the other, 'the idle justice, that only hunts after plausibleness and popularity, and for the good word of all the good fellows about him' (R. Bolton, 'Two Sermons Preached at Northampton', 56). There was 'no more notorious villany' than for 'an ingenious and free people... to have a magistrate set over them, which adding craft to his power and skill, welds them all three to work his own ends, and practise his private revenge from time to time upon his supposed opposites.' Justices should be 'men of truth', 'true hearted Nathaniels in their private and personal conversation; let them prize and prefer the truth... Before gold or friend, favourite, or richest favour' (ibid., 63). 
Bolton's most prominent public platform was the celebrated, and officially sanctioned, lecture at Kettering. 'His doctrine was never drawn into question either for error or schism' (Bagshawe, 27), and he did not urge reform in church or state, but he repeatedly demanded that both should operate in a more godly fashion. He was extremely and repeatedly outspoken in condemning corruption. In 1621 -- in a sermon before the assize at Northampton -- Bolton took as his text 'When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice: but when the wicked beareth rule, the people mourn'. He pointedly asked whether 'this gangrene of going into offices, benefices, and high rooms by corruption, is not unhappily crept into this famous and flourishing state; which if it should, it will eat into the hearts and sinews of the state, that no wit of man can foresee, into what baseness and degenerations this noble kingdom would fall in the next age. (R. Bolton, 'Two Sermons Preached at Northampton', 3)' On simony he was even less restrained, contrasting his deceased patron's integrity in disposing of livings with 'the practice of the times', attacking openly those among his auditory, who 'for a little bloody gain put upon them an ignorant, idle, dissolute, non-resident, or some way unfaithful minister... And what a vexing cry in the ears of all sacrilegious church robbers will that be of a damned wretch in hell; when he shall complain everlastingly that his soul had been saved, if such a man had not been simoniacal. ('Works', 1.161-2)' Bolton came to believe that many among the governing classes of England were becoming more selfish and arrogant, less godly and less humane; he attacked the 'degenerations of our gentility', in which gentlemen 'think to bear down all before them with an artificial affected impetuousness, as it were, of countenance; a disdainful neglect and contemptuousness in their carriage, with a kind of outbraving and brow beating of their brethren, as though brave apparel and a big look were demonstrations of a noble spirit. ('Works', 1.167)' He thought that when a 'patriot which in some high place like a strong pillar opposes the corruptions and popery of the times; or any faithfull pastor... is taken away' then people should prepare 'against an evil day', and he feared 'some heavy thing is preparing for us', for the sins of England were 'ripe for His revenging hand' ('Works', 1.157). In 1629, in what was surely taken as a comment on recent developments in religion, he pointed to the danger of 'unrighteous ruling' by means of 'tampering with our articles of religion... by labouring to put false glosses upon them, and talking of some reconcilement of our church to the Romish synagogue' (R. Bolton, 'Two Sermons Preached at Northampton', 76). It may be that he also became more aware of and unhappy at the sale of offices. In 1630 he attacked the practice in a sermon before justices of assize Sir Richard Hutton and Sir George Croke, quoting Tacitus, 'Never came any to an high room wrongfully, and unworthily: but he exercised his power and authority wickedly and unjustly' ('Works', 1.188). 
Bolton's biographer claimed that his zeal 'was always tempered with discretion' (Bagshawe, 27), but this had limits. He corresponded with Arthur Hildersham, a veteran of the Elizabethan puritan movement, and was friendly with John Preston. His sympathies were with the reformed churches abroad: 'for his charity, he was ever universally bountiful, but especially he exceeded in those public distresses of Germany, France, Bohemia etc and to those that stood in true need' (Bagshawe, 28). Bolton knew from his training that the word 'puritan' meant sympathy with the teachings of the heretic Novatius. Before his conversion he was not above deploying it as a mere insult, but later he sought to correct the misuse of the term, to rebut the sort of sneering attacks which he himself had once mounted, and to identify with the people thus stigmatized. In 1610 he could note that 'The world is come to that wretched pass, and height of profaneness, that even honesty and sanctification, is many times odiously branded by the nick-name of puritan' (Bolton, 'Discourse', 132). Almost two decades later he thought it had become commonplace: 'Nowadays, every Nimrod, impure drunkard, and self-guilty wretch, is ready with great rage' to impute puritanism to anyone of religion and integrity, thus striking 'at Gods best servants, and the kings best subjects' (R. Bolton, 'Two Sermons Preached at Northampton', 84). Ironically, through its abuse the name had become synonymous with honesty in public life: 'We are coming to a strange pass, that it should be holden a puritanical point, to condemn all corrupt coming into places of preferment, and public charge, since even politic pagans, and barbarous nations, out of light of reason, and ordinary notions of nature, did abhor it. (ibid., 92)' Bolton took his family and pastoral responsibilities with the utmost seriousness, and undoubtedly acted and appeared in a demeanour calculated to encourage respect. His portrait depicts a well-built, handsome, grave man of nearly sixty, with long white hair and impressive beard. It would be unwise to dismiss out of hand as an invention of puritan hagiography the story that Bolton, when 'walking in the streets, was so much cloathed with majesty' that people would stop their levity, for fear of attracting his disapproval or censure (Bolton and Bolton, 227). He acquired a reputation far outside Northamptonshire. For Anthony Wood, a historian rarely generous to men of Bolton's stripe, he was 'a most religious and learned puritan', and 'a painful and constant preacher, a person of great zeal for god, charitable and bountiful' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.513, 515). After enduring for over three months a 'quartan ague' (characterized by the recurrence of fits every four days), Robert Bolton died on 17 December 1631. His funeral sermon was preached two days later at St Andrew's, Broughton, by Nicholas Estwick and was published in 1635. Bolton was buried in the chancel, where in an alcove was set a half-length figure of the rector at prayer, his arms resting on an open bible. He was survived by his wife, Anne, son Samuel (died 1669), and daughters Hannah, Mary, Elizabeth, and Sara. 


@@@@@


doc= 2807


Bolton, Robert (1697-1763), dean of Carlisle, was born in April 1697 in London, the son of John Bolton (died 'c'.1699), a merchant of Lambeth. His early education was in Kensington, after which he went to Wadham College, Oxford, in 1712, where he became a scholar in 1713, graduated BA in 1715, and proceeded MA in 1718. He was awarded the Lambeth degree of LLD in 1735. At Wadham, Bolton had hoped to be 'elected fellow in his turn; but in this he was disappointed, and appealed without success' to the college visitor, George Hooper, bishop of Bath and Wells (Coates, 118). By 20 December 1719, when he was ordained deacon in St Paul's Cathedral by John Robinson, bishop of London, Bolton had transferred to Hart Hall, Oxford; but he served his title in Stepney. Robinson ordained him priest in Fulham Chapel on 11 April 1721. 
Bolton stayed with the bishop for two years, perhaps as chaplain. In 1722 he joined Dulwich College, and lived there. Though he was not elected first fellow (or preacher) until March 1725, there is clear evidence of his activity in the college as early as March 1723. After resigning the fellowship in May 1725 he moved to Kensington where he lived off his private income. Here he became friendly with William Whiston, the mathematician and rationalist, who had lost his Cambridge mathematical professorship on account of his Arian views. Whiston introduced Bolton to Sir Joseph Jekyll, master of the rolls, and Philip Yorke who, as earl of Hardwicke, became lord chief justice and then lord chancellor. Whiston's son John later claimed Bolton shared his father's views, but this did not stop him subscribing to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. 
In 1729 Jekyll nominated Bolton preacher at the Rolls Chapel in succession to Joseph Butler, later bishop of Durham. Doubtless it was through Hardwicke's patronage that Bolton was appointed dean of Carlisle; he was installed by proxy in February 1735. Though eventually he bequeathed money to support poor clergy in the diocese, Carlisle records reveal him as totally non-resident there. He showed more interest in his parish of St Mary's, Reading, where he became vicar in 1738. This was another crown appointment which he held concurrently with the deanery. Despite having a curate he was present at five of the eight triennial visitations and preached at two; and in July 1763, only four months before his death in London on 26 November, he was present at the primary visitation by John Gilbert, bishop of Salisbury. Certainly a sermon after his death describes him as 'constantly almost residing in this place... he held forth to all by his daily example and pressed upon [his parishioners] by his weekly instruction and exhortation' (Wray, 27-8). The same sermon described him as 'an excellent scholar, as well as a most pious Christian, as exemplary in his life as instructive in his writings' (ibid., 33). He was buried in the church porch at St Mary's, Reading. 
Bolton's publications were mainly tracts and sermons, and included pieces such as 'An answer to the question -- Where are your arguments against what you call lewdness, if you make no use of the Bible' (1755), with references to Greek and Roman authors; and a curious work about Duke Ernest I of Saxe-Gotha (1601-1675), entitled 'The ghost of Ernest, great-grandfather of HRH the princess dowager of Wales, with some account of his life' (1757). 


@@@@@


doc= 2808


Bolton, Samuel (1605/6-1654), Church of England clergyman and college head, was the son of William Bolton of Lancashire. Educated at Manchester School, he matriculated as a pensioner at Christ's College in 1625, graduated BA in 1629, and proceeded MA in 1632. In 1633 he married Elianor Little, and in 1634 was curate of Harrow, Middlesex. For three years from about 1638 he was minister of St Martin Ludgate, London, and then for seven years minister of St Saviour's, Southwark. In 1641 he was also appointed as a lecturer at St Anne and St Agnes, Aldersgate. 
Highly regarded both as a preacher and as a pastor, in 1642 Bolton was appointed to the Westminster assembly. His first publication was a set of fast sermons, 'A Tossed Ship Making to Safe Harbor, or, A Word in Season to a Sinking Kingdome' (1644). In 'The Guard of the Tree of Life' (1645), dedicated to his 'beloved friends' the congregation at Southwark, he described his work and that of his fellow minister in encouraging a right attitude to the Lord's supper. Pastoral concern and an essentially moderate stance characterize both this volume and his 'The True Bounds of Christian Freedome' of the same year, dedicated to the earl of Manchester. 
In 1645 Bolton was chosen as master of Christ's College, Cambridge, but 'his desire to win souls to Christ by preaching was so great' (Calamy, 25) that he continued to give regular sermons in London, especially at St Andrew's, Holborn. He was still described as the minister of St Saviour's in 'The Arraignment of Error' (1646), dedicated to John, 'Lord Roberts' (Robartes). Despite its title the work stressed the need to avoid unnecessary controversy and seek happy accommodation; the pastoral use of synods and the power of the civil magistrate, 'a nursing father to the church' (p. 317) were necessary, but both should be limited and clearly defined. On 29 July 1646, choosing as his texts verses on waiting in hope and the blessedness of peacemakers, he gave a fast sermon to the Lords, subsequently published as 'Deliverance in a Birth' (1647). He was probably the Mr Bolton who, on 9 March 1649, attended the failed peacemaker, the earl of Holland, on the scaffold. 
Bolton did not neglect Cambridge, serving as vice-chancellor of the university from 1650 to 1652. In December 1650 he was one of six college heads who, in response to the parliamentary visitors' demands for subscription to the engagement, petitioned 'protesting as we had adhered to the parliament, soe we would live peaceably not disturbing the present government, desireing this might be accepted for our subscription' (Twigg, 156). In 1654 he was nominated as an assistant to the committee of ejectors in Cambridgeshire, Huntingdonshire, and the Isle of Ely, but by this time he had succumbed to a 'long, tedious and costly sickness': his diseases, according to Edmund Calamy, who visited him, were 'many, very many' (Calamy, 26). 
Bolton died on 15 October 1654, aged forty-eight, and was buried four days later. His funeral sermon, preached by Calamy at St Martin Ludgate, was published both as 'The Saint's Transfiguration' (1655), an official version dedicated to the earl of Warwick and acknowledging the deceased as 'very dear to Lady Lucy Roberts', and also as 'The Doctrine of the Bodies Fragility' (1655), a surreptitious version -- the duplication a testament to Bolton's standing among the godly. 'He was', asserted Calamy, 'a shining light in this our Israel... a workman that needed not to be ashamed... [whose] life was an excellent commentary upon his sermons' (Calamy, 24). Two years later a series of Bolton's treatises 'prepared for the press in the author's lifetime' were published as 'The Dead Saint Speaking'. Dedicated by his widow, Elianor, to the earl and countess of Warwick, these were largely devotional in character, but in 'The wonderful workings of God for his church and people' Bolton exhibited continuing public, political concerns: 'the Grounds of hope from the Church of God, the good of most other reformed Churches in the Christian world doth depend upon the welfare of England'. 


@@@@@


doc= 2809


Bolton, William (d. 1532), prior of St Bartholomew's, West Smithfield, London, and royal administrator, was of unknown parentage. A canon of the Augustinian order, his talents permitted him to rise to a degree of prominence. Between 1501 and 1503 he attended the Augustinian foundation of St Mary's College, Oxford. Entries in the register of the chancellor of the university naming him as proxy for a lawyer from the court of arches suggest that he already had wealthy London connections. His election as prior of St Bartholomew's in West Smithfield, London, was given royal assent on 21 August 1505 and confirmed by the bishop of London on 27 August. In 1509 Bolton was named in the will of Henry VII as master of the king's works; it is probable that he had taken over these responsibilities in 1504. He oversaw building work at Henry VII's chapel and the monument to Lady Margaret Beaufort (in 1511) in Westminster Abbey, supervised small works at Hampton Court, and, from 1517, controlled the major rebuilding of New Hall, Boreham, Essex. Between 1513 and 1517 Bolton also initiated major reconstruction at St Bartholomew's Priory, where the oriel window in the nave of the church of St Bartholomew-the-Great remains as evidence, as well as at the priory's manor of Canonbury, Islington. Bolton's rebus, a barrel (tun) pierced by a crossbow bolt, was carved on both these buildings, although it was not until 1530 that he received the formal grant of arms of a shield 'gules', a vessel in the manner of a tun 'argent' pierced by a bolt 'or', feathered 'argent'. In 1518 he was fined by the general chapter of his order for overlooking visitation duties. 
Henry VIII presented Bolton to the prebend of Bullinghope belonging to Hereford Cathedral on 7 July 1516 but, two years later, refused him promotion to the see of St Asaph, remarking that promotion depended not solely upon building skills but also on additional qualities such as profound learning. This drew the comment from Richard Pace, the king's secretary, in a letter to Cardinal Wolsey that the newly appointed bishop was not to be compared to the prior. The prior is listed among distinguished members of Gray's Inn, to which he seems to have been admitted some time before 1520. On 23 September 1522 Bolton received preferment as rector of Harrow on the Hill, Middlesex. In 1527 he became very ill and it appears that thereafter lameness rendered him immobile. He died on 5 April 1532 in London and was buried before the high altar of the priory church. 


@@@@@


doc= 2810


Bolts, William (1739-1808), merchant and speculator, was born on 7 February 1739 on the continent, probably in Germany. However, as a child he lived in Britain, and he became an apprentice in a London merchant house. He was acting in a commercial capacity in Lisbon by the time of the great earthquake of 1755 which devastated that city. 
Following his return to Britain, Bolts was appointed as a factor in the service of the East India Company in November 1759 and he arrived in Bengal the following summer. By acquiring a working knowledge of Bengali, and by drawing on his previous experience as a merchant, he was able to develop his own private trading activities while working for the company, and he soon entered into a partnership with two members of the council at Fort William (Calcutta), John Johnstone and William Hay. The partners engaged in a wide range of speculative activities, the nature of which drew them into conflict with both the company and the Indian authorities. Bolts acquired a reputation as an unscrupulous and untrustworthy figure and he was repeatedly censured by the company for his misconduct. 
Bolts married Ann Aston (died 1821) in Calcutta on 11 February 1764. In 1765 he was recalled to Fort William from Benares, where he was then serving as second in council, but events were then given a remarkable twist when he was appointed as alderman of the mayor's court of Calcutta in August 1766. Further disputes with the company, however, led to his resignation three months later. Bolts was ordered to return to Britain by the next available ship, but he repeatedly delayed his departure from Bengal in order that he could seek further to extend his business interests in the region. This brought him into conflict with the new governor of Bengal, Harry Verelst, who was making a vigorous effort to implement the company's policy of curbing private trade in the territories under its control. Bolts's position was further undermined by the fact that he was suspected of intriguing with the Dutch and French, and after many warnings he was arrested on 23 September 1768, and deported to Britain a week later. 
On reaching Britain in April 1769 he at once appealed to the court of directors, who would have nothing to do with him and declared him a 'very unprofitable and unworthy servant', and in 1771 commenced a lawsuit against him. In 1772 he published the first volume of his 'Considerations on India Affairs', in which he attacked the whole system of British government in Bengal, and complained of the arbitrary power exercised by the authorities, and of his own deportation by Verelst. The volume caused some excitement and was at once answered by Verelst himself in 'A View of the Rise, Progress, and Present State of the English Government in Bengal' (1772), which Bolts attacked in a second volume of 'Considerations' in 1775. This vigorous exchange of views developed into a bitter controversy and played an important part in fuelling the extensive public debate that was taking place on the subject of the East India Company's operations in India. 
Bolts's lawsuits with the company and the cost of publishing his books bankrupted him in the autumn of 1773 for, owing to his deportation, he had not been able to realize more than $30,000 out of the fortune of $90,000 which he had accumulated in India. 
Thus, following a visit to Vienna in 1775, he was glad to accept an offer from the empress Maria Theresa to enter the Austrian service. He was made a lieutenant-colonel and sent out to India to establish factories for the Imperial East India Company of Trieste. After arriving in Surat in September 1777 as commander of the 'Joseph and Theresa', he founded a number of factories, including three on the Malabar coast, much to the annoyance of the British. He was well on the way towards making another personal fortune when the project failed because of poor relations with his partners in Antwerp. The Imperial Company went bankrupt in 1784 and Bolts then unsuccessfully floated ambitious trading schemes with the French and Swedish governments. He lived in France during the 1790s, returned briefly to Britain in 1800-01, and then established himself in Lisbon once more. Finally, he moved to Paris in 1808 where, a ruined man, he died in hospital later the same year. 


@@@@@


doc= 2811


Bomelius, Eliseus (d. 1579), physician and astrologer, born in Wesel, Westphalia, was probably the son of Henry Bomelius (died 1570), a native of Bommel (now Zaltbommel) in the Netherlands, who from 1540 to 1559 was Lutheran preacher at Wesel, and the author of several religious and historical books of wide repute. The 'Summa der godliker scrifturen', published in England as 'The Summe of the Holye Scripture and Ordynary of the Christen Teachyng' (1548), is attributed to him. Henry Bomelius's friend Bishop Bale lived for some time at Wesel: he contributed Latin verses in the author's praise to Bale's 'Illustrium maioris Britanniae... summarium' (1548), and to his 'Scriptorum... catalogus' (1557). 
It was probably on Bale's advice that Eliseus Bomelius was educated at Cambridge, which is probably what Jerome Horsey meant by writing that Bomelius was 'brought up' there. He proceeded to the degree of doctor of medicine. Well received by the English reformers, he contributed an 'epigramma' in Latin elegiacs to an edition of Thomas Becon's early works (1560). Henry Bennet of Calais, in dedicating his life of Oecolampadius to James Blount, sixth Baron Mountjoy, praises Mountjoy for entertaining with 'zealous affection Heliseus Bomelius, a German, who readeth unto your honour the liberal sciences, and whom Phillip Melancthon hath in familiar letters praysed highly for erudicion and godlynes' (Bennet). Although Bennet refers to Bomelius's 'learned works published' (ibid.), no such piece has been identified. Bomelius married Jane Richards, of St Stephen Walbrook, London, on 18 July 1564. In 1567 he was said to be living in Lord Lumley's house (presumably, his London residence, near Tower Hill); his last known domicile in London was in St Michael-le-Querne parish. 
As a physician and astrologer, Bomelius rapidly made a high reputation in London. An astrological discussion made in 1570 for the prospective marriage of Queen Elizabeth, and found among William Cecil's papers, has been attributed to Bomelius (or to Sir Thomas Smith (1513-1577)). 'An almanacke and pronostication of master Elis Bomelius for ye yere of Our Lorde God 1567 autorysshed by my lorde of London' [Edmund Grindal] was published in London in 1567. Prescriptions -- not identified -- in Gervase Markham's 'The English Hus-Wife' were claimed to have been 'gathered together' by Dr Bomelius and 'Dr Burket' (Burchard Kranich) (Markham, 5). A few Latin letters Bomelius wrote survive in the Public Record Office (state papers, domestic) and the British Library. 
In 1567 Bomelius was arrested at the instance of Thomas Francis, president of the College of Physicians, for practising medicine without licence of the college, and was imprisoned in the Wood Street Compter. On 27 May 1567 he wrote to Cecil, praying for an opportunity to expose Francis's ignorance of astronomy and Latin, and on 3 May 1568 he supplicated at Oxford for incorporation, as a doctor of medicine of Cambridge. 
Early in 1569 Bomelius's wife stated before the censors' committee of the College of Physicians that her husband had given due satisfaction for his offence, and petitioned for his liberation. The censors demanded payment of a $20 fine and $15 costs, which Bomelius was unable to pay. (In a letter to Cecil, of February 1568, he said that while living in London he had expended over $100 but received only $12.) On 2 June 1569 the committee appears to have offered Bomelius his release on condition of his giving a bond of $100 to abstain from practice. Before Easter 1570 he was 'an open prisoner' of the king's bench. 
On 3 April 1570 Archbishop Matthew Parker wrote to Cecil about Bomelius: 'Whether any practitioner hath resorted to him (as many have a wonderful confidence in him and in his magic) I know not'. What he did know, however, was that, 'last term', Bomelius had deliberately holed the bottom of Parker's 'poor barge' on the Thames, and he feared 'some conspiracy' ('Correspondence', 363-5). He enclosed a letter of Bomelius's, concerning England's imminent peril: accordingly, Cecil wrote to Bomelius, to find that the 'conspiracy' was merely an astrological forecast. 
In early May 1570 Bomelius sent a Latin letter to Cecil, claiming: 'In about a month hence I shall be enabled... to devote my services... to Her Royal Majesty, and point out a way whereby these intestine evils may be healed, without any effusion of blood'. However, he observed that 'the Russian Ambassador sends messengers to me daily, and does not expect to obtain my services without a large stipend' (Leigh). As Cecil treated Bomelius's announcements with deserved contempt, Bomelius resolved to live in Muscovy. The English government did not hinder his departure, and late in 1570 Bomelius, who had promised to supply Cecil with political information, was settled in Russia. During his travels in that country (1572), Sir Jerome Horsey frequently met Bomelius, then living in great pomp at the court of Ivan IV, in high favour with the tsar as a magician, and holding an official position in the household of the tsar's son. He was said to have amassed great wealth, which he transmitted by way of England to his native town of Wesel; and by his astrological calculations, to have encouraged the tsar to persist in an absurd scheme of marrying Queen Elizabeth, falsely represented as a young girl. Charged with intriguing with the kings of Poland and Sweden against the tsar, Bomelius was arrested with others and racked. After being roasted at a stake, he was put into a loathsome dungeon where he died, in 1579. Horsey, who gives a full description of his death, characterizes him as 'a skilful mathematician, a wicked man, and practiser of much mischief'. Like his preacher father, he was a protestant, and when near his end, under torture, 'cast up his eyes, naming Christ'. Only in 1583 could Sir Jerome Bowes obtain leave for the widow, Jane, to leave Russia and return to England. No will or administration of Bomelius's has been noticed, but a marriage licence of 29 October 1586 shows Jane, widow of Eliseus Bomelius, late of St Michael-le-Querne, MD, about to marry Thomas Wennington, gentleman, of St Margaret Pattens parish, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 2812


Bonar, Andrew Alexander (1810-1892), Free Church of Scotland minister, was born at Paterson's Court, Edinburgh, on 29 May 1810, the seventh son of James Bonar (1757-1821), solicitor of excise, and Marjory Maitland (died 1854), daughter of James Pyott, bailie of Montrose. He was educated at Edinburgh high school, where he was dux, before studying at Edinburgh University. Although he intended to follow his elder brothers Horatius Bonar and John James Bonar ['see below'] into the ministry, he did not undergo a conversion experience until October 1830. He began his divinity studies the following year and was licensed by the presbytery of Jedburgh in July 1835. He worked as an assistant in Jedburgh until in November 1836 Robert Smith Candlish offered him a position as missionary in St George's parish, Edinburgh. He was ordained assistant and successor to the parish of Collace, Perthshire, in September 1838. 
The early years of Bonar's ministry were distinguished by his friendship with Robert Murray McCheyne. Their circle also included William Chalmers Burns and Alexander Somerville. In 1839 he accompanied McCheyne, with Alexander Black and Alexander Keith, to the Holy Land. Bonar's description of their journey appeared in 1842 as 'Narrative of a Mission of Inquiry to the Jews'. This book was hugely popular and would itself have assured him of lasting influence, even had it not been followed by the still more popular 'Memoir and Remains of the Rev Robert Murray McCheyne' (1844). Bonar published numerous other works, chief among which were 'A Commentary on the Book of Leviticus' (1846) and his edition of Samuel Rutherford's 'Letters' (1848). 
After the Disruption of 1843, in which controversy he joined as a pamphleteer, Bonar remained in Collace as minister of the Free Church congregation. He married on 4 April 1848 Isabella Dickson (died 1864), with whom he had four daughters and two sons, including James Bonar (1852-1941), civil servant and economist. In December 1856 he transferred to a new congregation at Finnieston, in Glasgow, where he remained for the rest of his life. His later publications included 'Christ and his Church in the Book of Psalms' (1859). He received the degree of DD from Edinburgh in 1874 and was elected moderator of the Free Church general assembly in 1878. It was also in that year that his congregation moved to a larger building near the West End Park, Glasgow. He died, after a short illness, at his home, 20 India Street, on 30 December 1892 and was buried in Sighthill cemetery on 4 January 1893. His diary and letters were collected and published by his daughter. 
Invariably described as saintly, one obituary described Bonar as 'an Evangelical of the Evangelicals' ('Glasgow Herald', 2 Jan 1893). He was little interested in church courts and accepted the moderatorship with reluctance; his interest lay in evangelism and revival, and he latterly worked closely with the American Dwight L. Moody. While staunchly conservative in matters of doctrine he held some unfashionable views, for example on prophecy and millennialism, which he had formed under the influence of Edward Irving. As a preacher he was notable for his unusual sing-song delivery, and for the stamina that allowed him to preach three or four times a Sunday until almost the end of his life. 
His elder brother 
The least well known, though possibly the most genial of the three brothers, Bonar shared many of their gifts. Like them he was an evangelical who combined the covenanting spirit of the seventeenth century with the literary cultivation of the nineteenth. An outstanding preacher, he was also a contributor to the 'Presbyterian Review' and the 'Quarterly Journal of Prophecy'. He was for fifty years secretary of the Greenock branch of the Bible Society. Bonar married on 17 July 1838 Isabella Watt (died 1875), with whom he had five sons, two of whom died in infancy. In 1883 he was honoured with the degree of DD from Edinburgh University. He died at his home in Greenock on 7 July 1891, and was buried in the town cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 2813


Bonar, Archibald (1753-1816), Church of Scotland minister, was the fifth son of John Bonar (1721-1761), minister, and Christian Currier (1724-1771). His elder brother, John Bonar, later became the first solicitor of excise in Scotland. He was born at Cockpen, Edinburghshire, on 23 February 1753, and was educated at Edinburgh high school and the University of Edinburgh. He was licensed to preach on 29 October 1777, ordained minister of the parish of Newburn, Fife, on 31 March 1779, and was transferred to the North-West Church, Glasgow, on 17 July 1783. As a young man Bonar had been influenced by George Whitefield's evangelicalism and remained a proponent of 'vital religion' in his ministries. On 15 August 1782 he had married Bridget (died 1787), eldest daughter of the Revd Mr Black, minister of Perth. Bonar's health compelled him to resign his charge, and on 19 April 1785 he settled in the parish of Cramond, near Edinburgh. After his wife's death on 4 January 1787 he married, on 16 August 1792, Ann, daughter of Andrew Bonar; they had two sons and three daughters. While at Cramond he published his 'Genuine Religion' (1796) which was reprinted at Boston (1807) and at Middlebury, Vermont (1810), and 'Sermons, Chiefly on Devotional Subjects' (1815-17). The second volume, published after his death at Cramond on 8 April 1816, includes a memoir by his brother James Bonar. 


@@@@@


doc= 2814


Bonar, Horatius (1808-1889), Free Church of Scotland minister and hymn writer, was born at Edinburgh on 19 December 1808. He was the sixth son of James Bonar, the second solicitor of excise at Edinburgh, and his wife, Marjory Maitland (died 1854), the daughter of James Pyott, bailie of Montrose. Bonar was educated at the high school and the University of Edinburgh, where his contemporaries included Robert Murray McCheyne (1813-1843). After attending the Divinity Hall, Edinburgh, he was licensed as a preacher and did mission work at Leith. 
In November 1837 Bonar settled at Kelso as the minister of the new North Church, founded as a part of Thomas Chalmers's church extension scheme. He became a prominent evangelist and a popular preacher. He anticipated the methods of the Evangelical Alliance by arranging for eight or more days of united prayer, and instituted special meetings once a month for children. He also produced many pamphlets, editing a series of religious tracts known as the 'Kelso Tracts', and published evangelical works of considerable popularity, such as 'The Night of Weeping' (1846), which sold 59,000 copies. The influence on Bonar of Edward Irving's lectures in 1828-30 on the Apocalypse was evident in 'Prophetic Landmarks' (1847) and 'The Coming and Kingdom of Our Lord Jesus Christ' (1849). While he was still at Leith he had begun to write the hymns for which he is best known, a practice which he continued at Kelso. On 16 August 1843 he married Jane Catherine (died 1884), the third daughter of Robert Lundie, a former minister at Kelso. They had three sons and six daughters. Jane was sympathetic to his work, and seems to have written religious verse herself. She died in December 1884. 
At the Disruption in 1843 Bonar and his congregation joined the Free Church of Scotland. Some years later, however, the North Church reverted to the Church of Scotland, and Bonar was obliged to hold services first in a hired room and later in a church lent by the burgh council. This hardship was not his to endure for any length of time: in June 1866 he was appointed minister of the Thomas Chalmers Memorial Church in Edinburgh. His reputation continued to grow during this ministry: his congregation followed suit, increasing from 61 in October 1866 to 805 in July 1888. He continued to hold children's services, established a mission at Causewayside in the poorer part of his parish, and preached frequently in the open air in addition to his usual Sunday duties. In 1874 he shared a platform with the American evangelist Dwight Moody. Bonar continued his literary activities: in 1862 he published 'God's Way of Peace: a Book for the Anxious', which was translated into French, German, and Gaelic, and sold more than 285,000 copies during his lifetime. He was the editor of several religious journals, including the 'Christian Treasury' and the 'Presbyterian Review'. Several events varied his ministerial and literary activities. In 1856 he visited Palestine, a journey which resulted in the publication of 'The Desert of Sinai' (1856) and 'The Land of Promise' (1858). He is said to have composed hymns even as he crossed the Sinai Desert on a camel. In May 1883 he became moderator of the general assembly of the Free Church of Scotland. He died in Edinburgh on 31 July 1889, survived by only four of his children. 
Bonar was (and is) best known for such famous hymns as 'I heard the voice of Jesus say' (1846). His verses are spontaneous and essentially lyrical; he composed them quickly and rarely revised his work, which explains the retention of some very poor lines. He wrote more than 600 hymns, which appeared in publications such as 'The Bible Hymn Book' (1845) and 'Hymns of Faith and Hope', published in three series between 1857 and 1866. In 'The Scottish Hymnary', a work widely used by Scottish and Irish Presbyterians, eighteen of his hymns were included. J. Julian's 'Dictionary of Hymnology' (1907) reported that 110 of his hymns were in common use at the time of its publication, but their popularity later declined, possibly because Bonar's premillenarian sentiments were less and less favoured. It is a sad irony that Bonar, one of the few Scottish hymn writers to gain an international audience for his work, never heard his hymns sung in his own church in Edinburgh, since his was one of the Free Church congregations which opposed the introduction of hymns. 


@@@@@


doc= 2815


Bonar, James (1757-1821), Greek scholar and writer, was born on 29 September 1757, the eighth son of the ten children of John Bonar (1721-1761), minister of Cockpen and Perth, and Christian Currier (1724-1771). He was educated at Edinburgh high school and at the University of Edinburgh. Bonar entered the office of the solicitor of excise where his elder brother John Bonar was employed; John later became the first solicitor of excise in Scotland. James, by contrast, is better known for his scholarship. On 9 December 1777 he was admitted as a member of the Speculative Society of Edinburgh University (of which John Bonar was a co-founder) and was elected an extraordinary member on 24 December 1781. For several years he was treasurer of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. He was one of the original promoters of the Astronomical Institution, and a founder of the Edinburgh Subscription Library in 1794. In March 1797 he married Marjory Maitland (died 1854), daughter of James Pyott, bailie of Montrose. 
Bonar contributed the article 'Posts' in 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (1794) and the entries, among others, 'Alphabet characters', 'Etymology', 'Excise', and 'Hieroglyphics', for the 'Edinburgh Encyclopaedia' (1808-18). He wrote 'Disquisition on the Origin and Radical Sense of the Greek Prepositions' (1804), edited a new edition of 'Ewing's Greek Grammar', and published an English edition of Hans Holbein's 'The Dance of Death' in 1788. A regular contributor to the 'Edinburgh Magazine', 'Missionary Magazine', and 'Scottish Register' in the period 1790-95, Bonar also wrote the memoir of his brother Archibald Bonar (1753-1816), which is prefixed to the second volume of the latter's 'Sermons, Chiefly on Devotional Subjects' (1815-17). James Bonar died on 25 March 1821. He was survived by his wife and eight children including John James Bonar (1803-1891) ['see under 'Bonar, Andrew Alexander], Horatius Bonar (1808-1889), and Andrew Alexander Bonar (1810-1892). 


@@@@@


doc= 2816


Bonar, John (1721-1761), Church of Scotland minister, was born at Clackmannan on 4 November 1721, the eldest son of John Bonar (1696-1752), then a tutor in the family of Colonel Bruce at Kennet, and Jean Smith ('b'. 1695), daughter of William Smith of Alloa, Clackmannanshire. Following his father's ordination as minister of Fetlar and North Yell in Shetland in 1729 he was sent for his primary education to the parish school at Torphichen, Linlithgowshire, where his grandfather, John Bonar (1671-1747), was the minister, and then to the University of Edinburgh, where he graduated MA on 27 April 1742. Bonar of Torphichen was a prominent evangelical leader who preached at the famous Cambuslang revival in 1742, and his grandson is said to have left behind manuscript accounts of two visits that he made there. He completed the divinity course at Edinburgh and was licensed to preach the gospel by the presbytery of Glasgow on 5 June 1745. On 29 January 1746 he was presented by Archibald Cockburn of Cockpen to the little parish of Cockpen in Edinburghshire, where he was ordained on 22 August. Three months later he married, on 18 November 1746, Christian (1724-1771), daughter of Andrew Currier of Edinburgh, writer to the signet. They had a large family, with eight children who survived infancy, including John Bonar (1747-1807), a solicitor of the excise who was among the six co-founders of the Speculative Society at the University of Edinburgh; Archibald Bonar (1753-1816), minister of Cramond; and James Bonar (1757-1821), also a solicitor of the excise, whose life of Archibald, in the second volume of the latter's 'Sermons' (1815-17), is not always reliable as a source of information about their father. 
John Bonar was allied with the orthodox or popular party in ecclesiastical affairs, but was well versed in secular as well as scriptural learning. His first publication, a pamphlet entitled 'Observations on the Conduct and Character of Judas Iscariot', appeared in 1750, went to a second edition in 1752, and was reprinted with a memoir of the author in 1822. Said to be 'one of the most popular preachers in the Church' (Somerville, 169), he was invited to preach the annual sermon before the Society in Scotland for Propagating Christian Knowledge on 6 January 1752, published one month later as 'The Nature and Necessity of a Religious Education'. In its passionate affirmation of 'useful knowledge' in association with religious knowledge, the sermon prefigures Bonar's later work on behalf of educational academies. Another passage asserts that magistrates must use their authority to restrain 'open immoralities, -- a contempt of religion, -- and the immoderate use of public diversions' (pp. 6-9, 22), anticipating another important theme in Bonar's career. On 26 May 1755 he published an anonymous pamphlet, 'An analysis of the moral and religious sentiments contained in the writings of Sopho and David Hume, esq.', designed to persuade the members of the general assembly of that year to take action against 'the public attack which in this country has of late been made on the great principles and duties of natural and revealed religion, in the works of David Hume; and in the essays of an author who has been distinguished by the name of Sopho [Lord Kames]. (p. 2)' Bonar may have acquired his zeal for purifying the kirk from his grandfather, who wrote in a work published in 1743 of the need to 'shun the company of such as are either of unsound Principles or unsuitable Conversations' (Bonar and Willison, 31). Shortly after the campaign against Hume and Kames failed in the general assembly Bonar was involved in an attempt, successful in his presbytery but eventually overturned in the synod, to censure Alexander Carlyle for attending a performance of the tragedy of 'Douglas' in December 1756. Even Carlyle, however, acknowledged that Bonar 'was a man of sense -- an excellent preacher; he was temperate in his opposition' ('Autobiography', ed. Burton, 247). 
In January 1756 Bonar was presented to Jedburgh through the influence of the fourth marquess of Lothian, but he was never translated due to opposition from the parishioners, who had already committed themselves to Thomas Boston. Bonar was soon called to the second charge at Perth (later the West Church), where he was translated and admitted on 29 July 1756. On 16 April 1760 he preached a sermon before the synod of Perth and Stirling, 'The nature and tendency of the ecclesiastic constitution in Scotland', which was published later that year and was also in the first volume of 'The Scotch Preacher' (1775); it praised the presbyterian system of the Church of Scotland for its tendency to support ecclesiastical and civil liberty and order, as well as doctrinal purity. The following year Bonar wrote his 'Memorial relative to the academy in Perth', dated 11 November 1761, which argued warmly against an educational system based on 'the Grammatical knowledge of Dead Languages and a skill in Metaphysical Subtiltys' and in favour of an alternative system grounded in practical scientific applications tending towards 'the Improvement of the Merchant, Mechanick and Farmer in their respective Arts'. Although never published it was an important expression of the philosophy of practical education that helped to define the pedagogical policy and curriculum of Perth Academy and similar institutions. 
Scarcely one month later, on 21 December 1761, Bonar died at the age of forty from what his son James called 'an inflammatory fever' (Bonar, xxv). His surviving manuscripts include several sermons and an unfinished book, 'History of Tyre', intended to show that 'national punishment has been, and ever must be the Consequence of National Guilt'. 


@@@@@


doc= 2817


Bonar, John (1747-1807), lawyer, was born on 22 or 24 August 1747 at Cockpen, near Dalkeith, the eldest of the ten children of John Bonar (1721-1761), Church of Scotland minister, and his wife, Christian Currier (1724-1771), daughter of Andrew Currier, writer to the signet, of Edinburgh. He was educated at the high school, Edinburgh, and between 1763 and 1769 at the University of Edinburgh. There in November 1764, together with William Creech, John Bruce, Henry Mackenzie, and Mr Belcher of Invermay, he co-founded the Speculative Society, and from 1764 until 1771 acted as secretary and treasurer of this debating society. In 1767 he published 'Considerations on the proposed application to his majesty and parliament for the establishment of a licensed theatre in Edinburgh', expressing strong moral hostility to the plan. It had been intended that Bonar should follow his father into the ministry but by 1766 he had begun to work as a temporary clerk in the office of the solicitor of excise in Scotland. He was appointed a deputy solicitor in 1767 and pursued this career for the rest of his life, eventually becoming first solicitor of excise. He was considered to be skilled in leading evidence from reluctant witnesses and expert in knowledge of the revenue laws. He helped to produce the parliamentary report on Scottish distilleries in 1798. He married Janet Palmer, but they separated; they had no children. Bonar died on 3 April 1807 at Worcester, while returning from an extended visit to Bath, taken for the sake of his health. He was buried in Greyfriars churchyard in Edinburgh on 18 April 1807. 


@@@@@


doc= 2818


John James Bonar (1803-1891), Free Church of Scotland minister, was born in Edinburgh on 25 March 1803. Educated at the high school and Edinburgh University, he was licensed by the presbytery of Edinburgh in April 1827. He served as assistant at Scoonie, Fife, before succeeding William Cunningham as assistant to Dr John Scott of the Middle parish church, Greenock, in January 1834. A year later, a dispute led to the withdrawal of a portion of the congregation with Bonar as their pastor. He was ordained minister of St Andrew's Chapel, West Stewart Street, Greenock, in August 1835. After the Disruption of 1843 Bonar and his congregation adhered to the Free Church and, unusually, were able to retain their building. Bonar remained in St Andrew's Free Church for the rest of his long ministry. 


@@@@@


doc= 2819


Percyvale, Thomasine (d. 1512), trader and school founder, was born in Week St Mary, near Bude in Cornwall, daughter of John and Joan Bonaventure. She became the subject of a legend, recounted by Richard Carew in his 'Survey of Cornwall' (1602), which described the visit of a London merchant to Week St Mary, where Thomasine, the daughter of a poor family, kept sheep on the moor. The merchant, admiring her beauty and virtues, rescued her from poverty and took her to London where she married three times, her last husband becoming mayor of the city, and founded a school in the parish of her birth. Far from being poor, however, Thomasine's parents were in fact of gentry rank and were related by marriage to the Dinhams of Lifton. She may have gone to London about 1460, possibly as a servant to Richard Nordon, a wealthy London tailor with business links in Cornwall. He was an associate of one of her brothers, Richard, who from 1463 was rector of Chelsfield in Kent where their parents were eventually buried. Her first husband, whom she married before 1466, was Henry Galle, a London tailor who supplied clothes to Sir John Howard, later duke of Norfolk (died 1485). Galle died probably in April 1466, leaving her his business, which she ran for a short while, before marrying Thomas Barnaby, another tailor and a fellow parishioner of St Dunstan-in-the-West. This marriage was even more short-lived, and Barnaby died in March 1467, leaving her a young but wealthy widow, capable of running a business and training apprentices. 
Thomasine's third husband, whom she married 'c'.1469, was 
Thomasine continued to run the business and train apprentices, and she maintained a large household at their mansion in Lombard Street, London. In November 1508 her prominence and wealth made her a target for a 'forced loan' of $1000 levied by the crown. She shared her late husband's interest in education and after his death brought up and instructed several poor children. In 1506 she began to make arrangements for her own grammar school, in Week St Mary, and the foundation deed of 10 July mirrored that of her late husband's school in Macclesfield, in providing for board and education to be given free of charge by a graduate of Oxford or Cambridge. The endowment, comprising lands in Devon purchased by Thomasine from Sir John Lisle, was to be placed in the hands of nineteen feoffees on her death. These arrangements were largely complete by February 1508 when Thomasine made the first of her two wills, in which she gave property to the Merchant Taylors' Company to augment the chantry, founded by her late husband in St Mary Woolnoth, which was administered by the company. Later that year she acquired a royal licence enabling her to found a chantry in the church at Week St Mary, and soon afterwards the first master of the school was appointed. She died before October 1512 and left the final arrangements for the school in the hands of her cousin, John Dinham. Her will, dated 26 March 1512, included a large number of cash bequests to servants, friends, and her remaining family in Cornwall, as well as money for charitable works. She also established numerous post-obit arrangements in London and Cornwall through her bequests to churches and religious houses. In a codicil dated 10 April she made over more lands in Devon to the trustees of her school. She was buried alongside her third husband in the church of St Mary Woolnoth in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 2820


Bond, Daniel (bap. 1725, d. 1803), painter and japanner, sometimes called John Daniel Bond, was baptized on 6 July 1725 at Stroud, Gloucestershire, the son of William Bond, bookseller and bookbinder, and probably Mary Duks; he was the elder brother of Capel Bond (bap. 1730, d. 1790), composer. His uncle the Revd Daniel Bond was usher of the Crypt School in Gloucester, and it is likely that he was educated there. Nothing is known of Bond's early career until 1761, when under the name Daniel Bond he exhibited a landscape drawing after Vernet at the Society of Artists in London. 
From 1762 to 1769 Bond exhibited over thirty landscape paintings at the Free Society of Artists in London, winning the second premium prize for landscape in 1764. His work was described as highly finished, with figures, in the style of George Lambert and Gaspar Poussin. It is possible that during this period he taught drawing; in 1763 James Butler exhibited 'A Drawing of a Landscape after Mr. Bond of Birmingham' at the Free Society of Artists. Bond exhibited only twice after 1769, showing one painting in 1775 and two in 1780, both at the Free Society of Artists. He also provided nine illustrations for William Shenstone's 'Works in Verse and Prose' (1764) and the tailpiece for the fourth edition of Robert Dodsley's 'Cleone: a Tragedy' (1765), all engraved by Charles Grignion. Besides painting on canvas, Bond was employed decorating japanned wares for the papier mache producer Henry Clay in Birmingham. The dates of his employment here are not known. He became a freeman of the city of Gloucester on 2 February 1789, when he was described as a painter and japanner of Birmingham. 
Bond was married; it is possible his wife was Susannah Hodgetts ('fl'. 1758-1803), to whom a Daniel Bond was married on 1 October 1758 at St Philip's, Birmingham, and who together had three daughters. Bond's personal circles were noted by contemporaries as 'confined' ('GM', 1803). He does not appear to have had any contact with influential groups in Birmingham concerned with the manufacture of wares, such as the Lunar Society. He died on 18 December 1803 at his home, at Hagley Row, Edgbaston, Birmingham. In the months following his death there was a small flurry of interest in the paintings owned by his widow in the 'Gentleman's Magazine', although no record of a public sale has been traced. A large landscape by Bond is in Aston Hall, Birmingham. 


@@@@@


doc= 2821


Bond, Denis (1588-1658), merchant and politician, was born on 30 August 1588, the eldest son of John Bond (1556-1633) of Lutton, in the Isle of Purbeck, Dorset, merchant and four times mayor of Weymouth, and his wife, Margaret (died 1631), daughter of Richard Pitt of Weymouth. John Bond was an apprentice in France at the time of the St Bartholomew's day massacre (1572) and his son, in turn, travelled abroad in connection with the family's trading interests, journeying to St Malo in 1603 and spending the years 1605-7 in Cadiz. He appears to have moved to Dorchester in 1610, when he married Joane (1588-1620), daughter of John Gould, a director of the Dorchester Company; they had two sons -- John Bond (1612-1676), MP for Melcombe Regis from 1645 and vice-chancellor of Cambridge University in 1658-60, and William (died 1669) -- and three daughters. Two years after Joane's death Bond married Lucy (died 1651), daughter of William Lawrence of Winterbourne Steepleton, Dorset; they had four sons, including Samuel (MP for Poole and Melcombe Regis) and Nathaniel Bond, lawyer and politician, and two daughters. 
Bond set himself up as a clothier in Dorchester, becoming a large employer by 1630, and expanding through purchase his inherited property, which included the Lutton estate. Family resources may have been insufficient for him to acquire a formal education but he built up a library, largely theological, and, over the course of several years, compiled a 'chronology' of local, national, and international events, including political events from the 1640s and 1650s, and collected genealogical information, registering a family pedigree which placed his ancestors in Somerset. He established a local political career in Dorchester, securing office as constable (1619), capital burgess (1621), bailiff (1630), lord mayor (1635), and alderman (1636), and winning the friendship of the prominent local minister and puritan colonizer John White. In 1640 he was elected a Dorchester MP in both the Short and Long parliaments, in the latter of which he served on 263 committees. He retained his local power base, sitting on the county committee for Dorset in 1643-50 and being appointed a militia commissioner in 1648. 
On the radical parliamentarian wing throughout the 1640s, Bond supported the 'war party' drive for army reorganization in 1643. He also proved himself unremitting towards opponents of the cause, civil or religious. Along with several other MPs he ransacked the chapel of the queen's Capuchins at Somerset House in February 1643 and spoke against allowing William Laud to defend himself during the archbishop's impeachment. A member of the committee for compounding with delinquents from September 1643, he consistently opposed the granting of generous terms to parliament's opponents; in one debate in 1648 on the exception from pardon of named royalists he stated that he hoped 'to see the day when we may have power to hang the greatest lord of them all (if he deserves it) without trial by his peers' ('Mercurius Pragmaticus', 10-17 Oct 1648). Even so, when named as a judge for the trial of Charles I he did not attend any sessions of the proceedings and did not sign the royal death warrant. Nor did he attend parliament between Pride's Purge in December 1648 and the execution of the king the following January. 
Bond did, however, return to political activity under the Rump regime, actively participating from November 1649 as a member of the Rump's first council of state; he would be elected to all five councils of state during the Commonwealth years, and was to serve two monthly stints (1652 and 1653) as council president. He served on the council's admiralty committee from 1650 and became a recognized expert on naval affairs. In foreign policy he seems to have acted in association with Bulstrode Whitelocke: in January 1652 both men may have been involved in an attempt to secure Dunkirk for England, as well as participating in negotiations with the Dutch. In May, Bond and Cromwell were empowered to investigate the clash between the Dutch and English fleets which would prompt the First Anglo-Dutch War. The experience seems to have inclined Cromwell towards support of the war, and perhaps the same is true of Bond. Over the summer of 1652 both men were engaged with Colonel William Purefoy in discussing the possible movement of troops to Dover for coastal defence, but already it was being reported that Bond, like Cromwell, was willing to countenance moves towards peace. He also served on several parliamentary committees on law reform, though he opposed reform 'at critical moments' (Worden, 116), and on the Hale commission on legal reform of 1652. He was one of four commissioners appointed in December 1652 to inspect and reorganize the treasuries, retaining that post until May 1653. 
With the fall of the Commonwealth, Bond has been seen as having 'apparently abandoned political ambitions and accepted the semi-sinecure office of Clerk of the Pells and Treasurer's Clerk in the Lower Exchequer' (Aylmer, 118); he already held the office of master of the Savoy Hospital, granted in 1645. He was, however, appointed to Cromwell's council for trade in July 1655, and was elected to the protectorate parliaments of 1654 (Weymouth) and 1656-8 (Melcombe Regis). According to Thomas Burton's parliamentary diary, Bond made at least fifty speeches in the 1656/7 session and spoke sixty-six times in the 1657/8 session. He criticized members who absented themselves to attend to personal affairs and opposed lifetime clerical appointments. Still hostile to religious toleration, he favoured the execution of the Quaker radical James Naylor in 1656. He seems to have supported Cromwell's plans to nominate members of an upper house in 1657, and was sufficiently trusted by the lord protector to be one of the commission appointed in 1658 to tender an oath of loyalty to prospective MPs. 
Bond died in London on 30 August 1658 just a few days before Cromwell's death, a coincidence often cited by royalists. He was buried in September at Westminster Abbey, only to have his remains exhumed in 1661, like those of other parliamentarian leaders, and removed to a common grave at St Margaret's, Westminster. 


@@@@@


doc= 2822


Bond, Sir Edward Augustus (1815-1898), librarian, was born on 31 December 1815 at Hanwell, the son of the Revd John Bond, who conducted a large private school there, and Sophia Bond. He was admitted to Merchant Taylors' School in December 1830. In 1833 he was appointed assistant at the Record Office under the supervision of Sir Thomas Duffus Hardy and the Revd Joseph Hunter. In 1838 he was appointed assistant in the British Museum manuscripts department, where he rapidly earned the respect and affection of the keeper, Sir Frederic Madden, for his expertise and industry. He married in 1847 Caroline Frances, a relative, daughter of the Revd Richard Harris Barham, author of the 'Ingoldsby Legends'. They had five daughters. 
At the British Museum, Bond became indispensable as a channel for conducting the manuscripts department's business with Sir Antony Panizzi, the principal librarian, with whom Madden was not on speaking terms, and it says much for Bond's tact and integrity that he was trusted by both these imperious and exigent officers. Madden praised Bond warmly to the royal commission on the British Museum in 1848, and his good opinion even survived Bond's appointment by the trustees as Egerton librarian in 1852, nominally in charge of the Bridgewater bequest of manuscripts. The earl of Bridgewater had provided capital for a stipend of $227 to be paid to the holder of this post, and in 1832 the trustees decided that it should be paid to the librarians of the manuscripts department. It was in practice paid to the keeper of manuscripts, but his salary was reduced by the same amount, a violation of the terms of the Bridgewater bequest for which the trustees were censured in the royal commission report of 1850. Their response was to separate the Egerton librarianship from the keepership of manuscripts for the first and last time, so that Madden could no longer complain that he had the office without the salary. This was a meaningless ploy, as he was still responsible for the custody of the Egerton manuscripts as head of the department, and it was a tribute to the value that Madden placed on Bond's services that their friendship outlasted what he called 'a pitiful and unworthy trick to take away the money from me to augment Bond's salary' (Madden, journal, 8 May 1852). 
Bond succeeded John Holmes as assistant keeper on the latter's death in 1854. Madden delegated much routine administration to him and when he succeeded him as keeper in 1866 he was virtually running the department. He at once addressed its most pressing problem, the twelve years' arrears of cataloguing. He gave priority, however, to the creation of the class catalogue of manuscripts. Descriptions of manuscripts were cut out of published catalogues, arranged in subject order, and laid down in folio volumes; a subject index was provided, and descriptions were added when new catalogues were published. This invaluable unpublished research tool made it possible for the first time to learn what the department held on particular subjects. Catalogues of additions between 1854 and 1875, published in 1875-7, cleared the cataloguing arrears, and further special catalogues were produced, notably the 'Facsimiles of Ancient Charters' (1873-8) and the 'Catalogue of Spanish Manuscripts' (1875-93). He advocated the creation of a separate department of oriental manuscripts, which was established in 1867. 
In August 1878 to the surprise of many, including himself, Bond was appointed principal librarian upon the resignation of John Winter Jones, the post having been unexpectedly declined by the heir apparent, Sir Charles Thomas Newton. He immediately set about making the museum more welcoming and useful to the public. Almost his first act was to install electric light in the reading-room, an innovation attended with some misgiving in view of the primitive and hazardous circuitry and apparatus. It was, however, an inestimable boon for readers: the room was now open until 8 p.m. instead of having to be shut upon the failure of natural light, which often happened in the mornings when winter fogs descended. The period when the reading-room was closed for cleaning was cut from eighteen to eight days. The galleries were opened to the public every day instead of three and a half days a week, and the ban on babes in arms was ended. The public restaurant was improved. Accommodation for books was greatly increased at modest expense by the installation of sliding presses suspended from the grid-iron floors of the bookstacks, modelled on those in use at the Bethnal Green Free Library. Improved accommodation for manuscripts, newspapers, prints, and drawings was provided by the completion of the White wing to the east of the colonnade in 1884, built with the legacy of $72,000 from William White, bequeathed in 1823 but subject to a life interest which did not expire until 1879. The delicate business of transferring the natural history collections to the new museum in South Kensington was successfully accomplished in 1880. 
Bond also speedily addressed the intractable problem of the printed books catalogue, which then consisted of manuscript title slips prepared by transcribers and laid down in folio volumes. As the slips grew in number, the volumes were continually being broken down and rebound; between 1850 and 1875 their number had swollen from 150 to 2250. The situation was out of control and the expense of the endless relaying and rebinding brought repeated rebukes from the Treasury. Bond capitalized on the Treasury's alarm and in 1880 negotiated its consent to the printing of all new accession titles and the publication of the existing manuscript volumes. The 'General Catalogue of Printed Books' took twenty years to complete, and with its supplement, published in 1905, it described the library as it was on the last day of the nineteenth century. The British Museum Library was the first library of its size to make its contents known to all the world through a comprehensive printed catalogue, to the inestimable benefit of literature and scholarship. 
Bond's personal contributions to scholarship were substantial. For the Hakluyt Society he edited Giles Fletcher's 'Of the Russe Common Wealth' and the Russian travels of Sir Jerome Horsley (1856). He edited the 'Speeches... in the Trial of Warren Hastings' (4 vols., 1859-61), and for the 'Rolls Series' the 'Chronica abbatiae de Melsa' (3 vols., 1866-8). In 1873 he founded the Palaeographical Society with his assistant keeper, Edward Maunde Thompson, which did much to develop palaeography as a scientific discipline, and he began publication of the invaluable 'Facsimiles of Ancient Manuscripts' (5 vols., 1873-88). Also with Thompson, he published 'The Utrecht Psalter' (1874). He was elected FSA in 1880 and retired as principal librarian in 1888. Bond's colleague Richard Garnett wrote of him that 'beneath a cold and reserved exterior' he had 'a most kind heart and truly elevated mind, far above every petty consideration and delighting to dwell in a purely intellectual sphere' (Garnett, 338). He managed to remain aloof from the professional jealousies, feuds, and intrigues rife in the museum for much of his career, and he was entirely without self-importance; he was always receptive to new ideas for the improvement of the museum from whatever quarter, and having accepted them, he would immediately put them into practice. A photograph of 'c'.1880 hints at his benevolent disposition: a broad, open face, generous mouth, and penetrating but kindly eyes. 
Official recognition of Bond's great service to the museum was tardy; although he was appointed CB in 1885, he was made KCB only shortly before he died at his house, 64 Prince's Square, Bayswater, on 2 January 1898. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 2823


Bond, George (1750-1796), lawyer, was the younger son of George Bond (died 1792), of Farnham, Surrey. His mother was a daughter of Sir Thomas Chitty (died 1792). He and his elder brother, Thomas, were both called to the bar on 12 February 1779 at the Middle Temple. 
Bond became famous as a counsel in criminal cases, and obtained a large practice at the Surrey sessions. He often played on his local associations, referring to 'my native county', which rarely failed to sway Surrey juries, who were enthralled by his coarse and vulgar humour. A common verdict at the Surrey sessions was: 'We finds for Serjeant Bond and costs' (Polson, 207). He was made a serjeant in 1786, and a king's serjeant in 1795. He married Kitty Cooke on 1 April 1793 at St George's, Hanover Square, London. His wife was a granddaughter of one of the protonotaries of the common pleas and they had two children. Bond died on 19 March 1796, aged only forty-six, from a rheumatic fever. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 2824


Bond, Henry John Hayles (1801-1883), physician, younger son of the Revd William Bond (1745-1832), fellow of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, and rector of Wheatacre, Norfolk, and his wife, Martha Hayles, was born in Wheatacre on 22 December 1801. He was educated at Norwich grammar school under Edward Valpy. He studied medicine at Cambridge, London, Edinburgh, and Paris, and graduated MB at Corpus Christi, Cambridge, in 1825, and MD in 1831. 
By 1831 Bond had settled in Cambridge, where he soon established a large practice. On 11 December 1834 he married Mary, daughter of William Carpenter, of Toft Marks, Norfolk, and niece of Sir Edward Berry, bt.; they had a large family. In 1835 he was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, and in 1851 he was appointed regius professor of physic at Cambridge in succession to John Haviland. From 1858 to 1863 he was a member of the General Medical Council. He resigned his professorship in 1872, having largely retired from practice some time before. 
Bond published nothing except an excellent syllabus of his lectures, but his tenure of office was contemporary with a great rise in the reputation of the medical school at Cambridge. He was a man of great integrity and ability, but was shy and retiring, and an enemy of ostentation. He died at his home, 4 Regent Street, Cambridge, on 3 September 1883, and was buried in Cambridge cemetery. He was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 2825


Bond, John (c.1550-1612), physician and classical scholar, is of unknown parentage. He was associated for the greater part of his life with Taunton, Somerset. He may have been related to George Bond of Trull, 2 miles south of Taunton, who became lord mayor of London in 1588. However, as MP for Taunton in 1601 he described himself as 'a Devonshire man' (Townshend, 306). He was 'educated in grammaticals' at Winchester College, and from there proceeded to New College, Oxford, in 1569, 'about the nineteenth year of his age'. He gained the degree of BA on 4 February 1574, 'being either one of the clerks or chaplains of New coll. and much noted for his proficiency in academical learning' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.': 'Fasti', 1.115). On 6 July 1579 he received the MA and later in the same year he took up the mastership of the grammar school at Taunton, a post which lay within the gift of the warden and fellows of New College. 
For the next twenty-two years Bond was engaged in the Sisyphean labour of schoolteaching, as he characterizes it in the opening words of the preface to his edition of Horace's works: 'While I was undertaking the task of educating the young, a stone that I rolled for twenty years and more' (Horace, sig. A4'v'). But his efforts, however arduous, were crowned with considerable success, since 'he did exercise such an admirable way of teaching, that many departed thence so excellently well grounded in humane learning, that they proved afterwards eminent either in church or state' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.': 'Fasti', 1.115). During his years as a schoolmaster Bond also took up the study of medicine, eventually becoming well known as a physician: 'at length being in a manner worn out with the drudgery of a school, he did for diversion, I cannot say profit, practise physic, tho' he had taken no degree in that faculty... and became at length eminent therein' (ibid.). When he entered parliament in 1601 it was as a physician rather than as a classical scholar that he was known to his fellow MPs. 
Bond's first intervention in the House of Commons occurred during the debate on a bill designed to increase attendance at church on Sundays. He argued that the bill would place excessive power in the hands of JPs. By speaking of the 'luxuriant authority' of JPs he caused grave offence to certain prominent members, including the puritan Sir Francis Hastings, MP for Bridgwater, Somerset, the promoter of the bill. Hastings accused him of making 'dangerous and seditious' speeches, described his strictures on JPs as 'insolent', and demanded that he be called to the bar of the house (Townshend, 277-8). Bond apologized, but on the third reading of the bill again declared his opposition, calling it 'altogether needless' (ibid., 317). When the bill was defeated by a single vote Sir William Knollys, comptroller of the household, delivered the following rebuke: 'We have been often troubled by a Physician (meaning Mr. 'Bond')... He troubled us with 'Aristotle' and other books; if he had stayed there, it had been well:... it is a most intolerable disorder' (ibid., 321). During the first parliament of James I's reign Bond proved to be an ardent advocate of union between England and Scotland. His last recorded intervention came on 2 May 1610, when his speech provoked 'much hissing and spitting' ('JHC', 1.423). 
Bond left no writings on medicine. As a Latinist, however, he enjoyed a lasting reputation, based on his editions of Horace, first printed in 1606 and dedicated to Henry, prince of Wales, and of Persius, published posthumously in 1614. His notes, the fruit of his experience as a schoolmaster, are concise and to the point. For Horace much of his material is derived from the commentary of Lambinus, but Bond concentrates on the essentials, giving the sense of the passage where Horace's poetic expression is not immediately clear and explaining geographical, historical, and mythological references as briefly as possible. His edition very quickly gained the approval of writers on education. In the year of his death John Brinsley, the author of 'Ludus literarius: or, The Grammar Schoole', recommended 'M. Bonde upon Horace; who hath by his paines made that difficult Poet so easie, that a very childe which hath been well entred, and hath read the former Schoole Authors in any good manner may go thorough it with facilitie, except in very few places' (Brinsley, 122). Bond wrote the preface to his edition of Persius in 1610, but died before it could be published, and it was seen through the press by his son-in-law Roger Prowse, who was married to his daughter Elizabeth. Little is known about his wife, Anstice, who survived him. Wood states that his commentaries were used at free-schools and universities and frequently printed abroad. At least twenty separate editions of Bond's Horace were printed, fifteen of them outside Britain. The most eloquent tribute to his achievement as a scholar was paid by the Parisian publisher Nicolas-Louis Achaintre, who in 1806 produced a new edition of Horace with Bond's annotations. Achaintre's preface sets Bond above every other commentator on Horace. 
In his will Bond stated that he had made provision for the construction of a hospital in Magdalene Lane, Taunton. His wife received his house in Taunton and most of his goods. He died on 2 August 1612 and was buried in the chancel of the church of St Mary Magdalene in the town. 


@@@@@


doc= 2826


Bond, John (1612-1676), college head, was born on 12 April 1612, the son of Denis Bond (1588-1658), clothier of Dorchester, Dorset, and later MP for Lutton in the same county, and his wife, Joane (1588-1620), daughter of John Gould, a director of the Dorchester Company. Nathaniel Bond was his youngest half-brother. He was educated first by John White, rector of Dorchester, and then at St Catharine's College, Cambridge. There he matriculated at Michaelmas 1628, graduated BA in 1632 and proceeded MA in 1635. He appears never to have married. Bond was for long, and understandably, confused with an Exeter minister of the same name, born in Dorset about the same time, who also had a connection with John White, succeeding him as master of the Savoy. 
Following the issue of a writ on 25 September 1645, Bond and William Sydenham were admitted as the two MPs for Melcombe Regis, Dorset. Bond was already a member of the county committee and on 18 October he was admitted to the post of recorder of Weymouth and Melcombe Regis; he retained the position until 23 April 1649 when he was replaced by Samuel Bond (who was perhaps his half-brother). In 1646, in a controversial appointment, Bond became master of Trinity Hall, Cambridge, vacant through the death of Thomas Eden. After the mastership was declined by John Selden, on 28 October 1645 the fellows elected Dr Robert King. King, however, was politically unacceptable to parliament, which on 7 March following appointed Bond to the position. He appeared at Trinity Hall and was admitted on the 11th of that month; about the same time he was admitted to the degree of doctor of civil law. On 26 March 1646 the Commons' journal reported the house's approval of the appointment to the college of 'John Bond, DCL, a member of this House' ('JHC', 4, 1644-6, 489). 
On 5 June 1646 Bond was named to a parliamentary commission for the exclusion of 'notorious offenders' from the sacrament, and the following May he was appointed a commissioner for appeals from the visitors of the University of Oxford. On 29 August 1648 he was named to a committee of both houses to judge scandalous offences, but he was one of those secluded at Pride's Purge a few weeks later. On 4 May the following year he was appointed professor of law in Gresham College in the place of Dr Thomas Leonard. He was also appointed as a master in chancery on 22 May 1650, holding the office until 3 May 1655. He was admitted as member of the Inner Temple on 20 January 1651 and on 1 February was called as an associate of its bench. 
Bond continued as master of Trinity -- on 20 November 1655 he was paid $53, the arrears due to him for the augmentation earlier granted to his position -- and also acted as vice-chancellor of Cambridge University in 1658-9. He was one of the members readmitted to the Rump Parliament by Monck in 1660, and was named as one of the militia commissioners of Dorset in the act of 12 March 1660. However, Bond lost his preferments later that same year; he left Trinity Hall before the reappointment of Robert King on 3 August and resigned his Gresham professorship on 23 October. He retired to Dorset and died in 1676; he was buried at Steeple, Dorset, on 30 July of that year. 


@@@@@


doc= 2827


Bond, John James (1819-1883), archivist, was born on 9 December 1819, the son of William Andrew Bond of Ashford, Kent. In 1841 he entered the public service as a clerk, assisting Henry Cole, his brother-in-law, in the arrangement of the public records when they were transferred from Whitehall to the Royal Riding School of Carlton House. Bond became an assistant keeper in 1855 and in August 1862 he was appointed superintendent of the literary search room. In 1866 he published a 'Handy Book of Rules and Tables for Verifying Dates of Historical Events'. This work was well regarded but Bond never rose above the rank of assistant keeper because of his 'oddness', which by 1883 had reached the point where it could be called mental instability. He was convinced that he was an illegitimate son of the duke of Sussex, a belief that his colleagues regarded as delusionary. He died on 9 December 1883 at his home, 96 Philbeach Gardens, Earls Court, London, where he had lived with his sister, Marian Fairman Cole. 


@@@@@


doc= 2828


Bond, John Linnell (1764-1837), architect, was born on 14 September 1764. Of his parents nothing is known. Though described as having been taught architectural drawing by James Malton, it is more probable that it was from Thomas Malton junior that he received instruction, for when exhibiting his first design, for the inside of a banqueting room, at the Royal Academy in 1782, his address was given as Mr Malton's, Carlisle Street, Soho. In the same year Thomas Malton junior exhibited a design for the front of a banqueting house, when his address was given as 8 Carlisle Street, Soho. Bond entered the Royal Academy Schools in 1783, aged nineteen, and won a silver medal in 1784, and a gold medal in 1786 with a design for a mausoleum. His architectural drawings and designs, which he continued to exhibit at the Royal Academy until 1814, included views of the temples of Jupiter and Minerva, as well as Tintern Abbey, Raglan Castle, and other Gothic ruins. His varied designs included an anatomical theatre for J. Brooks in Blenheim (now Ramillies) Street, a cast-iron bridge over the Thames near the Adelphi at the Strand (eventually built by John Rennie to his own designs), a naval obelisk, an altar, an Egyptian hall, a 'Gothic villa' and several villas at Wimbledon, Bushey, and in Kent. Of his exhibited designs, those which include further reference to construction include 'a room erected at Southampton Castle for the Marquis of Lansdowne after the manner of the Moorish architecture at Granada' (Papworth, 1.108), and a shop-front 'lately erected' to Messrs Tatham and Bailey's premises, 13-14 Mount Street, Grosvenor Square, London. His most important work appears to have been that commissioned by Sir Gerard Noel MP, for whom Bond built the nucleus of Exton Hall, Rutland (1811), and the neo-classical Stamford Hotel at Stamford, Lincolnshire ('c'.1810-1829). 
In 1818 Bond travelled to Italy and Greece; he returned in 1821, after which date he appears to have ceased practising as an architect, although he continued to contribute several papers on architectural subjects to the 'Literary Gazette'. In 1833 he exhibited at the Society (later Royal Society) of British Artists, Suffolk Street, 'The interior of the Temple of Jupiter at Olympia, designed from the description of it in the 5th book of Pausanias', and in 1834 'The interior of the Temple of Apollo at Delphi, designed from the description of it in the 10th book of Pausanias', together with 'The interior of the Parthenon at Athens, attempted to be restored from the description of it in the 1st book of Pausanias, in Pliny, and in other authors' (Johnson, 1.47). A noted classical scholar, William Gifford, editor of the 'Quarterly Review', gave Bond a copy of his translation of Juvenal for comment. It was suggested by a contemporary that: 'his retired habits and the modesty of his disposition rendered him averse to appear before his public, and that he preferred to confine his labours to the gratification and service of the few friends who had discernment enough to appreciate his merits. (Colvin, 'Archs'., 136)' He died, apparently unmarried, at his home, 87 Newman Street, London, on 6 November 1837, leaving in manuscript a translation of Vitruvius on which he had worked for more than twenty years. 


@@@@@


doc= 2829


Bond, Martin (1558?-1643), merchant, was the third or fourth son of 
Settling in Aldgate ward, London, in a house leased from the corporation, Bond soon became a member of common council, and in 1606 was sufficiently trusted to be included in the small committee named to oversee the preparations for the visit to London of James I and his brother-in-law, the king of Denmark. But though he twice served as a London auditor, was briefly deputy governor of the Irish Society (1613-14), and rose to the rank of deputy alderman (by 1626), he never attained the highest City offices, failing in several elections during the 1620s to unseat Cornelius Fish as chamberlain. His talents in the field of bookkeeping were nevertheless well regarded, for after two years' service as an auditor of St Bartholomew's Hospital, he was appointed its treasurer, which post he held for twenty-two years until his resignation in 1642 due to ill health. He also served as master of the Haberdashers' Company in 1624-5, and was the first president of the Honourable Artillery Company (1616-18). In addition he twice represented London in parliament (in 1624 and 1625), where he spoke in defence of the monopoly of the merchant adventurers against the criticisms of the outports. His financial expertise undoubtedly explains why he was named as one of the eight treasurers of the subsidies voted by parliament in 1624. 
Dying unmarried, Bond was buried on 11 May 1643 in St Helen's Church, Bishopsgate, where his father lay interred, rather than in his own parish church, St Katharine Cree. He remained wealthy enough to make generous bequests to both the Haberdashers' Company and St Bartholomew's Hospital. His nephew William erected an impressive stone monument over his tomb to his 'piety, prudence and honesty', in which Bond was depicted as a young captain at Tilbury, sitting in armour in a tent, outside which a servant holds his horse and two sentries are on guard with matchlocks. His portrait in oils, by an unknown artist, has been preserved in the hospital, with a pewter inkstand bearing his arms. 


@@@@@


doc= 2830


Bond, Nathaniel (1634-1707), lawyer, was born on 14 June 1634 at Dorchester, Dorset, the fourth son of one of the town's puritan leaders, Denis Bond (1588-1658), a linen draper, and his second wife, Lucy (died 1651), daughter of William Lawrence of Winterbourne Steepleton, Dorset, and widow of John Fley, vicar of Buckerell, Devon. John Bond was one of his half-brothers. In 1648 the parliamentary visitors at Oxford University awarded Nathaniel Bond a fellowship at All Souls College. He matriculated from Wadham College in 1650, graduating as bachelor of civil law after four years' study, and proceeded to the Inner Temple, where he was called to the bar in 1661. With only a legacy of $500 under his father's will he must have drawn upon his professional earnings to purchase Lutton, the ancestral home of the Bond family, from his elder brothers. On 21 December 1667 he married Elizabeth Churchill ('b'. 1648/9), daughter and coheir of John Churchill, rector of Steeple in Dorset. She died without issue on 18 December 1674, and Bond's second marriage, on 3 August 1675, marked a decisive advance in social status. Mary (1641/2-1728), with whom he had two sons, was the daughter of Lewis Williams of Shitterton and the widow of Thomas Browne of Frampton; both families ranked among the established Dorset gentry and both had supported parliament in the civil war. With a dowry of $2000 and a jointure of two large farms on the Frampton estate she was well provided for. 
Bond succeeded his brother Samuel as recorder of Weymouth in 1673. He was elected as a whig for Corfe Castle in 1679 and for his father's old constituency of Dorchester in 1681. But he never showed much interest in parliament. Upon Churchill's death in 1682, Bond presented to Steeple the controversial Samuel Bold, whose sermon against persecution was published by Awnsham Churchill in the same year. In consequence the grand jury at the winter assizes of 1684 found a true bill against him for seditious practices. Like Bold, Bond was a strong supporter of James II's policy of toleration in 1687-8, with its repeal of Roman Catholic as well as protestant nonconformist disabilities. He became a bencher of the Inner Temple in 1687 and was recommended as court candidate for Weymouth; but as one of James's whig collaborators, he failed to find a seat in the Convention Parliament, though he accepted the somewhat empty dignity of serjeant-at-law in May 1689. By the purchase of Creech Grange in 1691 he took the decisive step that propelled the family into county magnate status. He was advanced to king's serjeant and, according to family tradition, refused a judgeship from love of solitude. Regaining his Dorchester seat in 1695, he was one of the few whigs to scruple at the attainder of Sir John Fenwick. In 1699 he was made recorder of Poole. He retired from his profession on the accession of Anne and the return to power of the tories, and died at Creech Grange on 31 August 1707. He was buried at Steeple the following day. A portrait of his widow, who survived him for more than twenty years, remains with his descendants, but no likeness of Bond himself survives. 


@@@@@


doc= 2831


Bond, Nicholas (1540-1608), college head, was from Lincolnshire. He matriculated as a pensioner at St John's College, Cambridge, on 27 May 1559 and was elected Lady Margaret scholar on 27 June, graduating BA in 1563/4. In 1565 he was admitted a fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford, taking his MA in that university on 17 October 1567. In 1574 he was admitted to the rectory of Bourton on the Water, Gloucestershire, on presentation of the crown, and resigned his fellowship of Magdalen College the following year. On 15 July 1580 he was awarded a doctorate of divinity for a thesis concerning the question 'Is God's will immutable?'. On 1 March 1582 Bond was presented by Queen Elizabeth to the fifth prebendal stall of Westminster Abbey, and later in that year he was named as one of those qualified to confer with captured Jesuits. In or before 1584 he was appointed a chaplain-in-ordinary to the queen, and a chaplain of the Savoy. But his further progress was not smooth. 
On the death of Richard Alvey, the master of the Temple, a protracted struggle developed over the succession to his post, not least because one of the candidates was the presbyterian Walter Travers. In August 1584 Whitgift, the new archbishop of Canterbury, wrote to the queen strongly opposing Travers and recommending instead 'Dr Bond', a man 'very fit for that office, and willing also to take pains therein'. Nevertheless, Bond's candidature was rejected. Burghley, the lord treasurer, seems with many reservations to have favoured the other man for the mastership. The lawyers' preference may also have played a role in Bond's failure. Burghley considered Bond 'one well learned and honest', but believed that 'if he came not to the place with some applause of the company he should be weary thereof' (Strype, 'Whitgift', 1.343). Whitgift could not secure the victory of his protege, but he was able to block Travers: in the end a compromise candidate, Richard Hooker, was installed. 
Bond appears to have carried out his duties as a canon of Westminster more conscientiously than many, for as Dean Goodman reported in April 1586, he was one of those 'most commonly present' in midsummer quarter and was ranked among 'such as preach and come to divine service in their habits being present' (Strype, 'Annals', 3, pt ii, 415-16). Further preferments followed. On 3 May 1586 Bond acquired the rectory of Britwell, Oxfordshire, and in 1590 that of Alresford, Hampshire. In 1586 he was proposed by Whitgift for the deanery of Worcester, but was unsuccessful, despite the sympathy of Burghley. 
In 1589 Bond's ambition, and the strength of his connections and influence, was subjected to a most exacting test. Lawrence Humphrey, the president of Magdalen College, was a Calvinist scholar whose alleged laxity in government and religion had nevertheless for some years aroused puritan disapproval. Humphrey's death on 1 February 1589 gave rise to a division as to the choice of his successor. The name of Ralph Smith was canvassed among the 'precise party', notably by the college vice-president, John Harding. Within days, however, the fellows received from the queen a letter which brooked no argument: 'we will and command you, and every one of you, immediately upon receipt hereof... to nominate and elect unto the place of your president the said Doctor Bond' (Harriss, 19). The privy council was also moved to write in Bond's favour. Such heavy pressure probably owed much to the continuing patronage of Archbishop Whitgift, determined as ever to resist puritan advances. In the college, however, the ranks of Bond's more precise opponents were swelled by those who resented royal and governmental interference. Others were unimpressed by his performance in the roles of dean of arts in 1570, bursar in 1571-2, and vice-president in 1572, recalling his 'lightness in behaviour and small skill or care of matters in our House' (ibid.). On the day of the senior fellows' decision, Ralph Smith emerged with eight votes, but it seems that some of Bond's supporters, sensing defeat, had planned a means to evade it: 'before the scrutiny could be announced, Swithin Stroud, one of Bond's voters, snatched away the papers from the scrutator, and rushing out of the chapel with his friends, contrived to delay the election beyond the statutable time' (Cooper, 'Ath. Cantab.', 2.466). Feeling ran very high and the official candidate was dubbed the 'bond of iniquity' by Smith's partisans. But their loud protests at the frustration of the majority will were to no avail: since the election had not been valid under the statutes, the right of presentation lapsed to the queen under the royal prerogative. On 4 April 1589 Elizabeth signed letters patent appointing Bond to the presidency. 
Very soon after, on 16 July 1589, Bond was appointed vice-chancellor of Oxford University, probably on the urging of his old patron, Whitgift, and of Sir Christopher Hatton, the chancellor. Hatton seems to have expected rapid progress in enforcing regulations more rigorously and in imposing upon the advanced protestant party the oath of subscription to Whitgift's three articles. On 8 July 1590 he ordered the vice-chancellor to read out before congregation a catalogue of the university's supposed failings in such matters. Bond refused, protesting in a letter to Richard Bancroft that the charges were unjust and tended to his own disgrace. Regulations, he asserted, were taken seriously: at Magdalen, for example, the 'scholars dare not presume to speak any other language than Latin' (Wilson, 135-6). A few days later, on 16 July 1590, Bond resigned the vice-chancellorship. 
Bond served a second term for the year from 13 July 1592; in September, the queen visited Oxford and was feasted at Magdalen. Here, Bond's influence was considerable. Support for puritanism dwindled during his presidency, though it was to revive under his successor, John Harding. It is indeed ironic that as an executor of the will of the countess of Sussex, Bond played a role in the foundation in 1596 of the puritan stronghold of Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge. But at Magdalen his regime was not one of rooted traditionalism; purchase for the library of books by theologians of the reformed churches increased considerably during his presidency, and there were important reforms and improvements. In December 1591 Bond instructed that the 'poor scholars' were to attend the grammar school. The students of logic and sophistry were divided into classes with lecturers appointed for each; efforts were made to require bachelors to make more determined efforts to improve themselves. Meanwhile, the college prospered. By the mid-1590s the accounts showed a growing surplus which was used for repairs and a new organ for the chapel. 
For half a century after the Reformation in England, the independent spirit of Magdalen College had often inconvenienced governments. The election of Bond marked something of a watershed. When Hatton died on 20 November 1591, there was pressure from the advanced protestant party for the appointment of the earl of Essex to the university chancellorship, a proposal strenuously opposed by the court and by Whitgift. It was Bond, more than any other individual in the university, who worked for and secured the election of Thomas Sackville, Lord Buckhurst. Generally, 'Elizabeth had confidence in Bond, not least for his ability to keep the puritan element under control and he did much to strengthen ties with the court' (Harriss, 21). A tradition of independence survived, however, in the college. In 1602 Bond found it expedient to write to Burghley, explaining that his own strong recommendation for a fellowship for a court nominee, Edward Othen, had been insufficient to prevent the Magdalen fellows rejecting him in favour of John Burrows. 
On the death of Queen Elizabeth, Bond published Latin verses in her honour. He continued in his position after the accession of the new king. It was during his presidency that on 28 August 1605 Prince Henry matriculated at Magdalen, and with King James was entertained at the college; extensive renovation was carried out in advance of the royal visit. Bond died on 8 February 1608. He was a benefactor of the college library and the Bodleian. His own collection must have been very extensive, since it was valued at $290. Among the more unusual bequests were the two globes and mathematical instruments granted to his servant, George Neighbour, whom he had long permitted to use them. Bond was buried in the chapel of Magdalen College, Oxford, where there is an inscription in his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 2832


Bond, Oliver (1760/61-1798), woollen merchant and Irish nationalist, was born at St Johnstown, co. Donegal, the son of a dissenting minister. His full name may have been Oliver Cromwell Bond, as this was used in contemporary reports of his radical activities. After serving an apprenticeship in Londonderry he moved about 1783 to Dublin, where he worked as a woollen draper, initially at Pill Lane and, from 1786, in larger premises at 13 Lower Bridge Street. In June 1791 he married Eleanor Jackson (died 1849), daughter of Henry Jackson, iron founder and later a senior United Irish figure; they had four children. 
Bond joined the Dublin Society of United Irishmen at its inception in 1791. William James MacNeven later commented that 'He was one of the earliest in planning and promoting the union of Irishmen... His feelings were truly Irish, his principles those of an enlightened republican' (Madden, 4.166). Bond was closely involved in attempts during late 1792 to establish a new radical volunteer force in Dublin, styled the National Guard. On 1 March 1793 he and Simon Butler, as secretary and president of the Dublin Society of United Irishmen, were arrested on account of an allegedly libellous paper that had criticized the secret committee of the Irish House of Lords. Bond denied signing the paper but admitted that it had been printed on his authority. Both men were sentenced to six months' imprisonment in Dublin's Newgate gaol and fined $500. 
During the later 1790s Bond became a central member of the militant United Irishmen, who frequently used his home at Bridge Street as a meeting place. In 1797 Lady Lucy Fitzgerald described him as 'a great merchant, one of the handsomest and most delightful men to all appearances there ever was' (Maher, 102). R. R. Madden suggested that by 1797 Bond was a member of both the northern executive and the Leinster directory. On 12 March 1798 the Leinster delegates met at Bond's house but the organization had been betrayed to the government by one of its members, Thomas Reynolds, and all those present were arrested. Bond was again imprisoned at Newgate until his trial for high treason on 23 July. On this occasion the attorney-general characterized him as 'a man of strong mind and body, and of talents which, if perverted to the purposes of mischief, are formidable indeed' ('The Trial of Oliver Bond', 3). The key prosecution witness was Thomas Reynolds. Despite the searching cross-examination of Reynolds carried out by John Philpot Curran, Bond was quickly found guilty and sentenced to death. The execution was initially scheduled for 27 July but was postponed for two days. In the interim the United Irish state prisoners and the Cornwallis administration reached an agreement that saved the lives of Bond and the remaining prisoners. The latter agreed to provide a detailed statement concerning the United Irish conspiracy in return for their lives and voluntary exile. 
Bond died suddenly in prison a few months later, on 6 September 1798. Despite allegations of suspicious circumstances the official report suggested an apoplectic seizure as the cause. He was buried in the churchyard of St Michan's, Dublin. His wife, also a sworn United Irish activist, continued the family business until 1809, when she moved with her family to Baltimore, USA, where she died on 15 September 1849. 


@@@@@


doc= 2833


Bond, Thomas (1765-1837), topographer, was born at East Looe, Cornwall, in February 1765, the son of Thomas Bond, JP, and his wife, Philippa, daughter of John Chubb of East Looe (said to be the first discoverer of fossils in Cornwall). Bond was by training a lawyer, and practised as a solicitor in East Looe; his legal knowledge was considered extensive. In 1789 he was appointed town clerk of the two parliamentary boroughs of West and East Looe, to which latter his father had been elected mayor. Both boroughs were controlled by the Buller family of nearby Morval, and East Looe was 'managed' by Bond's cousin Davies Giddy (later Gilbert). In 1823, while still in office, Bond published 'Topographical and historical sketches of the boroughs of East and West Looe, in the county of Cornwall', which was illustrated by his relative Mrs Davies Gilbert. This work, written 'for private amusement', was published for the benefit of 'travellers, strangers and residents'. Bond also contributed to the 'Journal of the Royal Institution of Cornwall'. He died, unmarried, at East Looe on 18 December 1837, and left most of his property to Davies Gilbert. He was buried in the churchyard of St Martin by Looe on 23 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 2834


William Bond (d. 1576), an alderman of London and merchant adventurer, who was sheriff in 1567. It is unclear whether he was the Martin Bond who, in 1572, was admitted to St Alban Hall, Oxford. Like his father he joined the Haberdashers' Company, obtaining his freedom in 1580. During the 1588 Armada campaign he served as a captain in the London militia, and was apparently among the forces assembled at Tilbury to meet the Spanish invasion. He subsequently travelled to Stade, in northern Germany, where, as a merchant adventurer, he traded in cloth for a short period before returning to England. His cloth business prospered, and during the Jacobean period he invested in the Spanish, Virginia, and Somers Island companies. 


@@@@@


doc= 2835


Bond, William (c.1675-1735), journalist and poet, was, in adulthood, said to be of Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk. His parentage is uncertain, but he claimed to be related to Sir Henry Bond (died 1721), a Roman Catholic Jacobite, and to Thomas, Viscount Gage (died 1754) (Bond, 389; 'Dedication', 'The Spectator', 9). Another Suffolk aristocrat, John Hervey, first earl of Bristol (1665-1751), acknowledged Bond as his 'cousin' ('Letter-Books', iv). It has been argued (Baine, 171-2) that Bond was the youngest son of Sir Henry Bond's younger brother Thomas, who was very distantly related to Viscount Gage, but Bond's dedications in 1723 and 1732 to Thomas's children, Henry Jermyn Bond and Judith Bond, do not imply that he was their sibling; also Bond's reputed age at death makes it virtually impossible that he was a legitimate son of Thomas. 
Nothing is known of Bond's upbringing and education except that his writings imply that he once lived in France. He may be the William Bond, 'a Protestant', who was given a pass to travel to Holland in 1697 ('CSP dom.', '1697', 206). He was certainly in England by 1715, when he emerged in print as something between a gentleman amateur and a hack. He wrote in the 'Weekly Journal' and was the editor and chief author of a spurious continuation of Steele and Addison's 'Spectator', twice a week from January to August 1715. He and Thomas Willis, a fellow contributor to 'The Spectator' continuation, were said to be Jacobite plotters in 1718, when it was also claimed that Bond had used his pen in the Jacobite cause in 1715 ('Stuart Papers', 287), but his identifiable early writings seem politically unexceptionable. By 1720 he was publishing stridently loyal Hanoverian verse. 
Bond was the proprietor and probably part author of the 'Weekly Medley' from July 1718 to January 1720, and he was co-author with Aaron Hill of the better-known 'Plain Dealer' from March 1724 to May 1725. Richard Savage called Hill and Bond 'the two contending Powers of Light and Darkness' because, as Johnson explained, the character of the 'Plain Dealer' rose with Hill's essays and fell with Bond's, but this is hardly noticed by an impartial reader (Johnson, 25n). Bond published translations of two books of Tasso's 'Jerusalem Delivered' (1719, 1732), a poor edition of Edward Jones's translation of George Buchanan's 'History of Scotland' (1722), and other editions and translations. Between 1720 and 1730 he addressed several complimentary poems to royalty and aristocracy. Some of his verse appeared under the pen-name H. Stanhope and was published by Edmund Curll. With Martha Fowke Sansom (1689-1736) Bond wrote 'The Epistles of Clio and Strephon' (1720), a fictional courtship in the form of Ovidian love poems with occasional prose letters. 
Bond lodged for a while with the deaf mute fortune-teller Duncan Campbell (died 1730) and wrote the well-known anonymous 'Life' of Campbell (1720), once thought to be by Defoe even though it was reissued as 'The Supernatural Philosopher' (1728) under Bond's name. Bond also wrote a verse address to Campbell, 'The Parallel', much of which consisted of an attack on Alexander Pope. It first appeared in 'Mr Campbell's Packet' (1720) and was reprinted by Curll as the title-poem in an anti-Pope collection, 'The Progress of Dulness' (1728), at which point Pope responded by naming Bond as a hitherto nameless dunce in notes to the 'Dunciad variorum' (1729, 2.118, 3.151). Happily, Pope seems to have been unaware that Campbell later accused Bond of causing dissension in his family and of ruining honest men by inveigling them into dubious business ventures: all the more deplorable because he was 'a Man of good Family' (Campbell, 26). 

'The Tuscan Treaty, or, Tarquin's Overthrow', a blank-verse tragedy, 'written by a gentleman lately deceased' (title-page), revised and altered by Bond, with prologue and epilogue by Aaron Hill, was acted twice at Covent Garden in August 1733 and printed in the same year. Hill gave more substantial help when he allowed his own new tragedy 'Zara' to be staged by amateurs in the York Buildings for the benefit of Bond, who, according to the playbill, 'has lain ill of the Gout, and Rheumatism, upwards of Four Years' (Scouten, 496). Bond played Lusignan, father of the heroine, on the first night, 29 May 1735, but fainted on the stage and was carried home, where he died the following morning, aged about sixty. It is not known if Bond was ever married: his works contain scattered references to unhappy marriages. In his 'Spectator' essays (1715) he repeatedly describes himself as old, but not too old for love. 


@@@@@


doc= 2836


Bone, Henry (1755-1834), miniature and enamel painter, was born at Truro on 6 February 1755, the son of Henry Bone, a cabinet-maker and carver, who took his family to Plymouth, where Bone learned to paint on hard paste china for the Cookworthy factory. He continued his apprenticeship with Richard Champion in Bristol until the firm went bankrupt in 1779, whereupon he moved to London with 1 guinea in his pocket and $5 borrowed from a friend. Here he worked on jewellery design and enamelling watches and fans. Dr Wolcot (better known as Peter Pindar), also a Truro man, is said to have advised him to return to Cornwall to paint miniatures on ivory and make copies in enamel; but he finally decided to remain in London and began to exhibit miniatures at the Royal Academy in 1781. One of his first portraits was a miniature on ivory, painted in 1779, of Elizabeth Van der Meulen (died 'c'.1830), a descendant of Philip Van der Meulen, battle-painter to William III, whom he married on 24 January 1780 (Victoria and Albert Museum, London; copy in Bristol Art Gallery). They had many children, of whom five, including Henry Pierce Bone, and also two grandchildren, became miniaturists and helped in the production of an enormous corpus of enamels, mainly copies of well-known portraits and old masters, usually signed with the monograms 'HB', 'WB', and 'HPB', and lavishly inscribed in purple paint on the counter-enamels. 
The Bone technique was first to visit a private collection, Woburn Abbey for instance, and laboriously copy the chosen picture on to squared paper. Occasionally the picture might be borrowed from the artist or owner and copied in his studio in Berners Street (Farington, 'Diary', 7.4295). The drawings were in pencil, the exact size of the intended enamel, and could be used for several enamels of various sizes. The paper was notched to allow accurate alignment, laid over another paper coated with red chalk, and traced through to the prepared enamel plaque, usually copper or brass, which was then fired to fix the chalk outline. Sometimes the outline was traced in ink on to transparent paper. The drawings, bound into three large albums and copiously annotated by Bone's sons, are in the National Portrait Gallery library. The number of firings varied from six or seven to twelve or more, and could take as long as three years to complete. Benjamin Haydon described Bone's nervous twitch and creaking voice, 'as if he was always watching a bit of Ivory in a furnace for fear it should crack!' ('Diary', ed. Pope, 3.121-3). And 'Rainy Day' Smith believed that the value of Bone's work lay in the preservation of an artist's colours, especially in portraits by Sir Joshua Reynolds where 'much of the interest is annually lessened by the fading of his colours' (Smith, 223-4). 
The pictures chosen for enamel copies, usually commissioned by the owners, reflect the popular taste of the time. The majority were religious and mythological subjects, in frequency order by Titian, Guido Reni, Correggio, Annibale Carracci, Raphael, and Rembrandt. Most of them were medium sized (about the average postcard today), but Bone was ambitious and some were much larger. His enamel copy of Leonardo's 'Madonna of the Rocks', then belonging to the earl of Suffolk, now in the National Gallery, measures 161/4 in. x 10 in.; it was begun in 1806 and finished in 1808. An even larger enamel, a copy of Titian's 'Bacchus and Ariadne', then belonging to Lord Kinnaird and now also in the National Gallery, begun in 1808 and finished in 1811, was exhibited in Bone's studio and visited by several thousand admirers. It was sold to a keen enamel collector, George Bowles, for 2200 guineas, and it is reported that Bone cashed the cheque on his way home, in the nick of time, before Fauntleroy's Bank crashed the next day (Rogers, 292). 
Bone was an immensely prolific artist and towards the end of his life two major projects occupied his energies and were available to the public during May to July 1822. The first was a series of portraits of the Russell family, commissioned by the duke of Bedford and copied from portraits at Woburn Abbey, mostly in 1823 and 1824. They are still at Woburn Abbey. The second was an eighty-five strong series 'Portraits of illustrious characters in the reign of Queen Elizabeth'. Bone's collections were valued at $10,000 and the offer to the nation for $4000 was declined. They were exhibited in his studio at 15 Berners Street after his death in 1834, and again at the British Institution where they were sold by Christies in April and June 1836. Most were sold for between 5 and 30 guineas each. The highest price was 124 guineas for lot 62, the Hatfield portrait of Queen Elizabeth. A group of forty kings and queens from Edward III to Charles II, by Henry Bone and his son Henry Pierce Bone, was acquired for the Royal Collection, and many more were bought by William Bankes for his Dorset house, Kingston Lacy, where they still hang in a row in the drawing-room. 
Bone was appointed enamel painter to the prince of Wales in 1800, and thereafter to George III, George IV, and William IV. He was elected an associate of the Royal Academy in 1801, and Royal Academician in 1811, his diploma work, which is still at Burlington House, being an enamel 'Nymph and Cupid' (exh. Royal Academy, 1963). He died of paralysis in Clarendon Square, Somerstown, London, on 17 December 1834. Likenesses of him by Andrew Plimer ('c'.1790), G. F. Joseph (1798), John Opie (1799; National Portrait Gallery, London), R. Jean (1803), his son H. P. Bone (1805), Peter Rouw (1808), John Jackson ('c'.1814; National Portrait Gallery, London), George Harlow ('c'.1818; Woburn Abbey), Sir Francis Chantrey (1816-20; Burlington House), and by another son William, holding glasses and with the 'Elizabethan gallery' in the background (1828; National Portrait Gallery, London), are all discussed in R. Walker's 'Regency Portraits' (1985). 


@@@@@


doc= 2837


Bone, Henry Pierce (1779-1855), miniature and enamel painter, was born in Islington, London, on 6 November 1779, the eldest son and pupil of the enamel painter Henry Bone (1755-1834) and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Van der Meulen (died 'c'.1830). He went to school in Tooting, Surrey, then trained under his father, learning to paint in oils and watercolour and in the art of enamelling. He entered the Royal Academy Schools on 17 March 1796, aged sixteen, but does not seem to have been too diligent a student; he had to be reprimanded for the late delivery of a life school drawing (Farington, 'Diary', 4.1315-1316). Three years later he began to exhibit at the Royal Academy, first portraits in oils, then subject pictures from the classics, Shakespeare, and the 'Bible'. In 1833 his father became seriously ill (he died the following year) and, exploiting his early training, he turned to enamels, often of a size slightly larger than his father's. His first enamel exhibits were a copy of the 'Virgin and Child' by Carlo Maratti, the 'Infant Saviour' after Murillo, and portraits of the duchess of Kent, William IV, Georgiana, Lady Spencer, and Lavinia, Lady Spencer. He continued year after year, producing a stream of enamel copies of portraits by Holbein, Rubens, Van Dyck, Kneller, Reynolds, Benjamin West, Beechey, and Winterhalter, interspersed with several painted 'ad vivum' by himself. The quality of his work may not have the delicate finish of his father's but the drawing is good and the colouring rich and faithful to the originals. He nearly always signed with his initials, 'HPB', and copiously annotated the counter-enamels with informative details. A substantial collection of his enamels, mostly historical portraits, are in the Royal Collection. Examples of his work are also in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London: 'Charles I' (1825) after Van Dyck, 'Rubens's Self-Portrait' (1834), 'Sarah Duchess of Marlborough' (1843) after Kneller, 'Isaac Newton' (1847) after Vanderbank; in the National Portrait Gallery, London: 'Nelson' (1840) after Lemuel Abbott, and 'Wellington' (1845) after Lawrence; in the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge: 'George IV', one of many also copied by Henry Bone, after Lawrence; in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford: 'Prince Albert' (1842) after Winterhalter; and in the Wallace Collection: 'Lady Cockburn and her Three Eldest Sons' (1842) after the Reynolds now in the National Gallery, London. He was a prolific artist and many other enamels are in various museums and galleries, and private collections. He succeeded his father as enamel painter to Queen Adelaide, the duchess of Kent, and later Queen Victoria and Prince Albert, but in spite of several attempts at election he never became an associate of the Royal Academy. The whole Bone family was closely involved with the art community in London. In October 1805 Bone married Anna Maria, the daughter of a watchmaker, John Long, of Clerkenwell. They had three daughters, Louisa, Elizabeth, and Maria. Farington describes a dinner at which Mr and Mrs Henry Bone, Mr and Mrs Henry Pierce Bone, and one of the daughters entertained the painters Edmund Garvey, Thomas Stothard, Beechey, West, John Yenn, William Owen, Samuel Woodforde, Turner, and Callcott (Farington, 'Diary', 11.3881). 
Bone died at his home, 22 Percy Street, Bedford Square, London, on 21 October 1855. There was a sale of his enamels at Christies, on 13-14 March 1856, when 172 of his best works fetched substantial prices. 'On the back of each enamel is indelibly recorded its history' (Christies sale catalogue), a practice which is of considerable value and interest to the historian and collector, especially in relation to the provenance of old masters. 
Bone's brother, 
Another brother, William Bone (1792-1846), also exhibited at the Royal Academy from 1815. His work included an enamel portrait of their father copied from an oil by John Opie, which are both in the National Portrait Gallery, London. Henry Bone's sons, and possibly a grandson, William, helped to produce an invaluable collection of their father's preliminary drawings, bound into three quarto albums in the National Portrait Gallery library, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 2838


Robert Trewick Bone (1790-1840), was born on 24 September 1790, and was taught to paint by his father. He also studied at the Royal Academy Schools which he entered on 19 January 1809. He gained the academy's silver medal in 1811 and exhibited at the Royal Academy and British Institution from 1813 to 1841. An enamel portrait of him, copied by his brother William from a portrait by their father, is in the National Gallery, Dublin. He died at 6 Brompton Grove, Brompton, London, on 5 May 1840. 


@@@@@


doc= 2839


Boner, Charles (1815-1870), poet and journalist, was born at Weston, near Bath, on 29 April 1815, the second child and only son of Charles Antonius Boner (1759-1833), and his wife, Maria. Boner was educated at Bath from 1825 to 1827, and then at Tiverton grammar school from 1827 to 1829. From 1831 to 1837 he was tutor to the two elder sons of John Constable, the painter. Boner became a close friend of the Constables, organizing the painter's private affairs, and helping him research and write his lectures on landscape painting. 
After his mother's death in 1839, Boner accepted an invitation to join Baron August Doernberg in Germany. The following spring he accompanied the baron to Regensburg, where he accepted the offer of a post in the family of the Prince Thurn und Taxis. Boner, who shared the prince's passion for art and literature, spent twenty years in the family of Thurn und Taxis, and became intimate with a large number of the prince's friends. 
Boner travelled widely throughout Germany and Austria, and devoted himself to the study of the German language. In 1844 he was contracted by the London 'Literary Gazette' for a series of articles on the German poets. Boner's facility in the language of his adopted country was widely admired, and his translations into English, notably of the German versions of Hans Christian Andersen's tales, 'A Danish Story Book' (1846) and 'The Dream of Little Tuck' (1848), were held to be remarkably faithful and idiomatic. In August 1845 Boner was introduced to Mary Russell Mitford, and the two writers embarked on a literary correspondence that was to last for a decade. A number of Mitford's letters to Boner, many offering constructive criticisms of Boner's work, are printed in Rosa Kettle's 'Memoirs and Letters of Charles Boner' (1871). 
While in the service of Thurn und Taxis, Boner came to love the forests and mountains of Bavaria, and his experiences as a naturalist and huntsman are recorded in 'Chamois Hunting in the Mountains of Bavaria' (1853). Boner's 'Memoirs' reveal that 'Chamois Hunting' was scrutinized in manuscript by Mary Russell Mitford. In 1855 Boner composed the letterpress to 'English Landscape Scenery', a collection of engravings by John Constable. In the same year he translated Professor Masius's work from the German as 'Studies of Nature'. Boner also turned his hand to verse, publishing 'Cain' in 1855, 'The New Dance of Death and other Poems' in 1857, and 'Verses' in 1858. 
Boner left Regensburg in 1860 and settled in Munich. In 1863 he travelled through Transylvania. A detailed account of his studies there, 'Transylvania, its Products and People', was published in 1865, and later translated into German. On 27 February 1865 Boner's daughter Marie married Professor Theodor Horschelt (1829-1871), the Munich painter who twelve years earlier had supplied the illustrations for 'Chamois Hunting'. In September 1865 Boner left Munich for Vienna as special correspondent of the London 'Daily News'. While in Vienna, he contributed articles to a number of other newspapers, including the 'New York Tribune'. In 1867 he went to Salzburg to be present at the meeting of Napoleon III and the emperor of Austria, and wrote a very graphic description of the scene. He later attended the funeral in Trieste of the emperor Maximilian, of whom he compiled a memoir. Boner died in Professor Horschelt's house at Louisenstrasse 5, Munich, on 9 April 1870. 


@@@@@


doc= 2840


Bonham, Sir (Samuel) George, first baronet (1803-1863), colonial governor, was born at Faversham, Kent, on 7 September 1803, the son of Captain George Bonham (died 1810) of the naval service of the East India Company and his second wife, Isabella Baines (died 1852), only daughter of Robert Woodgate of Dedham, Essex. He had one sister, Isabella, who married Ferdinand, count d'Oultremont, of Belgium. On 16 June 1846 he married Ellen Emelia (died 1859), eldest daughter of Thomas Barnard of the East India Company; they had one son. 
In 1837, after a period of service with the East India Company, Bonham was appointed governor of the incorporated settlement of Prince of Wales Island, Singapore, and Malacca. He held this post until 1843, during which time he acquired a measure of knowledge of the Chinese language, customs, and habits; later in his career he was said to prefer officials who had not learned the language, believing that the 'study of Chinese warped the intellect and undermined the judgement' (Coates, 83). On 20 March 1848 he was appointed by Palmerston to succeed Sir John Davis as governor of Hong Kong and her majesty's plenipotentiary and superintendent of trade in China. 
The issue of British entry into Canton (Guangzhou) had not been resolved during Davis's governorship and was to dominate Bonham's time in office. Davis had reached an agreement with the imperial commissioner at Canton, Qiying, for the British to be given admittance to Canton in 1849; however, Qiying had been replaced in 1848 by the ferociously anti-foreign Xu Guangjin, who rebuffed Bonham's attempts to negotiate the preliminary arrangements for British entry. The British government was unwilling to force the issue at this time, and Palmerston's instructions to Bonham to let the matter stand in abeyance were taken by the Chinese as a sign of their victory in the matter. Warnings to the emperor's court that British actions were taken from a position of strength, not weakness, were greeted with derision in Peking (Beijing). 
In Hong Kong itself Bonham's governorship met with mixed reviews. The German missionary and official Ernst Johann Eitel (1838-1908) considered him a 'model Governor, the first really popular and successful one of the Colony's rulers' (Eitel, 287), while recognizing that there were those in the Hong Kong community who viewed him as 'a useless governor, purely ornamental, highly decorated and extravagantly paid' (ibid., 286). His relationships with his subordinates were seldom easy, as he had a tendency to bully them: with Rutherford Alcock and his own eventual successor, John Bowring, then consul in Canton, his relations were particularly tense. In 1851 he was made a KCB for his services in China, and the following year was created a baronet. In April 1853 he led the first foreign mission to meet the Taiping insurgents, securing from them rights for foreigners to enter their territory and trade there; he recommended that the British government maintain a position of neutrality towards the rebels, rather than support the Manchu government, as was being urged in some quarters. 
Bonham retired from his appointments in China on 12 April 1854 and returned to England, where he died at the Great Western Railway Hotel, Paddington, on 8 October 1863. His son, George Francis, of the diplomatic service, succeeded to the baronetcy. 


@@@@@


doc= 2841


Bonham, Thomas (c.1564-c.1628), physician and surgeon, about whose early life nothing is known, matriculated at St John's College, Cambridge, during the Easter term of 1581, which places his birth probably between 1563 and 1565. As a sizar, he most likely came from a relatively humble family. In 1584 he earned a bachelor's degree (which he took the trouble to incorporate at Oxford in the same year), and continued for the master's degree, which he completed in 1588. He apparently also earned a medical doctorate at Cambridge, for his later claim to one was never disputed; he therefore probably graduated in medicine in the middle to later 1590s, and certainly before he signed himself 'in Medic: Doct.' in 1602, at the end of a laudatory Latin poem prefaced to a treatise on the king's evil by the surgeon William Clowes the elder. 
Despite being a physician, Bonham took the side of the London surgeons in their disputes with the College of Physicians. His poem celebrated the work of one of the most prominent surgeons of London; in early 1605 he signed the unsuccessful parliamentary petition of the Barber-Surgeons' Company asking for the right to administer internal remedies. But with the strengthening of the College of Physicians in the same years, Bonham presented himself to its censors on 6 December 1605 for the examination required for membership of that body. For whatever reason, he failed to answer the censors' questions to their satisfaction. Bonham underwent examination again on 14 April 1606, but this time his replies to questions were declared 'not pertinent'. The censors went further in making an example of his disobedience: because he had practised without membership in or licence of the college, the censors fined Bonham $5, and threatened him with imprisonment if he did not obey them. Bonham refused. On 3 October the censors recorded that Bonham had several times ignored their summons to appear before them to answer charges that he was continuing to practise without their permission, and that he would be arrested and fined $10. On 7 November Bonham and his lawyer, Dr Smith, appeared before the censors. When asked by the college's president, Henry Atkins, if he had come to be re-examined or to make satisfaction, Bonham defiantly put on his hat and said that he practised and would continue to practise without seeking the permission of the college and without obeying the president, since they had no power over graduates of the universities. Standing on recently reiterated legal precedent, the president and censors sent Bonham to Newgate prison for contempt, to be held at their pleasure. 
Bonham's lawyer managed to free him from Newgate by entering a writ of habeas corpus before the court of common pleas on 13 November. After some delays due to other business, the college officers met on 1 May 1607, at the home of Lord Chancellor Ellesmere, with a committee of royal judges, which unanimously supported a rigorous interpretation of the college's statutes. The censors also gathered further evidence of Bonham's continuing practice in London, including his work with one Mrs Paine of Aldersgate Street. Subsequently, in Trinity term of 1608, the censors sued Bonham for twelve months' illicit practice (or a total of $60), with Attorney-General Hobart pleading their case before the court of king's bench. Bonham in turn returned to common pleas in the Michaelmas term of 1608, asking for $100 damages against the college for trespass against his person and wrongful imprisonment. About 3 February 1609 king's bench found Bonham guilty of illicit practice, imposed the fine, and sent him to prison. (One month later his alleged accomplice, Mrs Paine, was also fined $10 by the college and imprisoned.) Bonham nevertheless managed to become a member of the Barber-Surgeons' Company and got Archbishop Bancroft to write a letter on 3 October 1609 strongly desiring the college to release him. The college replied that it would let Bonham out only if he acknowledged its authority and dropped his suit. He did not. 
Bonham's suit in common pleas against the college was finally decided in late February 1610. The decision of the justices set Bonham free, and fined the college $40. Chief Justice Edward Coke declared that because the College of Physicians was both judge and prosecuting body in cases brought before it, the parliamentary acts confirming the powers granted to it by charter were void: 'it appears in our books, that in many cases, the common law will controul Acts of Parliament... for when an Act of Parliament is against common right and reason, or repugnant, or impossible to be performed, the common law will controul it, and adjudge such Act to be void.' Coke may have intended only to overturn the college's royal patent, but his language allowed eighteenth-century Americans to interpret his words as giving the courts jurisdiction over parliament, helping to create the idea of a powerful supreme court. Lord Chancellor Ellesmere, Sir Francis Bacon, and King James were all furious with Coke's decision. 
On 9 July 1611 Bonham incorporated his MD at Oxford, and on 8 August 1614 he entered Gray's Inn. As late as 1617 a page of the queen, Michael Silvester, was requesting the half of Bonham's fine due to the king. Thomas Bretnor dedicated his translation and enlargement of Angelo Sala's 'Opiologia, or, A Treatise Concerning... Opium' (1618), a work advocating chemical preparations, to Bonham (and also to Nicholas Carter). Bonham continued to practise medicine in London, signed a parliamentary petition of the surgeons against a new charter for the College of Physicians in 1621, served as an assistant in the Barber-Surgeons' Company, and apparently sponsored surgical experiments in his home. Bonham died in the late 1620s; his servant in medicine and surgery, Edward Poeton, edited and published Bonham's well-regarded papers on medicines as 'The Chyrurgians Closet, or, An Antidotarie Chyrurgicall' (1630), dedicated both to Frances, countess of Exeter, and to the London Barber-Surgeons' Company. Bonham's will, made on 16 July 1625, mentions his wife, Dorothy, and their son and daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 2842


Bonhote, Elizabeth (1744-1818), writer, was born at Earsham Street, Bungay, Suffolk, and baptized on 11 April 1744 in St Mary's Church, Bungay, the elder of two surviving children of James Mapes ('bap'. 1714, died 1794), baker and grocer of Bungay, and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Galliard (died 1789). Her first work, a novel entitled 'Hortensia, or, The Distressed Wife', was published anonymously in 1769. On 13 October 1772 she married Daniel Bonhote (1748/9-1804), a solicitor of Bungay, later an under-sheriff of Suffolk and captain of the 2nd company of Bungay Volunteers. In that same year she published her second novel 'The Rambles of Mr Frankly, Published by his Sister' (2 vols.). A moralizing tale influenced by Laurence Sterne's 'Sentimental Journey' (1768), it describes how Frankly learns contentment from observing the lives of various classes of people during strolls in Hyde Park. Immediately popular, it was translated into German at Leipzig, later published in Dublin and Paris, and reprinted with additions by the Minerva Press in 1797. Illness following the birth of her three children between 1773 and 1777 prevented further publications from appearing until 'Olivia, or, The Deserted Bride' in 1787. Her next work, and another best-seller, was an educational guide, 'The Parental Monitor' (2 vols. published by subscription, 1788): it consists of a series of short, moral essays addressed to children, and enlivened by quotations and illustrative stories. It ran to three editions, and was published in Dublin and posthumously in the USA. 
In total, Elizabeth Bonhote published seven fictional works, all of which reflected the contemporary taste for novels of sentiment and sensibility, combining 'a reaction against coarseness, preoccupation with conventional morality and a strong bent towards emotionalism' (MacCarthy, 31-64). They appealed to a growing female readership catered for by the circulating libraries. In particular 'Darnley Vale, or, Emelia Fitzroy' (1789) and 'Ellen Woodley' (1790) were favourably noticed in the 'Monthly Review' (February 1790, 223; July 1790, 351). In 1791 her husband purchased the site of Bungay Castle. Its ruined grandeur and fabled history appealed to her imagination and inspired her final novel, a Gothic romance entitled 'Bungay Castle' (1796). Featuring the popular ingredients of a handsome hero imprisoned in a dungeon, a fair heroine of acute sensibility, secret passages, and ghostly hauntings, it confirmed her position as one of the Minerva Press's best-selling authors. In 1804 her husband died during a residence at Bury. Throughout her life she had published occasional verse and her last production was the anonymous 'Feeling, or, Sketches from Life: a Desultory Poem' (1810). She died at Bungay on 11 June 1818 aged seventy-four. Her generous will left dwelling houses, a baking office, and shop in Bungay, and approximately $3500 in cash and annuities. No portrait of her is known, and little has been recorded about her appearance or personality; but her husband in his will dated 1792 referred to the 'excellency of her head and heart', a tribute which seems justly confirmed by her writings. 


@@@@@


doc= 2843


Boniface (672x5?-754), archbishop of Mainz, missionary, and martyr, is unusually well documented for a man of the early eighth century. One life was written about him by Willibald in Mainz before 769, and other lives followed in the course of the eighth and ninth centuries. He was also the major figure in the lives of numerous of his followers, notably in those of Sturm of Fulda and Gregory of Utrecht. More important for an in-depth understanding of the saint is that a large number of letters written by, to, and about him were gathered together, apparently at the behest of his pupil and successor at Mainz, Archbishop Lul. Among other works left by Boniface are a grammatical treatise and some riddles, while he is also known to have written a treatise on metrics. In addition, canons of several church councils in which he played a leading role have also survived. These sources are not without difficulties, since Boniface was a controversial figure, and some of the evidence relating to his career is undoubtedly skewed by the propaganda of both his supporters and his detractors. Moreover, even among his supporters there were differences of opinion, since rival factions, notably in Mainz, Fulda, and Utrecht, tried to claim Boniface as their own, as is apparent from the surviving hagiography relating to the martyr and his disciples. Nevertheless, the sum total of the evidence for Boniface makes him more accessible as an object of study than most other figures of the early middle ages. 
The collections which include the letters of Boniface shed light not just on the martyr himself, but also on a wide range of aspects of Anglo-Saxon and continental society in the late seventh and eighth centuries. The letters are essentially preserved in three manuscripts of the eighth and ninth centuries. Study of these collections suggests that there was once a 'Collectio pontificia', a collection of papal letters addressed to and from Boniface, as well as a separate 'Collectio communis', a more general collection of the saint's correspondence. To these were added a further collection of letters associated with Boniface's disciple Lul, as well as other miscellaneous letters from Anglo-Saxon England, several of them written by or sent to Aldhelm of Malmesbury. 
Altogether there are 150 letters, of which 38 were written by Boniface, 32 were addressed to him, and a further 14 were written in support of him. In addition there are 15 letters by Lul and 24 written to him. Of obvious importance for reconstructing Boniface's career are the 15 papal letters (including 2 forgeries) written to him, and the 12 letters written on his behalf, by popes Gregory II ('r'. 715-31), Gregory III ('r'. 731-41), Zacharias ('r'. 741-52), and Stephen II ('r'. 752-7), as well as the 4 letters which Boniface himself addressed to popes Zacharias and Stephen. Equally interesting, however, is the correspondence of Boniface and Lul with other Anglo-Saxons. These letters reveal a network of family and professional connections and shed considerable light on the English church of the early eighth century, most notably on the piety and intellectual and cultural achievements of a number of Anglo-Saxon nunneries. There are 8 letters to Anglo-Saxon abbesses and nuns, and a further 4 from them. More specifically there are letters to and from Abbess Eadburh of Thanet, from whom Boniface requested a copy of the epistles of St Peter written in gold; from Abbess Eangyth, and to and from the latter's daughter Bugga; and above all to and from the missionary's relative Leoba, who was to follow Boniface to the continent, where she became first abbess of the saint's foundation of Tauberbischofsheim. According to Rudolf of Fulda, who wrote the life of Leoba in the 830s, Boniface wanted the abbess to be buried in the same tomb as himself. In the event, Leoba was buried initially at Fulda, although not in the same tomb as the martyr, but was later translated to nearby Petersberg. 
Boniface's early years are known only from hagiography. He was probably born between 672 and 675 and apparently in the neighbourhood of Exeter: later medieval tradition named his birthplace more precisely, and apparently without justification, as Crediton. His original name was Wynfreth. After an early illness he was placed, according to his earliest hagiographer, on his own insistence and despite paternal opposition, as a 'puer oblatus' ('child oblate') in the monastery of Ad-Escancastre (Exeter), which was then ruled by Abbot Wulfhard. Subsequently he transferred to the monastery of Nhutscelle (Nursling), near Southampton, where Wynberht was abbot, and where he completed his education in grammar, rhetoric, and the scriptures. Thereafter he was appointed head of the monastic school and his teaching there is presumably reflected in his treatise on grammar. On reaching the age of thirty, the traditional age for ordination, he also became a priest. Following a rebellion in Wessex, Wynfreth was sent as an envoy to Archbishop Berhtwald by a synod held, probably at Brentford in 705, by King Ine and his leading churchmen. 
Despite his intellectual and diplomatic successes Wynfreth resolved to become a missionary on the continent. In making such a choice he may have known of the work of evangelization which had already been carried out in Frisia by Bishop Wilfrid of York, and of the mission to the same region begun in 690 by another Anglo-Saxon, Willibrord. Wynfreth left for Frisia in 716. The year was not a propitious one, for, in the aftermath of the death of the Frankish mayor of the palace, Pippin II, in 714, war had broken out between Pippin's son and successor, the eponymous founder of the Carolingian dynasty, Charles Martel, and the Frisian king, Radbod. As a result of this Radbod had turned against Christian communities in his kingdom, and against Willibrord, who had come to be closely associated with Charles. Although Wynfreth did manage to make contact with Radbod, he realized that he would achieve little in the circumstances, and returned to Nursling. There, on the death of Wynberht, he was elected abbot, but he refused the appointment and instead set off for Rome in 718, with a letter of introduction from Bishop Daniel of Winchester, who found an alternative abbot of Nursling in the person of Stephen. Wynfreth was to continue to turn to Daniel for advice, even when he was himself on the continent. 
Wynfreth was not the first Anglo-Saxon missionary to travel to Rome: both Wilfrid and Willibrord had done so, the latter specifically to obtain approval for his work of evangelization. Nevertheless, Wynfreth was to develop a particularly close link with the Holy See, and especially with popes Gregory II and Gregory III. Having reached Rome in 719 he was examined by Gregory II; and on 15 May 719 the pope granted him a commission to preach to the pagans. It seems that on the previous day the pope had conferred on Wynfreth the name of Boniface, from Boniface, the martyr of Tarsus, whose relics had been brought to Rome. Thereupon, as Boniface, Wynfreth travelled north, via the court of the Lombard king, Liutprand ('r'. 712-44), to Bavaria, and thence to Thuringia and on to Frisia, much of which had been taken over by Charles Martel following the death of Radbod in 719. Boniface now joined forces with Willibrord in Utrecht, working in the neighbouring region for the following two years. In 721, however, when Willibrord offered to make him 'chorepiscopus' (a suffragan bishop, with no diocesan centre, working in a rural, often missionary, zone), Boniface declined and resolved to carry out the commission conferred on him by Gregory II. He set off -- via the nunnery of Pfalzel outside Trier, if traditions relating to the childhood of Gregory of Utrecht are to be believed -- for Amoneburg in the Lahngau. There he preached with some success against the supposedly syncretist Christianity of the local rulers Dettic and Devrulf, and of their followers. 
In 722 Boniface sent his companion Bynnan to Rome, and on receiving an invitation to the Holy See from the pope he set off, via Francia and Burgundy, on his second visit to the papacy. On his arrival he was again examined by Gregory II; and on St Andrew's day (30 November) he was raised to the episcopate, becoming a missionary bishop with no fixed diocese -- an unusual, but by no means unprecedented, appointment, which was well suited to the needs of the church in an area which had as yet not been subjected to a diocesan structure. Thereafter he returned north, with letters of recommendation from the pope addressed to Charles Martel and to the leaders of Thuringia. 
Having paid his compliments to Charles, Boniface travelled on to Hesse, where he is said to have felled a great oak associated, according to Willibald, with the Roman god Jove (and presumably to be equated with the Germanic deity Thor), at Gaismar, near Fritzlar. Subsequently he turned his attention to Thuringia, where Christianity had supposedly collapsed during the period of rule of Theobald and Heden in the face of aggression from the pagan Saxons. Among Boniface's bases at this time was his monastery of Ohrdruf, near Gotha. In assessing the strength of paganism in Hesse and Thuringia it is, however, important to recognize two points: first, that these regions had been Christianized before Boniface's arrival (and here it must be remembered that early medieval clerics made very little distinction between pastoral work among imperfect Christians and mission to the outright heathen -- they were adjacent points on the spectrum of sin); and, second, that the references to a resurgence of paganism in these areas may have had more than a little to do with the propaganda of Charles Martel and his apologists. For instance, Heden is known to have been a supporter of Willibrord's monastery of Echternach, while an inscription, now lost, showed Theobald to be a church founder. Their poor reputations are probably to be associated not with their religious positions, but with their opposition to Charles Martel. 
In 731 Gregory II died, to be succeeded in the Holy See by Gregory III. A year later the new pope sent Boniface the pallium, thus conferring on him archiepiscopal status and considerable authority east of the Rhine -- but Boniface still lacked a fixed diocese. Meanwhile, he continued to found monasteries in Hesse and the region of the Main, notably at Fritzlar, Tauberbischofsheim, Ochsenfurt, and Kitzingen. At some point before 736 he was invited to Bavaria, by Duke Hugobert, and it was then that he probably first became acquainted with his disciple Sturmi. Having reached Bavaria, however, Boniface travelled on south, to make his third visit to Rome. There, in 738, he received further support from Gregory III. 
Meanwhile Boniface began to turn his attention northwards once again, not least because in 738 Charles Martel launched a major campaign against the continental Saxons. The evangelization of these peoples had always been very dear to Boniface's heart: indeed, like Willibrord's teacher, the Anglo-Saxon Ecgberht of Rathmelsigi, before him, he was particularly concerned to Christianize the continental cousins of the English. Although he had always kept in touch with relatives and clerics in England, hopeful that Charles would open up the possibility of a mission to the Saxons, Boniface now penned a number of well-known letters to his insular contacts, seeking help in the Christianization of Saxony. Taken out of the very specific context to which they belong, these letters have led to a certain overemphasis on the extent to which Boniface was involved in missionary activity among pagans. In the event, however, Charles's failure to press home his military advantage meant that Boniface's hopes came to nothing -- although in the wake of his appeal for help he did attract a number of notable Englishmen to him, including Willibald, who had been living as a monk in Monte Cassino. 
Instead of working as a missionary in Saxony, Boniface returned in 739 to Bavaria, whose duke was now Odilo. Here he reformed the ecclesiastical structure of the region, dividing it into four dioceses, Passau, Salzburg, Regensburg, and Freising. In fact these dioceses were not totally new creations: Vivilo, bishop of Passau, had already been consecrated by Gregory III, while Salzburg had had a bishop, Rupert, as early as the late seventh century; and in the generation before Boniface's work of reform, Regensburg and Freising had been the respective centres for Emmeranus and Corbinian. Further, the man chosen as bishop of Freising by Boniface, Erembert, was actually Corbinian's brother. Boniface's work in Bavaria was thus one of reorganization, rather than the creation of a Bavarian church. 
The deaths of two major figures in 741 affected Boniface's position radically. First, Charles Martel died on 22 October, leaving his power to be divided between his sons Pippin III and Carlomann, to the exclusion of Gripho, a third son from another marriage. Although he had backed Boniface when necessary, Charles had never been an enthusiastic supporter of the Anglo-Saxon missionary, preferring rather to cultivate the leading clergy of the Frankish kingdoms, on whom he depended for much political support. Carlomann and Pippin were to prove much more supportive of Boniface and his reforming ideals than their father had been. Second, on 29 November Gregory III died. Boniface had had consistently good relations with the two Gregorys, who had been never less than supportive. The new pope, Zacharias, appears not to have been on such cordial terms with the Anglo-Saxon, although he continued to approve his work, albeit sometimes rather reluctantly. 
For Boniface the new regime in Francia quickly brought benefits. In 742 Carlomann, despite local opposition, conceded territory in the forest of Buchonia, along the banks of the River Fulda, for the foundation of what was to prove to be Boniface's greatest monastery, itself named after the river. The site had been discovered by Sturmi and Boniface appointed him the monastery's first abbot. After 747-8, when Sturmi spent a year in Rome and Monte Cassino, Fulda became a major centre for the transmission of the Benedictine rule. In 751 Boniface obtained a papal privilege for his foundation; and after his martyrdom Fulda became the main focus for his cult. 
Meanwhile, since his father's death in 741, Carlomann had backed Boniface in his establishment of dioceses east of the Rhine. Boniface had already appointed the Anglo-Saxon Burchard to the see of Wurzburg in 741; in the following year he raised Willibald (not to be confused with Boniface's hagiographer) to the see of Erfurt; and during the same period he appointed a third Englishman, Hwita, to be bishop of Buraburg, near Fritzlar. The creation of all three dioceses he announced in a letter of 742 congratulating Pope Zacharias on his elevation to the papacy. Replying in a letter of 743, the pope confirmed the new creations, despite some scepticism as to whether they were based in appropriately populous centres. The see of Erfurt did soon have to be abandoned, and Willibald was appointed to a new bishopric of Eichstatt in 745. 
In 742 Carlomann had authorized the first of a number of reforming councils, held under the leadership of Boniface, which were to have a major impact on the Frankish church, and which were to end a long period (sixty or seventy years, according to Boniface, although rather less than that in reality) in which no church council had been held in the Frankish kingdom. The Concilium Germanicum, so called because its place of meeting is unknown, recognized Boniface as leader of the churchmen within Carlomann's domains (chiefly the eastern Frankish kingdom of Austrasia) and as papal legate, although as yet he had no diocese of his own. Thereafter the council turned to the abuses of the Frankish church, to the promotion of the rule of St Benedict, and also to the existence of semi-pagan beliefs. These were listed in greater detail in a short work known as the 'Indiculus superstitionum et paganiarum', which must, therefore, have originated in Bonifatian circles. 
The council of 742 was followed on 1 March 743 by a second Austrasian council, which was held at Les Estinnes, near Lobbes, on the River Sambre, in present-day Belgium. Again the council dealt with ecclesiastical abuses and prescribed the use of the Benedictine rule. It also tried to regulate the development of precarial tenure in such a way that it did not impoverish monasteries. The leasing out of monastic estates was a long-standing practice, which had become a significant way of providing warriors with landed property. It had been abused under Charles Martel, but was too useful to subsequent rulers for it to be abolished completely, despite the complaints of Boniface and other reformers. 
In March 744 Carlomann's brother Pippin III, prompted by Boniface, called a council at Soissons, which dealt with abuses similar to those which had been discussed at the Austrasian councils and also with the heresy of a bishop, Gallic by birth, called Adalbert. He was a charismatic, regarded by many as a wonder-worker, who treated his own hair and fingernails as relics. He refused, however, to recant, following the council, and was therefore sent for judgement to Pope Zacharias, along with a second heretical bishop, the Irishman Clemens, who rejected teachings of the church fathers. In a council held in Rome in 745 both men were stripped of their episcopal office: Adalbert was made to do penance and was threatened with excommunication, while Clemens was excommunicated. 
Meanwhile, in 744, Boniface elevated three Neustrian clerics, Grimo of Rouen, Abel of Rheims, and Hartbert of Sens, to archiepiscopal status; and in a letter of 22 June 744 Pope Zacharias confirmed the appointments. Within months, however, Pippin revoked his support for the elevation of Abel and Hartbert, probably because of local Frankish opposition to them -- a change of mind which angered the pope. Despite the setback caused by Pippin's second thoughts, Boniface was able to press on with his reforms, and at a general council of the whole Frankish church, held with the joint support of Pippin and Carlomann, one of the leaders of the old guard, Bishop Gewilib of Mainz, was deposed. At the same time the council decided to confer on Boniface the diocese of Cologne, which was elevated to the status of a metropolitan see. These decisions were approved by Zacharias in a letter of 31 October 745, in which the sentences on Adalbert and Clemens were also announced. 
In the event the planned transfer of the diocese of Cologne to Boniface did not take place. Instead he received Gewilib's old diocese of Mainz in 746, where he appointed his disciple Lul as his archdeacon. This new distribution of dioceses, however, was soon to lead to considerable conflict between Mainz and Cologne over their jurisdiction east of the Rhine and over their missionary interests, particularly in Frisia. 
Also in 746-7 Boniface turned his attention to the English church and more particularly to the behaviour of the Mercian king, AEthelbald ('r'. 716-57), who was reputed to have been sleeping with nuns and to have violated the privileges of churches and monasteries. Together with seven other Anglo-Saxon bishops who had Frankish dioceses (Wera of Utrecht, Burchard of Wurzburg, Werberht, Abel of Rheims, Willibald of Eichstatt, Hwita of Buraburg, and Leofwine), Boniface wrote a letter of admonition, which he sent first to Archbishop Ecgberht of York, for correction. Boniface's intervention in the affairs of the Mercian church was to bear fruit, first in the 747 Council of 'Clofesho', whose canons show close dependence on those of the Concilium Germanicum and on various letters of Boniface, and subsequently on the grant of ecclesiastical privileges made by AEthelbald at the Council of Gumley in 749, which regulated the scale of the obligations owed by the church to the king. 
Although Boniface's prestige was apparently unchallenged in England, the same could not be said in Bavaria. Already in 746 the Irishman Virgilius, then abbot of St Peter's, Salzburg, and Sidonius, later bishop of Passau, wrote to the pope, complaining of the high-handed way in which Boniface had insisted on rebaptism in a case where a priest had made grammatical mistakes in the baptismal liturgy. Zacharias upheld Virgilius's point of view, arguing that grammatical errors did not invalidate the baptism and that rebaptism in itself was heretical. Virgilius continued to be a thorn in Boniface's side. In 747 he was put in charge of the diocese of Salzburg, by Duke Odilo, following the death of Boniface's appointee, John. The next year Virgilius was making open criticism of Boniface, while the latter held the Irishman guilty of such heretical thoughts as that there were other men beneath the world. Not that Virgilius was either a heretic or an opponent of church reform. In fact he was, like Boniface, a man of considerable missionary interests, and he was to play a major role in the Christianization of Carinthia. Indeed, it is possible to regard him as being more successful in the missionary field than his Anglo-Saxon contemporary. 
Meanwhile, 747 saw another significant political development on the continent. Carlomann decided to retire from the office of mayor of the palace and become a monk at Monte Cassino, leaving his position to his son Drogo. In the event, Pippin was to take over rule of the whole Frankish kingdom, much to his brother's fury. As yet, however, Pippin, like his father and grandfather before him, could only lay claim to mayoral office and was not in a position to claim the Frankish throne, which was still occupied by a member of the Merovingian dynasty, Childeric III ('r'. 743-51). Before he could depose Childeric, Pippin had first to deal with his own half-brother, Gripho, who took advantage of Carlomann's retirement and the death of Odilo of Bavaria to seize the duchy of Bavaria in 748. It was not until the following year that Pippin could dislodge him, and only in 750 did he send Bishop Burchard of Wurzburg and Abbot Fulrad of St Denis to ask Pope Zacharias whether it was right for him to take the crown of the kingdom of the Franks. Zacharias concurred and Pippin III was anointed king, perhaps by Boniface, in 751. 
By the late 740s Boniface himself was beginning to look to the future, when he would no longer be archbishop of Mainz. In 752 he sought the help of Fulrad, to ensure the protection of his followers after his death. He also wished to secure the appointment of Lul as his successor. This he wanted to arrange during his own lifetime, not least because he was intent on resigning his see and returning to missionary work. His concern was all the greater because of growing disagreement between himself and Bishop Hildegar of Cologne. What was at stake was the missionary legacy of Willibrord at Utrecht, where, on Carlomann's orders, Boniface had appointed a new bishop. Hildegar, however, laid claim to Utrecht on the grounds that King Dagobert I ('r'. 623-39) had given the place to Cologne as a missionary base from which to convert the Frisians. As Boniface pointed out, since the bishops of Cologne had not carried out missionary work, their claim to Utrecht had lapsed. All this Boniface set out in his last surviving letter addressed to a pope, the newly elected Stephen II. Stephen's reply does not survive, but in the event Boniface took matters into his own hands. 
Hildegar died on campaign against the Saxons in 753. Meanwhile Boniface himself set off to work in Frisia, in other words in what he claimed to be the missionary field of Utrecht. In the summer of 754 he reached northern Frisia and on 5 June he and a number of companions, including a suffragan bishop, Eoban, were attacked, supposedly by thieves, while waiting to confirm those who had recently been baptized in the neighbourhood of Dokkum (in the province of Friesland in the modern Netherlands). The whole missionary party was massacred, Boniface himself dying, according to tradition, while trying to ward off blows with a copy of the gospels. Their belongings were ransacked, but the thieves found nothing they deemed to be of value, leaving the manuscripts which the missionaries had brought with them lying in the mud. 
The bodies of Boniface and his companions were then taken by boat to Utrecht. There most of the party were buried, but the body of Boniface himself was taken on to Mainz, and then to Fulda, where, in July, he was buried in accordance with his own wishes. According to Eigil, the biographer of Abbot Sturm of Fulda, Bishop Lul intended to keep the martyr's body at Mainz, but was unable to do so. Other evidence, however, does not suggest that Lul attempted to prevent Boniface's burial in his monastic foundation. More important, from the moment of the arrival of the cortege, Fulda received enormous prestige as the resting-place of a martyr. 
Fulda was to be developed into a northern equivalent of the shrine of St Peter in Rome. Indeed, beginning in 791, Ratgar, first as architect and then as abbot, embarked on rebuilding the main church at Fulda as a copy of St Peter's, which itself commemorated the greatest martyr of the western church. Boniface was, therefore, to be seen as the martyred apostle of the Germans. The building project, however, was to prove too costly. Among other relics of the martyrdom which the church of Fulda still claims to possess is the manuscript with which Boniface tried to protect himself -- but far from being a gospel book, the manuscript in question is a copy of Isidore of Seville's 'Synonyma'. 
The manner of Boniface's death, and the development of the image of him as the apostle of Germany, buried in such a way as to make him the equivalent of St Peter in Rome, tends to stress the saint's importance as a missionary figure. It is certainly true that he spent time at the beginning and end of his continental career working among the pagans of Frisia. It is also true that he always longed to be an active missionary, particularly among the continental Saxons, whom he regarded as cousins of the English, and that he sought help, especially from England, for a mission to the Saxons, most notably around the time of Charles Martel's campaign in Saxony in 738. Nevertheless, he did not manage to work among the Saxons and his missionary career in Frisia was short-lived. Despite the lack of any clear line between mission and pastoral care, Boniface's continental career was above all that of a reformer and organizer. Even in Thuringia and Hesse, where he undoubtedly came across paganism, syncretism, and heresy, his major achievement lay in the foundation of monasteries and bishoprics and in the creation of a diocesan system. In Bavaria, where churches were well established, it was again in ecclesiastical appointments and diocesan organization that he was to play a crucial role. In this respect there is no sharp division between his work east of the Rhine and his reform of the Frankish church, which was to dominate his life in the 740s when he had the backing of Carlomann and subsequently of Pippin III. 
What was new after Charles Martel's death in 741 was that at last Boniface had support to reform the church of the Frankish heartlands. This Charles had been unwilling to agree to, for he had relied too much on the support of the ecclesiastical old guard, in order to establish himself, to be able to turn against them 'en masse'. Boniface knew only too well that he could do nothing without the help of, first, Charles, and, later, Carlomann and Pippin; and Charles, at least, gave him little aid, except where it was to his own advantage -- in the peripheral regions of the Frankish kingdom, which had been most opposed to Carolingian rule. The lack of Frankish support during his early years on the continent, however, enhanced the significance for Boniface of his outside contacts, with England and the papacy. Not surprisingly, he came to play an important role in strengthening links between the Franks and the Holy See. 
Boniface has, therefore, to be seen first and foremost as a reformer, and one aspect of that is his promotion of monasticism, and especially of the rule of St Benedict, which played an increasing role both at Fulda and in other monastic foundations like Heidenheim, where Winnebald, brother of Bishop Willibald of Eichstatt, was abbot. He packed his monasteries and the episcopal sees he created with like-minded individuals, many of them relatives or contacts from Anglo-Saxon England, and both men and women, like Leoba, abbess of Tauberbischofsheim. Moreover, through his English connections Boniface played a major role in bringing English learning and insular culture to the continent. Although Bede seems not to have heard of Boniface, making no reference to him in his 'Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum', Boniface came to hear of Bede, and several of his letters to England are requests for copies of Bede's works. Further, Boniface's continuing links with England enabled him to involve himself in the reform of the English church, particularly in Mercia, where his attack on AEthelbald seems to have led directly to the reforms of the Council of 'Clofesho' in 747. Although the drama of his martyrdom has caused Boniface to be remembered as a martyr and a missionary, his achievements lay primarily in his reform and organization of the church across much of north-west Europe. 


@@@@@


doc= 2844


Savoy, Boniface of (1206/7-1270), archbishop of Canterbury, was probably the seventh son of Thomas (I), count of Savoy (1178-1233), and Marguerite (died 1258), daughter of either Guillaume, count of Geneva (1137-1195), or the lord of Faucigny. 
Described by Matthew Paris as a man 'of noble stature and elegant bearing' (Paris, 'Chron'., 4.104), Boniface was intended, like four of his brothers, for an ecclesiastical career, but was the only one who appears to have had a religious vocation. By 1224 he was probably a novice in the Carthusian order at Portes, a daughter house of the Grande Chartreuse south of Chambery, but he never took his monastic vows because, as part of his father's policy of consolidating his hold on strategic sees and providing for his sons, Boniface was elected bishop of Belley and prior of Nantua in 1232. In the following year these appointments were confirmed after he had taken subdeacon's orders, and he inherited, on the death of his father, a share of his family inheritance, including the castle of Ugine. 
Boniface might have remained in Savoy had it not been for the marriage in 1236 of his niece, Eleanor of Provence, to Henry III, who strongly promoted his career, and that of his brother, Peter of Savoy, in England. After narrowly failing to secure for him the bishopric of Winchester (he had earlier tried to procure it for Boniface's elder brother William of Savoy), the king induced the cathedral chapter of Canterbury, which was labouring under a ban of excommunication imposed by the former archbishop Edmund of Abingdon (died 1240), to elect him archbishop and primate of England on 1 February 1241. Anxious to win support in his dispute with Frederick II, and under Savoyard influence, Innocent IV ('r'. 1243-54) confirmed the appointment on 16 September 1243. The temporalities were restored some time after 27 February 1244. Despite having promised to come as soon as he could, another seven months passed before Boniface travelled to England, probably because of a dispute with Etienne (II) de Thoire-Villars about jurisdiction over the priory of Nantua. The delay was significant for the future: although Boniface had renounced his claim to the succession in 1238, his links with Savoy remained close, and he often returned to his homeland. 
When Boniface eventually arrived in England on 25 April 1244, he was warmly welcomed by the king, who had commissioned for him a mitre decorated with precious stones worth 300 marks, and thoughtfully restocked the archiepiscopal wine cellars. He was ordained into the priesthood by Walter de Cantilupe, bishop of Worcester (died 1266), and lost no time in grappling with Canterbury's vast debts, in part the result of his predecessors' extravagance. After his suffragans refused to help, Boniface left England on 26 November 1244 for Lyons, where the exiled Innocent IV consecrated him on 15 January 1245, and later agreed that the first fruits of vacant benefices in the province of Canterbury for up to seven years, or to the value of 10,000 marks (later doubled), should be applied to paying off the debts, a decision the suffragans accepted only after Boniface suspended them. By also reorganizing the Canterbury administration, exacting all dues and services from his tenants, felling timber, and reclaiming part of Romney Marsh, Boniface had paid debts amounting to 22,000 marks by 1261, including those incurred by his predecessors in the construction of the great hall of the archbishop's palace. 'Thus it seems to me', he jested, 'that I have built it, for I have paid their debts' ('Works of Gervase of Canterbury', 2.251). Boniface then embarked on his own building schemes, including a hospital at Maidstone, Kent. 
Except for two brief visits to Savoy, Boniface stayed at the papal court in exile at Lyons from 1244 to 1249. While there he worked to secure the canonization of his predecessor, Edmund of Abingdon, and at the general council summoned by Innocent IV (June-July 1245) was one of the four archbishops chosen to codify the privileges of the church previously acknowledged by emperors and kings. To the annoyance of Henry III he also helped to arrange the marriage of his niece Beatrice, sister of Queen Eleanor, to Charles of Anjou, the younger brother of Louis IX of France. Most important of all, his long stay at Lyons engendered in him a determination to defend the liberties of the church, resist secular control, and pursue ecclesiastical reform, not least by centralizing provincial administration in his own hands. 
In September 1249 Boniface returned to England from Lyons bearing the first news of the fall of Damietta to Louis IX, and at Canterbury on 1 November he was enthroned as archbishop in the presence of the king and queen, and most of the prelates. Although Matthew Paris condemned him as 'a man... insufficient for such a dignity... in learning, manners and years' (Paris, 'Chron'., 4.104), Robert Grosseteste, the eminent bishop of Lincoln (at whose funeral Boniface was to officiate in 1253), and the Franciscan scholar Adam Marsh (died 1259) hoped to find in him a like-minded ecclesiastical reformer with the ear of the king. What his suffragans were determined to resist was any attempt to supervise their activities. Despite this, in the spring of 1250, while resentment at his financial demands was at its height, Boniface asserted his metropolitan rights by undertaking a visitation of the clergy of his province. Soon after, at the priory of St Bartholomew's, London, a brawl seems to have occurred about which Adam Marsh, who accompanied the archbishop, claimed 'extremely false accounts have been spread throughout the province both by the clergy and by the populace' (Brewer, 1.163). Matthew Paris's contribution was a damning account of the archbishop, who, he said, wore armour under his vestments and manhandled the sub-prior. After the disputants had appealed to Rome, Boniface left for the continent on 13 June 1250, where he stayed, except for a brief visit to his archiepiscopal see in the following summer, until the end of 1252. During his absence the bishops ignored Marsh's pleas not to disrupt the work of the archbishop, and assembled on several occasions to assert their liberties. The pope, for his part, eventually vindicated Boniface's right of visitation, but exempted parish churches from the payment of procurations in May 1252. That same year his elder brother, Count Amadeus (IV), assigned to him the castle of Tournon and the manor house of Ste Helene-des-Millieres in the Tarentaise. 
After Boniface's return to England on 18 November 1252 he was more conciliatory, and even Matthew Paris raised no objection to his conduct during later visitations, which continued intermittently until 1262. Yet there was no weakening in his resolve to protect his rights and supervise his province with strictness. In 1258-9 he successfully defended his jurisdictional liberties by arranging agreements with three of his most powerful vassals by knight service: the priory of Christ Church, Canterbury, the see of Rochester, and the earl of Gloucester. On 22 May 1261 he strengthened his 'sede vacante' jurisdiction, and settled a long-running dispute with the diocese of Lincoln, by securing recognition of his authority to appoint members of his own household, rather than officials of the diocese, to take charge during an episcopal vacancy. This agreement became the model for others with the dioceses of London (21 August 1262) and Salisbury (18 January 1263). He also asserted his authority over his suffragans by sanctioning the development of a new 'court of Canterbury' at London to hear appeals from their courts, and other business, and by insisting on receiving personally the profession of obedience of all but three of the thirty-seven bishops consecrated during his archiepiscopate. Consecrations usually took place at Canterbury, and whenever practicable his bishops were required to attend these ceremonial occasions. 
Much to Henry III's anger and disappointment Boniface was equally vigorous in his defence of ecclesiastical privileges and resistance to the king's interference in episcopal elections, taking up a position he was to defend resolutely for the rest of his life. Even before his first visit to England, he had opposed the king's vindictive efforts to prevent William of Raleigh (died 1250) from becoming bishop of Winchester, and later in 1244 he quashed Henry's attempt to make his clerk, Robert Passelewe (died 1252), bishop of Chichester, after an examination by Grosseteste had found him unfit for office. Boniface was also offended by the arrogance and brutality of the Lusignan half-brothers of the king, who came to England in 1247 and competed for royal patronage with the Savoyard relatives of the queen. In 1252, after he had clashed with one of their number, Aymer de Lusignan (died 1260), bishop-elect of Winchester, over the patronage of the hospital of St Thomas at Southwark, the archbishop's manor of Lambeth was ransacked and one of his officials was abducted. Those responsible were excommunicated, and Boniface and Aymer were not reconciled until 13 January 1253. 
Henry took the cross at the hands of Boniface, who may himself have pledged to go, at Westminster on 6 March 1250. After he had persuaded the clergy to grant Henry III a crusading subsidy in return for the king's agreement to reissue 'Magna Carta', Boniface and thirteen bishops pronounced a sentence of excommunication on 13 May 1253 against those violating the charters and the liberties of the church, a decision confirmed by the pope on 28 September 1253. In Gascony in the following summer, and later in Savoy, he furthered papal policy and the interests of his family in Italy by taking part in the negotiations that resulted, to the dismay of his suffragans, in the diversion of the crusading tenth to the conquest of Sicily. 
While again away, mainly in Savoy, between October 1254 and November 1256 Boniface joined his brothers Peter and Philip in an unsuccessful attempt in the summer of 1255 to rescue their brother Count Thomas from captivity at Turin. Meanwhile Henry III's financial exactions had continued. In May 1257 the clergy consented to extend the financial assistance granted to him provided he removed grievances, and did not use this agreement as a precedent for new taxes. The pope urged a compromise, but the king was incensed, and forbade the prelates and other clergy to attend a meeting that Boniface summoned to London in August 1257. Most prelates defied his prohibition and discussed a list of their grievances, as well as authorizing the use of spiritual sanctions against those infringing ecclesiastical liberties. In June 1258 Boniface summoned another meeting for Merton, Surrey, later moved to Westminster, at which the clergy approved a long list of provisions defining the rights of the church. 
Although the clergy may have kept away from the reforming parliament held at Oxford later in the same month, Boniface participated in its work, and must have welcomed some features of the baronial takeover. Along with his brother Peter he was appointed to the new ruling council of fifteen, while Aymer de Lusignan and the king's other Lusignan half-brothers were forced into exile. The barons undertook to seek funds for the Sicilian war, and a promise to reform the church was included in the provisions of Oxford. The archbishop also conducted the impressive ceremony which proclaimed a sentence of excommunication against those who opposed the provisions. 
Boniface became increasingly disenchanted with the baronial government when, despite his protests at the infringement of his jurisdiction, the castles of Canterbury and Rochester were given to baronial castellans, the barons failed to finance the papal wars in Sicily, his brother Peter was forced off the council, and no action was taken about the reform of the church. In March 1260 he opposed Simon de Montfort's attempt to hold a parliament in defiance of Henry's wishes, and later he helped Richard, earl of Cornwall (died 1272), the king's brother, who was married to Sanchia, another of the archbishop's nieces, to reconcile the king and his son, the Lord Edward, after a dispute. In the spring of 1261 Alexander IV ('r'. 1254-61) issued a bull absolving Henry from his oath to support the provisions, though he was careful to insist that the king was bound by any changes that were to the advantage of the church. Boniface headed the list of those authorized to absolve the prelates and magnates from their oaths. In August, Boniface published the papal absolution and threatened Hugh Bigod (died 1266), the justiciar, with excommunication if he refused to surrender the castles granted to him under the terms of the provisions. 
Responding to a papal request for financial assistance against the Tartar invasion of Hungary, Boniface summoned an ecclesiastical council to meet at Lambeth on 8 May 1261, at which he complained that neither the king nor the barons were prepared to improve the condition of the church. Although an angry Henry III sent a delegation headed by Peter of Savoy and the Lord Edward to press his objections, Boniface and the clergy issued the constitutions of Lambeth on 13 May 1261, a formal restatement of the decisions taken in June 1258, and sought papal confirmation of them. Henry responded by sending proctors to the court of Rome to urge the rejection of the constitutions, which he described as 'to the prejudice of the king's right and dignity and the liberties, law and customs of the realm' ('CPR', '1258-66', 155). New proctors were appointed in the following January: 'to show the grievances done to the king and the realm by the archbishop of Canterbury and his suffragans, and to obtain the revocation of certain statutes issued by them to the great prejudice of the king and the crown. ('CPR', '1258-66', 197)' On 25 February 1262 Urban IV ('r'. 1261-4) confirmed the decree of his predecessor, and instructed Boniface and others to absolve the king from any oaths he had taken. All promises made by the prelates and magnates contrary to the dignity of the crown and prejudicial to its rights were declared null and void. 
After Boniface left England on 8 October 1262, presumably to secure papal confirmation of the constitutions of Lambeth and to attend to family affairs in Savoy, he found himself increasingly isolated and powerless. His tendency, at times, to exceed his canonical authority had long been a source of anxiety at Rome. Innocent IV had been obliged to use his plenitude of power to confirm Boniface's appointment of Richard of Wyche (died 1253) as bishop of Chichester in 1244, while Alexander IV had overruled the archbishop when he tried to have Adam Marsh made bishop of Ely in preference to Hugh of Balsham (died 1286) in 1256. The archbishop's encroachments on the jurisdiction of diocesan courts had also caused concern. Now the papacy could not allow Boniface's insistence on ecclesiastical reform to compromise its support for Henry III. In January 1263, out of deference to the king, Urban IV refused to approve the constitutions, even though he admitted that he could see nothing wrong in them, and by appointing Guy Foulquois, cardinal-bishop of Sabina, as legate to England in November he deprived Boniface of much of his authority. The increasing disorder in England, especially the ravaging of his lands in Kent, which made it impossible for him to return safely, further undermined Boniface's influence. With their archbishop in exile many of the reforming clergy rallied behind Walter de Cantilupe and other bishops sympathetic to Simon de Montfort, and the disruption in communications enabled a Canterbury monk, Adam of Chillenden, to trick Boniface into appointing him prior of Christ Church. After Henry III's defeat at Lewes on 14 May 1264 Boniface rejected the demands of the Montfortian government that he return to England, or delegate his authority, 'otherwise his emoluments will not be allowed to go out of the realm' ('CPR', '1258-66', 328). Instead, using the power granted to him by the pope in the spring of 1264 to exercise jurisdiction while resident abroad, he refused in January 1265 to consecrate Walter Giffard (died 1279) as bishop of Bath and Wells until he had appeared before him in France. Meantime, with his future uncertain, and perhaps already often bedridden with the stone, Boniface had made his will at Tournon on 11 October 1264. The experiences of twenty years of incessant travel no doubt explain why one of his many bequests was money to build a bridge over the Rhone on the road between Savoy and France. 
It was not until 29 May 1266, almost ten months after Montfort's defeat at Evesham, that Boniface returned to England and recovered possession of his plate and treasure, worth over 6000 marks, which had been safeguarded by his officials throughout the civil war. By then Ottobuono Fieschi, cardinal-deacon of St Adrian (died 1276), who had been appointed legate on 4 May 1265, had already taken charge of ecclesiastical affairs and instituted proceedings against the Montfortian bishops. Although the two men were on friendly terms (the cardinal's sister Beatrice had been married to the archbishop's late brother Thomas), Boniface's authority was effectively in eclipse until Ottobuono's departure in July 1268, the same month in which the archbishop settled a 'sede vacante' dispute with the cathedral chapter of Worcester. Despite being disheartened by the ravaging of his estates, he showed continued determination to defend his rights and privileges from whatever quarter they appeared to come under threat, as he demonstrated in April 1266, when he astonished the king by objecting to an appointment to a prebend in Herefordshire. Yet it says much for his weakened standing that Giffard, the official collector of a new crusading subsidy, was able to command him to submit on pain of excommunication. 
Although Boniface probably attended the council summoned by Ottobuono to discuss church reform at St Paul's, London, in April 1268, there is no evidence that he played any part in drawing up the important canons it produced, which were in any case published under the name of the legate. When Boniface was too ill to attend the celebration of the feast of St Edward the Confessor at Westminster on 13 October 1268, Giffard, who had been appointed archbishop of York in the previous year, reopened an ancient dispute by having his cross carried before him in the southern province. If the angry Canterbury suffragans showed their feelings by sitting stony-faced in their stalls, Boniface demonstrated his by imposing an interdict on London. He left England for the last time on 14 November 1268, and after his death on 14 July 1270 at Ste Helene, he was buried with other members of his family in the Cistercian abbey of Hautecombe. 
On the continent, where he spent the greater part of his career of twenty-nine years as archbishop of Canterbury, Boniface was held in high esteem. By the late fourteenth century, his grave, over which an impressive bronze effigy had been erected soon after his death, was the centre of a cult, and it was claimed that Boniface had performed miracles in England during his lifetime. When his tomb was opened in 1580, his body was found to be perfectly preserved. Although the effigy was melted down during the French Revolution, Boniface's remains were reburied under the high altar, and he was beatified by Gregory XVI ('r'. 1831-46) in 1839, when a new stone tomb modelled on the original effigy was erected. In England, by contrast, despite the eulogies of the chroniclers after his death, and the provision in his will of 1000 marks for the poor of his estates, and 20 marks for impecunious scholars at Oxford, most later historians accepted uncritically Matthew Paris's initial vilification of him as a violent, greedy, and neglectful foreigner. Boniface was undoubtedly aggressive and high-handed, he failed to resolve the conflict between family loyalties, the needs of the crown, the interests of his suffragans, and his obligations to the papacy, and he was often absent from England on church and family business at critical times. The civil war, moreover, broke the unity of the ecclesiastical reformers, devastated the archiepiscopal lands, and severely curbed the archbishop's authority. Yet earlier, Boniface's stubborn defence of the prerogatives of the church and of his office had made him the unlikely champion of ecclesiastical liberties, won over many of his former critics, and helped persuade Matthew Paris to modify his first censorious verdict. With papal support Boniface established the rights of provincial visitation in the see of Canterbury, and by clarifying and settling the relationship between the archbishop and his cathedral chapter, largely removed a long-standing conflict between them. His constitutions of Lambeth of May 1261 'became the focus of the continued conflict over the reform of the church up to the seventeenth century' (Wilshire, 65). Although none of his registers has survived, he was clearly also an able administrator who built up an unusually large household and administration, composed almost entirely of university men. So the continuator of Gervase of Canterbury's 'Gesta regum' had justification for claiming that 'with great labour and at great expense he procured much good for his church and liberties for himself and his successors' ('Works of Gervase of Canterbury', 2.250). 


@@@@@


doc= 2845


Bonington, Richard Parkes (1802-1828), landscape painter, was born on 25 October 1802 in Arnold, near Nottingham, and baptized there at High Pavement Unitarian Chapel on 28 November, the only child of Richard Bonington (1768-1835) and Eleanor Parkes (died 1838). His father inherited the post of governor of Nottingham gaol in 1789, but eight years later resigned that sinecure under duress to become a drawing master and portrait painter. He would exhibit landscapes and watercolours at the Royal Academy in London in 1797 and 1808 and at the Liverpool Academy in 1811 and 1813. His posthumous and justly deserved reputation as an opportunist and exploiter of his progeny's fame has perhaps overshadowed the fact that he was a reasonably competent artist whose industry satisfied a variety of cultural needs in the provinces. He conducted weekly drawing lessons at the Jennings circulating library in Sheffield, for instance. In 1801 the senior Bonington married Eleanor Parkes, an educated woman with prior experience tutoring children, and together they managed in Nottingham until 1813 a finishing school for girls and a 'repository of arts' that stocked artists' supplies and the latest graphic arts from London. The nearly 3000 old master and modern prints auctioned by his estate (Sothebys, 24 February 1838) would have figured prominently in the earliest artistic instruction of his son, for which he was unquestionably responsible. 
Economic stagnation during the second decade of the century devastated Nottingham, and in a distressed financial state the Boningtons moved in the autumn of 1817 to Calais, where the father had established a lace-making business in partnership with two other expatriate Nottinghamshire businessmen. The younger Bonington's earliest known works of art date from after his arrival in France. Although initially discouraged by his parents, he refined his skills as a painter of marine watercolours under the tutelage of the Anglo-French artist Louis Francia, who, after many successful years in London as a watercolourist, had returned to Calais only months before the Boningtons' arrival. The impact of Francia's style is actually less apparent in Bonington's earliest watercolours than in those of 1823, when the two artists again worked in close association in Paris. 
Following the dissolution of the Calais partnership in October 1818, the family moved to Paris in the spring and opened a retail lace business at 22 rue des Moulins. They would subsequently occupy premises at 27 rue Michel le Comte and 16 rue des Mauvaises-Paroles. The younger Bonington began copying Dutch and Flemish paintings in the Musee du Louvre, where he met Eugene Delacroix. On the recommendation of the English artist James Roberts, whom he also met in the Louvre, Bonington was enrolled in April 1819 in the studio of Baron Antoine-Jean Gros, France's pre-eminent painter of historical subjects. Gros's studio, located in the Institut de France, was the most prestigious in Paris. Among the fellow pupils whom Bonington would befriend at this time were Eugene Lami, Camille Roqueplan, Paul Huet, and Henri Monnier. However, large-scale, academic figure painting was anathema to Bonington, and he eventually renounced formal training for a regimen of self-tuition in naturalistic landscape painting. Late in 1821 he made the first of several tours of Normandy, journeying to Rouen and then along the coast from Caen to Abbeville. Two watercolours from this trip, 'Vue prise a Lillebonne' and 'Vue prise au Havre', received favourable critical notice when exhibited at the 1822 Paris Salon and were acquired by the Societe des Amis des Arts. Watercolour painting was considered a British speciality and was not much practised at this time in France, but Bonington's bravura technique soon attracted both private collectors and numerous imitators. These early topographical watercolours, exhibited in the gallery of Madame Hulin and Claude Schroth at 18 rue de la Paix, Paris, Camille Corot later acknowledged as the inspiration for his becoming a painter. 
Until 1823 Bonington painted exclusively in watercolours, both for the middle-class cognoscenti and for publishers of illustrated topographical and antiquarian books. His first topographical commission was to copy in watercolours a sketch by the comte de Forbin for J. F. d'Ostervald's 'Voyage pittoresque en Sicile' (1822-6), a 'tour de force' of British printmaking technology, for which the Swiss-born publisher employed a battery of English watercolourists and aquatint etchers, including the entire Fielding family. With the proceeds of his watercolour sales, Bonington visited Belgium in 1823 and again toured Normandy, gathering material to illustrate Ostervald's 'Excursions sur les cotes et dans les ports de France', and for his own set of lithographic views of Gothic architectural monuments, 'Restes et fragmens ['sic'] d'architecture du moyen age', also called 'La petite Normandie'. Despite their great beauty as drawings, the last portfolio was a commercial failure owing to printing problems and the lack of any descriptive text. 'Restes et fragmens' would appear in 1824, as would his most innovative lithographic contributions to Baron Taylor's voluminous 'Voyages pittoresques et romantiques dans l'ancienne France'. Like most artists of his generation, Bonington admired the enchanting blend of historical pageantry and exacting archaeological research that typified the novels of Sir Walter Scott, and his 'instinctive predilection for historical reminiscences' (Roberts) is evidenced in these scrupulously observed antiquarian prints, as well as in his later genre lithographs 'Cahier de six sujets' (1826) and the pseudo-Gothic illuminations for Ferdinand Langle's 'Contes du gay scavoir' (1827). 
The year 1824 was one of tremendous ferment in the arts. In the spring, two of the titans of romanticism died tragically -- Theodore Gericault in Paris and Lord Byron in Missolonghi. Jacques-Louis David's principal disciple, Anne-Louis Girodet, would also not survive the year. In February Bonington and the artist Alexandre-Marie Colin left Paris for the coastal town of Dunkirk. This sketching tour, planned to last but a few weeks, developed into a self-imposed exile of nearly one year's duration. It was during this sojourn, which the artist described as the 'happiest year of my life', that Bonington concentrated on the marine oil paintings that would trumpet his arrival as a serious artist at the Paris Salon in August. The 1824 Salon was the most passionately contested cultural event in France of the 1820s, pitting the academic painters of David's school against the younger generation of artists, like Delacroix, who identified themselves as romantics. British artists were also invited to exhibit, and Bonington shared in the notoriety accorded such celebrities as Sir Thomas Lawrence and John Constable. With its vivacious brushwork and its serene expansiveness, 'A Fishmarket, Near Boulogne' (Yale U. CBA), for which Bonington was awarded a gold medal, was a brilliant exercise in Anglo-Dutch naturalism without parallel in contemporary French practice. Altogether Bonington exhibited under his own name four marine oils, a watercolour view of Abbeville, and an impression of his 'Rue de Grosse-Horloge, Rouen', which remains one of the signal images of early lithography. Under Ostervald's name appeared an unspecified number of Bonington's watercolours related to various topographical publications. The success of the Salon pictures thrust the diffident artist to the forefront of the French romantic movement. His work, with that of John Constable, would influence the course of French landscape painting for the next decade. 
Inspired by what they had seen of British art at the Salon, Bonington and numerous French colleagues, including Colin, Delacroix, Hippolyte Poterlet, Edouard Bertin, and Augustin Enfantin, travelled to London in summer 1825. While in England, Bonington developed close ties to Delacroix and Eugene Isabey, working with the former at Westminster and at the collection of the antiquarian Dr Samuel Meyrick, and with the latter on the Normandy coast at the conclusion of their trip. Through the offices of the engravers Abraham Raimbach and William Cooke, he probably visited the superb old master and modern paintings collections of Sir Walter Fawkes, Sir John Leicester, and the marquess of Stafford, where he would have discovered the extraordinary range and power of J. M. W. Turner's art. In response to Constable and Turner, Bonington began painting oil sketches 'en plein air' using a commercially prepared millboard that was readily available in London, and he enlarged his repertory of subjects to include a variety of landscape types, especially river scenes at twilight. 
After a sketching tour with Paul Huet along the Seine in autumn 1825, Bonington moved into Delacroix's Paris studio in the rue Jacob. Through Delacroix he was introduced to the most progressive French literati, including Prosper Merimee, Honore de Balzac, Charles Nodier, Victor Hugo, and Amedee Pichot, for whom he illustrated 'Vues pittoresques de l'Ecosse' (1825-6). While Delacroix and his circle persuaded Bonington to expand the scope of his ambitions to include historical subjects in oils, the earliest of which is 'Anne Page and Slender' (Wallace Collection, London), Bonington's seminal influence on Delacroix is sensed, as Theophile Gautier first observed, in the new eclat of colouring and the more assured handling of paint that is evident in the French artist's pictures of 1826, in particular, his 'Combat of the Giaour and Hassan' (Art Institute of Chicago) and the 'Execution of the Doge Marino Faliero' (Wallace Collection, London). The clarity and dazzling execution of Bonington's style also inspired Delacroix and other French painters, like Alexandre Decamps, Charles Gleyre, Isabey, and Huet, to explore watercolour painting with renewed commitment. 
In February 1826 the critic for the 'London Literary Gazette' asked in his review of the annual exhibition of contemporary art at the British Institution, 'Who is R. P. Bonington?' The two oil paintings, 'French Coast Scenery' and 'French Coast with Fishermen' (both priv. coll.), that the artist had sent from Paris for inclusion in the exhibition had astounded his British compatriots who were seeing his work for the first time. In the spring, Bonington moved to his own studio at 11 rue des Martyrs, a building owned by Jules-Robert Auguste, an amateur artist and former friend of Gericault. Shortly thereafter he commenced a tour of northern Italy and Switzerland in the company of a friend and pupil, the future Baron Charles Rivet. Delacroix was meant to accompany them but at the last minute withdrew. Since it was the Italy of Shakespeare and Byron that fascinated Bonington, he spent most of his time in Venice, where he produced a substantial number of graphite, watercolour, and oil sketches of the principal monuments and views. These furnished him with studies for major exhibition pictures that he would send to the Salon and to the Royal Academy in 1828. As one of the earliest nineteenth-century artists to depict Venice in its faded splendour, Bonington appears to have influenced the way many French writers, including Chateaubriand, perceived the city. Antoine Claude Pasquin (M. Valery), who was travelling in Italy at the same time, would write that: 'Bonington, a British artist of melancholy cast, has painted some new views of Venice in which is most perfectly sketched its present desolation; when compared with those of the Venetian painter Canaletto, they resemble a woman still beautiful but worn down by age and misfortune. ('Voyages historiques et litteraires en Italie', 1831, 143)' The experience of Venetian Renaissance painting was also important to Bonington's increasingly comprehensive artistic interests, and, on resettling in Paris, he would become preoccupied once again with genre subjects. 
After leaving Venice at the end of May, Bonington travelled to Padua, Florence, Pisa, Sarzana, Lerici, Spezzia, Genoa, and Turin. It has been assumed on the evidence of Rivet's correspondence that the two friends were back in Paris by 20 June; however, extant drawings from Staubbach, Thun, Bern, and Basel suggest that Bonington possibly separated from his companion and returned to France by way of Switzerland, thus extending his journey by perhaps several weeks. 
The last two years of Bonington's life were marked by astounding popular success both in England and in France. The development of his painting technique was breathtaking and experimental. By the summer of 1827 there was little but scale to distinguish visually between his work in oils and his work in watercolours. The denser texture of oil paint is simulated with gouache in the watercolours, while the limpidity of translucent watercolours has its analogue in the oil glazes that begin to dominate in his canvases. Although he continued to paint marines, including the radiant 'On the Cote d'Opale, Picardy' (priv. coll.), exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1827, his primary subject interests were now views of Venice and illustrations to medieval and Renaissance history or the literary works of Scott and Goethe. In his genre paintings he was much influenced by the emerging science of modern historiography, with its demand for archaeological exactitude, and by the type of intimate historical painting known in France as the Troubadour style, of which Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres was then the foremost exponent. But, unlike Ingres, Bonington was also enamoured of the expressive techniques and colouring of Venetian painting, which he endeavoured to translate into his own stylistic idiom. His final master-works in this genre are 'Quentin Durward at Liege' (Nottingham Castle Museum), which was commissioned by the duchesse de Berri, 'Henri IV and the Spanish Ambassador', and 'Henri III of France' (both Wallace Collection, London). 
At the end of 1827 Bonington moved his studio for the final time to 32 rue St Lazare and sent to the Salon two oil paintings, the 'Ducal Palace' (Tate collection) and 'Rouen Cathedral', together with a watercolour and several lithographic interpretations of drawings by Maurice Rugendas for 'Voyages pittoresques en Bresil' (1827). He again travelled to London in January 1828, where he met Sir Thomas Lawrence and exhibited 'The Piazzetta, Venice' and 'View of the Ducal Palace, Venice' (both Tate collection) at the British Institution. In February he exhibited, at the second Salon instalment, 'Francis I and the Queen of Navarre' (untraced), 'Henri IV and the Spanish Ambassador' (Wallace Collection, London) and 'Entrance to the Grand Canal' (priv. coll.), a large picture commissioned by the publisher James Carpenter. To the Royal Academy, in May, he sent 'Henri III' (Wallace Collection, London), Carpenter's 'Grand Canal', and a coast scene. Within a month of that exhibition, Bonington collapsed from either sunstroke or nervous exhaustion, and, in a weakened state, succumbed to tuberculosis. In an effort to save him, his parents took him to London in August, but treatment proved futile, and he died on 23 September at 29 Tottenham Street, the home of the publisher John Barnett. During his final illness he was attended by Thomas Shotter Boys, who helped him produce his only etching, 'Bologna: the Leaning Towers'. He was buried in London, on 29 September 1828, at St James's Chapel, Pentonville, and later reinterred, at Kensal Green cemetery, in 1837. In a letter to his spouse, the engraver George Cooke described the funeral and its many mourners, among whom were some of the first names in British painting: Sir Thomas Lawrence, Henry William Pickersgill, Clarkson Stanfield, John Frederick Lewis, and George Fennel Robson (J. Munday, 'Edward William Cooke', 1996, 44). 
The little that we know of Bonington's character and appearance comes from two sources -- a manuscript recollection written by James Roberts, probably in response to Allen Cunningham's flawed biographical notice of 1832, and a letter from Eugene Delacroix to Theophile Thore (Noon, 'On the Pleasure of Painting', 12), composed decades after Bonington's death. Roberts had only recently preceded Bonington to Paris in 1817, and he recalled meeting him in the Louvre copying a picture by Gerard Dou. It was Roberts who alleged that there occurred a breach in the relationship between Bonington and Gros, which resulted in his unjust expulsion from the studio. Roberts also noted that: 'Bonington's appearance at that time was particularly boyish owing to his round plump cheeks... yet [one] would observe in his eyes unequivocal marks of intelligence. Although he was never noisy or boisterous like his comrades of the atelier he was fond of mirth. (Roberts)' Rivet, in his correspondence from Italy, described his companion as moody, obsessively self-critical, and addicted to his studies (Dubuisson and Hughes). Delacroix, on the other hand, wrote, 'I knew him well and loved him much. His British composure, which was imperturbable, in no way diminished those qualities that make life enjoyable'. His assessment of Bonington's merits was extremely apt: 'To my mind, one can find in other modern artists qualities of strength and of precision in rendering that are superior to those in Bonington's pictures, but no one in this modern school, and perhaps even before, has possessed that lightness of touch which, especially in the watercolours, makes his work a type of diamond that flatters and ravishes the eye. (Noon, 'On the Pleasure of Painting', 12)' 

After his death Bonington's reputation grew prodigiously. Lawrence, who owned several of his pictures including 'A Seated Turk' (Yale U. CBA) and the resplendent 'Lerici' (priv. coll.), actively promoted his reputation in England. In France his legacy was even more zealously defended. For writers and critics from Flaubert and Sainte-Beuve to Baudelaire and Thore, Bonington was not only the equal of Turner and Constable, but also, with Delacroix and Gericault, one of the pillars of modern sensibility -- an exquisite colourist and technician whose affinity with nature made his works emotional as well as painterly statements of the highest calibre. Bonington never sought, like Turner or Gericault or Delacroix, to depict the sublime events of nature and history, and he had little interest in the theoretical, but his vision was no less seminal to the development of modern art. 
Despite the persistent high reputation of the artist through the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, there have been surprisingly few exhibitions of Bonington's work. The first retrospective was organized by Paul Oppe for the Burlington Fine Arts Club in 1937. The Nottingham Castle Museum exhibition of 1965 was the largest, while the 1991 exhibition in New Haven and Paris (Yale Center for British Art and Petit Palais) focused on defining a corpus of authentic masterworks from the plethora of imitations and forgeries that began flooding the markets as early as 1830. The most impressive single collection of Bonington's works is in the Wallace Collection, London, the benefaction of the most resolute of the artist's collectors, Sir Richard Wallace. At the first studio sale of 1829, the marquess of Lansdowne purchased a significant collection of architectural and Venetian drawings, which are now at Bowood House, Wiltshire. In Bonington's adoptive city, the Bibliotheque Nationale houses the Atherton Curtis bequest of drawings and prints and a number of Bonington's manuscript letters. The Musee du Louvre has several notable oils. Other important groups of works are in the British Museum and the Nottingham Castle Museum. During the twentieth century there has been only one tenacious collector, Paul Mellon, who donated eleven oil paintings to the Yale Center for British Art. 


@@@@@


doc= 2846


Bonner, George Wilmot (1796-1836), wood-engraver, was born on 24 May 1796 at Devizes, Wiltshire. Having been educated at Bath, he was apprenticed first to an uncle, Allen Robert Branston, a wood-engraver in London, and later to James Henry Vizetelly, of Vizetelly and Branston. He became a proficient draughtsman and engraver, employing the white-line style of engraving, popularized by Thomas Bewick, in a competent if pedestrian way. His greatest skill was his ability to produce a gradation of tints by using a combination of blocks. 
Bonner was also a good instructor, and several of his apprentices became important engravers. Most notably he trained William James Linton (from 1828), who lived with him for some time at 12 Canterbury Row, Kennington (Bonner's address in trade journals between 1832 and 1836). Linton described Bonner as 'a clever artist, and a good master' (Linton, 191-2), and recalled how his master had taught him all the processes of wood-engraving from the cutting of woodblocks to the most delicate graver work, and had encouraged him to sketch from nature (including from animals at London Zoo) to avoid becoming a mechanical copyist. Another talented apprentice of Bonner was W. H. Powis. By contrast, Henry Vizetelly, who came to Bonner around 1835, dismissed him as a 'second-rate wood engraver, who intensified in his woodcuts the conventional mannerisms of the bold watercolour drawings which he was somewhat adept at producing' (Vizetelly, 119-20). He finished his training elsewhere, on account of Bonner's unexpected death on 3 January 1836, which Vizetelly ascribed to brain fever. Bonner was apparently unmarried. 
One of Bonner's first engravings was a frontispiece designed by Robert Cruikshank for John Cumberland's 'British Theatre' and 'Minor Theatre' series (1820 onwards). Another was his engraving of W. H. Brooke's painting 'Mercy' (inspired by William Collins's 'An Ode on Mercy'), which was printed in colour in William Savage's 'Practical Hints on Decorative Printing' (1822), a milestone in the history of chromoxylography. In its preface Savage noted that he had used engravers who would 'show what the art is capable of producing at the present day in England' (p. v). 
Above all, Bonner excelled in his portrayal of animals. He produced plates for William Pickering's edition of Izaak Walton and Charles Cotton's 'The Compleat Angler' (1825); engraved numerous vignettes after William Harvey's designs for James Northcote's 'Fables' (1828; second series 1833); and provided wood-engravings for two zoological publications by Edward Turner Bennett: 'The Tower Menagerie' (1829) and 'Zoological Gardens' (1835). Quite frequently, too, he produced landscapes and topographical views. Many vignettes were commissioned by William Kidd for his guidebooks, including 'Picturesque Pocket Companion to Margate, Ramsgate, Broadstairs' (1831) and 'Kidd's New Guide to the 'Lions' of London' (1832), while numerous views by Bonner enlivened Arthur Freeling's 'Picturesque Excursions' (1839). 
Possibly the best-known publication on which Bonner worked was Francis Douce's 'The Dance of Death', printed at the Chiswick Press in 1833. Douce pointed out in the preface that the facsimile designs from the Lyons edition of 1547 had been 'executed with consummate skill and fidelity by Messrs Bonner and Byfield, two of our best artists in the line of wood engraving. They may very justly be regarded as scarcely distinguishable from their fine originals' (pp. v-vi). Certainly these engravings were far superior to most available at the time. Bonner signed his work in a spidery hand: G. W. Bonner; G. Bonner, SC; Bonner; G. B.; G. B. Sc; G. W. B. 


@@@@@


doc= 2847


Bonnar, William (1800-1853), painter, was born in Edinburgh, the son of a house-painter. He showed artistic talent at an early age and was apprenticed to one of the leading decorative artists of the day; after some time he became foreman of the business. When George IV visited Edinburgh in 1822 Bonnar helped David Roberts to decorate the Assembly Rooms in George Street for the state ball. Shortly after this Captain Basil Hall recognized the quality of his work, having seen some signboards that Bonnar had painted, and encouraged Bonnar to become a professional artist. This he did in 1824, when he exhibited 'The Tinkers' at Waterloo Place. This painting was well received and five years later Bonnar was elected a member of the Royal Scottish Academy, which had been founded the previous year, in 1828. He was also presented with the Hope and Cockburn award. 
Bonnar specialized in rural scenes, pictures of children, and humorous subjects that show the influence of David Wilkie, such as 'Showing the New Dress' (1829), 'The Blessing' (1832), and 'The Orphans' (1838). He was often inspired by Scottish literary sources such as the life and works of Robert Burns, as in 'The Cottar's Saturday Night' (1839), Allan Ramsay, as in 'The Gentle Shepherd', and the works of Sir Walter Scott, as in 'Jessie Deans in the Robber's Barn' (1836), 'Kilmeny's Return' (1838), and 'Caleb Balderstone Burnishing the Pewter Flagon' (1840). He also painted historical subjects including 'The First Sermon of John Knox, in the Castle of St Andrews' and 'King Robert Bruce and the Spider' (1840). Bonnar was a popular and prolific artist and many of his paintings were engraved. Latterly he concentrated on painting portraits, many of which were engraved by his sons. These include 'Portrait of John Blackie Senior' (Glasgow Art Gallery), 'Thomas Chalmers', 'William Cunningham', 'George Kemp', and 'Isabella Begg' (all Scot. NPG), and a self-portrait (NG Scot.). 
Bonnar died in London Street, Edinburgh, on 27 January 1853. His son William Bonnar junior ('fl'. 1849) also became a painter. 


@@@@@


doc= 2848


Bonneau, Jacob (d. 1786), painter, moved to England about 1741, with his father, an engraver, who worked in London for booksellers during the mid-eighteenth century. Probably trained by his father, Bonneau also worked for booksellers, for whom he engraved the heads prefixed to the 'History of the American Buccaneers' published in London in 1741. Whitley noted that on the retirement of Alexander Cozens in 1754 the 'artists of London petitioned the Governors of Christ's Hospital to give the post [of drawing master] to Jacob Bonneau, afterwards one of the drawing masters to the Royal Family, who, although his reputation as a painter was small, received some support when a candidate for the Associateship of the Royal Academy twenty years later. Bonneau must have been extremely popular among his brother artists, for the petition, drawn up by Joseph Highmore, is signed by nearly all the important painters, sculptors and engravers of the time including Hogarth, Reynolds -- then a young man not long returned from Italy -- and Roubiliac. (Whitley, 316-17)' Bonneau was described in the petition, which is cited by Whitley in full, as 'being a person in every way qualified for that Trust' (ibid., 317). In the ballot he failed to obtain the post, losing by 15 votes to 40 to an artist named Bisse. From 1765 to 1778 Bonneau exhibited landscapes at the Society of British Artists, of which he was a member. From 1770 to 1781 he exhibited seven landscape paintings and the watercolour drawing 'St John' at the Royal Academy. Bonneau worked chiefly in watercolour, and his principal occupation was that of a teacher of drawing and perspective. He died at Kentish Town, London, on 18 March 1786. 


@@@@@


doc= 2849


Bonnell, James (1653-1699), government official, was born in Genoa on 14 November 1653, the son of Samuel Bonnell, a merchant and ardent royalist (died 1663), and his wife, Rebecca Sayer (died 'c'.1691), daughter of Thomas Sayer of Norwich. John Strype, the ecclesiastical historian, was James's cousin and close friend. Samuel himself was the grandson of the protestant refugee Thomas Bonnell, originally 'a gentleman of good family near Ypres' (Hamilton, 1), who had fled Spanish persecutions and settled in Norwich, where he became mayor. Samuel made a promising beginning to his career. Apprenticed to the great London merchant Sir William Courteen he eventually settled at Leghorn, and by 1649 was said to be worth $10,000. However, commercial misfortunes and generous subsidies to the exiled Charles II greatly reduced his circumstances, and in 1655 he returned to England. A belated recompense came in 1662 in the form of a grant of the office of accountant-general of Ireland, worth some $800 a year, jointly to himself and his son. After Samuel's death in March 1663 the office was regranted to James Bonnell and Robert Wood. The benefits of the patent were enjoyed only until 1669: after the removal of the duke of Ormond from the viceroyalty a new Irish establishment was issued in which all remuneration for the accountant-generalship was effectively suspended. 
By this time James Bonnell was at Cambridge, where he had been sent, as he put it, 'by the Duke of Ormond's orders' (Hamilton, 1). His mother, 'a woman of singular piety and prudence', had taken great care in his upbringing to 'give a right tincture to his mind, and season it with the love of virtue and religion' (Hamilton, 3). After early education in Dublin he had been sent to school at Trim, co. Meath, under the care of Richard Tennison, later bishop of Meath, who remembered him as 'a child of a most innocent and genteel behaviour, never inclined to any vice, but strictly religious, and extraordinarily ingenious' (Hamilton, 4); one who 'had the greatest sense of religion that ever I knew any boy in my life' (NL Ire., Smythe of Barbavilla MSS, P.C. 435, Tennison to Mrs Jane Bonnell, 21 April 1705). He then proceeded, about 1667, to a nonconformist academy at Nettlebed, Oxfordshire, run by Thomas Cole, former principal of St Mary's Hall, Oxford. The general atmosphere, and in particular the behaviour of his fellow pupils, was not conducive to piety, and he seems to have felt distinctly uncomfortable there. While refusing to find fault with Cole he admitted that the school possessed 'all the dangers and vices of the university without the advantages' (Hamilton, 11). 
At St Catharine's College, Cambridge, where he was admitted pensioner in July 1669 and matriculated in 1672, his situation greatly improved: he was taught by Benjamin Calamy, son of the prominent nonconformist Edmund Calamy sen. and was surrounded by like-minded undergraduates, including Calamy's brother James, who became his particular friend, and Offspring Blackall, future bishop of Exeter. In this atmosphere of intense religiosity 'his advancement in learning kept equal pace with his improvements in piety' (Hamilton, 12). He formed habits of personal introspection, prayer, and devotional practice which stayed with him throughout his life, especially the frequent reception of holy communion, and regular observance of fast days. Having graduated BA in 1673, and proceeded MA three years later, he obtained a post as tutor to the young Ralph Freman, son of Ralph Freman of Aspenden in Hertfordshire and later tory MP for the county. Having failed in an application to the crown for an ecclesiastical appointment he accompanied his young charge to the continent in 1678 on a prolonged grand tour to the United Provinces, France, and Italy; and this despite chronic ill health, which he endured with fortitude. They were at Nijmegen in 1678 during the negotiation of the treaty, where Bonnell made a favourable impression on the English diplomat Sir Leoline Jenkins. He eventually returned to Ireland in 1684. 
In the meantime his office had been re-established as 'comptroller- and accountant-general': Bonnell held first a half-share and then the whole patent until he was replaced in 1691. Even then he acted as his successor's deputy for more than three years. At some point he ceased to pursue actively his ambition of taking holy orders, declining an offer from his former pupil Freman to purchase an advowson for him, but in essence he remained a priest 'manque', and always regretted having followed a secular path. 
Bonnell remained at his post throughout the revolution of 1688 and the ensuing war, but was subsequently critical of his own passivity, especially when contrasted with the more vigorous opposition to the Jacobites made by his friend William King, later bishop of Derry. At the time his prayers and meditations show not only a deep concern for the protestant cause in Ireland but sorrow for the sins which, he felt, had brought down this providential judgment. His joy and relief at the Williamite victory were tinged with anxiety for the security of the revolution settlement: this, he felt, required not only radical political measures, if possible an incorporating union between England and Ireland, but a thorough reformation in the religious and moral life of protestant Ireland, to propitiate divine providence. 
Bonnell's Anglicanism was of a comprehensionist kind, as befitted a former associate of the Calamys, and although he was proud of the traditions of the established church, he was also conscious of the spiritual weaknesses of both clergy and laity. He helped to promote the religious societies which flourished in Dublin in the 1690s, bringing together pious young men to pray, sing psalms, and organize charity for the poor; and the societies for the reformation of manners, which sought to enforce the public observance of Christian precepts, notably sabbath observance (something always close to Bonnell's heart), and the rejection of blasphemy and sexual incontinence. In this work he was greatly encouraged by his marriage, in 1693, to Jane (died 1754), daughter of Sir Albert Conyngham of Mount Charles, co. Donegal, who was both pious and exceedingly well connected (one of her sisters married William Conolly, a future speaker of the Irish House of Commons). She brought him unexpected domestic happiness relatively late in life, bore him a son and a daughter, and subsequently devoted herself to fostering his posthumous reputation. Bonnell left the accountant-general's office in March 1695 to take on the secretaryship of the revived forfeitures commission, and when, a year later, the commission was wound up and its functions transferred to the Irish revenue commission, a place was found for him under the revenue commission as registrar of forfeitures. 
Bonnell died of a fever in April 1699 and was buried in St John's Church, Dublin, on 29 April. His funeral sermon, preached by one of his many episcopal friends and admirers, Edward Wetenhall of Kilmore, offered his life as 'a pattern of most universal virtue' (Wetenhall, 30-31), and suggested that in earlier ages he would have been regarded as a saint. Another bishop, William King, composed the inscription for his funerary monument, and, in a somewhat proprietorial manner, proposed writing his life, but the formidable Mrs Bonnell arranged for this honour to pass instead to Archdeacon William Hamilton of Armagh. Published in 1703, the 'Life' went through at least seven editions, the last in 1852. Bonnell himself studied and wrote extensively, leaving behind a corpus of manuscript meditations. His favourite authors, not surprisingly, were Thomas a Kempis and Richard Hooker. One work, 'The Harmony of the Holy Gospels Digested into one History', was published posthumously in 1705. Bonnell's widow was resident at Writtle, Essex, at her death in 1754 (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/740, fols. 113'r'-115'r'). 


@@@@@


doc= 2850


Bonner, Edmund (d. 1569), bishop of London, was probably born in Hanley, Worcestershire. He was the son of Elizabeth Frodsham, later the wife of Edmund Bonner, sawyer, but most contemporary records suggest that he was the natural son of George Savage, the rector of Davenham, Cheshire ['see 'Savage family (per. c.1369-1528)]. Strype, however, suggests that the allegation of illegitimacy may be false, on the evidence of Sir Nicholas Lechmere, the great-grandson of a great friend of Bonner. If the allegations are indeed false, they may have stemmed from the kindnesses done to the youthful Bonner by John Savage, rector of Quatt in Shropshire, who was later rewarded with a licence to hold additional benefices after Bonner's appointment as bishop. 
Bonner was admitted to Broadgates Hall in Oxford about 1512. For seven years he studied civil and canon law, and was admitted to the degrees of bachelor of civil law and canon law on consecutive days in July 1519. According to Wood he took orders around this time. In July 1526 he received his doctorate in civil law, and in October that year was admitted to the College of Advocates in London. His diplomatic career began in the following March, when he was sent on a mission to the Netherlands. By 1529 he was a chaplain to Cardinal Wolsey, and in August was sent on an embassy to the king of France. Wolsey's downfall in 1530 did not arrest Bonner's progress, and he became a loyal servant of Thomas Cromwell. He was often employed abroad, and during this period became well known for his anti-papal sentiments, expressed clearly in his preface to Stephen Gardiner's 'De vera obedientia'. It was only after Cromwell's fall in 1540 that he became more clearly associated with the conservative elements of the Henrician reforms. In the meantime he amassed a number of benefices, which supported his work abroad on behalf of the state. He became archdeacon of Leicester in 1535, and two years later was appointed to a canonry at St Paul's in London, and prebend of Chiswick. Also in 1537 he became a chaplain to the king, receiving a licence to be non-resident and to hold benefices to the value of $500. 
In January 1532 Bonner was sent to Rome by the king to protest against his citation there by the pope. He returned to England for a briefing in February 1533, returning to Rome in March. After Henry had been excommunicated Bonner followed the pope on his way to meet Francois I at Marseilles, where he made known the king's intention to appeal to a general council. In 1536 he was sent to negotiate with the protestants of Denmark and northern Germany. Two years later he was again sent abroad to make contact with the emperor with regard to the calling of a general council. He was transferred from that mission to the court of Francois I in July 1538, where he remained as ambassador until February 1540. While in Paris he promoted the printing of the 'Great Bible'. It was during this time that the bishopric of Hereford became vacant through the untimely death of Edward Fox, and it was little surprise to find Bonner nominated to that see on 5 October 1538; formal election followed on the 26th. 
Bonner spent much of his time as bishop of Hereford on diplomatic missions abroad, and as a result he had still not received episcopal consecration when, after the death of John Stokesley, he was promoted to be bishop of London. Elected on 20 October 1539, he received royal assent on 7 November and had his temporalities on the 18th. Having returned from his embassy in France in February, Bonner was consecrated bishop on 4 April 1540. Soon afterwards, in September, he ordered a general procession to be held weekly in the city of London, to pray for the ending of the pestilence caused by that year's hot, dry summer. Bonner's enthronement as bishop of London took place in his cathedral church of St Paul on 16 April 1541. His concern with the prevention of the spread of heresy first showed itself when in December 1541 he issued an injunction requiring Alexander Nowell and William Tolwin, rector of St Antholin, Watling Street, to make a public recantation at Paul's Cross of their erroneous opinions regarding free will and good works. Soon after this he was again sent on an embassy, this time to the emperor Charles V, from February 1542 to November 1543. On Whit Sunday 1546 (13 June) Bonner took part in the public celebration of thanksgiving for the peace with France. He presided at a solemn 'Te Deum' after high mass in the cathedral, sitting next to the lord mayor of London, then carried the sacrament in procession, with all the parish churches of London taking part. On the Friday following (18 June) he sat in the Guildhall with Nicholas Heath in the trial of Anne Askew and others for heresy. While the three men before them were persuaded (by Bonner, Heath, and others) to recant on the following day, Askew refused and was sent to the Tower where she was racked in order to obtain a confession (and probably to induce her to implicate Queen Katherine Parr, a known sympathizer with the new religion). 
Despite his diplomatic contacts with continental protestantism Bonner remained broadly conservative in doctrine. When matters of religion took a turn towards reform on the accession of Edward VI, Bonner soon found himself in difficulties for his opinions. He was present at the coronation of the new king on 13 February 1547, and two days later attended the funeral of Henry VIII; he was one of a number of bishops who met the corpse at Syon and Windsor on its way to burial. Bonner appears to have given some offence to members of the council, to the extent that on 1 March the bishop of Winchester, Stephen Gardiner, found it necessary to write on his behalf to Sir William Paget. He seems to have kept a low profile in the first year of the young king's reign, and appears at the very least to have failed to encourage the progress of the reform that the new regime was promoting so vigorously. This lack of progress led the king to write to the bishop on 2 August 1549, not long after the first 'Book of Common Prayer' came into force, of the negligence of many in his diocese who neglected to attend church and the holy communion. This was put down to Bonner's 'evil example and slackness'; although he used to preach frequently, and at least on all principal feasts, he now preached very rarely indeed. The king, as supreme head of the church, ordered Bonner to reform, and commanded him, in his next sermon at St Paul's, to preach strongly against rebellion and resistance to temporal authority, and in support of obedience in the use of the rites of the church as established by law. A week later the king sent further injunctions to the bishop (delivered to him on 10 August), requiring him to celebrate communion in St Paul's a week from the following Sunday, and to declare in his sermon that despite his youth the present king's authority was no less than that of any of his predecessors; he was also to preach God's displeasure at rebellion. 
Instead of obeying these orders, however, Bonner preached in support of the doctrine of transubstantiation, and omitted to emphasize the authority of the king. His failure to observe the king's clear instructions was discussed by the council on 8 September, and a commission for his deprivation was appointed. He was committed to the Marshalsea, and after inquiry by two royal commissions was deprived of his bishopric on 1 October. He returned to prison where he was to remain at the king's pleasure. His removal was well received by many of the reforming party. In a letter to Heinrich Bullinger of 7 November 1549 John Hooper wrote of the confinement and deposition of 'the most bitter enemy of the gospel', with whom he had had a 'sharp and dangerous contest' at Paul's Cross and in the council. Prophetically, he added 'Should he be again restored to his office and episcopal function, I shall, I doubt not, be restored to my country and my Father which is in heaven' (Robinson, 69-70). The author of the grey friars' chronicle relates how on 8 January 1550 Bonner had his bed removed by the keeper of the prison, and for eight days had only straw and a coverlet to lie on, for refusing to pay his gaoler the sum of $10. Bonner's appeal against his sentence was heard on 6 February 1550, when he was taken from the Marshalsea to the council, sitting in Star Chamber at Westminster. He was informed that his appeal had been considered and dismissed by eight privy councillors. His deprivation by the archbishop and other commissioners stood, and his sentence was confirmed. He remained confined in the Marshalsea, without allowance for food or clothing, for the remainder of Edward VI's reign. 
Edward VI died on 6 July 1553, and on Saturday 5 August a pardon was sent from Queen Mary to Bonner in the Marshalsea, under the great seal of England. Bonner was effectively immediately reinstated as bishop of London, and went straight to his house at St Paul's on that evening. He was greeted with great joy by the people, who rang the bells of the cathedral. There is evidence, however, that Bonner's release was not greeted with universal acclaim. On Sunday 13 August he was present at Paul's Cross for a sermon by the leading conservative preacher (later bishop of Bath and Wells) Gilbert Bourne, who included in his bidding prayer an intercession for the souls departed, and in his sermon declared that Bonner had been wrongfully imprisoned. A serious commotion ensued, and a dagger was thrown at Bourne, missing him but hitting the post of the pulpit. The mayor and aldermen dispersed the crowd only with some difficulty, and Bonner had to be led through St Paul's to safety. 
Bonner was formally restored to his bishopric on 22 August. The altars of his cathedral had been torn down in the previous reign, and he immediately set about having them restored. He sang mass in St Paul's on 17 September, then on 7 October, at the beginning of the convocation held there, sang the mass of the Holy Ghost at the high altar in full pontificals, the first mass to be celebrated there after it had been set up again. Bonner enjoyed the royal favour from the outset, and in January 1554 he was sent as one of the queen's ambassadors to meet Philip of Spain at Portsmouth. On 13 March he was appointed one of the commissioners for the examination of those bishops who had contracted marriage in the previous reign, and two days later to the commission for the deprivation of several of them. To fill the vacancies thus created he assisted Stephen Gardiner in consecrating six new bishops on 1 April. There was, however, much resistance to the restoration of Catholicism of which these consecrations were an important part. On 8 April a cat, made to look like a priest saying mass, was found hanged in Cheapside. It was taken to Bonner, who had it displayed at Paul's Cross during sermon time. Despite the offer of a reward by the lord mayor, no one was ever brought to account for this action. On 25 July Bonner was present at the marriage of Philip and Mary in Winchester Cathedral. In the following month he was in St Paul's, with the lord mayor and nine other bishops, for high mass, 'Te Deum', and procession, to give thanks for the queen's (mistaken) pregnancy, and to pray for her safe delivery. 
Bonner commenced a visitation of his diocese on 3 September, ending on 8 October 1555. Undertaken under his own authority as bishop, rather than by virtue of the royal supremacy as had been the case for the previous twenty years, Bonner's visitation was a model of thoroughness in its inquiries into the morals, beliefs, and practices of the people of his diocese. He visited in person, preaching everywhere he went, while his articles formed the basis for those of a number of later visitations by other bishops, including those of Cardinal Pole's metropolitical visitation of 1556. On 28 October he consecrated John Hopton as bishop of Norwich, then on 18 November consecrated Ralph Baynes to Coventry and Lichfield, and John Holyman to Bristol. He also conducted personally about a quarter of the ordination ceremonies held in the diocese throughout the reign of Mary, many of which seem to have included large numbers of candidates for minor orders, perhaps as a way of validating the orders of those who had been ordained using the Edwardine ordinals, then generally considered deficient. On Advent Sunday (2 December) he and the lord chancellor (Gardiner) received Cardinal Pole at St Paul's. In Christmas week Bonner ordered that the feast of St Thomas of Canterbury (29 December) be kept as a holy day throughout his diocese. In September the following year he undertook three more episcopal consecrations, and after the death of Gardiner on 13 November conducted his funeral rites. 
On his release Bonner had returned to him the control of all the estates that he had held as bishop when he was first summoned to trial in 1549. The restored estates included manors at Braintree and Southminster and lands at Hackney which had been given away by Nicholas Ridley during his tenure of the London diocese. The manors had been intended for the endowment of the short-lived diocese of Westminster, and Bonner was also allowed to retain the lands that had been granted to Ridley in exchange for them. He found it difficult, however, to draw any revenue from these properties; no income from them is recorded in his accounts for 1557, while in 1558 he appealed to Pole for help in securing Southminster. Much of his concern for his lands stemmed from his desire to provide financial support for his relatives, members of the Mongey family, to whom he gave leases of diocesan estates for sixty or seventy years, and also his mother, sister, and niece. 
It was during the Marian years that Bonner gained a reputation for fierceness in his prosecution of heresy, earning him the title Bloody Bonner. His diocese had a long history of Lollardy, and the capital tended also to draw to itself those most active in promoting new ideas, in religion as in anything else. It was not surprising that new ideas had taken root there more securely than elsewhere under Edward VI, and it was also the place where they would be most obvious to those in government who were concerned with the restoration of Catholic orthodoxy. However, in the early years of the reign Bonner was reluctant to proceed in this matter with much vigour. In 1555 he was warned by the council for his slackness, as two months had passed without any convictions. His image as a bloody persecutor of the godly derived from his later actions, after his earlier misgivings had been overcome by pressure from government and the goading of obstinate heretics. His active campaign began in earnest soon after this, when on 25 May he sat with the lord mayor in St Paul's, and condemned a number of individuals for their opinions against the sacrament of the altar. Of 282 burnings recorded in episcopal registers for the period, 232 took place in the dioceses of London, Canterbury, Norwich, and Chichester; half the burnings in these four dioceses took place in Bonner's see of London. 
It was not only in the eradication of heretics that Bonner and the other bishops sought to restore Catholicism and eliminate heresy. In 1554 Queen Mary's articles had required of each diocesan bishop that the people should be compelled to attend church and to receive instruction. To enable this to happen the bishops were to set forth a uniform order by homilies or other means for the teaching of the people. Bonner's response to this was to publish in 1555 his treatise 'A Profitable and Necessary Doctrine with Certain Homilies Adjoined Thereto'. The treatise was modelled on the 'King's Book' of 1543, thus retaining both continuity with the recent past and a link with a work that had been a focus for traditionalists in the reign of Edward VI. He was sent to Oxford in February 1556, where he carried out with Thomas Thirlby the solemn degradation of Cranmer, after which the former archbishop, now reduced to the lay state, could be handed over to the civil powers for burning (though Foxe's account of the incident, contrasting Bonner's fierceness with the reluctance and gentleness of Cranmer's old friend Thirlby, may have been exaggerated). The execution took place on 21 March, and on the following day Cardinal Pole was consecrated as archbishop, Bonner being one of those who assisted in this rite. He was also one of the bishops who received Pole at Bow church in London for mass on the feast of the Annunciation (25 March). On 30 June he took part in a procession at St Paul's for the patronal feast, while in July he and other royal commissioners set out a new order for processions. On 29 December 1556 (the feast of St Thomas of Canterbury) the council appointed him to a commission to seek out heretical books and writings. When a commission to inquire concerning heresy was set up on 8 February 1557, Bonner was one of the two bishops appointed to it, along with Thomas Thirlby, then bishop of Ely. It was little surprise to find these two acting together, as both were trained in civil and canon law, and each had a diocese containing a number of major centres of heresy -- London in Bonner's case, and Cambridge in Thirlby's. 
An important part of the Catholic restoration was the attempt to reverse the dissolution of the monasteries, both by refounding dissolved institutions and (more rarely) by setting up new foundations. As a part of this process on 1 August 1557 Bonner carried out the perpetual enclosure of a community of nuns of Syon. The late summer of 1557 found Bonner associated with the funeral rites of a number of important people, including those for Anne of Cleves, the duchess of Norfolk, and the countess of Arundel. On 21 November 1557 he consecrated John Christopherson as bishop of Chichester. His activity against heretics continued through the final year of Mary's reign, and on 21 March 1558 he examined three heretics from his diocese, who were condemned to death by him, and handed over to the civil arm to be burnt. A report of Nicholas Sander, dating from about 1561, on the change of religion in England which took place in 1558-9 after the death of Queen Mary, includes both an evaluation of Bonner the man, and a rationale of his severe approach to the prosecution of heresy. Stressing Bonner's 'greatness of mind', Sander notes how even some Catholics considered he had been too zealous in his persecution, having condemned more heretics than all the other Marian bishops together. Bonner's usual reply to this charge was that one death, by which many lives would be saved, was full of mercy, and that in matters of state the individual was of less concern than the whole body of citizens. 
The reputation of Bonner as a persecutor of heretics was widespread in the reign of Elizabeth I, and he was said by a contemporary commentator to have been in danger of his life whenever he ventured out, and that if any of the Marian bishops were executed, he would be the first to lose his life. There is a story that when the bishops were presented to the new queen after her accession she declined to offer him her hand to be kissed on account of his actions in the previous reign. He continued to be used on diplomatic business to the end, and on 23 May 1559 he entertained the French ambassadors, who stayed with him in his palace until 28 May. He was offered the oath of supremacy on 30 May, which he refused, and he was deprived of his bishopric, though allowed to remain at liberty. On 20 April 1560 he was again imprisoned in the Marshalsea, though it would appear under less restraint than during his previous confinement ten years before. He was held there under the jurisdiction of the bishop of Winchester, Robert Horne, for the rest of his life. In April 1564 he was taken from the prison by Horne and offered the oath of supremacy. Bonner had already once refused the oath, and to refuse a second time was a capital offence. At this point Bonner's legal training and forty years in the service of the state came into their own. When Horne presented the certificate of Bonner's refusal to the court of queen's bench, Bonner argued that it was without legal force as it named Horne as bishop of Winchester, and that under English law Horne's consecration was invalid, having been carried out by Matthew Parker whose own consecration as archbishop of Canterbury in 1559 had not been performed in accordance with the law then in force. Rather than test this argument in court the government chose not to proceed with the case. An act retrospectively validating all consecrations carried out since the beginning of Elizabeth's reign was passed in 1567, but Bonner was not again troubled with the oath. He died, still a prisoner in the Marshalsea, on 5 September 1569, and was buried at midnight in the churchyard of St George's, Southwark, on the order of Bishop Grindal of London, who feared that the occasion might otherwise lead to serious disturbances. However, it would appear that his body was subsequently moved to Copford (an ancient manor of the bishop of London) near Colchester, and buried in the church there. It was rediscovered in 1810 when a grave was being dug for a recently deceased rector. 
The image of Bonner as a cruel, even sadistic, man is drawn largely from Foxe's interpretation of his actions. While it is true that he could be short-tempered, insolent, and tactless (Cromwell had more than once to protect him from the consequences of his own actions), he was also an able lawyer, quick-witted in argument. He seems to have become more violent as he grew older, perhaps as a result of his harsh confinement in the early 1550s; even so, it is possible that some of his reported excesses of behaviour were intended to frighten heretics into recantation and so to save them from the flames. Although clearly a difficult personality, it is none the less unfortunate that his reputation for cruelty has come to overshadow many years of valued service to both church and state. 


@@@@@


doc= 2851


Bonner, Richard (fl. 1541-1548), religious controversialist, was incumbent of St Tricat in Calais, appointed by Cranmer on 6 June 1541. Little more is known of him except the treatise published in his name in 1548, 'A treatyse of the ryght honourynge and wourshyppyng of our saviour Jesus Christe in the sacrament of breade and wyne'. This work was dedicated to Cranmer, from 'your obedyent Diocesan and dayly orator, Rycharde Bonner', the dedication dated 14 November. The treatise discussed eucharistic doctrine, concerning which Bonner had recently been in correspondence with Martin Bucer, whose reply to Bonner dated 4 September 1548 survives. It expressed a view on how the sacrament should be honoured which incorporated much unacknowledged quotation from Bucer's own work. Bonner emphasized that outward signs of respect were appropriate, 'as with the uncoveryng of our headdes, wyth the knelyng and bowyng downe of our bodyes, and with the praysyng of hys goodnes therein with oure tounges' (Bonner, sig. Av'v'). However, such outward reverence was to be preceded by a spiritual honouring, and true faith and trust in Christ's passion and resurrection. He condemned practices such as the reservation of the host, or non-communicating, 'private' masses. 
It seems likely that Bonner's primary purpose in writing this work may have been to deploy the views of Bucer and Cranmer at a precarious stage in the implementation of reformed eucharistic doctrine. Certainly in the preface Bonner stated that he had been 'constrayned to wryte of thys so weyghty a matter' (Bonner, sig. Aii'v'). It is notable that ideas and actual phrases from the treatise can be found in the 'Book of Common Prayer' of 1549 and 1552. The coincidence that the author bore the same surname as the conservative bishop Edmund Bonner may also have enhanced his suitability as a controversialist at this time. All this may suggest that Bonner was a relatively minor figure being used by Cranmer at a delicate stage of the Edwardian Reformation. And yet he was in correspondence with Bucer, a major reforming figure, which suggests another possibility, that he was one of the network of agents discreetly employed by Cranmer, a role in which his benefice in Calais would have been an asset. This would explain why so little about his life and work is known. 


@@@@@


doc= 2852


Bonney, Henry Kaye (1780-1862), dean of Stamford, was born at Tansor, Northamptonshire, of which parish his father was then curate, on 22 May 1780, the son of Henry Kaye (or Key) Bonney, later rector of King's Cliffe and prebendary of Lincoln. His father's family friend Lord Westmorland procured for him a foundation scholarship at Charterhouse School, where he obtained an exhibition, and he went to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in 1798. Having been elected to a Tancred divinity studentship, he migrated to Christ's College in December 1798. He graduated BA in 1802, MA in 1805, and DD in 1824. He was ordained deacon in 1803, when he was licensed curate to his father at King's Cliffe, and was curate of Ketton and Tixover in Rutland, and Duddington in Northamptonshire from 1804 to 1807. Ordained priest in 1804, he was presented by his father to the perpetual curacy of Thurlby in Lincolnshire, which he held from 1804 to 1823. He was collated by Bishop Tomline on 8 January 1807 to the prebend of Nassington in Lincoln Cathedral. 
Bonney was presented by the earl of Westmorland to the rectory of King's Cliffe in succession to his father, who died of paralysis on 20 March 1810. He published in 1815, with a dedication to the earl of Westmorland, the 'Life of the Right Reverend Father in God, Jeremy Taylor, DD'. In 1821 Bonney dedicated to Lady Cicely Georgiana Fane his 'Historic Notices in Reference to Fotheringay. Illustrated by Engravings' (done by his own hand). In 1820 he was appointed examining chaplain to George Pelham, the new bishop of Lincoln, and was collated by the same prelate on 10 December 1821 to the archdeaconry of Bedford. (An order in council, dated 19 April 1837, transferred the archdeaconry from the diocese of Lincoln to the diocese of Ely.) Bonney published the 'Sermons and charges by the Right Reverend Father in God, Thomas Fanshaw Middleton, DD, late lord bishop of Calcutta. With memoirs of his life' in 1824. On 15 May 1827 he married Charlotte, the fourth daughter of John Perry, of Blackwall and of Moor Hall, Essex. 
In 1827 Bonney was appointed to the deanery of Stamford by his close friend John Kaye, then recently translated from the see of Bristol to that of Lincoln, and was advanced by him, on 22 February 1845, from the archdeaconry of Bedford to that of Lincoln. Soon after his appointment he made a parochial visitation, recording each church's affairs and showing a nice sense of a visitation's purpose (see N. S. Harding, ed., 'Bonney's Church Notes', 1937). He shared Kaye's high-church sympathies. As an archdeacon Bonney was indefatigable. In the early part of 1858 he was seized with paralysis, and never entirely recovered. He died at the rectory, King's Cliffe, on 24 December 1862, and was buried in the churchyard of King's Cliffe with his wife, who had died childless on 26 December 1850 at King's Cliffe. Shortly before his death he had contributed $500 to the restoration of the church at King's Cliffe. 
Bonney published his charges to the clergy of the archdeaconry of Bedford for the years 1823, 1843, and 1844, and the various charges delivered to the clergy and churchwardens of the archdeaconry of Lincoln at the visitations of 1850, 1854, and 1856. He also contributed a sermon to the third volume of 'Practical sermons by dignitaries and other clergymen of the united church of England and Ireland' (1846). 


@@@@@


doc= 2853


Bonnor, Charles (d. 1829?), actor and civil servant, was the son of a distiller in Bristol. After commencing his working life as apprentice to a coachmaker, he appeared on the Bath stage on 4 October 1777 as Belcour, in Richard Cumberland's comedy 'The West Indian'. He remained at Bath until the close of the 1782-3 season, playing such characters as Charles Surface in 'The School for Scandal', Ranger in Benjamin Hoadley's 'The Suspicious Husband', and Touchstone in 'As You Like It'. He also made his first attempts at writing, and supplied successful prologues, epilogues, and occasional addresses. On 7 July 1783 he appeared for his farewell benefit as Mercutio in 'Romeo and Juliet' and Puff in 'The Critic', and announced his forthcoming departure for London. He made his debut there on 19 September 1783 at Covent Garden, as Brazen in 'The Recruiting Officer'. In London, as in Bath, his reception was favourable. 
In 1784 Bonnor was sent by Thomas Harris, the manager of Covent Garden, to Paris to establish an English theatre there. Initially it seemed as if the mission would be successful, and a theatre in the Tuileries was taken. However, when the queen of France withdrew her patronage the scheme failed, and all Bonnor and the others realized was an opportunity to perform in Paris for a while. On his return from France, Bonnor produced for his benefit, at Covent Garden on 6 May 1785, an interlude called 'The Manager in Spite of himself', translated by Bonnor himself from Dorvigny's 'La fete de campagne', in which he played all but one of the characters in the play. Meanwhile he also performed a variety of other parts, including Petulant in Congreve's 'The Way of the World', Lovelace in Arthur Murphy's 'Three Weeks after Marriage', and the title role in 'The Marriage of Figaro'. Bonnor's last appearance at Covent Garden was in May 1785, as Lord Sparkle in 'Which is the Man?' and Robin in 'The Contrivances'. His only other connection with this theatre was in December 1790, when his pantomime adapted from the French, 'Picture of Paris', was produced there. Neither of Bonnor's plays was ever printed. 
Soon afterwards John Palmer, the owner of the Bath theatre, and the first proprietor of mail coaches, who had been appointed comptroller-general, of the Post Office, availed himself of Bonnor's organizational abilities in his scheme for the establishment of a mail-coach service. This led to Bonnor's appointment as deputy comptroller of the Post Office, and his consequent retirement from the stage. In 1788 he became resident surveyor, as well as deputy surveyor and comptroller-general, of the General Post Office. When Palmer became involved in a dispute with the postmaster-general and vacated his post in 1793, Bonnor displayed his political astuteness by dissociating himself from his erstwhile benefactor and getting himself appointed to the comptrollership of the inland department of the Post Office. This position he held for two years. Changes were then made in the Post Office, the comptrollership was abolished, and Bonnor retired on a pension. Between 1797 and 1800 he published three pamphlets in connection with Palmer's claims. He was apparently still living in 1827, and was very possibly the Charles Bonnor of Gloucester whose death the 'Gentleman's Magazine' recorded in August 1829. 


@@@@@


doc= 2854


Bonnor, Thomas (c.1743-1807x12), draughtsman and engraver, was probably born in Gloucestershire. He was apprenticed in 1758 to Henry Roberts, engraver, for a 20 guinea premium. In 1763 he was awarded a premium by the Society of Arts for a landscape by an artist aged under twenty-one, and in the same year his drawing of the comedian Richard Yates as Launce was engraved and published by Roberts. Working chiefly for magazines, he designed and engraved a number of portraits of actors such as Ann Catley and Spranger Barry, in character, and he also designed illustrations to the works of Richardson, Smollett, and Fielding. In 1773 he exhibited drawings, including a design for the Gloucestershire Society, at the Society of Artists, together with a proof of a landscape after Adriaen Boudewijns and Pieter Bout. This was published later that year. 
Bonnor, however, failed as an engraver-publisher and in 1781 he was imprisoned in the king's bench prison as an insolvent debtor. Whether his work for Nash's 'Collections for the History of Worcestershire' (1781-2) had landed him in debt or helped to get him out of it, his later career was devoted chiefly to topographical illustration. He drew and engraved country houses, churches, and monuments for John Collinson's 'The History and Antiquities of the County of Somerset' (1791), Ralph Bigland's 'Historical, Monumental, and Genealogical Collections Relative to the County of Gloucester' (1791-2), and Richard Polwhele's 'The History of Devonshire' (1793-1806). By 1799 he had published four numbers of a proposed 'New Copperplate Perspective Itinerary', containing views of Gloucester Cathedral and Goodrich Castle, for which he also wrote the text. He exhibited some drawings of architectural ruins at the Royal Academy in 1807, and he died between that date and 1812. 


@@@@@


doc= 2855


Bonnycastle, John (c.1760-1821), mathematician, was born at Whitchurch, in Buckinghamshire. His parents, though not affluent, managed to provide him with a reasonable basic education. At an early age he went to London 'to seek his fortune' ('GM'), and afterwards kept an academy at Hackney. On the title-pages of the earlier editions of his first work ('The Scholar's Guide to Arithmetic') he is described as a 'private teacher of mathematics', and was at one time private tutor to the sons of the earl of Pomfret, during which time he lived at Easton Neston in Northamptonshire. In October 1782 he became a mathematics master at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, and in July 1807 succeeded Charles Hutton as professor of mathematics. 
Bonnycastle was a prolific and successful writer of textbooks. Of his chief works, 'The Scholar's Guide to Arithmetic' first appeared in 1780 and ran to an eighteenth edition in 1851. 'An Introduction to Algebra' followed in 1782. (A thirteenth edition appeared in 1824, 'with addenda by Charles Bonnycastle', the author's son.) His 'Introduction to Astronomy' (1786), intended as a popular introduction to astronomy rather than as an elementary treatise, was one of the best-selling books on the subject for many years. An edition of Euclid's 'Elements', with notes (1789), and 'An Introduction to Mensuration and Practical Geometry' (1782; 18th edn, 1840) were both translated into Turkish. Other works included 'A Treatise on Plane and Spherical Trigonometry' (1806) and 'A Treatise on Algebra' (2 vols., 1813). Besides elementary mathematical books, Bonnycastle was in early life a frequent contributor to the 'London Magazine'. He also wrote the introduction to a translation (by T. O. Churchill) of Bossut's 'Histoire des mathematiques' (1803) and a 'chronological table of the most eminent mathematicians from the earliest times' for the end of the book. 
Bonnycastle married twice. His first wife, a Miss Rolt, whom he married when he was nineteen, died young. His second wife, Bridget Johnstone, survived him, as did three sons, including Sir Richard Henry Bonnycastle, army officer, and one daughter. He seems to have been a man of considerable classical and general literary culture. He was strongly associated with the military, since many of the artillery officers had been his students, and he also seems to have been a popular tutor for children of the aristocracy. Leigh Hunt, who used to meet him in company with the Swiss painter Fuseli, of whom Bonnycastle was a great friend, left a description of him in his book 'Lord Byron and Some of his Contemporaries'. He describes him as 'a good fellow... passionately fond of quoting Shakespeare and of telling stories'; he suggests that Bonnycastle may have 'thought a little more highly of his talents than the amount of them strictly warranted', but that 'the delusion was not only pardonable but desirable' in this case, given his strong sense of duty and his common humanity. Bonnycastle died at Woolwich Common, after a 'long and tedious illness' ('GM'), on 15 May 1821, and was interred, during a semi-military funeral, in a purpose-built vault at Charlton, Kent. 


@@@@@


doc= 2856


Bonnycastle, Sir Richard Henry (1791-1847), army officer, born on 30 September 1791 at Woolwich, was the son of Professor John Bonnycastle and his second wife, Bridget, 'nee' Johnstone. He studied at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, passing out as second lieutenant Royal Engineers on 28 September 1808, and becoming first lieutenant in 1809. He served at the siege of Flushing in 1809 in the Netherlands campaign, and in the Anglo-American War of 1812-14, during which he was present at the capture of Fort Castine and the occupation of Maine east of the Penobscot, and was commanding engineer at the construction of the extensive works on the Castine peninsula. In 1814 he became captain, and in the same year married Frances, daughter of Captain W. Johnstone. They had two sons and three daughters. Subsequently he served with the army of occupation in France. 
After service at home Bonnycastle was sent in 1826 to Upper Canada, serving at Fort George and at Kingston until 1832, when he was posted to York, in Toronto. He was keenly interested in colonial development, did original research in geology and mineralogy, and was a freemason and amateur artist. In 1837 he completed the construction of Fort Henry. As commanding royal engineer in Upper Canada he rendered crucial services during the uprising in 1837-9, particularly in February 1838 when, at the head of an 'ad hoc' force of militia, volunteers, sailors, and Mohawks -- in the absence of regular troops -- he defeated the attempt of the insurgents at Napanee, and of the brigands at Hickory Island, near Gananoque, to attack Kingston. For these services he was knighted in March 1840. 
Bonnycastle was afterwards commanding engineer in Newfoundland. He became a brevet major in 1837 and a regimental lieutenant-colonel in 1840, and retired in 1847. His publications included 'The Canadas in 1841' (2 vols., 1842), 'Newfoundland in 1842' (2 vols., 1842), 'Canada and the Canadians in 1846' (2 vols., 1846), and the posthumous 'Canada as it was, is and may be' (2 vols., 1852). These were competent and informative, and helped attract immigrants and capital to Canada. 
Bonnycastle died on 3 November 1847 at Kingston, in Canada. Liked and esteemed by Canadians, Bonnycastle was a fine example of a 'constructive imperial military officer' ('DCB'). 


@@@@@


doc= 2857


Bonomi, Joseph (1739-1808), architect, was born on 19 January 1739 in Rome, the eldest of five children of Giovanni Giacomo Bonomi (died 1750), agent to some of the Roman nobility, and his wife, Teresa Corbi. He studied at the Collegio Romano, and, according to his son Ignatius, writing in 1808, having as a child 'employed himself... in endeavouring to solve architectural problems' (I. Bonomi to Lord Buchan, May 1808, U. Glas. L., MS Murray, 502/41/3), he was placed under Antonio Asprucci (1723-1808), architect to Prince Borghese. He studied also with Girolamo Teodoli (1677-1766) and possibly received tuition in drawing from Charles-Louis Clerisseau. About 1763 James Adam, then on his grand tour in Rome, saw some of Bonomi's work, including drawings in competition for a gold medal in architecture, and engaged him to work exclusively for the Adam brothers in drawing Roman antiquities. 
In 1767 Robert and James Adam invited Bonomi to Britain, where he worked as a draughtsman in their London office until 1781. His skill as a perspectivist makes it highly probable that some of the finest architectural drawings of the Adam office, especially interior views for the Adam brothers' publication 'The Works in Architecture' (1778-9), were done by Bonomi. His only known independent design of this period, for the sacristy intended by Pope Pius VI for St Peter's, Rome (1776), must have been produced surreptitiously, since the Adams forbade their employees to engage in private work, under threat of a heavy financial penalty. In 1775 Bonomi married Rosa Florini (1755-1812), cousin and ward of the artist Angelica Kauffman. Rosa Florini had come to Britain in 1767 with Angelica's father; Angelica herself married Bonomi's friend and erstwhile colleague in the Adam office, the artist Antonio Zucchi, in 1781. The Bonomis' first children, twins Angelica (died 1792) and Luigi (died 1784), were born in 1779. 
Bonomi left the Adams in 1781 and set up as an independent architect. He prepared designs dated 1782, all apparently unexecuted, for several clients, including his later patrons the bluestocking Elizabeth Montagu and the fourth earl of Aylesford. In 1783 he was induced, probably by Angelica Kauffman, to return to Italy. His younger brother Giovanni Carlo Bonomi (1743-1801), professor of theology at the 'propaganda fide' in Rome, possibly also held out the prospect of work. Bonomi was elected a member of the Accademia di Belle Arti at Bologna, and the Accademia di San Luca at Rome, and made a tour of southern Italy, examining among other sites the Greek Doric temples of Paestum. Success in Italy eluded him, however, and in 1784 he returned to London, practising there until his death. In Britain he received commissions almost immediately, and with some of his patrons his relations were close and long-lasting, particularly with Heneage Finch, fourth earl of Aylesford, to whom he acted as tutor and drawing-master as well as architect. 
Bonomi exhibited regularly at the Royal Academy from 1783. In 1789, after several attempts, he was elected an associate on the casting vote of the president, Sir Joshua Reynolds. Reynolds proposed Bonomi as a full academician and professor of perspective in 1790, but Henry Fuseli was elected instead; regular attempts to promote Bonomi were made until 1806, but he was consistently opposed by a group in the academy which included Joseph Farington. In 1800 Bonomi was appointed architect to the king of Naples, but was unable to take up the post because of political conditions in Italy. In 1804 he received the honorary title of architect to St Peter's, Rome. Bonomi's Royal Academy exhibits, many of which are now in the Royal Institute of British Architects drawings collection in London, showed a firm handling of perspective and a feeling for light and shade; there is an unsubstantiated family tradition that the young J. M. W. Turner painted the landscapes in some of Bonomi's exhibits. Bonomi's design for Elizabeth Montagu's Great Room in Portman Square, London (exhibited 1790), is especially fine. The Great Room excited much admiration when it was finished in 1791, and was inspected by Queen Charlotte, but it did not lead to any other commissions on so grand a scale. 
In his designs Bonomi turned away from the Adam brothers' elaborate delicacy, producing stronger and more chaste designs which possibly reflect the influence of James Wyatt (with whom he occasionally collaborated) and Henry Holland. Bonomi's exteriors, however, were often blockish and severe, unless enlivened by a bold feature, such as a 'porte-cochere' (at Longford Hall, Shropshire, built in 1789-92 for Ralph Leake, and Laverstoke Park, Hampshire, built in 1796 for Henry Portal) or an open colonnaded belvedere on the roof (as at Rosneath, Dunbartonshire, 1803-8; dem. 1961, for the fifth duke of Argyll). Other forceful features used by Bonomi were a double, superimposed portico -- employed at Barrells House, Henley in Arden, Warwickshire (1792-4), for Robert Knight, and Stansted House, Sussex (1786-91), for Richard Barwell -- and ground-floor wings linked to the 'piano nobile' of the main house by descending quadrant passages, at Eastwell Park, Kent (1793-9), for George Finch Hatton. 
Bonomi remodelled the interiors of Lord Aylesford's Packington Hall, Warwickshire, over many years. His work at Packington culminated in two extraordinary designs, the Pompeian Gallery (1787) and Packington church (1789-90). The source for the gallery, Nicolas Ponce's 'Description des bains de Titus' (1786), may have been suggested by Aylesford, a connoisseur of architecture. Aylesford possibly also inspired the design of Packington church, a remarkable neo-classical building with a Greek-cross plan, vaulting derived from the Roman baths of Diocletian, and Greek Doric columns; Bonomi translated this eclectic material into solid form, producing a startlingly original building without parallel in English church architecture. His sources were mainly Roman: the pyramid of Caius Cestius in Rome inspired his pyramidal mausoleum (1793) at Blickling Park, Norfolk, for the second earl of Buckinghamshire. As a Roman Catholic he was at that time excluded from public commissions, but he designed two Catholic embassy chapels in London, the Bavarian chapel in Warwick Street (1789-90) and the Spanish chapel in Manchester Square (1793-6). Bonomi had no affection for the Gothic style, which he felt had totally corrupted architecture, but he produced a few unexecuted Gothic designs, for a gateway and a castellated summer house. 
Bonomi died at home at 76 Great Titchfield Street, London, on 9 March 1808, and was buried in Marylebone churchyard. His grave no longer exists, but the Latin inscription on his gravestone was published in the second volume of the second edition of Daniel Lysons's 'Environs of London' (1811). A son, Peter, died in 1792, and another son, John James (1782-1803), was killed at the battle of Assaye in India. His six surviving children were: Ignatius Bonomi (1787-1870), also an architect; Charles (1789-1826), a soldier; Agnes (1792-1874); Joseph Bonomi (1796-1878) and his twin sister, Mary Anne (1796-1872), mother of George Goldie, another architect; and Justina (1801-1890). 


@@@@@


doc= 2858


Bonomi, Joseph (1796-1878), sculptor and Egyptologist, and his twin sister, Mary Anne Bonomi (1796-1872), were born at 76 Great Titchfield Street, London, on 9 October 1796, the eighth and ninth but fourth and fifth surviving children of Joseph (Giuseppe) Bonomi (1739-1808), architect, and Rosa Florini (1755-1812). Bonomi was baptized four days later in the Venetian Chapel in London, when his sponsors (by proxy) were Giovanni Carlo Bonomi, his uncle, and Angelica Kauffman, his mother's cousin. Bonomi's parents died when he was young but comfortable provision was made for the children. He attended school at Carshalton, Surrey. By 1815, when the Society of Arts awarded him a silver medal for a bas-relief in plaster, Bonomi's thoughts were turning to sculpture, and in 1816 he joined the Royal Academy Schools, where the sculptor John Flaxman was his teacher; he won silver medals there in 1817 and 1818. About 1818 he became the pupil of Joseph Nollekens and in 1819 executed a monument to Captain Showers for Calcutta Cathedral. He eventually tired of the discipline of assisting the elderly Nollekens and in 1822 decided to go to Rome to study under Antonio Canova, who, however, died before his arrival. 
In Rome, Bonomi soon became part of the British artistic community, meeting among other artists Charles Eastlake, John Gibson, Joseph John Scoles, and Frederick Catherwood. In an echo of his father's early career he turned aside from his sculptor's training and in 1824 joined Robert Hay's expedition to Egypt as a salaried artist. In 1825 Hay made a journey up the Nile to Abu Simbel, Philae, and Thebes, and on this trip Bonomi produced numerous drawings and helped to make casts at Kalabsha, the largest of which are in the British Museum. On a second visit to Thebes in 1826 Hay and Bonomi saw the temple of Hermopolis just before it was demolished. Bonomi quarrelled with Hay over ownership of his drawings and parted from him in the summer of 1826. He spent 1827-8 in Cairo producing engravings for James Burton's 'Excerpta hieroglyphica'; he lived for a time in Thebes and formed a great friendship with the Italian traveller Rosselini; in 1830-31 he travelled in Egypt with two French artists, Linant and Dupuy; and in 1832 he was reconciled with Hay and worked with the architectural draughtsman and painter Francis Arundale. In a letter dated 9 August 1832 from Thebes, Arundale noted that 'Bonomi and I live in the same tomb' (Vialla, 114), an abode he recorded in a letter and sketch (14 August 1832) of which he stated that 'the person entering the door is Bonomi in his habitual dress' (ibid., 115-16). While in Egypt, Bonomi formed a liaison with a woman called Fatima, with whom he had two children. In August 1833 Bonomi toured Palestine and Syria with Arundale and the draughtsman and printmaker Frederick Catherwood. Bonomi, mistaken for a native, having adopted Eastern dress, assumed Eastern manners, and learned Arabic, was one of the first Europeans to visit the Dome of the Rock (or the mosque of Omar), but Catherwood, posing as a military engineer, entered soon after, and both claimed credit for producing the detailed drawings which James Fergusson used in his 'Essay on the Ancient Topography of Jerusalem' (1847) when he asserted that the Dome of the Rock covered the holy sepulchre (an assertion demolished by Robert Willis in his treatise on the holy sepulchre in 1849). 
Bonomi returned to England some time after 1834 and was employed in illustrating the Egyptian works of John Gardner Wilkinson and Samuel Birch, and in helping to arrange the Egyptian exhibits in the British Museum, but he failed to find the regular employment which his family hoped would be his. In 1838 he went to Rome to copy the hieroglyphics and obelisks there. In 1842 he was asked to provide designs for an Egyptian facade for John Marshall's Temple Mills at Leeds. This monumental facade, based on the temple of Edfu, might have established Bonomi's architectural reputation. (Indeed, his designs for the mill later formed his chief claim to be an architect.) He decided, however, to join the Prussian government's expedition to Egypt led by Dr Karl Richard Lepsius. The invitation was the result of a chance meeting with the Prussian crown prince, Alexander von Humboldt, the Prussian ambassador Baron von Bunsen, and Lepsius in the British Museum, and Bonomi had only two days to prepare to sail, leaving Ignatius, his more prudent brother, to negotiate the details of his contract and remuneration. Bonomi spent two years in Egypt, measuring and drawing, and returned to England in 1844. In 1850 he went into partnership with Henry Warren and James Fahey and made a series of drawings which Warren and Fahey painted as a 'Grand Moving Panorama of the Nile', which was at first profitable but which finally ran into financial difficulties from which Bonomi was extricated with Ignatius Bonomi's help. 
In 1845 Bonomi married Jessie Martin (1825-1859), daughter of the artist John Martin, with whom he had four children: Joseph Menes ('b'. 1846), Cautley ('b'. 1847), Jessie ('b'. 1849), and John ('b'. 1851); but in a devastating week in April 1852 all four died of whooping cough. Four more children followed: Isabella ('b'. 1853), Cecilia Nefeeseh (1855-1944), Joseph Ignatius (1857-1930), and Marion (1859-1887); but in 1859 Jessie Bonomi died, aged thirty-four. Thereafter Jessie's sister Isabella Mary Martin kept house for Bonomi and helped to raise his family. 
In 1853 Bonomi had a notable success in assisting Owen Jones in the arrangement of the Egyptian court at the Crystal Palace; much of the modelling was executed by Bonomi himself. Among those whom he advised on their collections of Egyptian and other antiquities were John Lee of Hartwell House, Buckinghamshire, Henry Abbott, the earl of Ashburnham, the marquess of Northampton, and, notably, the duke of Northumberland, who as Lord Prudhoe had been one of the group of Egyptological enthusiasts in the 1820s and 1830s. In 1861 the curatorship of Sir John Soane's Museum in Lincoln's Inn Fields in London fell vacant. A practising architect had to be appointed; and after fierce struggle and controversy Bonomi, who, but for the work which he had done for John Marshall in Leeds, would have found it impossible to prove his qualification for the post, overcame his critics and was elected. The curatorship at last gave him a permanent salary, and he and his brother Ignatius purchased land at Wimbledon Park, Surrey, and built a house in Princes Road, The Camels, which Joseph adorned with a frieze of a caravan, representing the path of life. In 1864 he published remarkably detailed drawings of the Soane Museum's 'Belzoni sarcophagus' of Seti I, king of Egypt, with descriptions by Samuel Sharpe. In 1867 he designed the first hieroglyphic font to be produced in England, for the illustration of Birch's hieroglyphic dictionary. The Soane Museum post suited him, and he remained there until his death at The Camels on 3 March 1878. He was buried with his wife and first family in the Brompton cemetery, London, 'beneath a guardian Anubis' (Tillett). 
Bonomi's scholarship was shown in articles on Egypt which he contributed to the principal publications of the time, especially the 'Transactions of the Royal Society of Literature'; and his artistry was expressed in his illustrations for other people's works. One of the foremost hieroglyphic draughtsmen of his day, his work can be found in the 'Transactions of the Syro-Egyptian Society'; the 'Gallery of Antiquities Selected from the British Museum', by Francis Arundale and Bonomi (1842-3), with descriptions by Samuel Birch; his catalogues of Robert Hay's collection; and John Lee's collection in the Hartwell House Museum. Bonomi frequently collaborated with Samuel Sharpe especially, illustrating most of Sharpe's books; in many cases it would be more correct to say that Sharpe supplied the text explaining Bonomi's drawings. Bonomi's major publication was 'Nineveh and its Palaces', a popular and scholarly work which regarded the city from the artistic and scriptural points of view and illustrated and discussed in depth the chief sculptures, reliefs, and inscriptions then known of that city; the work ran through several editions from 1852. Bonomi also invented a machine for measuring the proportions of the body and wrote a treatise on the proportions of the human figure. Samuel Birch, Egyptologist and keeper of oriental antiquities at the British Museum: 'praised his abilities... considering him to have greater knowledge of Egypt than anyone else of the period save Wilkinson; the number of works and projects he contributed to after 1830 was enormous and exceeded that of any other artist, so that although not an Egyptologist he yet made greater contributions than most. (Dawson and Uphill, 54)' 



@@@@@


doc= 2859


Bonville, Anthony (1623-1676), Jesuit and theologian, was born at Canford in Dorset either on 20 February or on 2 March 1623, the son of Humphrey Bonville, esquire, and his wife, Mary. Both his parents were Roman Catholics, although, according to a later account by Anthony, his father 'was much estranged from the Catholic faith' (Kenny, 468). As a result the parents followed the not unusual procedure of raising their six sons as protestants, while their daughter was brought up as a Roman Catholic. 
Owing to the missionary activities of the Jesuit Thomas Blackfan (or Bennett), Anthony and three of his brothers converted to Catholicism. At the age of fourteen Anthony went to Flanders and studied at the Jesuit college at Ypres for three years, after which he travelled to Rome to become a priest. He entered the English College at Rome on 4 December 1640 and received minor orders in 1642. Unwilling to subscribe to the usual college oath (which bound students to return to the English mission as soon as they had been ordained) he became a convictor, which meant that he had to pay for his own board and lodging. His ordination took place at St John Lateran on 16 March 1647 and on 20 June of the same year he entered the Society of Jesus at St Andrew's noviciate, Rome. In the following years he went through the various stages of higher Jesuit studies which he completed by being professed of the four vows on 25 March 1658 at Parma. 
During these years Bonville also functioned as one of the penitentiaries at Loreto, taught philosophy at Florence, and completed his dissertation, 'Conclusiones philosophicae rationibus illustratur' (1657). About this time the University of Parma appointed him professor of philosophy and subsequently professor of scholastic divinity. 
In 1660 Bonville brought out a short treatise on mathematics, 'Problema mathematico-philosophicum tripartitum'. Shortly afterwards he transferred to the English province of the Society of Jesus and was sent to the English Jesuit college at Liege where he stayed for the rest of his life, working as a professor of theology and mathematics and, from 1661 to 1674, as rector. At Liege he wrote his two most important works, 'Fundamentum totius theologia moralis, seu, Tractatus de conscientia probabili' (1668) and the posthumously published 'Regula morum, sive, Tractatus bipartitus de sufficienti ad conscientiam rite formandam regula' (1677). These two works established Bonville's reputation as one of the most systematical expounders of the seventeenth-century moral-theological doctrine of probabilism, whose central tenet was that when faced with a choice between two courses of action, neither of which has been explicitly condemned by the church, it is permissible to choose one course of action even though it is probable that the other course of action is morally safer. In his 'Florus Anglo-Bavaricus' (1685) John Keynes had high praise for Bonville's intelligence, erudition, and personal charm. Bonville died at the Jesuit college at Liege on 11 October 1676. 


@@@@@


doc= 2860


Bonvisi, Antonio (1470x75-1558), merchant, was born in England between 1470 and 1475, possibly the son of Louis Bonvisi. He belonged to an ancient family from Lucca, north Italy, which was descended from a councillor of the emperor Otto III in the tenth century, and had become merchants and bankers. He established himself in the family business, which he further extended by introducing a new method of spinning into the Devonshire cloth trade. By 1513 he was already a thriving merchant, and laying the foundation of the great wealth for which he was famous. In that year he received from Henry VIII a remission of customs for five years in repayment of a loan to the crown. He dealt largely in fine woollen cloth, and also imported jewels and other foreign articles, for which Cardinal Wolsey was one of his principal customers. He acted as banker for the government, transmitting money and letters to ambassadors in France, Italy, and elsewhere. Henry VIII personally contacted Cardinal Campeggi in Rome, requesting his favour towards Bonvisi in a lawsuit (1526). He was proctor-general for Silvestro Gigli, the absentee bishop of Worcester and the government's personal agent at the papal court. Sometimes through his correspondents he succeeded in obtaining earlier news of foreign events than the government did. In March 1528 Stephen Vaughan, agent to Thomas Cromwell, sent the latter news of the French invasion of Naples, which he had learned from Bonvisi. 
Bonvisi was a patron and friend of a number of learned men. Thomas Starkey, Thomas Winter, Florence Volusenus, and others expressed their obligations to him, and he knew Sir Thomas More especially well. From the late 1490s, he regularly entertained More in his house. Their conversations probably had an influence on the content of More's 'Utopia' (1516), which delighted Bonvisi. In 1524 he helped clarify More's thoughts on heresy and the papal primacy. He was godfather to one of More's grandsons, and in 1524 he purchased from More the lease of Crosby Place in Bishopsgate Street, London. When More was sent to the Tower in 1534, Bonvisi supplied him with meat and wine and provided a silk camlet gown for him to wear to his execution. In one of his last letters from the Tower, written with a coal, More speaks of himself as having been for nearly forty years 'not a guest, but a continual nurseling' in Bonvisi's house, and calls him 'the apple of mine eye' ('Correspondence', letter 217). Bonvisi's friendship was also extended to Fisher, bishop of Rochester, imprisoned with More in the Tower, to whom he sent each day a quart of French wine, stewed meat, and jellies. His attitude to Henry VIII's divorce is demonstrated by the courageous help he gave to Friar Peto, who had fled to the Low Countries after preaching a violent sermon against the king. 
Bonvisi spent late 1535 and most of 1536 in Lyons, in Lucca, and in other parts of north Italy. From Europe he wrote a series of letters to Thomas Cromwell which formed the government's main source of news about troop movements, the political situation, and rumours concerning the French and imperialists, battling for control of Italy. The last years of Henry VIII's reign show Bonvisi still in a position to command respect. In 1544 he was twice given a licence to trade with France, despite a general prohibition. But his well-known aversion to the principles of the Reformation (Wriothesley called him 'a rank papist') gave him a sense of insecurity in England as the Reformation advanced under Edward VI. The introduction of the first 'Act of Uniformity' (1549) hastened his choice between conformity or exile. On 22 June 1547 he had obtained a licence to convey Crosby Place to Richard Heywood, in trust for himself, and about the same time he procured a quittance for all sums of money paid to him by the crown since 1544. Having thus settled his affairs, he fled to Louvain on 25 September 1549. His house was seized by the sheriffs of London on 7 February 1550. 
Bonvisi's house in Louvain became a refuge for religious exiles, especially More's relations and friends. That his leadership of the exiled Catholics there was recognized by the English government is shown by his exclusion, together with others of his household at Louvain, from the general pardon of 1553. Although Mary's accession enabled him to regain his English property (10 May 1554), he was probably too old to contemplate returning. But the esteem in which he was held by the Marian regime is shown in an address by Cardinal Pole to an assembly of Londoners after the formal reconciliation with Rome (November 1554). He called Bonvisi 'a special benefactor to all Catholic and good persons... I doubt not but his name is in the Book of Life' (quoted in Ford, 235). Bonvisi died in Louvain on 7 December 1558, and was buried there, leaving Benedict Bonvisi, the son of his brother Martin, to inherit his English property. 


@@@@@


doc= 2861


Bonwicke, Ambrose (1691-1714), nonjuror, eldest son of Ambrose Bonwicke (1652-1722) and his wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Stubbs (died 1722), was born in the Schoolmaster's house, Merchant Taylors' School, London, on 30 September 1691. He grew up in Headley, Surrey, and in 1703 entered the Merchant Taylors' School in London, where his father had been headmaster. He spent more than seven years there, and, having reached the head form, was eligible for election to St John's College, Oxford. However, his refusal to read the prayer for Queen Anne and the house of Hanover deprived him of this advantage and compelled him to seek admission to St John's College, Cambridge, which had gained a reputation as a nonjuror stronghold. 
Having entered St John's, Cambridge, in August 1710, Bonwicke's exemplary conduct and acquirements quickly procured him a scholarship, the enjoyment of which was somewhat marred by the scruples of an oversensitive conscience. The statutes, to his mind, not only enjoined personal obedience but implied some control over others. 'Am I', he asked his father, 'by the words 'faciam ab aliis observari', which are part of the oath, obliged to tell lads continually their duty as far as I know it, and also to inform against transgressors?' (Bonwicke, 30). Happily his mind was set at ease on this point and he was able to continue in college, enthusiastically devoting himself to study and to religious exercises. 'His temperance was always very great, and his fasting and abstinence rather more than his weak constitution could well bear' (ibid., 32). Further reports may also suggest that Bonwicke suffered from tuberculosis. He died, unmarried, on the evening of 5 May 1714 in his college study, his favourite devotional works by Robert Nelson and Edward Lake beside him. He was buried four days later at All Saints' churchyard, Cambridge. 
Bonwicke's father, at the suggestion of the printer William Bowyer, drew up an account of his son's life but desired that its authorship should be concealed. Bowyer edited the memoir after the death of Bonwicke the elder, and in 1729 published 'A Pattern for Young Students in the University, Set Forth in the Life of Mr. Ambrose Bonwicke' with the intent to present 'the virtues of a private life' for general 'imitation' (Bonwicke, 1). It is interesting not merely as a picture of college life and reading habits in the early eighteenth century, but also because it depicts the nature and development of the scrupulous conscience which made both father and son nonjurors. 


@@@@@


doc= 2862


Bonwicke, Ambrose (1652-1722), nonjuring Church of England clergyman and schoolmaster, son of the Revd John Bonwicke BD (1622-1698), later rector of East Horsley and of Mickleham in Surrey, was born on 29 April 1652 at East Horsley. On 11 September 1663 he entered Merchant Taylors' School, where the headmaster was John Goad, later dismissed for his sympathy towards the Roman Catholic church. Bonwicke matriculated at St John's College, Oxford, on 2 May 1668 and was elected fellow in 1669, graduating BA in 1673 and proceeding MA in 1676 (incorporated at Cambridge in 1678) and BD in 1682. His time as an undergraduate was vividly described by Bonwicke in a series of letters written to his father, many of which were later published with notes by John Nichols in his edition of the printer William Bowyer's 'Miscellaneous Tracts' (1785). These letters make frequent allusion to acute shortage of money, a problem which was allayed when Bonwicke became tutor to Lord Stawell through the interest of Dr Peter Mews, president of St John's College from 1667 to 1673. 
Having been ordained deacon in 1676 and priest in 1680, Bonwicke retained his fellowship at St John's until 1686, when, after the Merchant Taylors' Company had successfully resisted an attempt by James II to intrude his own nominee, Mr Lee, he was appointed to the headmastership of Merchant Taylors' School. Bonwicke proved a successful schoolmaster, and his pupils at this time included two future archbishops: Hugh Boulter (Armagh) and Sir William Dawes (York). In these years he married Elizabeth (died 1722), daughter of Philip Stubbs, citizen and vintner of London, and sister of Philip Stubbs, later a prominent high-churchman and noted supporter of Henry Sacheverell at the time of his trial in 1710. Ambrose and Elizabeth had twelve children, of whom their eldest son, Ambrose Bonwicke the younger, was born on 30 September 1691. 
Unwilling to take the oath of allegiance to William and Mary, Bonwicke was dismissed from his post as a nonjuror on 5 August 1691. His letters at this time to Richard Blechynden, a prebendary of Peterborough Cathedral and fellow of St John's College, who had conformed to the new regime, provide a concise statement of nonjuring scruples, echoing the doctrine of the 'Oxford Decrees' (1683) and 'The Whole Duty of Man': 'I suppose... that King 'James' had a right to my allegiance, and that secured by an oath; and unless he has given away this right or forfeited it, it is still in him. Now to me it does not appear that he has done either, therefore I dare not give it to another. (Bonwicke to Blechynden, 11 Aug 1691, cited in Mayor, 131)' 
'I am to consider how I am to behave myself under a king that has possession and not right... if it were barely submitting to him in power, I suppose we should have no great dispute. (20 Aug 1691, ibid., 132)' 
'The sons of the Church of England (by their general defection) have brought an indelible scandal upon her; and it is not to be wiped off by the constancy of a small party... if every man must be the judge of the actions of his prince, and quit his allegiance whenever he thinks the coronation oath broken, there can be no such thing as peace. (16 Sept 1691, ibid., 135)' Following deprivation Bonwicke opened a private school at Headley, near his father's parish of Mickleham in Surrey. The poet Elijah Fenton served as usher there for a brief period during Queen Anne's reign, and the younger William Bowyer, a pupil 'c'.1711-1716, recalled Bonwicke's teaching ability and personal generosity with affection (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 1.63-6). Following the death of his eldest son, Ambrose, in 1714 Bonwicke was persuaded to write an anonymous account of his life by Bowyer's father, William the elder. In this memoir, published posthumously in 1729 as 'A Pattern for Young Students in the University', Bonwicke movingly presented his son as an exemplar of devotion and conscience. 
Bonwicke died on 20 October 1722, and was buried six days later in the chancel of the parish church at Mickleham. In his will, dated 26 July 1722, he left personal bequests amounting to more than $3000. His wife died soon afterwards, on 3 December 1722. 


@@@@@


doc= 2863


Bonython, Charles (c.1649-1705), lawyer, was the son and heir of John Bonython ('b'. 1618, died after 1680) of Bonython, Cornwall, and Anne (died 1723), daughter of Hugh Trevanion of Tregulan, Cornwall. He was admitted as a student at Gray's Inn on 26 October 1671, and was called to the bar on 12 June 1678. From surviving deeds it would seem that in 1680 he married Mary Livesay ('bap'. 1661), probably the daughter of William Livesay of Staple Inn. They had three sons and two daughters. Bonython was very active in pleading before the court of king's bench in 1680, and he appeared for the crown in some of the Popish Plot cases, notably in that against Lord Castlemaine. In April 1683 he was appointed deputy steward of Westminster, an office which no doubt paved the way for his election as MP for Westminster in 1685. He lost his deputy steward's post in February 1687, presumably because of his opposition to James II's religious policies, but he regained the office on 7 October 1688 when the king attempted to shore up his deteriorating position by re-employing his former tory supporters. 
Bonython's position as steward, which he held until his death, gave him a political base in the city. He stood unsuccessfully for Westminster at the election for the Convention Parliament in 1688, and again on the 'pure Tory interest' ('Letters of Lady Rachel Russell', 292) in a by-election in 1691. He was appointed a serjeant-at-law in April 1692. Bonython threatened to stand again for the city of Westminster in the 1698 election, although he did not go to a poll. In the following general election, in January 1701, he finished bottom of the poll. Amid another election campaign, on 30 April 1705, Bonython 'shot himself through the body with a pistol' (Luttrell, 5.545), although another report had it that he 'shot himself through the head' ('Ormonde MSS', new ser., 8.152). John Evelyn commented that he 'hanged himself' (Evelyn, 5.593). His two surviving sons were educated at Gray's Inn: the eldest, Richard, on 8 June 1717, burnt down his chambers in Gray's Inn, stabbed himself, and then threw himself out of the window. 


@@@@@


doc= 2864


Bonython, Richard (bap. 1580, d. 1647x54), soldier and planter in America, was baptized on 8 April 1580 at St Columb Major, Cornwall, a younger son and one of eight children of John Bonython and his wife, Eleanor Myleinton. Nothing else is known of his early life. He married by 1607 Lucretia Leigh, daughter of William Leigh and Phillippa Prest of St Thomas by Launceston, Cornwall. They had two sons and three daughters, of whom one son and two daughters lived to adulthood and married. On 29 February 1630 the Council for New England granted to 'Thomas Lewis and Capt. Ric[hard] Bonighton' a substantial tract of land between Cape Elizabeth and Cape Porpoise on the coast of New England ('York Deeds', 2.110). Lewis had travelled to New England in 1628, and settled there permanently in 1631, but no record of Bonython is found in New England prior to 25 March 1636, when he served as a magistrate at Saco court. Bonython continued to serve in the various governments of the region which became Maine, holding office as councillor under Thomas Gorges in 1639 and 1640, and assistant in 1646. In 1645 he was made colonel-general of the militia in Saco. 
Bonython was frequently associated with Sir Ferdinando Gorges, the leading promoter of New England colonization. In 1639 he was appointed to the council established by Gorges for his territory in New England, and in 1641 he attested to the earlier military service of Gorges. Bonython adhered to the Church of England, and opposed developing a New England church government. He died between 14 July 1647, when he was last recorded alive, and 29 June 1654, when his son John acted in his stead. The large tract of land granted to Lewis and Bonython in 1630 was in 1681 divided among the heirs of these two men, including representatives of the three children of Bonython. 


@@@@@


doc= 2865


Booker, John (1602-1667), astrologer, was born at Manchester on 23 March 1602 and was later described as being of 'good parentage'; his father died on 23 March 1621. He received a sound schooling which gave him a lasting proficiency in Latin, and his writings show that he read widely. He moved to London in August 1616 and the following April was bound apprentice to a haberdasher of small wares in Laurence Lane. However, instead of pursuing that trade he taught for a time as a writing-master at a school in Hadley, near Barnet, Middlesex, and worked as a clerk for the London aldermen Sir Hugh Hammersley and Sir Christopher Clitheroe (both of whom served as mayor). According to William Lilly 'he served with great Credit and Estimation; and by that means became not only well known, but as well respected of the most eminent Citizens of London, even to his dying Day' (Lilly, 27). 
Booker was drawn to astrology from an early age, poring over almanacs as a child, and he came to enjoy an extensive astrological practice in London. His friend the parson-astrologer William Bredon, formerly chaplain to Sir Christopher Heydon, may have been his mentor. Booker's casebooks for the years 1648-65, written in shorthand, survive among the Ashmolean manuscripts in the Bodleian Library; they cover roughly 16,500 enquiries from clients who ranged from peers through merchants and artisans to domestic servants. Lilly called him 'an excellent Proficient,... a very honest Man, abhorred any Deceit in the Art he studied; had a curious Fancy in judging of Thefts, and as successful in resolving Love-Questions' (Lilly, 27-8). His astrological practice flourished right up to his death. 
Booker's wider fame rested on the series of almanacs he published annually from 1631 to his death. He used a variety of titles, including 'Bowker: a New Almanack', 'Mercurius Coelicus', 'Uranoscopia', 'Celestiall Observations', and, in his final years, 'Telescopium Uranicum'. In the 1630s he was recognized as the leading astrologer of his day. His fame was secured by a hint in his almanac for September 1632 that Saturn and Jupiter in opposition threatened the death of kings, a 'prophecy' seen as fulfilled by the death of the conquering king of Sweden, Gustavus Adolphus, two months later. Booker was the most outspoken compiler of the 1630s. In 1632 he complained of pervasive 'bribery, oppression, extortion' ('New Almanack', 1632, sig. C5'v'), and in 1633 made a provocative prediction of 'wonderful change in the church' ('New Almanack', 1633, sig. C2). As a result he was arrested by the high commission in 1634, gaoled eight weeks in the Gatehouse, fined $500, and suspended from writing. The case prompted an order that henceforth all almanacs must be licensed by the archbishop of Canterbury or bishop of London. Booker did not publish in 1635, and his almanacs for the later 1630s were heavily censored; he later complained that he had been tempted to abandon writing them altogether. 
In the 1640s Booker quickly emerged as a militant parliamentarian, and became so famous that his almanacs were pirated and counterfeited. In June 1643 he and the reader of mathematics at Gresham College were appointed by parliament as joint licensers of mathematical books (which included almanacs), a position he retained until 1660. His almanacs predicted the downfall of popery and sweeping reforms in religion, though he criticized separatists and was pained by the rift between Presbyterians and Independents. In 1644 he savaged the king for associating with the bloodthirsty Irish papists who in 1641 had 'cut the throats of 200,000 Israelites, I mean Protestants in Ireland' ('No Mercurius aquaticus', 1644, 5). His political stance led to fierce quarrels in print with the royalist astrologer George Wharton, whom Booker attacked in 'Mercurius Coelius' (1644) and who replied with 'Mercurio-Coelico-Mastix, or, An anti-caveat to all such, as have (heretofore) had the misfortune to be cheated and deluded by that grand and traiterous impostor of this rebellious age, John Booker' (1644), and with the versifier turned royalist propagandist, John Taylor, whom Booker attacked in his vigorous 'No Mercurius aquaticus, but a Cable Rope Twisted for John Tayler, the Water-Poet' (1644). None the less Booker continued to stand for a limited monarchy and he was shocked by the extremism he found in the first almanac submitted by William Lilly, which he licensed only after insisting on substantial changes. Lilly rapidly overtook him as the leading parliamentary astrologer, but they became friendly colleagues. Booker greatly admired Lilly's 'Christian Astrology' (1647), and sometimes sought his professional advice. In 1647 they were both invited to the army's headquarters at Windsor, where General Fairfax tried to convince them of the justice of its cause. During the second civil war in 1648 they were summoned to Colchester to encourage the besieging forces with predictions of a speedy triumph, which quickly followed. Booker's importance in shaping public opinion is confirmed by the counterfeit astrological judgement issued in his name in 1649 by his rival Henry Walker, which claimed that the stars indicated the failure of Cromwell's expedition to Ireland. 
After the king's execution Booker adopted a more radical political and religious stance. He now damned Presbyterianism as well as prelacy and popery, and predicted in 1651 that monarchy would soon disappear throughout Europe. He interpreted 'black Monday', the solar eclipse of 29 March 1652, as heralding the fall of kings as well as popery. His clients included several radicals, and he wrote a verse lamenting the death of John Lilburne, whose wife was a frequent visitor. During the 1650s Booker's almanacs gave warm support to the Commonwealth and protectorate, with dire warnings to royalists, Scots, Dutch, French, and Spaniards. In his almanac for 1660 he dismissed the failed rising of Sir George Booth as the 'gripings and wringings of Antichrist' ('Telescopium Uranicum', sig. C5). The Restoration, which he had totally failed to anticipate, therefore demanded some nimble footwork. Henceforth Booker heaped praise on Charles II and his generous amnesty and poured fierce invective on the regicides. His political prophecies were now very cautious, and sales dwindled; his fee from the Company of Stationers accordingly halved from $40 to $20. The approach of 1666 rekindled something of his old anti-popery, however, and he prophesied that the year would prove fatal to the popish Antichrist. 
Though Booker published little outside the field of astrology, he seems to have had some involvement in both iatrochemistry and natural magic. Lilly described him as very competent in physic, and he sometimes described himself as physician (and mathematician) as well as astrologer. He 'was a great Admirer of the Antimonial Cup', Lilly remarked, and 'not unlearned in Chymistry' (Lilly, 28). He was one of the friends who supplied Elias Ashmole with materials for his 'Theatrum chemicum Britannicum' (1652). In 1650 he published 'The Dutch Fortune-Teller... Brought into England by John Booker', which set out a system of divination based on letters, words, and numbers and employing dice, 'wheels', and 'globes'. Egyptian in origin, it had been carried to Germany by an Ottoman ambassador and translated into German. Booker complained that many treated it merely as a jest; he stopped short of endorsing it, but suggested it might be seen as a form of natural magic, and similar to some of the writings of Dr Robert Fludd. Booker was also 'no mean Proficient in Astronomy' (Lilly, 28), vigorously supporting the system of Tycho Brahe against its Copernican rival. In 1639 he published an updated edition of William Rastall's concordance of years. 
Booker married his wife, Joan, in June 1638; they had several children. One daughter, Victoria, born in 1644, was named after the victory at Marston Moor. In 1662 Booker sent an agitated note begging Lilly to help trace his son Samuel, who had run away from home on the eve of being bound apprentice, adding that he had sent another troublesome son (John) to Barbados; 'never was any man so vexed with his children', he complained (Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 180, fol. 112). Gadbury's later comment that Booker possessed 'a competent share of Choler' (Gadbury, 181) may provide a clue to his domestic problems. Booker was still living at Hadley, at the house of Francis Atkinson, as late as 1633. By 1646 he had a house in Cree-Church Lane, near Duke's Place; from 1662 he gave his address as near St James's Church in Duke's Place. (The minister of St James's, William Harrison, was a client.) Booker died in Duke's Place on 8 April 1667, after three years of dysentery had 'at last consumed him to nothing' (Lilly, 28). He had also been diabetic. He was survived by his wife, two sons, and two daughters; Joan sold his collection of astrological books to Elias Ashmole for $140, which Lilly thought far more than they were worth. Ashmole, a client and friend since 1646, was the dedicatee of Booker's last almanac, and paid for a marble slab to be placed over his grave in St James's Church. No likeness of Booker is known to exist -- perhaps a mercy, for a contemporary jibed that his face would 'fright a razor' (J. B., 'A Faire in Spittle Fields', 1652, 7). Lilly, summing up his career, said that he had always 'lived an honest Man, his Fame not questioned at his Death' (Lilly, 28). 


@@@@@


doc= 2866


Booker, Luke (1762-1835), Church of England clergyman and author, was born at Nottingham on 20 October 1762, the son of a schoolmaster who had been married four times and had thirteen children; he gave the names of the evangelists to his four sons. Educated at home, Booker was ordained in 1785 by Bishop Cornwallis of Lichfield and Coventry. He was soon afterwards appointed lecturer for the collegiate church of Wolverhampton. He also held the curacy of Old Swinford, Worcestershire, before accepting the incumbency of St Edmund's chapel of ease, Dudley. In 1806 he was presented by his brother-in-law, Richard Blakemore, to the rectory of Tedstone Delamere, Herefordshire. In addition he was presented by William, third Viscount Dudley, to the vicarage of Dudley in 1812. Booker soon found himself in difficulties: the historic church of St Thomas, Dudley, was demolished in 1816 in the face of much opposition, and Booker was subsequently satirized in the poem 'The Procession and the Bells, or, The Rival Poets' (1817), reputedly by W. T. of Wantage. 
Booker was a popular preacher of charity sermons, of which he was said to have delivered 173, raising nearly $9000. His poetry -- which included 'Malvern, a Descriptive and Historical Poem' (1798), 'Calista, or, A Picture of Modern Life' (1803), and 'The Springs of Plynlimmon' (1834) -- was less successful. He also published 'A Moral Review of the Conduct and Case of Mary Ashford' (1818), in which, extrapolating from the case of a twenty-year-old local girl murdered in 1817, he exposed the evils of promiscuous dancing assemblies. The pamphlet attracted much attention, as Booker assumed the guilt of Abraham Thornton who was, in fact, acquitted of the crime. Booker has been wrongly suggested as the author of 'The Mysterious Murder' (1817?), a melodrama also based on the Ashford case, which was written by George Ludlam of the Theatre Royal, Birmingham. Additional works by Booker included numerous single sermons and 'Select Psalms and Hymns for the Use of Churches' (1796). His most significant work, however, was his 'Description and Historical Account of Dudley Castle' (1825), which was only superseded by Charles Twamley's history of the same edifice in 1867. 
Booker was a JP for Worcester, Hereford, and Stafford, and a sternly orthodox opponent of atheists, Unitarians, and Roman Catholics alike. Like his father, he was married four times; he lost his eldest son, at the age of thirteen, in 1810. He died at Bower Ashton, near Bristol, on 1 October 1835. 


@@@@@


doc= 2867


Boolde, William (d. 1489x92), Benedictine monk, was professed at Christ Church Cathedral priory, Canterbury, on 25 March 1443, and ordained priest six years later. The only office he is known to have occupied within the monastery is that of keeper of the shrine ('magister tumbe') of Thomas Becket, which he held shortly before his death. He owned a manuscript (now Bodl. Oxf., MS Bodley 648), which had previously belonged to Prior William Molasshe ('r'. 1428-38); Boolde's name on folio 6 is preceded by the word 'constat', implying possession, and followed by the year 1468, presumably the date he acquired it. This volume contains treatises on medicine, astrology, and doctrine, together with lists of popes, archbishops, religious houses, and castles in England and Scotland, and a brief chronicle. Tanner attributes to him the compilation of the lists and the chronicle, but evidence for this is lacking. 
Boolde may have been a relative of Master William Bolde, a notary, who was mayor of Canterbury in 1457. His death occurred probably on 4 February in a year between 1489 and 1492. 


@@@@@


doc= 2868


Boole, George (1815-1864), mathematician and logician, was born on 2 November 1815 in Lincoln, the eldest of four children of a local tradesman, John Boole (1777-1848), and his wife, Mary Ann (1780-1854). He adopted a love of learning from his father, who was active in the local mechanics' institute, to such an extent that in his teens he was employed as a teacher at schools in Lincoln and nearby; in his twentieth year he opened his own school. He also learned classical and modern languages and wrote poetry, and taught himself mathematics to a level which permitted him to engage in research. He began publishing in 1841, first and frequently in the 'Cambridge Mathematical Journal', founded two years earlier by D. F. Gregory, his initial mathematical mentor and inspiration. 
Although his contributions quickly gained attention, Boole continued as a private teacher until the Queen's University in Ireland was set up in 1845. After delays caused by the potato famine, he took up appointment in 1849 as founder professor of mathematics at Queen's College, Cork, a post which he filled for the rest of his life. Often he spent the summer vacations in England, at Lincoln and studying in London libraries. While he was unable to generate a school of research students at Cork, his work was recognized by honorary doctorates from Trinity College, Dublin, in 1851 and Oxford University eight years later, and by fellowship of the Royal Society in 1857, although he was not elected to the Royal Irish Academy. Among other duties, between 1847 and at least 1852 he was an examiner of mathematics for the College of Preceptors, which was founded in 1846 as an institution to raise the reputation and calibre of the profession of school teachers. 
On 11 September 1855 Boole married Mary Everest (1832-1916) ['see 'Boole, Mary], daughter of the Revd Thomas Everest and niece of Sir George Everest of mountain fame. Brought up in France, she became greatly interested in mathematics; she had met Boole in 1850 when she was visiting her uncle John Ryall, vice-president of Queen's College. She assisted her husband with his two textbooks, as the first reader for intelligibility and also as checker of some of the exercises. After his death she moved her family to London, where Frederick Denison Maurice found her a post at his Queen's College in Harley Street. Later she was secretary to the philosopher James Hinton, and became interested in Judaism, and also in psychical research. She continued to proselytize Boole's philosophy, especially its application to educational questions, both in discourse and extensively in print. She gained a reputation as a crank, but her understanding of his ideas on logic and education were basically sound. She presented the bulk of his manuscripts to the Royal Society in 1873. 
George and Mary produced five daughters with repetitive two-year regularity. Mary Ellen Boole ('b'. 1856) married the mathematician Charles Howard Hinton, the eldest son of James Hinton. Margaret Boole (1858-1935) married Edward Ingram Taylor, an artist; their son Geoffrey Ingram Taylor (1886-1975) was to become one of the finest British mathematical physicists of the twentieth century. Alicia Stott, nee Boole (1860-1940) ['see under 'Boole, Mary], was led into mathematics by her brother-in-law Charles Hinton, and produced fine work in solid geometry (a startling contrast to her father's totally algebraic style). From 1889 to 1896 she worked with friends on organizing her father's manuscripts, with an intention (not realized) of producing a new edition of 'Laws'. Lucy Everest Boole (1862-1904) ['see under 'Boole, Mary] made a career in chemistry, teaching at the London School of Medicine for Women. She was the first woman professor of chemistry in Britain. Ethel Lilian Boole (1864-1960) ['see 'Voynich, Ethel Lilian] studied in Germany in her teens, and became associated with revolutionary causes in central Europe. She became a radical socialist and freethinker, and consorted with the activist W. M. Voynich, whom she married in 1906; however, within four years she ran away with the remarkable spy Sydney Reilly. In 1897 she produced a novel called 'The Gadfly', seemingly based upon Reilly, which was to become very well known in the Soviet Union. 
Boole's contributions to mathematics were both characteristic of and important for the development of English mathematics in his time, for they were entirely guided by algebras of new kinds. His earliest work extended the notion of the invariant, which was to become a major English industry in the hands of Arthur Cayley and J. J. Sylvester. His own main effort was directed to the algebraic form of the differential and integral calculus. Born at the start of the century out of certain ideas of J. L. Lagrange, it had been taken up in England from the 1810s by Charles Babbage and especially John Herschel. Taking much inspiration from Gregory, Boole specialized in differential operators, in which the operation of differentiation of a mathematical function was represented by the letter 'D', and an algebra constructed in which second differentiation was given by the power D2, the inverse operation of integration was D-1, and so on. He became a leading practitioner of this theory for solving differential and difference equations, and summing series. His main paper, 'On a general method in analysis', was submitted to the Royal Society; after initial rejection, it was published in the 'Philosophical Transactions' in 1844, and Boole later received the society's gold medal. This operator algebra became the largest single concern of English mathematicians in Boole's time, and his contributions gained him most of his attention. He examined operator functions F and G which did not commute (FG &ne; GF), and applied his methods and solutions especially to linear differential equations. He also wrote two well-received general textbooks: 'A Treatise on Differential Equations' (1859) and 'A Treatise on the Calculus of Finite Differences' (1860). 
The algebra of differential operators has a close bearing upon Boole's contributions to logic, which was then only an intriguing curiosity to his contemporaries but for which he is best remembered today. A dispute developed in the mid-1840s between the Scottish philosopher Sir William Hamilton and the English mathematician Augustus De Morgan over a certain extension of syllogistic logic which became called 'quantification of the predicate'; it inspired Boole to write up his ideas on logic in a short book entitled 'The Mathematical Analysis of Logic' (1847). Seven years later, he presented a much longer account as 'An Investigation of the Laws of Thought'; today it is recognized as the more authoritative and substantial book, but at the time it gained even less attention than had his 'Analysis'. 
Boole's logic was much more revolutionary relative to syllogistic logic than De Morgan's algebraic treatment; although they corresponded regularly, they communicated their respective ideas more than discussed them. However, Boole seems not to have recognized the full consequences of his own ideas when writing the 'Analysis', in that he referred there frequently to syllogistic logic. By the time of the 'Laws', however, it was treated only in the last of the fifteen chapters on logic. 
Boole's basic method may be explained as follows, using the version in 'Laws' where Boole gave prime place to classes, rather than the psychological interpretation concerning mental acts ('elective symbols') of choosing properties, which he preferred in 'Analysis'. From a given universal class 1 (of men, say) the mind picks out some class 'x' (of Englishmen, say), leaving the complementary class (1 - 'x') of non-English men. The basic laws of these classes, which grounded his algebra of logic, imitated as closely as possible the laws that he had found for differential operators in the 1844 paper: commutativity, distributivity in both theories, and a third law which he called in each case the 'index law'. For differential operators the index law followed the usual property of powers, DmDn = Dn+m, but in logic it asserted that 'x'2 = 'x', that is, that the class 'x' taken together with the class 'x' gives the class 'x' (or that to choose the property 'x' and to choose 'x' again is the same as choosing 'x' once). This law distinguished this algebra from all others of his time. As consequences of it he formed equations expressing the laws of contradiction and of excluded middle, which were taken as basic assumptions in traditional logics. 
To the operations of subtraction and multiplication Boole appended that of addition, where two classes were adjoined as long as they had no parts in common. He also worked with 0, denoting 'Nothing' -- but none too clearly, since it was a class of some sort. 
One main purpose of Boole's algebra was to take one or several propositions as premisses, express them as algebraic equations, and then to use various expansion theorems and processes of elimination of letters to relate a selected class to the others as derived equations; sometimes further equations arose which stipulated conditions (of no parts in common, say) on the classes in hand in order that any solution be found at all. As logic, these new equations expressed logical consequences of the premisses; syllogistic logic provided many cases, but only of special kinds. However, Boole's methods often did not find special solutions, and he did not always distinguish some of the modes used in quantification of the predicate. 
Boole always understood his algebra of logic 'to investigate the fundamental laws of those operations of the mind by which reasoning is performed', as he put it in the opening of 'Laws', but he changed position on the philosophical foundations of his theory. The preference of classes over mental acts between the 'Analysis' and 'Laws' arose from a rejection of syllogistic logic as a foundation in favour of a different tradition stemming from John Locke and continued by the Scottish common-sense philosophers in some ways. In this view signs were taken as the primary cognitive notion, with language as an essential means of expressing them. In Boole's hands, nouns and adjectives were principal components, denoting classes: thus, say, 'men' were formed from a universe of humans, and 'good men' similarly from 'men'; taking 'good good men' made no difference by the index law. Prepositions expressed the means of combination: 'and' for conjunction, exclusive 'or' for disjunction, and 'except' for subtraction. 
Boole tried several times to write a successor to the 'Laws' which would explain its principles and philosophy in a general manner, but he never succeeded. His manuscripts show that he tried to ground his logic in a philosophical procedure of his time, though he paid better attention than normal to the difference between a mental act and its product. For him the act of conception by the mind produced a concept, such as 'man' (or the class of them); then the act of judgement of the copresence of concepts produced a proposition, such as 'this is a wise man'; finally, the act of reasoning produced a conclusion, perhaps 'wise men are...', as delivered by his algebra of logic. However, he still found no commensurably comprehensive philosophy of mathematics to explain how his logic had its mathematical basis. 
Both in logic and in his educational theory, Boole thought that the mind was capable of original action, such as grasping general laws from particular cases. He would have hated the modern association of his logic with computing, and he had no particular congress with Babbage or concern to apply his logic to calculating machines. The religious aspects were also important; his 'universe 1' corresponded to the ecumenism of his day, in that it stood over and above the factions into which the Christian church was split. He was especially admiring of F. D. Maurice, who advocated ecumenism with great force in mid-century and so was dismissed from his chair at King's College, London: in his last years Boole attended Maurice's services when researching in London. He discreetly revealed his adherence right at the end of the 'Laws', with a reference to 'the Father of Lights'. 
Chapters 16 to 21 of 'Laws' were concerned with probability theory. One of Boole's main insights was to interpret compound events as Boolean combinations of simple ones. He also considered probabilistic inference, and in estimating probability values of logical consequences he manipulated inequalities in ways which place him among the precursors of linear programming. He also queried subjective interpretations of inverse probability (that is, given some event, calculating the probability of the circumstances which could have caused it to happen). After 'Laws' he produced important papers in this area; one won the Keith prize of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1857. Later his principles and calculations were criticized by Jevons, among others. 
Boole comes over as honest and straightforward, even naive (as when he told people in the street about the birth of his first daughter). He was also rather serious, showing little sign of a sense of humour. The circumstances of his upbringing and career isolated him from the mathematical and scientific communities; perhaps in compensation he corresponded quite intensively, having substantial exchanges with William Thomson on operator methods and with De Morgan on algebra and logic. He was also on good terms with fellow mathematicians such as Arthur Cayley and Robert Harley. 
Boole died from pleuro-pneumonia, the result of foolishly walking the 3 miles from home to university without proper protection from a rain storm -- so probable an event in Cork. He died at his home, Lichfield Cottage, Ballintemple, on 8 December 1864, with Maurice's portrait set by his bedside at his request, and was buried at St Michael's Church of Ireland, Blackrock, on 12 December. 
After Boole's death, his reputation declined for some decades. Differential operator methods became generally eclipsed by other techniques in the calculus, although his textbooks of differential and difference equations, which contained all basic techniques, continued to be well used after his death and are still in print. His work on logic remained marginal; John Venn was to remain its sole close adherent. Shortly after his death the chemist Benjamin Collins Brodie unsuccessfully tried to develop a similar algebra for chemical combination. The psychological and religious aspects of his logic disappeared completely, and the development of mathematical logic by men such as Giuseppe Peano and Bertrand Russell drew on quite different principles. His work on probability also made little impact. 
The main single issue for followers of Boole's logic was his restriction of ('x'+'y') to classes with no parts in common. His arguments for this were not convincing, least of all to his first serious reader, Stanley Jevons, who declared that + should be definable for all classes. Jevons outlined his position in his book 'Pure Logic' (1864), and corresponded at the time with Boole. Their test case was the expression ('x'+'x'); for Jevons ('x'+'x')='x', whereas for Boole it could not be 'interpreted', although when expanded the premiss ('x'+'x')=0 led to the consequence 'x'=0. A few years later the American logician C. S. Peirce came independently to the same modification; it altered Boole's algebra in quite a substantial way, which distanced it from the algebraic logic to come later in the century. The modern 'Boolean algebra' has 'x'2='x' among its axioms, but in technical and philosophical ways it differs from Boole's algebra of logic. 
Boolean logic is the basis for the design of all modern computers since the ultimate components of these devices were capable of storing just two values (equated with true and false) and their circuitry calculates the basic Boolean operators over these two values. These domains of application have added to the importance of Boole's work already evident in the relationship between logic and mathematics. 


@@@@@


doc= 2869


Boone, James Shergold (1798-1859), writer, born on 30 June 1798 at Sunbury, Middlesex, and baptized on 8 August 1798 there, was the second son of Thomas Boone ('b'. 22 July 1760), a surgeon, and his wife, Rose Ann, 'nee' Shergold, who died on 11 July 1798, shortly after her son's birth. He was educated from June 1812 to April 1816 at Charterhouse School, where he won composition prizes in 1814 and 1816, and then at Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated as a commoner on 30 May 1816 and was promoted to a studentship in 1818. In 1817 he won a Craven scholarship, as well as both the chancellor's Latin verse prize and the Newdigate English verse prize. While an undergraduate he published 'The Oxford Spy', an anonymous verse satire on university life critical of Oxford's curriculum and examinations, which caused a sensation. The first four dialogues and an appendix appeared in 1818, the fifth and last dialogue in 1819. In 1820 he won the chancellor's Latin essay prize. In keeping with his criticisms, however, Boone disdained an honours degree and took an ordinary BA on 24 May 1820. He took his MA on 4 March 1823. 
In 1820 Boone published, again anonymously, 'The Welcome of Isis', a verse tribute to the duke of Wellington on the occasion of his expected, but postponed, visit to Oxford. He then returned to the subject of university reform with the publication of 'An Essay on the Study of Modern History' (1821), urging the addition of the subject to the Oxford curriculum. One account states that after leaving Oxford Boone was offered a parliamentary seat by a patron impressed by his early promise (Mozley, 2.203). He declined, turning to literary pursuits in London and lecturing on such subjects as the mutual relations of art and science. 'The Council of Ten', a monthly periodical of which he was editor and virtually sole contributor, appeared in June 1822 but lasted only twelve numbers. He then published 'Men and Things in 1823: a Poem in Three Epistles, with Notes' (1823), a survey of European politics in which he expressed high admiration for Canning. 
On 24 April 1824 Boone married Ellen Cotterill, of Totteridge, Hertfordshire, relinquishing his Christ Church studentship in the same year. Ordained deacon in 1826 and priest in 1827, he returned to Charterhouse as a master in the latter year. Having stood unsuccessfully for the schoolmastership of Charterhouse in 1832, he accepted in June the incumbency of the newly consecrated St John's, Paddington. 
Boone's continued interest in educational matters found expression in 'National Education: a Sermon' (1833) and 'The Educational Economy of England' (1838), in which he railed against ideas of state control. Also of interest is 'One, Manifold, or, System' (1848), a philosophical work prompted by European revolution. His most important literary undertaking, however, was the editorship from January 1834 of the 'British Critic', a high-church literary and theological quarterly controlled by the Hackney Phalanx; this is the clearest indication of his own churchmanship. After January 1836, however, when John Henry Newman struck an agreement to provide the 'British Critic' with a fixed number of reviews written by his Tractarian coterie, Boone came under increasing pressure to suppress views uncongenial to the Oxford Movement. Newman's manoeuvres to wrest editorial control eventually undermined Boone's position and he resigned late in 1837, ultimately to be succeeded by Newman himself. 
Boone's wife, Ellen, died on 11 April 1840, and he married Julia Maria, daughter of William Cox, of London, on 11 January 1842. There were no children by either marriage. Boone remained at St John's, Paddington, until his death aged sixty, after two years of illness, at 2 Stanhope Street (now Terrace), Hyde Park Gardens, on 24 March 1859. A brass erected to his memory remains in the chancel at St John's. Boone enjoyed some reputation as a preacher. He was appointed select preacher at Oxford in 1859, but illness prevented him from fulfilling the office. Various of his individual sermons as well as a collection, 'Sermons on Various Subjects and Occasions' (1853), were published, while his 'Sermons Chiefly on the Theory of Belief' (1860) was posthumously edited. 


@@@@@


doc= 2870


Boorde, Andrew (c.1490-1549), physician and author, was born at Borde Hill near Cuckfield, Sussex. Like many others in the field of healing he began his career as a monk. He was brought up at Oxford and admitted under age, in 1515, into the Carthusian order at the London Charterhouse. His precocity within the order was rewarded while he was still in his twenties by nomination as suffragan bishop of Chichester. In 1517, however, he was accused of being 'conversant with women', and was dismissed from his post by papal bull in 1521 before he could exercise any of its prerogatives. Uncomfortable with the abstemious, vegetarian lifestyle of the cloistered Carthusians, Boorde wrote in 1528 to John Batmanson, then prior of Hinton Charterhouse in Somerset, asking for release from his vows. Although some technical difficulties remained, Boorde received his dispensation and went abroad to study medicine at as many universities as he could. He returned to England in 1530 and, while staying with Sir Robert Drewry, ministered to Thomas Howard, duke of Norfolk. Boorde recorded that at Norfolk's request he attended Henry VIII, but no report of payment is recorded in the king's privy purse expenses. 
Boorde was travelling again in 1532, conferring with medical men in Orleans, Poitiers, Toulouse, Wittenberg, and Rome. He also made a pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela in Galicia and met surgeons at the university there. Back in England, on 29 May 1534, Boorde took the oath of conformity, perhaps influenced by a brief confinement in the London Charterhouse. Upon his release he spent some time with Thomas Cromwell in Hampshire. 
Recognizing Boorde's usefulness as an itinerant physician Cromwell sent him abroad in 1535 to test continental opinion of the divorced king. Boorde travelled extensively through France, Spain, and Portugal. He corresponded with Cromwell on 20 June 1535 from Bordeaux, where he bemoaned England's lack of sympathetic allies in Europe excepting the French. Later that summer Boorde sent rhubarb seeds from Barbary to Cromwell with directions for their cultivation, noting that the plant was greatly prized in Spain (Boorde, 'Introduction and Dyetary', 56). Boorde's journey in 1535 was the most extensive he had yet undertaken, and he described it in 'The Itinerary of Europe', a diary describing each region, which he lent to Cromwell. Cromwell evidently lost the volume, but part of it may have been re-worked into 'The Peregrination or Itinerary of England', printed in 1735 (ibid., 23-4). 'Peregrination' lists market towns, castles in England and Wales, and adjacent islands for the armchair traveller, and includes information on bridges, rivers, and highways into the shires from London. 
By April 1536 Boorde was practising medicine in Glasgow, still writing regularly to Cromwell with information about the Scots, whom he did not like and who, he reported, did not like the English. After a year's residence in Scotland, Boorde was again briefly in England in 1537, spending some time in Yorkshire, Cambridge, and London, where he oversaw production of his 'Almanake and Pronostication for 1537'. He experienced some trouble in the capital, and wrote to Cromwell asking for help in recovering horses stolen from him and sizeable debts owed him by individuals who called him 'appostata', and 'all-to-nowght' (good-for-nothing). Late in 1537, or after the dissolution of the religious houses in early 1538, Boorde left for Jerusalem to see the holy sepulchre, travelling for several years on a journey of remarkable range that took him east via Venice and back to the west through Naples and Rome. In 1540 a little treatise usually associated with Boorde, 'Book for to Lerne a Man to by Wyse in Buyldyng his Howse for the Helth of his Body', appeared anonymously in London. For a while Boorde settled in Montpellier, site of his favourite university, purportedly accumulating amusing stories that were ascribed to him and later published as 'Scogin's Jests', 'a preservative against melancholy' (John Scogin, 'Scogin's Jests', 1680). This comedic book and 'Merry Tales of the Mad Men of Gotham', traditionally attributed to Boorde, have led to the popular notion that he was the original Merry Andrew. In Montpellier in 1542 he wrote his 'Pryncyples of Astronamye' and completed 'The Compendious Regiment, or, Dyetary of Helth', dedicated to Norfolk, which included the earlier 'Book for to Lerne'. That same year he penned 'The First Book of the Introduction of Knowledge'. Intended as a medical treatise, the 'Introduction' was illustrated with woodcuts and records Boorde's good-natured observations made on a lengthy clockwise tour of Europe beginning at Calais. Using rhyme, dialect, and other amusing techniques Boorde provided delightful details about the fashions, foods, costumes, weather, and business of dozens of continental regions from Norway to Greece. Dedicated to the Princess Mary, the 'Introduction' contained numbers, monetary information, and key foreign phrases including the first printed specimen of the Romani language. Boorde's lost 'Boke of Berdes' appeared at about the same time, and satirist Milton Barnes, through whose work we can detect Boorde's, retorted that Boorde blamed his own drunken stench on his facial hair (Barnes, 'Treatyse Answering the Book of Berdes', 1543). Boorde's 'A Breviary of Health', a self-help book of remedies and preventives gleaned from his travels, followed in 1547. Written in a popular and confident style, the 'Breviary' suggests oil of radish for ringing in the ears, green ginger for indigestion, and garlic for worms. Boorde returned to England later in 1547 to guide the 'Dyetary', the 'Breviary', and the 'Introduction' through publication. It is likely that he lived for a while in the house of the master of the hospital of St Giles-in-the-Fields. Barnes acknowledged, however grudgingly, that Boorde had many patients in London. 
Boorde took up residence in Winchester. Charged by John Ponet, later bishop of Winchester, with keeping three prostitutes in his chamber Boorde was put in Fleet prison in 1547; his old patrons dead or powerless, Boorde did not leave prison alive. His will was drawn up in the Fleet on 9 April 1549 and was proved on 25 April. He left two houses in Lynn given to him by Recorder Conysby; tenements in Pevensey, Sussex, that he had inherited from his brother; and diverse properties in and around Winchester. No record exists about his burial. 


@@@@@


doc= 2871


Booth, Abraham (1734-1806), Particular Baptist minister and author, was born at Blackwell, near Alfreton, Derbyshire, on 20 May 1734, the son of Robert Booth ('bap'. 1700) and Elizabeth Bradley. While an infant his parents moved to Annesley Woodhouse, Nottinghamshire, where his father had taken a small farm as a tenant of the duke of Portland. As the eldest of a large family he assisted them until his sixteenth year, during which time he was never at school for longer than six months, but on leaving farm labour for the stocking-frame trade he was able to support himself and get some further elementary education. On reaching his twenty-fourth year he married Elizabeth Bowmar (died 'c'.1804), a farmer's daughter, and soon afterwards he opened a school at Sutton in Ashfield, Nottinghamshire. 
Early in life the preaching of some evangelical General Baptists awakened in Booth a sense of religion, and in 1755 he was baptized by immersion and began preaching in the east midlands. In 1760 he became superintendent of the Kirkby Woodhouse congregation, but declined to be their pastor. Up to this point he had been a strenuous advocate of Arminian doctrines and, when twenty years old, had written a poem on 'Absolute Predestination', but he now changed his views to the Calvinistic doctrines held by the Particular Baptists, and accordingly seceded. This change took place at the same time as he was in contact with ministers from the Northamptonshire Association such as Sutcliff, Fuller, Ryland, and the younger Hall. Soon after he began to preach on Sundays at Sutton in Ashfield, Chesterfield, and other east midland towns and villages, and kept his school, which was his only source of income, during the rest of the week. At this period he composed 'The Reign of Grace' (1768; 2nd edn, 1771). Henry Venn, author of the 'Complete Duty of Man', read this work in manuscript and as a consequence travelled to Nottinghamshire to see him, a meeting which resulted in a lifelong friendship. Venn wrote the prefaces to both the first and second editions. Soon after its publication, the Particular Baptist church of Little Prescot Street, Goodman's Fields, London, invited Booth to be their pastor. He accepted the call and was ordained on 16 February 1769. 
In 1770 Booth published 'The Death of Legal Hope, the Life of Evangelical Obedience' as a supplement to 'The Reign of Grace', which was directed against the extremes of Arminianism and antinomianism. Theologically he was closer to the hyper-Calvinists than to Andrew Fuller, the leading Particular Baptist theologian of the day, whom he accused of abandoning true Calvinism. The hyper-Calvinists adhered to a theological system that emphasized the sovereignty of God in the work of salvation, yet ignored or denied man's responsibility. He was nevertheless a fervent and loyal supporter of the Baptist Missionary Society, one of the few London ministers to be so. He was active also in believing the gospel contained a complete warrant for the ungodly to believe in Jesus Christ, and this was the theme of his 'Glad Tidings to Perishing Sinners' (1796). A strong opponent of infant baptism and open communion, his 'Paedobaptism Examined' (1784), written as an answer to the posthumous work of the celebrated Matthew Henry, brought him into conflict with Edward Williams (1750-1813). 
Booth died in London on 27 January 1806 aged seventy-one, having been a minister for fifty years. He was buried in the Maze Pond church burial-ground, London, and a marble tablet was erected to his memory in the Little Prescot Street church. His wife had died about four years before him, and he was survived by several children. Booth was a man of strong muscular frame and of sound constitution, whose private life was distinguished by purity and kindness. A female member of his church once left him a handsome legacy but, on finding that there were poor relations of hers still living, he went to the Bank of England and transferred the whole amount to them. Unostentatious and a man of simple tastes, he hated flattery and deceit. He was a firm believer in religious liberty, though somewhat dogmatic in stating his own view, particularly in later years. His early experiences gave him a sound understanding of men and affairs, but his eager mind was always handicapped by his lack of real education. This gave him a concern for ministerial education, which in turn led to the formation of the Baptist Education Society in 1804. This interest he pursued vigorously with help from William Newman, the pastor of a church in Bow, and two of his own deacons, William Taylor and Joseph Gutteridge. After his death the Education Society became the Stepney Academy and, later still, moved to Oxford, where it became Regent's Park College. 


@@@@@


doc= 2872


Booth, Barton (1681-1733), actor, was the youngest of the three sons of John Booth, a Lancashire squire and a member of the extended family of the earls of Warrington. His family moved to London in 1684 after their estate became impaired. He was sent to Westminster School, then under the headmastership of Dr Richard Busby, where he developed a taste for both poetry and performance. He made his first acting appearance there as Pamphilus in a school production of Terence's 'Andria'. Although arrangements had been made for him to attend Trinity College, Cambridge, in order later to pursue a clerical career, Booth instead sought to join the acting profession. Following an unsuccessful application to Thomas Betterton at the playhouse in Lincoln's Inn Fields, in June 1698 he set off to Dublin to act for Joseph Ashbury at the Smock Alley Theatre. He gave his first professional performance there, in 'blackface' as Oroonoko, earning himself 5 guineas. This initial success ensured his engagement for the 1698-9 season in Dublin, and he was entrusted with key roles in three of George Etherege's comedies: 'The Comical Revenge', 'The Man of Mode', and 'She Would if she Could'. 
Booth was back in London in 1700 and, with a letter of introduction from Lord Fitzhardinge and the recommendation of the actor John Boman (or Bowman), was accepted by Betterton at Lincoln's Inn Fields. He gave his first performance there late in 1700 as Maximus in John Fletcher's 'Valentinian', and was sufficiently impressive to be offered that December the role of Artaban in the first play by his former schoolfriend Nicholas Rowe, 'The Ambitious Stepmother'. In January 1701 he appeared as Gratiano in Lord Lansdowne's 'The Jew of Venice', typical of the secondary roles he was to continue playing for the next decade. In 1704 he married Frances (died 1710), the second daughter of Sir William Barkham, third baronet, of Norfolk. 
Betterton moved to the newly erected Queen's Theatre in the Haymarket on 17 April 1705, taking Booth with him. Booth continued to play supporting characters, but slowly developed a firm reputation for serious roles. His annual salary of $100 was not as substantial as those paid to his seniors, Betterton, Robert Wilks, John Mills, and George Powell; his talents were clearly being ignored by Wilks, who had considerable say in the casting of productions and who would invariably favour his friend, the less capable John Mills. However, Booth was an ambitious and hard-working actor; his persistence paid off, winning him better roles over the years, including Hotspur in '1 Henry IV' and Laertes in 'Hamlet', both in 1707. The company moved during the 1707-8 season to Christopher Rich's Drury Lane Theatre, where Booth appeared for the first time as the Ghost in 'Hamlet', a role in which he was considered to be unrivalled. This was to be a key step in building his reputation as a formidable player of weighty and tragic roles. 
The lord chamberlain closed Drury Lane in June 1709 following actors' complaints that Rich maintained a tyrannical regime there. It opened again for the 1709-10 season with Aaron Hill as manager, and with Booth as its leading player, giving performances as Othello, Brutus in 'Julius Caesar', Valentine in William Congreve's 'Love for Love', and Horatio in 'Hamlet'. The change in management, however, had not brought an end to the turbulence of the theatre's internal politics, and the actors complained that Hill did not involve them enough in casting decisions. When Hill withdrew a joint management agreement involving eight actors, including Booth, the season was brought to a close with an effective mutiny. With Hill out of London, a group of actors led by Booth, Powell, Theophilus Keene, and John Bickerstaff refused to take to the stage and threatened to make off with a collection of costumes. The situation turned nasty, and ended with a sword being held to Hill's throat. Booth and his fellow rebels were suspended until the end of the season. Repercussions from the incident perhaps manifested themselves during 1710-11, when Booth had to revert to playing some of his secondary roles and to sharing leads with Powell. At the end of this season Booth regained status under the new management of Colley Cibber, Wilks, and Thomas Doggett. 
Booth's performance on 17 March 1712 as Pyrrhus in Ambrose Philips's 'The Distressed Mother' was much lauded. His achievement was consolidated a year later by his original portrayal of the title role in Joseph Addison's 'Cato' (14 April 1713); the critical and financial success of this production brought him to the forefront of his profession, establishing him firmly as an actor of significance, and also served to further his ambition to be admitted to the management of the theatre. A letter to the lord chamberlain (dated 16 December 1712), and the patronage of Lord Bolingbroke, resulted in Cibber, Wilks, and Doggett's receiving the command of Queen Anne to share the management with Booth, causing no small resentment. Booth's key position at the theatre, coupled with his recent accolades, gave him the chance to tackle roles he had long coveted. In the following seasons he gave performances as Timon of Athens, King Lear, Banquo in 'Macbeth', Jaffier in Thomas Otway's 'Venice Preserv'd', Bajazet in Rowe's 'Tamerlane', and Melantius in Beaumont and Fletcher's 'The Maid's Tragedy'. He was also an able poet, and published his masque 'The Death of Dido' following its performance with music by John Christopher Pepusch at Drury Lane on 17 April 1716. 
Booth married his second wife, the actress and dancer Hester Santlow ['see 'Booth, Hester (c.1690-1773)], on 3 August 1719, at Chipping Ongar, Essex. They enjoyed a successful, loving marriage; his poems on her were affectionate, and in his will he named her as the sole inheritor of his estate. She, in turn, erected a memorial to him in Westminster Abbey forty-five years after his death. There were no children of either marriage. 
Though past his prime, Booth continued treading the boards, adding only occasionally to his repertory, for example, with Anthony in John Dryden's 'All for Love' and Fainfall in Congreve's 'The Way of the World' in 1718. He continued to work hard and regularly, but was often said to perform without any true conviction unless his enthusiasm could be sufficiently mustered. He worked at a steady and reliable pace throughout the 1720s, burdened somewhat by his administrative duties, until September 1726, when he suffered a fever that lasted forty-six days. This effectively kept him from the stage until January 1727. The following season he was to play the part of Julio in Lewis Theobald's 'The Double Falsehood', but was taken ill on the opening night (13 December 1727) and had to be replaced by his understudy. He managed to resume his role on the fifth night, but after his performance on 9 January 1728 Booth walked off the stage for the last time, conceding to an illness which was eventually diagnosed as jaundice. 
Booth spent the rest of his life in pursuit of good health. In 1728 he stayed for three months in Bath and a further three weeks in Belgium in search of medical cure and advice. He died back in London, at his home, 4 Charles Square, Covent Garden, on 10 May 1733, following six months of recurring colic and a foolish attempt at a cure which prescribed the daily ingestion of mercury. He was buried, according to his wishes, at the parish church of St Laurence, Cowley, near Uxbridge, on 17 May 1733. 
As an actor Booth earned the admiration of his contemporaries. Thomas Davies said he was 'an actor of genius' (Davies, 279), and Theophilus Cibber considered him to have a natural talent, praised his voice and articulation, and commented warmly on his ability in roles of dignity and majesty, particularly Hotspur and Lothario. Aaron Hill spoke of his 'gestures', of his 'particular grace', his 'elegant negligence', and his 'talent of discovering the passions where they lay hid in some celebrated parts by the injudicious practice of other actors' (Russell, 56). 


@@@@@


doc= 2873


Booth, Benjamin (fl. 1746-1789), haberdasher and writer on bookkeeping, originated in New England and was born before 1746, possibly the son of Benjamin and grandson of Ebenezer Booth (died 1732), of Stratford, Massachusetts. He began work as a clerk in a New York store about 1759, eventually becoming chief clerk, when he first implemented his own bookkeeping system. He subsequently conducted his own haberdashery business for several years, until, apparently, the outbreak of the War of Independence brought it to a close. 
Booth then moved to England, where he advertised that he had been in business in New York for thirty years. He endeavoured to publicize his system, which he considered superior to those in general use, by means of his book, 'A complete system of bookkeeping... by an improved mode of double entry... [with]... a new method of stating factorage accounts, adapted particularly to the trade of the British colonies' published in London in 1789. The sample invoices shown in the book revealed both humour and literary interest, citing imaginary dealings with Lemuel Gulliver, Peter Pindar, and Tristram Shandy. John Ramsay McCulloch listed Booth's book in his 'Literature of Political Economy' (1845), with the erroneous date of 1799 (McCulloch, 139). 
No further details of Booth's life are known and he may have returned to America after the book was published. No record of his death has been found. 


@@@@@


doc= 2874


Booth, Catherine (1829-1890), evangelist and writer, was born on 17 January 1829 at Ashbourne, Derbyshire, the fourth of five children. Only she and her younger brother, John, survived. Her father, John Mumford (1804-1879), was a coach builder and wheelwright, and for some years a Wesleyan Methodist lay preacher. Her mother, Sarah Milward Mumford (1802-1869), was a devout Methodist. Catherine Mumford was educated by her mother and soon came to share her mother's serious faith. By the time she was twelve she had read the 'Bible' from cover to cover eight times, as well as works by John Wesley, John William Fletcher, and Charles Finney. She spent much of her childhood at home, partly because she suffered from a curvature of the spine and consumption but also because her mother feared that she would meet others who might not share her serious religious convictions. Catherine Mumford's childhood was marked by her father's difficulties. John Mumford broke with the Methodists and took to drink in the early 1840s. His subsequent irregular employment caused his family considerable economic difficulty. The Mumfords' only son emigrated to America in 1849 and occasional references in letters between Catherine and Mrs Mumford make clear that he did not share their religious convictions. 
The Mumfords moved to the London area in 1845 and settled in Brixton. Catherine Mumford was a member of the Wesleyan chapel until her ticket of membership was denied over a controversy within the connection. She was loosely associated with a group of Methodists expelled during the 'fly sheets' controversy of 1849. This group sought both greater connectional democracy and openness and the pursuit of a more zealous, evangelistic faith. Catherine began to attend services with the Reformers. She soon met William Booth (1829-1912), a pawnbroker's assistant and lay preacher already noticed for his energy and devotion. Catherine and William were engaged to be married in 1852. 
From 1852 to 1855 Catherine Mumford continued to live in Brixton with her mother. She taught Sunday school, read widely, and assisted her mother with lodgers and other efforts to make ends meet. She carried on an extensive correspondence with her fiance (now in the British Library manuscripts collection). William began his career in ministry. After several years as a circuit preacher for the Reformers and a short period studying with the Independents, he joined the Methodist New Connexion in 1854 and began to study and preach in preparation for ordination. On 16 June 1855 Catherine and William Booth were married at Stockwell New Chapel in London by an Independent minister, the Revd David Thomas. For the next two years William worked as an itinerant evangelist for the Methodist New Connexion. A regular circuit was the usual assignment, but the Connexion regarded William Booth as an especially gifted evangelist. The Booths were deeply committed to revivalist work in the tradition of Americans James Caughey and Charles Finney, and they were very happy with the success of William's labours. Catherine's first child, (William) Bramwell Booth (1856-1929), was born in 1856 and the baby accompanied them on their travels. 
In 1857 William was assigned to his first Methodist New Connexion circuit at Brighouse, Yorkshire, and Catherine gave birth to her second child, Ballington. In 1858 William was ordained and assigned to Gateshead, where the Booths remained until 1860. They were a great success and more than doubled the congregation. Catherine gave birth to two more children, another Catherine in 1858 ['see 'Clibborn, Catherine Booth-] and Emma in 1860. During these years she also published an influential pamphlet on female ministry and began her own preaching career. Her pamphlet was occasioned by the 1859 evangelistic tour of England by the American holiness speaker and writer Mrs Phoebe Palmer (1807-1874). During her tour the Revd A. A. Rees, minister of the Bethesda Free Church in Sunderland, wrote a pamphlet, 'Reasons for not Cooperating in the Alleged 'Sunderland Revivals'', to encourage others to shun Palmer's meetings. Rees asserted that the injunctions of St Paul against female teaching were universal and women were to remain in private under subjugation to men. Catherine then realized her long-standing ambition to write about female preaching. Her pamphlet, 'Female teaching, or, The Rev. A. A. Rees versus Mrs Palmer, being a reply to the above gentleman on the Sunderland revival', was published in December 1859, just days before the birth of her daughter Emma. 
Catherine's argument rested on what she termed a common-sense reading of scripture. Passages were considered in light of the particular verse as well as within the context of the chapter and the whole 'Bible'. The historical context was also considered. She argued, for example, that Paul's command 'let your women keep silence in the church' was a charge to the women of Corinth, not to women in all times and places, and it should therefore be read with an earlier passage in which Paul directed women to cover their heads when they prayed or prophesied. She also pointed to the women preachers and prophets in the 'Old' and 'New' testaments, and the passage in Joel; 'your sons and daughters shall prophesy'. Her pamphlet was not hermeneutically original. She drew heavily on the writing of the Methodist Adam Clarke and other nonconformist theologians. Her argument was significant, however, because she made no distinctions between a man's and a woman's call to preach. She argued that any woman called to ministry had the 'right to preach' without any 'man-made restrictions'. She did not believe women's preaching heralded the last days, like many nineteenth-century prophetic figures, nor did she claim women to be the weak, the foolish, or the low. Rather, she asserted that the church must be committed to vigorous soul-saving and that women were essential to that mission. This argument distinguished her from most of her contemporaries, who thought women could preach only with an extraordinary call and when their authority did not extend to other areas of church life. Her pamphlet was widely read and a second edition was printed in 1861. It was substantially revised and reprinted by the Salvation Army in 1870 as 'Female Ministry, or, Women's Right to Preach the Gospel', then much reprinted, anthologized, and quoted. 
In 1857 Catherine began to speak in public, addressing female temperance audiences and Band of Hope meetings. She also began to speak on occasional Sundays after her husband's sermon. In 1860 this work became a necessity when her husband fell ill and left Gateshead to recover at a clinic. She took his place in the pulpit while continuing to run her household and care for her four children. She wrote to her husband, 'I must try to posses my soul in patience and do all in the kitchen as well as in the Pulpit to the Glory of God' (C. Booth to W. Booth [1860], BL, Add. MS 64802, fol. 145). This unusual circumstance was accepted by the Connexion and the chapel and her preaching was both acclaimed and condemned in the local press. One newspaper claimed she wore her husband's clothes when she preached. She enjoyed preaching and wrote to her mother, 'I felt quite at home on the platform -- far more than I do in the kitchen' (C. Booth to parents, 23 Dec 1857, BL, Add. MS 64804, fol. 63). 
In 1861 the Booths left the Methodist New Connexion when the conference refused to consider William's request to devote all his time to evangelism and assigned him to a regular circuit. The Booths began a series of independent revivals in Cornwall, Wales, the midlands, and the north over the following four years. Their work met with resistance from Methodists and other nonconformists. Some objected to itinerant evangelists, particularly to the Booths' revivalism, while others forbade female preaching. Still, during these years the Booths established a number of significant connections across the country that were important to the development of the Salvation Army. Catherine became a prominent independent preacher and received many invitations to address congregations. Their son Herbert was born in 1862 and daughter Marion in 1864. In February 1865 Catherine was invited to conduct a revival for the Free Methodists in London. In July William joined her in London and began to preach in the East End, with the support of the editors of the evangelical weekly newspaper 'The Revival'. London offered both a wide range of opportunities for evangelistic work for the Booths and a settled home for their family, and they decided to remain there. Catherine gave birth to her seventh child, Eva, later called Evangeline, in December 1865['see 'Booth, Evangeline Cory]. She continued to work as an independent revivalist, speaking in chapels and halls in London and elsewhere. Her last child, Lucy, was born in 1868. In 1865 William established the East London Christian Mission. He preached in the streets and in rented halls with the assistance of a number of well-established London evangelicals. Catherine's work supported her family during these early years and also raised funds to support the Mission, although the financial position of neither her family nor the Mission was ever secure. 
The Mission adopted a structure of class meetings, circuits, and annual conferences loosely based on the Methodists. Catherine served on the several committees, attended the annual conferences, and preached frequently at Mission meetings. The Christian Mission grew to seventy-two mission stations in England and Wales by 1879 and it employed 127 evangelists. That year it transformed its structure and adopted a new name, the Salvation Army. This structure gave William Booth, as general superintendent for life, authority over the Mission's property and budget, and the power to establish and close mission stations and to hire and appoint evangelists. Uniforms were adopted, a series of ranks, each with its own duties and responsibilities, was developed, and military vocabulary was coined to describe the work. The Army soon opened corps in Europe and throughout the British empire. 
Catherine Booth never held an official title but came to be known as the Army Mother. Her influence was felt in the Army's theology and practice, particularly in relation to women. Holiness was crucial to the Salvation Army's theology, and Catherine wrote and preached extensively on this doctrine. Holiness theologians taught that all believers must renounce sin, and that when infused with the Holy Spirit their hearts, minds, and wills would become the very likeness of God. Holiness was the most important requirement for office in the Salvation Army. This doctrine allowed for women's enhanced authority, because women and men could equally attain it, and the significance of other differences between men and women was therefore diminished. The Salvation Army institutionalized women's right to preach the gospel and thousands of women were local corps officers, divisional officers, and leaders in the Salvation Army's social services beginning in the mid-1880s. Catherine was the most important force in establishing women's position in the Army and a powerful example to the Army's new converts. She frequently addressed Salvation Army meetings and large audiences in halls throughout Great Britain and published extensively in Salvationist newspapers. 
The prominence of Catherine Booth and other Salvationist women distinguished the Army from most other Victorian Christian denominations. Many Christians insisted that women's preaching was unscriptural and brought women out of their rightful private sphere. It was considered by many a particular disgrace for a mother to appear in public and encourage other young women. Others admired Catherine Booth's preaching. The 'Primitive Methodist Quarterly Review' (new ser., 7, 1885, 441) declared that she 'combined a facility of speech, a profound acquaintanceship with the spiritual power of the Cross and a knowledge of the subtle movements of the heart'. 
In addition to preaching Mrs Booth was the author of many books, including 'Practical Religion' (1878), 'Aggressive Christianity' (1880), 'Holiness' (1881), 'Mrs Booth on Recent Criticisms of the Salvation Army' (1882), 'The Salvation Army in Relation to Church and State' (1883), and 'Popular Christianity' (1887), all published by the Salvation Army. She was active in the social purity campaigns -- against prostitution and other vice -- of the 1880s and, along with other leading Salvationists, was involved in W. T. Stead's 1885 crusade to raise the age of consent. 
Catherine Booth was diagnosed with breast cancer in 1888 and in that year she ceased all public activity. She died on 4 October 1890 in Clacton. Over 30,000 people lined the streets of London to watch her funeral procession on 14 October, and she was buried in Abney Park cemetery, London. The 'Bible Christian Magazine' called her the 'most famous and influential Christian woman of the generation', and the London and provincial press eulogized her as a preacher, writer, and social purity activist. 


@@@@@


doc= 2875


Booth, David (1766-1846), lexicographer and writer, was born at Kinnettles, Forfarshire, on 9 February 1766. He was almost entirely self-taught, the whole amount paid by his father for his instruction being 18died for one quarter at the parish school. In early life he was engaged in business, and for some years was manager of a brewery at Woodside, near Newburgh, Fife. Although the undertaking was not unsuccessful, his intellectual interests and love of literature led him to retire from it to become a schoolmaster at Newburgh. 
Shortly before 1820 Booth moved to London, where, besides his involvement in general literary work, for several years he saw through the press the publications of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge (SDUK). In 1818 he published 'Tables of Simple Interest on a New Plan of Arrangement', and in 1821 'The tradesman, merchant, and accountant's assistant, being tables for business in general on a new plan of arrangement'. He also turned to account his practical knowledge of brewing by writing for the SDUK 'The Art of Brewing' (1829) and 'The art of wine-making in all its branches, to which is added an appendix concerning cider and perry' (1834). The latter volume contains a description of the brewer's saccharometer, a device to which he had added a considerable number of refinements. 
In 1806 Booth had published 'An Introduction to an Analytical Dictionary of the English Language'. He was unable for some years to proceed further with the work, and the first volume of the dictionary, the only one published, appeared in 1830. Its special characteristics, as stated on the title-page, are that: 'the words are explained in the order of their natural affinity, independent of alphabetical arrangement; and the signification of each is traced from its etymology, the present meaning being accounted for when it differs from its former acceptation: the whole exhibiting, in one continual narrative, the origin, history, and modern usage of the existing vocabulary of the English tongue.' An idea of Booth's idiosyncratic method of arrangement, which is not easy to follow, may be gathered from the following list of the first twelve words in their order of succession: microcosm, man, wife, woman, male, female, masculine, feminine, human, baron, virility, virtue. In its reductive ideas on etymology and word relationship Booth's work, like that of his contemporary Charles Richardson, shows the unfortunate influence of Horne Tooke, but lacking Richardson's mass of quotations had less value and little influence. 
In 1831 Booth published 'Principles of English Composition', chapters 2-4 being reprinted from the 'Introduction to an Analytical Dictionary', and in 1837 'Principles of English Grammar'. His other works include 'Observations on the English Jury Laws in Criminal Cases' (1833), strongly condemnatory of the 'unanimous verdict' system; 'A letter to Rev. T. R. Malthus, being an answer to his criticism of Mr. Godwin's work on population' (1823); and 'Eura and Zephyra, a Classical Tale, with Poetical Pieces' (1832). Dr Robert Blakey, who met Booth in October 1832 in Bloomsbury, recorded: 'He is one of the most extraordinary personages I have met for some time. He is not, I believe, five feet high, of very dark visage, eyes very red and watery, and presenting altogether an impish look'. Blakey accepted Booth's invitation to have tea with him, and was somewhat shocked by his system 'of complete scepticism' and his arguments against the Christian religion ('Memoirs', 75-7). 
Booth received a grant of $50 from the Royal Bounty Fund, and was also assisted by the Literary Fund Society. He died at the house of his son-in-law, Mr J. G. Stuart, at Balgonie Mills, Fife, on 5 December 1846. He left a widow, one son, and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 2876


Booth, Sir Felix, first baronet (1775-1850), distiller and promoter of Arctic exploration, was the youngest son of Philip Booth, a distiller of 55 Turnmill Street, Clerkenwell, London, and his wife, Elizabeth Wallis, who had in all three sons and three daughters. Felix was the most energetic and able of his family, many of whom were distillers and wine merchants in London. When he entered the business he rebuilt the existing Clerkenwell distillery, built a second at Brentford, and took over other brewing and distilling concerns. Eventually he became the owner of the biggest distilling business in England, making principally gin, but also cognac, at his Regent's Park distillery. He used his considerable wealth to enter other businesses, such as gas lighting and banking. 
Booth became interested in polar exploration, particularly the search for the north-west passage, and was a close friend of the explorer John Ross. Ross was unable to get official support to search for the north-west passage after the controversy and ill feeling which attended his earlier expedition and alleged discovery of mountains which were found to have been a mirage. He turned for financial backing to Booth, who initially declined to help, fearing that he would be thought to have been motivated by the government reward offered for the discovery of the passage. In 1828, however, the government offer was withdrawn and Booth, on condition of secrecy, provided $17,000, which largely financed Ross's expedition in the 'Victory' (1829-33). During the four years the ship was away Booth anonymously sent weekly allowances to the sailors' wives. Ross's party finally returned to great acclaim. The north-west passage remained undiscovered, but they had surveyed very considerable areas and discovered the magnetic pole. Ross immortalized Booth in many land and sea features, such as the Gulf of Boothia, Felix Harbour, and Cape Felix. Sheriff's Harbour commemorated Booth's election in 1828 as sheriff of London and Middlesex, and other place names commemorated his sisters and his country houses. Booth's involvement in the voyage was made public, and he was rewarded with election to the fellowship of the Royal Society and on 27 March 1835 with a baronetcy. 
In 1850 Booth helped finance John Ross's last voyage, when in the 'Felix' he went unsuccessfully in search of Franklin. On 25 January the same year Booth died very suddenly, probably of a heart attack, at the Royal York Hotel, Brighton, Sussex. He was buried in the family vault at the church in Stanstead Abbots, Hertfordshire. As he was unmarried and childless his title passed to his nephew J. Williamson Booth. The title is now extinct. Booth's gin is still widely drunk, but the company is no longer in family ownership. 


@@@@@


doc= 2877


Booth, George, first Baron Delamer (1622-1684), politician, was born on 18 December 1622, the second son of William Booth (died 1636), and his wife, Vere (died 1629), third daughter and coheir of Sir Thomas Egerton, son of Viscount Brackley, lord chancellor of England. He was descended from a younger branch of the Booths of Barton, Lancashire, which since 1433 had been settled at Dunham Massey, Cheshire. When his father died in 1636 Booth became the ward of his grandfather Sir George Booth, first baronet. He was educated at the Inner Temple in 1637. Booth is said to have quarrelled with his guardian late in 1639 or early in 1640, and to have fled to France. The quarrel had something to do with Booth's marriage on 30 November 1639 to Lady Katherine (died 1643), daughter of Theophilus Clinton, fourth earl of Lincoln -- a union which produced a daughter. 
By the outbreak of the civil war Booth had returned to England and followed his grandfather in being one of the chief supporters of the parliamentary party in Cheshire. Thereafter, they were also in the van of the opposition to the putative parliamentarian leader in the county, Sir William Brereton. The Booths were 'more moderate religiously and politically' than Brereton (Dore, 14). Booth's wife, Lady Katherine, was buried at Bowdon, Chester, on 5 August 1643 and, by a licence of 14 December 1644, Booth cemented his position within the parliamentarian elite by marrying Lady Elizabeth (1621/2-1691), daughter of Henry Grey, first earl of Stamford. They had seven sons, two of whom died before Booth, and five daughters. Early in 1645 Booth was in London spreading anti-Brereton propaganda, and attempting to promote a petition against him in parliament in April. By the autumn of that year he was back in Cheshire taking a leading part in the siege of Chester. In 1646 he resigned his commission as a colonel in the Cheshire forces and was recruited to the county's vacant parliamentary seat, thanks largely to canvassing on his behalf by his grandfather, and probably in an attempt to counter Brereton's influence at Westminster. It was certainly suspected that Brereton, if he could, would obstruct Booth's election. 
Booth was secluded at the purge in December 1648, his way into the Commons chamber barred on the 7th by soldiers under the direct instruction of his brother-in-law Thomas Grey, Lord Grey of Groby. Booth signed a protest got up by several of his fellow sufferers that day, explaining to his Cheshire constituents that he and they had been kept out of the Commons because they had 'stickled for the privilege of Parliament, and restoration of their members, then in hold, the day before' (Underdown, 152). On his grandfather's death on 24 October 1652, Booth succeeded to the baronetcy. He sat for Cheshire in the first Cromwellian parliament in 1654, and was appointed to head the new militia commission in Cheshire established in the aftermath of John Penruddock's royalist revolt, and in anticipation of the settlement of the major-generals. However, suspicions arose that he had actually been intended as the commander of an insurrection in Cheshire and north Wales in 1655, and in 1656 he was excluded from taking his seat at Westminster in the second protectorate parliament. 
In September 1658 General George Monck recommended to the new protector, Richard Cromwell, that he trust in Sir George Booth and men like him, in order to reassure and encourage the conservative gentry that the objective of 'healing and settling' the nation was still a priority, and that religious zealots would receive short shrift. Booth was subsequently returned to sit for Lancashire in the parliament which met in 1659 (having succeeded as lord of the manor of Warrington at the death of his father in 1636). On account of his grandfather's memory, Booth was, according to Clarendon, 'of absolute power with the presbyterians' (Helms, Hampson, and Henning). When the rump of the Long Parliament was restored later in 1659 Booth was chosen one of the committee of fourteen who were appointed by the members secluded in 1648 to attempt to obtain readmittance. After their repulse he joined the plot for an armed insurrection, receiving a commission from Charles II to command in Lancashire, Cheshire, and north Wales. The acquisition of arms and ammunition was conducted under cover of supposed fears of some kind of popular uprising, the possibility of which may have been lent some substance by John Bradshaw's victory at the polls in Cheshire in 1658 with the tumultuous support of freeholders and Quakers, a victory which repudiated utterly the social and electoral dominance of traditional elites in the region. However, the plot of 1659 failed at least partly because moderates were fearful of 'his Majesty's restoration by tumult', in the earl of Manchester's words (Underdown, 351). 
Booth was the only would-be insurgent who enjoyed any success. On 5 August 1659, totally ignorant of how matters had gone in other parts of the country, Booth, along with the earl of Derby, Colonel Egerton, and others, at the head of four thousand men, seized the city of Chester, where they were shortly joined by Sir Thomas Middleton from Wales. A proclamation was issued from which the name of the king was omitted, but asserting 'the freedom of parliament, of the known laws, liberty and property, and of the good people of this kingdom, groaning under uncomfortable taxes' ('DNB'). Leaving a sufficient force to besiege Chester Castle, which held out against them, Booth and Middleton split up, the latter heading for south Wales, while Booth marched towards York. 'En route' he learned of the disaster which had befallen the planned general rising, and that Major-General John Lambert was marching for Cheshire to extinguish the solitary spark of revolt. The two forces clashed at Northwich on 19 August. The skirmish was not bloody, but it was wholly decisive. Booth fled, and at some point on his way to London, whence he hoped to take ship for the continent, he put on female clothing. The disguise was penetrated at Newport Pagnell on 24 August, whereupon Booth was apprehended and conveyed to the Tower. He was interrogated by Sir Arthur Hesilrige and Sir Henry Vane the younger, then was retained to be dealt with by the council of state. He was set at liberty on bail of $5000 shortly after the readmission to the Commons of the secluded members in February 1660. In March he was restored to the Cheshire militia commission. 
That spring Booth was elected, probably unopposed, to represent the same county in the Convention Parliament. He was the first of the twelve members chosen on 7 May 1660 to convey to Charles II the reply of the Commons to the declaration of Breda. Marked as a friend on Lord Wharton's list he was teller for the majority which voted that no more than twenty offenders should be excepted from the 'Bill for Indemnity and Oblivion'. He opposed excepting Bulstrode Whitelocke from the provisions of the 'Indemnity Bill', personally submitted Oliver St John's plea for mercy, and spoke in favour of Sir Arthur Hesilrige and even his old foe, John Lambert. He also brought in two papers drawn up by his late brother-in-law, Thomas, Lord Grey of Groby, testifying to 'his penitence for his former being against the king' (Helms, Hampson, and Henning), and persuaded the house to remove him from the list of those denied the benefit of the bill, presumably in order to save Groby's estate from forfeiture. On 30 July, 'as a mark of respect for his eminent services and great sufferings for the public' (ibid.), the Convention granted Booth $10,000 out of excise revenues, which he offered to forgo in return for passage of a bill he had introduced that day permitting him to lease and sell lands in order that he might clear debts and provide portions for his younger children. The house evidently declined, the Lords' concurrence to the proposed gift was obtained, and order given to the excise commissioners that they make payment accordingly. In the second session of the Convention, Booth told for the minority who supported giving a second reading to the bill for establishment of a modified episcopacy. 
On 20 April 1661 Booth was raised to the peerage as Lord Delamer, one of six barons created at the coronation of Charles II. He was apparently also granted the liberty of nominating six gentlemen for knighthoods, and he was made 'custos rotulorum' of Cheshire. Reward for his services in promoting the Stuart restoration could not, however, ensure his loyalty to the new regime. Having supported in 1660 the case for cleansing episcopacy of its Laudian, high-church imperfections, Delamer came increasingly to distrust elements of the Restoration ecclesiastical settlement. In an undated letter to the Anglican Lord Bruce, probably written about the time of the debates on the 'Conventicle Bill' in 1664, Delamer begged him to be 'merciful to us Presbiterians and at least give us leave to play innocently at bowls' (Swatland, 148). As the reign wore on and the cause of comprehension slowly died he was probably among those presbyterian peers who came to favour toleration. Delamer was also suspicious of the parameters within which the royal prerogative began to reassert itself in the immediate aftermath of Restoration. He appears to have believed that restraint on the import of Irish cattle, contrary to the wishes of the king and the lord lieutenant, was a matter of the utmost importance for 'the good of England' (Seaward, 297), although his economic self-interest was plainly involved at a time of depressed rent receipts and a decline in the profitability of farming. 
By the time of Lord Treasurer Danby's ministry in the mid-1670s Delamer was firmly in the country party camp, and in 1677 was sympathetic to the duke of Buckingham's attempt, which was opposed by the court as encroaching on the royal prerogative, to secure the dissolution of the Cavalier Parliament. His opposition to government interests carried over during the exclusion crisis, during which he was one of the adverse or whig party in the Lords. In December 1679 he was one of the sixteen peers who signed and presented a petition to the king urging that he summon parliament to meet the following month, in an attempt to keep the threat of the Popish Plot firmly in the public eye, and hence sustain the pressure for the exclusion of the Catholic duke of York from the succession. He voted for the second 'Exclusion Bill' in November 1680. 
Delamer died at Dunham Massey on 8 August 1684, and was buried on 9 September at Bowdon in Cheshire. Lady Elizabeth survived him -- she died on 4 January 1691. Delamer was succeeded by his son Henry Booth, the future first earl of Warrington. 


@@@@@


doc= 2878


Booth, George, second earl of Warrington (1675-1758), writer on divorce, second son of Henry Booth, first earl of Warrington (1652-1694), and his wife, Mary (1652-1691), daughter of Sir James Langham of Cottesbrooke, Northamptonshire, was born on 2 May 1675 at Merehall, Cheshire. His elder brother having died young, George inherited the family estates centred on Dunham Massey, Cheshire, on his father's death in 1694. He found the estate heavily in debt and in bad repair. Warrington attributed this to his family's support for the protestant cause, and the generous portions allotted in his father's will to his sisters and younger brothers. The strain of these bequests on the estate finances led Warrington to try to suppress the will, but his siblings challenged him in the House of Lords and a trust was set up to pay the portions. The situation was compounded because his mother's marriage portion of $20,000 was never paid in full. In 1698 after his mother's death he brought a chancery suit for the recovery of the rest of his mother's portion against his grandfather. Although an out-of-court settlement was agreed the sum was never paid in full. 
Warrington's aim on inheriting the estate was to clear it of debt. He could do this by borrowing money, selling land, or making a good marriage. Indebtedness was against his principles so part of the estate was sold and a search started for a rich bride. His name was linked with a Welsh heiress possessing $4000 per annum, and with Madam Offley, the daughter of Lord Crew, but in 1701 his uncle George Booth negotiated a marriage settlement between Warrington and Mary Oldbury (died 1740) the eldest daughter of John Oldbury, a London merchant. Her fortune was rumoured to be $40,000 but was in reality $24,000. They married in 1702. 
The marriage was not felicitous. Warrington accused his wife of financial profligacy, and contemporaries noted their incompatibility. After the birth of their only child, Mary (1704-1772), the couple lived in the same house but apart, and in 1739 Warrington published an anonymous pamphlet, 'Considerations upon the Institution of Marriage'. The pamphlet advocated allowing divorce on the ground of incompatibility of temper. The obligations of a marriage contract in a landed family included the assurance that in the event of a wife's outliving her husband, her widow's jointure would be the first call on the estate. This particularly exercised Warrington although it did not happen in his case; his wife died the following year. Through Warrington's efforts the estate was put back on to a sound financial footing, and the family home at Dunham Massey was remodelled in the 1730s. Another pamphlet by Warrington, 'Letter to the writer of the 'Present state of the republic of letters'', vindicated his father against reflections against him in Burnet's 'History of our Time', claiming that his debts were due to his imprisonment for high treason after the Monmouth rebellion. Although a conscientious whig, Warrington was not above taking a bribe from the tory earl of Oxford to vote in favour of the 'Malt Tax Bill' in 1713. His growing cynicism with politics led to his withdrawal from political life, and the demise of the whig influence in Cheshire. 
Warrington died at Dunham Massey on 2 August 1758 and was buried at Bowdon, Cheshire. His daughter married Henry Grey, fourth earl of Stamford, and the Dunham Massey estate passed to the Grey family. 


@@@@@


doc= 2879


Booth, George (1791-1859), Latin scholar, was born on 12 November 1791 at Masborough House, Rotherham, the youngest son of William Booth of Ecclesfield. After attending Eton he went to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1809, but left because of poor health. He moved to Lincoln College, Oxford, in 1811, and took his BA in 1813 and his MA in 1816. In 1823 he was created bachelor of divinity. He was ordained deacon as curate of Nether Hoyland, in the diocese of York, in 1815, and priest the following year. In 1816 Booth was elected to a fellowship of Magdalen College, Oxford, which he retained until 1834, and was made vice-president of the college in 1830, and dean of divinity in 1832. In 1833 he became vicar of Findon, Sussex, a post he held until his death, which occurred at Findon on 21 June 1859. He was married; his wife's name was Mary Ann. He was an accomplished Latin scholar and wrote two volumes of Latin verse, 'Nugae canorae', which he published pseudonymously as Etoniensis in 1826, and 'Sicut lilium' (1854), a collection of choral songs. His other works include essays on Eton and the national debt. 


@@@@@


doc= 2880


Booth, Henry, first earl of Warrington (1652-1694), politician, was born on 13 January 1652, probably at Dunham Massey Hall, Cheshire. He was the eldest surviving son of George Booth, second baronet and first Baron Delamer (1622-1684), politician and military leader, and Lady Elizabeth Grey (1621/2-1691), his second wife and the eldest daughter of Henry, first earl of Stamford. One of a dozen children Booth became heir apparent to the barony upon the death of his older brother William in 1662. He was well educated in preparation for the responsibilities of family and position he would assume, but he matriculated neither at Cambridge nor Oxford, nor was he admitted to one of the inns of court as his father had been. Booth succeeded to the title of Baron Delamer [Delamere] on 8 August 1684, the name by which he was best known both to contemporaries and subsequent students of history, and was created earl of Warrington on 17 April 1690. 
On 7 July 1670 Booth married Mary Langham (1652-1691), the only child to survive from the several marriages of Sir James Langham, second baronet, of Cottesbrooke, Northamptonshire; Mary was the niece of Sarah Seymour, duchess of Somerset. The ceremony took place at St Helen's, Bishopsgate, London, a reflection of the long-standing Langham business interests and political ties in the city. Mary had also been baptized there, on 10 March 1653; she died on 23 March 1691 and was buried in the Booth family vault at Bowdon, Cheshire. Their first born son, James, died an infant. The surviving children included three other sons -- George Booth, later the second earl, Langham, and Henry, and two daughters -- Elizabeth and Mary. 
Booth's public career began in 1673 at the age of twenty-one when his father resigned as 'custos rotulorum' for Cheshire in his favour. The task of presiding over the commission of the peace was combined in many counties with the traditional military duties of the lord lieutenant, but since the lieutenancies of both Cheshire and Lancashire were firmly in the grasp of the earl of Derby, the separation of functions in the former had provided Charles II with a convenient way to recognize the very considerable influence of the Booths without giving substantial offence to the Stanleys. It was a position that Henry Booth learned to use to good advantage as a vehicle for advancing both personal and public goals. Among surviving examples of the charges he delivered to grand juries at the opening of quarter sessions are forceful pleas for the reformation of manners -- he inveighs frequently against 'Swearing and Drinking' and 'the Horrible Profanation of God's name' -- as well as cogent analyses of various national issues from a decidedly whig point of view. There is in these speeches, as well as in a number of essays he penned, evidence of a widely read man of strong intellect. They also give clear evidence of his presbyterian upbringing, although he himself conformed to the externals of Anglican practice, and of a degree of self-righteousness that has discomforted historians from Burnet to Macaulay. 
In a 1678 by-election Booth was returned unopposed to the House of Commons as a member for Cheshire and as an open and ardent opponent of the court. He was then re-elected to all three Exclusion parliaments, the first two times apparently without contest and to the Oxford parliament with an overwhelming majority despite some local effort to stay the whig juggernaut. While in the Commons, Booth advocated frequent meetings of parliament and spoke out strongly against those members of the lower house who accepted pensions or other perquisites from the king -- a stand that would come back to haunt him after the revolution of 1688 when he joined those on the receiving end of such favours. He also agitated for reform of the judiciary. In particular he singled out for stinging criticism Sir George Jeffreys, then (1680) chief justice of Chester, accusing him of heavy drinking, dereliction of duty and generally behaving 'himself more like a Jack-Pudding, than with that gravity that beseems a Judge' (Booth, 143). An early and passionate supporter of exclusion Booth took the position that the duke of York had no absolute right to the crown given the fact that the succession had been altered in the past when circumstances necessitated. As political passions mounted, however, he was careful to temper his rhetoric in an effort to reassure the county community that he was not trying to undermine the institution of monarchy and to quiet fears 'That 80, & 81 is become 40, & 41' (Booth, 627). 
Even after the dissolution of the Oxford parliament Booth continued to offend in Stuart eyes. He was, for instance, one of a half dozen individuals prominently identified in the entourage that accompanied the duke of Monmouth on a trip into the north-west in the summer of 1682 likened by some to a royal progress. Then he directed the Cheshire grand jury at the October quarter sessions not to indict protestant dissenters on the grounds that the applicable Elizabethan legislation had really been enacted only for use against Catholics. By the end of the year Booth was removed as 'custos rotulorum' and from the commission of the peace, and with the discovery of the Rye House plot in the summer of 1683 he suddenly found himself taken up with a dozen or more other radical whig activists, including lords Grey, Lovelace, and Russell, and imprisoned in the Tower of London on a charge of treason. In his case Charles II was particularly suspicious, perhaps because the rising that Booth's father had led in 1659 -- royalist in inspiration though it was -- still lingered in memory as an example of the family's ability to command a significant popular following especially among protestant nonconformists. In any event Booth was closely examined by the privy council, and Dunham Massey Hall was carefully searched, as were the homes of surrounding tenants on the theory that weaponry might already have been put in their hands. Several months later he was finally released on bail since nothing could be proved against him. 
His father having died the year before, Booth took his seat in the House of Lords as second Baron Delamer when parliament assembled shortly after James II ascended the throne in 1685. Then in July, while a prorogation was in effect, he was again arrested on a charge of high treason. Suspected of complicity in the Monmouth rebellion, he was essentially held incommunicado and without formal indictment for several months on the government's expectation that sufficient evidence would come to hand to warrant a trial and secure the conviction he had managed to side-step two years earlier. In truth, Delamer had been incautious in his contacts with agents of the duke of Monmouth, but there is no reliable evidence that he was actually prepared to take up arms even though several individuals were ready to implicate him in order to save their own necks. In any event, there followed some complicated legal manoeuvring. First Delamer petitioned the House of Lords to consider the grounds for his incarceration, arguing that it was a violation of his privilege as a peer and member of parliament. Despite efforts by both the earl of Devonshire and the marquess of Halifax to interest the upper house in the question, the matter was swept aside by a vote to adjourn that brought the session to an end. Delamer next sought and briefly secured his freedom under the terms of the 'Habeas Corpus Act'. He was soon back in the Tower, however, this time with a bill of particulars specified and a trial date set for 14 January 1686. 
Because parliament was not in session jurisdiction in this case fell to a special court presided over by a lord high steward appointed for the occasion by the crown and the lord triers, a panel of peers acting as a jury. The intent, obviously, was to make an example of Delamer. Lord Jeffreys -- Delamer's Cheshire 'jack-pudding' of 1680 and now the most powerful judge in the land -- was put in charge of the proceedings and he, in turn, picked a jury of thirty, of whom Macaulay reports fifteen were commanders of regiments who held their jobs at pleasure, another fifteen were court dependants, and all thirty were tories by political conviction. Heneage Finch, solicitor-general, did his best to make a case for conviction but was able to produce only one direct witness, whose testimony was doubtful at best, and circumstantial evidence that Delamer rebutted with relative ease. At the end of the trial, one by one, each of the twenty-seven lord triers then present declared him not guilty, although Ailesbury reported that the earl of Peterborough, groom of the stole, whispered into the ear of his neighbour just afterwards, 'Guilty by God' ('Memoirs', 1.135). In fact, the case became something of a 'cause celebre' that caught the attention of the entire political spectrum from Lady Rachel Russell, widow of the whig martyr, to a high-church Oxford tory like Anthony Wood who spent 2's'. 6died to buy a copy of the pamphlet describing the trial. Certainly Wood and most other loyalists would have agreed with Peterborough's private view of the matter; but the patent unfairness of the proceeding, the trammelling of aristocratic privilege, and perhaps some element of disquiet growing out of the savage revenge visited upon even the most humble followers of Monmouth combined to save Delamer from the axe. 
Within the week Delamer was admitted to kiss the king's hand and to be lectured about his future conduct. Thereafter he dropped out of sight for the next few years, except when he agreed in 1687 (with others) to stand surety for the earl of Devonshire who was forced to give the king a bond for $30,000 as a guarantee of good behaviour. Although the circumstances of the case were vastly different, to Delamer it was another instance in which privilege of parliament was being unfairly denied to the accused. Certainly Delamer's name appears on the various lists of peers opposed to James II and his policies drawn up during this period, but he was not admitted to the carefully orchestrated contacts and correspondence that ultimately led to the dispatch of the invitation to William of Orange at the end of June 1688. During that summer, however, he was finally brought into the conspiracy, and evidence survives of meetings with the earl of Devonshire and the bishop of London as plans were developed for risings centred on Nottingham and York to coincide with William's expected arrival along the northern coast. Although he worried about the fate of his family, particularly because the children were so young, Delamer was absolutely confident in his decision to participate. He subsequently elaborated on his reasons for engaging, but at bottom strong religious conviction, pride of class, and a well-developed sense of personal grievance were the key motivators. 
While the prince of Orange's descent at Torbay temporarily disrupted the plans of the northern conspirators, Delamer was in motion within less than a week, rallying friends and political associates among the Cheshire gentry and then reaching out for support from his tenantry and others willing to take up arms. Certainly he and the earl of Devonshire and, in turn, Devonshire and the earl of Danby, had to settle on a new timetable for action. But while the others moved cautiously at first Delamer was absolutely forthright about his intentions. On paper and then publicly at Manchester and on Bowdon Downs, where volunteers had been directed to assemble, he declared openly for William rather than taking cover under a call for a free parliament and, as well, made no secret of the planned rendezvous at Nottingham or of the names of the other principals associated in the project. Delamer understood the psychology of the situation. He fully expected that news of his taking up arms would encourage others to do likewise and that it would also complicate planning in London about how to deal with the larger situation at hand. Had there been a body of reliable troops available the force Delamer assembled might easily have been dispersed. However, he and the earl of Derby, recently restored to the lieutenancies of both Cheshire and Lancashire, had agreed that the latter would sit on his hands; and the one band of regular soldiers Delamer encountered at Manchester, a troop under the command of his neighbour Captain Richard Leigh, had yet to receive a supply of arms and, in fact, proved fertile recruiting ground for the rebel side. 
On 18 November, Delamer and a few hundred mounted followers rode out from Bowdon Downs, going first to Newcastle under Lyme and then to Derby before reaching Nottingham on the 21st. Newsletters of the day quickly spread word about Delamer's movements, some of them embellishing their reports with tales of plunder, Catholic chapels despoiled, and other violations of the rules of knight errantry. One concluded with some accuracy that 'of all the men that have appeared in Armes & declared for the P[rince] none have done more zealously than those who began the Dance in Cheshire who gather weight like a Snow-Ball' (BL, Add. MS 4194, fol. 426). In fact, a basic difference in strategy if not in ultimate goals became quickly apparent after Delamer arrived at Nottingham. He remained intent on marching south to join William almost immediately, while the earl of Devonshire wanted to play a more cautious game and wait for other associates to come in and for additional troops to be raised and organized. Even the matter of securing agreement about the terms of a public declaration was apparently problematic, with the document that finally appeared focusing on a catalogue of grievances and looking to a freely elected parliament as the sole remedy to the national dilemma. The prince of Orange was not even mentioned, although at the Saturday market just before he left the city, Delamer remedied that lack with a crowd pleasing speech that emphasized the hand of providence in William's arrival to save protestantism and traditional English liberties. 
Delamer's departure on 25 November brought with it a switch of partners. Lord Cholmondeley who had accompanied him from Cheshire stayed behind while the earl of Stamford, one of the first peers to join Devonshire, left with his cousin and long-time political associate. They took with them a troop of about 300 horse and set out to the west and then south -- through Derby, Lichfield, Worcester, and Tewkesbury -- on a line of march intended to avoid contact with any royal forces. Reaching Gloucester at the end of the month Delamer and Stamford freed Lord Lovelace from the castle where he had been held under arrest since making his own abortive attempt to reach the prince. They then moved on to Bristol and remained there until directed by William to join him at Hungerford on 7 December, by which time the focus of attention had shifted rapidly from the military to the political arena. The immediate and pressing problem was what to do about James II now that he had retreated from the contest, and Delamer numbered among the nineteen peers William summoned to consider the question at a meeting at Windsor ten days later. Joined by Lord Mordant, his cousin Stamford, and the earl of Shrewsbury, Delamer urged incarceration in the Tower, a plan the majority of the group wisely eschewed in favour of simply encouraging the king to flee England. That was advice William found to his liking, and he selected Delamer, Halifax, and Shrewsbury to deliver the message, a task by subsequent report that Delamer handled with greater sensitivity than might have been expected. Thereafter, however, he became an outspoken supporter of declaring the throne vacant. As Clarendon records in his diary for 31 January 1689: 'Lord Delamer said, it was long since he thought himself absolved from his allegiance to King James; that he owed him none and never would pay him any; and if King James came again, he was resolved to fight against him, and would die single with his sword in his hand, rather than pay him any obedience. (Singer, 2.257)' 

Whatever good feelings Delamer had about the beginning of the reign of William and Mary soon dissipated, despite substantial rewards recognizing his role in bringing them to the throne. Almost immediately (14 February 1689) he was made a member of the privy council, and later that spring he was appointed chancellor of the exchequer (28 March 1689) and one of the commissioners of the Treasury (5 April 1689). William also restored him to the position of 'custos rotulorum' of Cheshire and named him to the lieutenancy, a step taken with some reluctance perhaps because of the bitter quarrel that had erupted between Delamer and the earl of Derby about the latter's failure to act more forcefully during the revolution, but an appointment on which Delamer insisted saying 'he would not value all the K[ing] could give him, except hee might have that' (Foxcroft, 2.209). Other tokens of favour and emoluments followed, including long-term leases on former Jesuit properties in several counties, but appointment to one of the great offices of state eluded him, and Delamer soon came to feel that his advice on major issues confronting the government was ignored. For William, too, the working relationship was less than successful. Tory influence had increased substantially in the parliament elected to replace the Convention, and he needed financial managers able to persuade parliament to pay the bills for his military campaigns and other needs. Accordingly, Delamer and his two whig associates at the Treasury, Henry Capel and the earl of Monmouth, were all removed from their posts in the spring of 1690. To soften the blow Delamer was created earl of Warrington on 17 April of the same year and granted a pension of $2000 payable annually, but frequently paid in arrears. 
The decision to push Delamer to the sidelines was wise, given his temperament. 'Actuated with a sense of Honour and Justice, not afraid to declare his Opinion, not willing to conceal his Sentiments, which he seldom found reason to alter', even his eulogist felt constrained to allude to his inflexibility, a rigidity of character simply unsuited for a major governmental post (Wroe, 19). However, Macaulay's characterization of him: 'A restless malecontent even when preferred' (Macaulay, 3.1797), misses the essence of the man and, rather unfairly, relies on the satirical and Jacobite inspired depiction of Delamer in Arthur Mainwaring's poem, 'King of Hearts' (1690), from which the line is taken. The truth is that he was something of a throwback to an old-fashioned puritanism. It made him a very difficult man to deal with at close quarters; but it fed a public personality that many protestant dissenters and those to whom the label puritan low-churchmen has been applied found powerfully attractive. It was also the vein he tapped into when he returned to Cheshire in triumph as lord lieutenant in the early summer of 1689, escorted on his way out of London by as many as 500 horse; but at the same time it represented a view of the world that simply did not fit in the delicate balance of party politics that emerged after the revolution. As a consequence Warrington figured ever less importantly in that history, although he continued active in both local politics and parliament. Then late in 1693 he caught a cold at the Middle Temple Hall while listening to legal arguments growing out of a dispute between two peers. Characteristically, he insisted on continuing to attend sessions at the House of Lords, developed a fever and died in London, probably of pneumonia, on 2 January following. He was buried in the family vault at Bowdon twelve days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 2881


Booth, Henry (1789-1869), railway projector and manager, was born at 34 Rodney Street, Liverpool, on 4 April 1789, the son of Thomas Booth (1749-1832), a corn merchant, and his wife, Esther, 'nee' Noble (died 1826), of Lancaster. He was privately educated at the Revd Shepherd's boarding-school, Gateacre, near Liverpool, and then employed in his father's office, before going into business on his own account as a corn merchant, but with no great success. On 27 August 1812 he married Ellen Crompton (1789-1871), eldest daughter of Abraham Crompton of Chorley Hall; they had three daughters and one son. In 1822 a committee of Liverpool merchants was established to promote the construction of a railway between Liverpool and Manchester. Thomas Booth was a member of the committee, and Henry became an early supporter of the scheme, visiting the Stockton and Darlington Railway in 1824, and organizing and writing in support of the Liverpool and Manchester line. His energy, his administrative abilities, and his gift for public relations were quickly recognized by the committee; he became a member and was appointed secretary after his father stood down in 1824. It was Henry Booth who wrote the Liverpool and Manchester Railway's lengthy and detailed prospectus, dated 29 October 1829, which was the company's first major public announcement. In early 1825 a bill for the construction of the railway came before parliament. It was thrown out after a costly struggle. In the following year a second bill was introduced, and was carried, and Booth was appointed company secretary and treasurer at $500 a year, and as effective managing director of the railway, took an active part in the construction of the line, which was begun in June 1826 and finished in 1830. 
Booth was a consistent supporter of George Stephenson as principal engineer of the line, and an enthusiastic promoter of the use of steam locomotive power on the railway, in opposition to those directors who favoured horse-drawn vehicles or stationary steam engines. When the board of directors announced the holding of a series of competitive trials at Rainhill to test the capabilities of different locomotives, Booth and Robert Stephenson jointly constructed and entered the successful 'Rocket'. Booth certainly had a remarkable mechanical talent; he suggested the multitubular boiler, which gave a very large and effective heating surface, increasing the locomotive's efficiency; he also invented the first screw coupling, sprung buffers, and an artificial lubricant for carriage axles. 
In August 1845 the Liverpool and Manchester was absorbed into the Grand Junction Railway, for which Booth served as secretary for a year, until it in turn became part of the London and North Western Railway (LNWR) in 1846. Booth was appointed secretary for the northern section of the LNWR, and in October 1848 he became a director. He retired from office on 18 May 1859, after being presented with 5000 guineas by the company as a token of gratitude for valuable and faithful service. He spent the remainder of his life in his native town, where for some years he acted as a borough magistrate. 
In religion Booth was a Unitarian, and in politics a moderate Liberal. Contemporary accounts of him give the impression of a grave, reserved, reticent man, utterly dependable and trustworthy, rigorously honest, and a thorough and indefatigable worker. He was a tireless writer and pamphleteer for much of his life, publishing books, papers, and articles on technical and scientific subjects, social questions, taxation, politics, and the economy. His 'Account of the Liverpool and Manchester Railway' (1830) remains an indispensable starting point for serious study of the early history of that line. His works on politics, notably 'A Reformed Parliament' (1833), reflect his moderate Liberalism, and his studies of economic questions, most importantly 'Free Trade as it Affects the People' (1833), express his firm but pragmatic belief in 'laissez-faire' principles. As a prominent railway manager later in life he was not a dogmatic opponent of government regulation of the railways -- in which his brother James Booth (1796/7-1880) was involved -- but defended them against what he saw as unfair financial burdens, particularly in the case of the compensation payments they were required to make to the victims of railway accidents under 'Lord Campbell's Act' of 1846; 'A Letter to Lord Campbell on the 9th and 10th Vict., Cap. 93' (1854) is an important summary of the railway companies' position on this issue. He died at his residence, Eastbourne, Lodge Lane, Princes Park, Liverpool, on 28 March 1869, and was buried on 1 April at Toxteth Chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 2882


Booth, James Charles (bap. 1703, d. 1778), lawyer, was baptized on 6 November 1703 at the church of St Germain-en-Laye, the eldest son of Charles Booth (1666/7-1740), army officer and Jacobite courtier, and Barbara Symes. His godfather was James Stuart (James III), Jacobite claimant to the throne, whom Charles Booth served as groom of the bedchamber having followed James II into exile. Three of James Booth's brothers became Jesuit priests, but James was sent to Magdalen College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 14 July 1722 before enrolling at the Middle Temple, London, on 28 November 1722. In order to obtain this education Booth identified himself as the son of James Booth of Theobalds, Hertfordshire, an act that has subsequently misled historians concerning his true family and background. Booth later took chambers in Lincoln's Inn and acquired a licence to practise as a conveyancer, and soon gained a considerable amount of business. 
On the death of Nathaniel Pigott, the most eminent conveyancer of his day, and also a Roman Catholic, Booth succeeded to this position. His conveyances enjoyed the highest possible repute in the profession, and being often copied and used as precedents by lesser practitioners, they set the fashion in conveyancing for a great part of the eighteenth century. In one respect, however, they contrasted very unfavourably with those of his predecessor Pigott. Whereas Pigott's deeds had been models of conciseness, Booth's were remarkably prolix. This, while merely inconvenient to his wealthy clients, occasioned unnecessary expense to those whose advisers needlessly followed his example. He wrote no treatise on the subject, nor did he publish a collection of precedents, but his written opinions circulated within the profession, and several were printed. His knowledge of the 1536 Statute of Uses, a fundamental plank of his professional skill, was profound. He was said to have been consulted by the duke of Cumberland as to whether he could recover a legacy left to him by his father, George II, the new king having torn up the will, and to have advised that 'a king of England has by the common law no power of bequeathing personal property' (Polson, 2.84). He is also said to have drafted George III's will. He was for some years a friend of Lord Mansfield. 
On 2 July 1748 at St Anne and St Agnes, Aldersgate, London, he married Mary, daughter of the politician John Sharp and Anna Maria Hosier, and granddaughter of Archbishop John Sharp. The marriage was not a success and the couple separated, though both are named in property deeds in Herefordshire in 1777 (Herefordshire RO, BB2/63/284-5). A descendant of a Herefordshire Catholic family, and related to Charles Booth (died 1535), bishop of Hereford (Cooke, 3.11-12), Booth purchased an estate in the county at Whitfield, Kingstone, where he built a house. In later years Booth suffered considerably from cataracts. He died at Old Boswell's Court, Strand, London, on 15 January 1778 and was buried in East Barnet, Hertfordshire, on 21 January. He was survived by his wife. 


