@@@@@


doc= 28377


Wade, George (1673-1748), army officer and road builder, was the third son of Jerome Wade of Kilavally, co. Westmeath, whose father, William Wade, had served as a major under Cromwell. Wade's first commission, dated 26 December 1690, was as ensign in Captain Richard Trevanion's company of the earl of Bath's regiment. At that time the regiment was based in the Channel Islands, but in spring 1691 it transferred to Flanders as William III concentrated his troops to confront Louis XIV in the Low Countries. On 24 July / 3 August 1692 Wade's regiment participated in the bloody action at Steenkerke, and helped to cover the retreat of the Anglo-Dutch army; it subsequently joined the attack upon the Lines of Lys in July 1693. Wade rose rapidly within his regiment during this period of active service and heavy casualties: he was promoted lieutenant on 10 February 1693, captain-lieutenant in what was now Sir Bevil Granville's regiment on 19 April 1694, and on 13 June 1695 gained the captaincy of the elite grenadier company. 
Wade returned to England after the treaty of Ryswick, but when a fresh war with France erupted in 1702, his corps revisited the familiar battlefields of Flanders. The regiment was once again heavily engaged, fighting at Nijmegen and during the sieges of Kaiserswerth, Venloo, and Ruremond. In the autumn of 1702 Captain Wade served at the siege of Liege where his grenadiers distinguished themselves by storming the citadel, reckoned to be one of the region's strongest fortifications. In March 1703 Wade was promoted major, and in August of the same year served at the siege and capture of Huy; that October he succeeded to the lieutenant-colonelcy of his regiment. Having established his reputation during a decade of fighting in Flanders, Wade now volunteered for service with the British contingent bound for Portugal under the earl of Galway. Galway's influence gained Wade the staff appointment of adjutant-general, with the brevet rank of colonel, on 27 August 1704. In the spring of 1705 Galway laid siege to the frontier town of Valencia d'Alcantara, which was captured by assault on 27 April / 8 May. Officers slain during the attack included Robert Duncanson, colonel of the regiment later numbered the 33rd foot, and the vacant colonelcy was bestowed on Wade. In April 1706 Wade was wounded at the siege of Alcantara but continued to serve on Galway's staff, accompanying the allied forces on their triumphal entry into Madrid on 16/27 June. After remaining at the capital for more than a month, Galway's army retreated to Valencia. Wade's combat leadership was once again apparent in the fighting withdrawal; with two infantry battalions he repulsed a superior force of cavalry at Vila Nova. When the allied army was defeated by Bourbon troops under the duke of Berwick at Almanza on 14/25 April 1707, Wade emerged from the disaster with an enhanced reputation: he commanded the 3rd brigade of British infantry which encountered fierce fighting and suffered accordingly. Wade none the less evaded capture to join Galway at Alcira, and was sent to England with dispatches. On 1 January 1708 Wade was promoted brigadier-general in the British army, and returned to Spain in the spring. 
Wade's record as a competent and courageous officer led to his selection as second in command to General James Stanhope in the expedition to Minorca which sailed from Barcelona in September 1708. At the siege of Fort St Philip, the strongpoint guarding the harbour of Port Mahon, Wade led one of the storming parties, captured the outer defences, and subsequently negotiated the fort's capitulation. The entire island soon after submitted, to become a valuable British base in the Mediterranean. Wade was granted the honour of returning home with the news of Minorca's reduction; in 1709 he received a flattering letter from 'Charles III', the allies' candidate for the Spanish throne, and the rank of major-general while serving in Spain. Wade returned to Portugal, remaining there until 1710, when he rejoined Stanhope in Spain and was given the command of a brigade of infantry. On 9/20 August Wade participated in the overwhelming victory over the forces of Philip V at Saragossa; the battle avenged Almanza, but failed to stave off ultimate allied defeat in the dismal Peninsular campaign. 
Wade was sent home for reinforcements and in 1711 was serving in England on the subcommittee of the board of general officers. With the accession of George I, Wade's prospects improved dramatically. He was promoted major-general on 3 October 1714, and a month later was appointed commander of the forces in Ireland. It is unclear whether Wade actually took up his new post. A staunch whig, he was returned to parliament for Hindon, Wiltshire, on 25 January 1715. When rebellion broke out later that year, Wade was placed at the head of two regiments of dragoons and sent to overawe the potential Jacobite stronghold of Bath. The veteran Wade proved an effective enforcer for the Hanoverian regime; his efforts unearthed eleven chests of weapons and ammunition, four artillery pieces, and moulds to cast more -- an impressive haul which indicated that the west country Jacobites enjoyed the potential, if not the inclination, for insurrection. Wade soon consolidated his reputation for counter-insurgency work; two years later he was instrumental in foiling a Jacobite conspiracy to purchase military assistance from Sweden. The intrigue centred upon Charles XII's ambassador, Count Gyllenborg. It was Wade who led the troops responsible for arresting the count, searching his house, and securing incriminating papers. Wade's zeal did not go unrecognized: on 19 March 1717 George I gave him the colonelcy of the regiment that subsequently became the 3rd dragoon guards. When Spanish support for the Jacobite rising in Scotland prompted a British reprisal against Vigo in September 1719, Wade was appointed second in command to Richard Temple, Viscount Cobham. The expedition proved a complete success. Vigo surrendered, and in October Pontevedra was taken by Wade, who destroyed the arsenal after salvaging the most valuable armaments and munitions. 
In 1722 Wade was elected MP for Bath and continued to represent the borough until his death. He established an impregnable political position in the city; indeed in 1734 he achieved the unequalled feat of polling all thirty votes. The general's dominance stemmed from several factors -- the personal prestige acquired during his anti-Jacobite investigations of 1715, a philanthropic concern for local causes, and his alliance with the city's powerful postmaster and quarry owner, Ralph Allen, 'the man of Bath'; the frequently quoted story that Allen married Wade's illegitimate daughter appears to be a myth. 
Wade's record as a vigorous soldier with an aptitude for intelligence work may have influenced his appointment in 1724 to reconnoitre the Scottish highlands and observe their strength and resources. Wade found the district in 'a state of Anarchy and Confusion' (Allardyce, 1.137). Blood feuds, blackmail, and cattle rustling were rife; more worryingly for national security, efforts to disarm the highlands in the wake of the 'Fifteen had proved so ineffective that the pro-Jacobite clans were now better equipped for rebellion than ever before. Wade's report of 1724, and a scheme presented to George I in the following year, recommended a programme of reforms to redress the situation: these included establishing companies of loyal highlanders capable of policing the rugged region; improving communications; building new barracks; and repairing existing fortresses. These proposals gained Wade the post of commander of the forces in north Britain, an appointment he held until 1740. While 'en route' to the highlands in the summer of 1725, he was obliged to quell disturbances in Glasgow, where attempts to enforce the malt tax had triggered serious rioting; he concentrated sufficient troops to arrest the ringleaders and restore order. In the highlands Wade's measures were implemented with considerable success: in a second report, made to George II in 1727, he described how the 'Disarming [of] the Highlands was happily Executed without Resistance or Bloodshed' (ibid., 159). The general's improvements included the construction of a road stretching 60 miles from Inverness to Fort William through the heart of the highlands; he believed that further 'military ways' would provide crucial links with troops in the lowlands, so discouraging future uprisings. In the decade after 1725 Wade's 'highwaymen' -- gangs of soldiers given double pay for their labours -- toiled to build more than 240 miles of road, and some thirty bridges, including the spectacular five-arch crossing of the Tay at Aberfeldy. Wade's road-making programme was a remarkable feat of civil engineering, yet its strategic role proved ambiguous: ironically the general's fine roads merely served to expedite the movements of the Jacobite forces in 1745-6. 
During his sojourn in Scotland Wade continued to accumulate honours. He was promoted lieutenant-general on 7 March 1727, and when three regiments of dragoons were raised that summer to reinforce the troops in Scotland Wade gained the colonelcy of one of them. In 1732 he was awarded the sinecure government of Berwick and Holy Island, followed in 1733 by appointment to the governorships of forts William, Augustus, and George. On 2 July 1739 Wade was promoted general of horse, and in 1742 was sworn of the privy council and became lieutenant-general of the ordnance. 
These honours were crowned on 14 December 1743 when Wade received a field marshal's baton and command of the British forces in Flanders. The appointment followed the resignation of the earl of Stair; for Wade, who had never before commanded an army in the field, it was to prove a poisoned chalice. His return to Flanders yielded no victories to set beside those of his youth; indeed, in the opinion of one modern commentator the operations of 1744 proved 'one of the dingiest campaigns ever waged by British arms and nourished by British gold' (Whitworth, 84). Wade's contingent was required to co-operate with the Austrian and Dutch forces under the duc d'Aremberg and the prince of Nassau. Ranged against these uneasy allies was a powerful French army commanded by the most able general of the day, Maurice de Saxe. When the allies finally took the field in May 1744 they lacked both unified command and common objectives. Saxe reacted with decision: within weeks the French reduced Menin, Ypres, and Furnes. In July, when Prince Charles of Lorraine invaded Alsace, so obliging Louis XV to divert troops from Flanders, George II urged Wade to exploit the situation by mounting an offensive. An advance towards Lille was eventually organized, but subsequently stalled amid logistical problems and acrimonious councils of war. In October Wade made a successful application for leave to return to England. The field marshal had provided a convenient scapegoat for the allies' dismal showing: in fairness to Wade, who was now aged over seventy and in poor health, his performance had been hampered by obstructive colleagues and the unsettling interference of Lord Stair. Accepting Wade's resignation in March 1745, the secretary of state, Lord Harrington, assured him that George II expressed 'the most perfect Satisfaction' in his services (Parker, 114). The king demonstrated his continuing confidence in Wade by appointing him commander-in-chief in England. 
On the outbreak of the Jacobite rising in Scotland Wade headed the military committee responsible for deciding the government's response to the crisis. It was agreed that Wade should march north with thirteen battalions of foot, including a large contingent of foreign troops. By the end of October 1745 Wade's force had arrived at Newcastle upon Tyne, which was considered the most likely objective for the army of Charles Edward Stuart, the Young Pretender. Contrary to expectations, the Jacobites side-stepped Wade, opting for a western route to Carlisle, which they besieged. At Newcastle Wade faced problems controlling his heterogeneous command, half of which consisted of unenthusiastic Swiss and Dutch auxiliaries. When he finally began his march on 16 November it was already too late: his sickly and dispirited troops made slow progress over bad roads in appalling weather conditions. Encountering heavy snow, Wade's jaded men slogged on as far as Hexham, only to learn that Carlisle had already fallen. After a day of rest Wade and his army retraced their laborious steps, arriving back in Newcastle on 22 November. Wade had retired in the belief that the Jacobites would not risk a further advance into England; once again he was proved wrong as they proceeded unopposed into Lancashire. By the end of the month the duke of Cumberland had been ordered to counter the threat; he was to co-ordinate operations with Wade, but if the two armies met, the duke would assume command. Cumberland was alarmed by the field marshal's sluggish progress south and urged the duke of Newcastle to replace 'grandmother Wade' with a more dynamic general (McLynn, 123). Wade had failed to catch the swift-moving highland army on its southward march; more alarming was his inability to intercept the Jacobites on their subsequent retreat from Derby. Indeed, when Wade reached Wakefield on 10 December, he learned that the highlanders were at least three days ahead of him. Detaching his cavalry in the hope of blocking Prince Charles's route to Preston, Wade returned to Newcastle with the slow-moving infantry. 
Cumberland was appointed commander-in-chief for the coming pursuit of the Jacobite army into Scotland; Wade, who had already registered a plea that his age rendered him unfit for further campaigning, now retired from active service. In 1746 he presided over the court martial that considered the actions of Sir John Cope during the operations that culminated in disaster at Prestonpans; the tribunal exonerated Cope of any blame. Wade's own conduct of his final campaign prompted fierce contemporary criticism, and modern scholars have been scarcely less damning in their verdicts. The most careful account of the campaign finds it 'incredible' that Wade's 'extraordinarily lacklustre performance' did not lead to 'his' court martial (McLynn, 197). However, in Lord George Murray, Wade found himself pitted against an exceptionally gifted opponent who also outmanoeuvred Cumberland; in addition Wade's inability to maintain the momentum of a harsh winter campaign says more about George II's misguided penchant for superannuated generals than the deficiencies of a sickly 72-year-old who should have been enjoying a well-earned retirement. 
A competent brigadier, Wade lacked the ability to command an army in the field. In his prime he had none the less proved himself a brave soldier and diligent servant of the crown; these valuable qualities did not go unrecognized. Recording his death, one popular journal chose to forget his poor showing during 1744-5, instead emphasizing the faithful service through which 'he rose under four succeeding princes to the highest honours of his profession' ('GM', 139). Wade died on 14 March 1748 at his house in Abbey Churchyard, Bath, aged seventy-five and 'worth above 100,000 l' (ibid.). As the numerous surviving portraits of Wade testify, he was keen to perpetuate his own memory; by his will, dated 1 June 1747, he left $500 for a monument to himself in either Bath or Westminster Abbey. His memorial was erected at Westminster, where he was buried. The sculptor Roubiliac considered Wade's memorial to be 'his best work'; he wept upon observing that it had been placed too high to be appreciated. Unmarried, Wade left most of his substantial estate to his three children, George, John, and Jane; he also provided generously for the widow and children of his brother William, canon of Windsor, and his great-nephew William, probably William Wade (1734/5-1809), subsequently master of ceremonies at Bath. 


@@@@@


doc= 28378


Wade, John (1788-1875), radical author, was born in London, where he wrote his way out of obscurity. Nothing is known about his parents. Indeed, the only ascertainable fact about his early life was that he worked for over a decade as a journeyman wool-sorter. 
Wade embarked on a career in journalism with the encouragement of metropolitan radicals such as Francis Place. He started out by editing the short-lived, one-penny 'Gorgon' (1818-19), but is chiefly notable for his compilation of several versions of 'The Black Book, or, Corruption Unmasked!' (first published in cheap instalments in 1819, in book form the following year, then in a supplement in 1823, and in revised editions in 1831, 1832, and 1835), of which over 50,000 copies were sold. Its pages formed a far more accessible utilitarian critique of elite parasitism than anything to be found in the writings of his hero, Jeremy Bentham. The point behind this thick compendium was to draw attention to every conceivable abuse within the 'borough-mongering system'. Singling out the alleged depredations of church pluralists, government sinecurists, aristocratic pensioners, and virtually anyone else connected to the political power structure through money or interest, Wade sought to convince his readers that the only way to transform the central administration from a tax-plundering instrument of the well connected to an instrument of the people's will was through radical parliamentary reform. 
At first glance Wade seems to bear little resemblance to the greatest spokesmen for 'plebeian' radicalism in the years after Waterloo, William Cobbett and Henry Hunt. Indeed, he castigated them as demagogues. For their part, Cobbett and Hunt certainly did not share Wade's commitment to political economy, his Malthusianism, or his faith in the political virtue of the industrial middle classes. But all three were fixated on the ways in which a tax structure which had evolved over a quarter-century of virtually uninterrupted warfare had allegedly transferred vast sums of money from the pockets of the people to those of state parasites, and all three tended to exaggerate their plain-spoken allegations. Thus while there was a good deal of truth in Wade's charges of corruption, he often relied on outdated information in order to convey the impression that official 'abuses' cost the British taxpayer far more than they actually did. He simply ignored recent Pittite reforms of the administrative system, such as the reduction of sinecure offices and unmerited pensions, in order to cast the Pittites and their ilk in the worst possible light. 
While Wade's portrayal of the governing elite was not especially accurate, it was certainly influential; for it was strictly as a chronicler of war-related corruption that Wade was known to a truly broad audience. Thus one Durham observer lamented that the instalments of the 'Black Book' had an 'almost unlimited circulation' thanks to 'their cheapness, and the familiar style in which they are written'. Indeed, they were 'to be found', along with copies of T. J. Wooler's 'Black Dwarf', 'in the hat band of almost every pitman you meet' (J. Buddle to H. Philpotts, 25 Oct 1819, TNA: PRO, HO42/197, fol. 682). The legal authorities were concerned enough about the popularity of the cheap numbers of the 'Black Book' to briefly contemplate prosecuting some of them for seditious libel (Sir Robert Gifford and Sir John Singleton Copley to Lord Sidmouth, 31 July 1820, TNA: PRO, Treasury Solicitor's MSS, 11/155/473). 
Wade steered an easier course for the rest of his career because the political tide had moved in his direction. In his subsequent books and pamphlets, most notably the 'History of the Middle and Working Classes' (1833), 'British History, Chronologically Arranged' (1839), and 'Glances at the Times, and Reform Government' (1840), as well as in his leader writing for Robert Stephen Rintoul's 'Spectator', Wade advocated ideas which found a comfortable home below the gangway in the early Victorian House of Commons: gradual constitutional reform, free trade, and an informal alliance of the 'productive' classes against aristocratic drones. Indeed, the advocacy of such ideas became so inoffensive that in 1862 they won for the impecunious Wade, erstwhile assailant of the civil list, a $50 pension. He died at 5 Hans Terrace, Chelsea, on 29 September 1875, and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery on 2 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 28379


Wade, Joseph Augustine (1800/01-1845), composer, was born in Dublin. Earlier accounts usually gave his date of birth as about 1796, but the register of his death suggests that it was 1801. His father is said to have been a dairyman near Thomas Street, Dublin. He was a schoolfellow of Richard Robert Madden at Chaigneau's academy, Usher Street, Dublin, from about 1814 to 1816. Wade claimed to have been a student at Trinity College, Dublin, to have been a junior clerk in the Irish record office, and to have studied anatomy at the Irish College of Surgeons; but none of the records of these institutions bear any traces of his name, though in later years he may, with William Rooke, have found employment in the record office. Equal uncertainty surrounds his early musical education; he was probably self-taught. He left Dublin and about 1818 married a lady of fortune, a Miss Kelly of Garnaville, near Athlone, but he soon became tired of her. On his return to Dublin he is said to have acquired considerable skill as an anatomist and surgeon. Surgery was, however, soon abandoned, and Wade became a poet and musician, publishing, about 1818, 'A Series of Select Airs'. Sir John Andrew Stevenson, recognizing his great gift of melody, advised Wade to apply for the university chair of music, dormant since 1774 after the resignation of Lord Mornington, but the matter fell through. 
Wade migrated in 1821 to London, where he became conductor of the opera at the King's Theatre during Monck Mason's regime. His first significant success in London was his oratorio 'The Prophecy', from Pope's 'Messiah', which was produced at Covent Garden Theatre on 24 March 1824. His opera 'The Two Houses of Granada', of which he wrote both words and music, was first performed at Drury Lane on 31 October 1826, with John Braham as Don Carlos; two of its numbers, the duet 'I've wandered in dreams' and the song 'Love was Once a Little Boy', became popular favourites. In 1826 Wade composed and published his most successful song, a setting of his own text 'Meet me by moonlight alone', which enjoyed extraordinary popularity. It had the good fortune to be further immortalized by the witty Father Prout in 'Fraser's Magazine' (October 1834, 480), in a French poem: 'Viens au bosquet, ce soir, sans temoin, Dans le vallon, au clair de la lune'. Two further operas, 'The Convent Belles' (on which he collaborated with William Hawes), produced at the Adelphi on 8 July 1833, and 'The Pupil of da Vinci', given at St James's Theatre on 30 November 1839, made little impression. 
A man of remarkable gifts and acquirements as a writer of lyrics, a composer, a violinist, and a journalist witty and quick in perception, Wade became increasingly indolent and self-indulgent. He drank to excess, and latterly became an opium addict. For the last few years of his life he was largely forgotten. He did some editorial work for the music publishers Chappell & Co. at a salary of $300 a year, and in that capacity, with William Crotch and George Alexander Macfarren, he harmonized some of the airs of W. Chappell's 'Popular Music of the Olden Time', originally published in 1838 as 'A Collection of National English Airs'. From early 1829, for a while, he provided reviews of Italian opera in London for 'The Athenaeum', in which he showed his independence by chastising the other London critics for their disparagement of Rossini; he also contributed to 'Bentley's Miscellany' and the 'Illustrated London News', but he could never be relied upon. He compiled 'The Handbook for the Pianoforte' (1844), which he dedicated to Liszt, and apparently left a history of music in manuscript. He died penniless, in a state of mental derangement, at his lodgings, 450 (or 340) Strand, on 15 July 1845. His first forename appears in the death registers at Somerset House as Joseph (not John, as he sometimes signed himself), and his surname as Ward. His first wife having died childless, Wade lived with another woman, and at his death a subscription was raised for his presumed widow and her two destitute children. Wade's character may be best summarized in the words of the Revd John Richardson: 'A wise man in theory and a fool in practice. A vigorous intellect; planning everything, performing nothing. Always in difficulties, having the means at hand to extricate himself from their annoyance, yet too apathetic to arouse himself to an effort; content to dream away his time in any occupation but that which the requisitions of the occasion demanded.' 



@@@@@


doc= 28380


Wade, Nathaniel (d. 1718), lawyer and conspirator, was the third son of John Wade (d. in or before 1668?) of The Wicke, Arlingham, Gloucestershire, a Cromwellian army officer usually identified as the sometime governor of the Isle of Man during the protectorate. His mother, Anne (formerly Lane), died on 19 May 1678 and was buried at St Stephen's, Bristol. Pursuing a career in the law, Wade was admitted to New Inn on 11 June 1678, transferred to the Middle Temple on 15 June 1681, and was called to the bar on 26 May 1682. 
In the 1670s and early 1680s Wade and his brother William, a grocer, were active in dissenting circles in Bristol, often protecting and defending fellow nonconformists. In August 1680 Wade, then awaiting trial at the Wells assizes, was described as guilty of seditious and disloyal practices for the past three years. He was supposedly the ringleader of a company of about sixty sectarians that practised armed drills. He was also convicted and fined for resisting a justice who was disturbing a conventicle. In London Nathaniel was friendly with Green Ribbon Club whigs and for a time resided in Soho Square with fellow club members Richard Nelthorpe and Colonel John Rumsey. Not surprisingly, in 1682 he was brought into the whig conspiracy later known as the Rye House plot. Wade later declared that he had had nothing to do with the plot to assassinate the royal brothers Charles II and the Catholic James, duke of York, but was only involved in a planned insurrection for the redressing of grievances and to have Monmouth, 'the Protestant Duke', declared prince of Wales. Wade was present at a meeting of conspirators in October 1682, at which the earl of Shaftesbury urged a group of whig leaders, among them William, Lord Russell, Lord Howard of Escrick, and Lord Grey of Werk, as well as a lower cabal of conspirators including John Ayloffe, Robert West, Major John Wildman, Richard Rumbold, and Thomas Walcott, to initiate a rising. Shaftesbury imagined, Wade later stated, 'that he had many thousands at his devotion in an hour's warning' (Wigfield, 'The Monmouth Rebellion', 153). Shortly after this meeting Shaftesbury took refuge in Amsterdam and Wade returned to Bristol; he felt that he and his friends had been abused by the hesitancy and 'unconstancy' of the 'great men and their little resolution to execute what they had resolved' (ibid., 153-4). He did, however, remain in contact with fellow conspirators in London and brought his brother William and the Bristol merchant James Holloway in on the planned insurrection. 
In the winter of 1682 Wade was back in London and was informed by Colonel Rumsey of the plot to assassinate the king and his brother at Rye House mill. Wade supposedly refused to take part. The plans of the whig plotters were exposed in June 1683. Members of the lower cabal met one last time, and Wade proposed that they immediately muster what men they could and lead a rising 'here or in the west to die like men than be hanged like dogs' ('State trials', 9.409). But Colonel Rumsey declared that the situation was hopeless, and they finally decided that they should go their separate ways. On 23 June a royal proclamation was issued for the arrest of Wade, Rumsey, Nelthorpe, Rumbold, and others. Wade and Nelthorpe escaped abroad and lived for a time with the regicide Colonel Edmund Ludow in Switzerland. 
In the spring of 1684 Wade was in Holland serving as an intermediary between the duke of Monmouth and Archibald Campbell, ninth earl of Argyll. Following the death of Charles II Argyll and Monmouth agreed to co-ordinate their invasions. On 2 May Argyll set sail for Scotland, and Monmouth and his tiny band of eighty-three men followed three weeks later, landing at Lyme Regis on 11 June. Wade commanded the Red regiment and saw action at Bridport, where he proved himself a courageous commander. At the battle of Sedgemoor on 5 July Wade's battalion was routed and he fled the field. With fifty other men he rode to Ilfracombe, where they seized a coastal vessel only to be forced ashore by two frigates. Wade fled alone to Brendon Devon, where he was shot in the back trying to avoid capture. 
Despite his notoriety, Wade was allowed to turn king's evidence. At Windsor Castle and then Newgate, where he was held prisoner, he made a complete confession of his activities beginning with the dissolution of the Oxford parliament and continuing up to his capture. Wade's confession, which is not in his handwriting and, as he was recovering from a near fatal wound, was probably dictated, remains one of the best sources for Monmouth's rebellion. Although Wade was supposed to reveal names, he stated that 'all the persons I can positively charge to have been concerned in it are either outlawed, dead or executed' (Wigfield, 'The Monmouth Rebellion', 149). James's administration probably learned very little from Wade's confession, and at the trial of Lord Delamere in January 1686 he was only able to offer 'hearsay' evidence, but nevertheless he was granted a full pardon in May 1686. In 1687 he married Anne (died 1735/6), widow of Samuel Davies, daughter of Robert Vickris, a Bristol merchant, and sister of Richard Vickris. Anne was a Quaker and defied the wishes of the Bristol Friends' meeting in marrying Wade, who attended the Independent Church of Christ congregation, which met at Castle Green, Broadmead, Bristol. They had at least three children and in the 1690s owned two houses, in St Leonard's and St Augustine's parishes, Bristol. In January 1688, as part of James's efforts to court his former enemies, whigs and dissenters, Wade was sent to Bristol and appointed town clerk. In October that year, on the eve of the revolution of 1688, Wade lost his position when the corporation was ousted. Out of loyalty to James II Wade did not join the prince of Orange's army in November 1688. 
Wade remained active in local politics, supporting whig-dominated initiatives such as the creation of the Bristol corporation of the poor in 1696; helping to set up the Bristol workhouse; and becoming a guardian of the poor for St Ewen's parish from 1696 for twelve years, and deputy governor in 1704-5. He was also a member of the Bristol Society for the Reformation of Manners, active between 1700 and 1705. Their mission was to assist the local authorities in 'discouraging of Prophaneness and Debauchery' by 'discovering disorderly houses' and by the 'taking up of offenders and carrying them before magistrates' (Barry and Morgan, 15). In 1701 Wade petitioned parliament, hoping to have the attainder against Monmouth's followers reversed. In 1709 he commanded the Bristol militia against the Kingswood colliers who rioted against high food prices. He died in 1718 and was buried on 14 March in Redcross Street burial-ground, Bristol. 


@@@@@


doc= 28381


Wade, Thomas (1805-1875), poet and playwright, was born in Woodbridge, Suffolk, the son of Searles Wade of Woodbridge. Nothing is known of Wade's education or childhood -- indeed, biographical evidence on Wade is peculiarly sparse -- but he emerged on the literary scene in 1825 with a volume of poems entitled 'Tasso and the Sisters... Poems', which included a preface dated December 1824. Dialogues of blank verse characterize the volume, which tends toward the dramatic, but the centrepiece of the work, 'The Nuptials of Juno', owes a lyric debt to Shelley, a debt which was to pervade Wade's writing. At this early phase of his career Wade turned from poetry to drama, and in this both luck and charisma were with him. Moving now in London's dramatic circles, Wade found a useful patron in Charles Kemble, of the eminent early nineteenth-century acting family and at that time manager of the Theatre Royal, Covent Garden. Kemble's theatre was in dire financial straits -- it was in the possession of bailiffs during the 1829-30 season -- and, in this desperate situation, the timing was right for an untried dramatic talent such as Wade's. Wade's first effort, 'Woman's Love, or, The Triumph of Patience', later to be known as 'Duke Andrea', was mounted in December 1829, with Kemble acting the lead role; a fairly simple melodrama based on the Griselda story, the play was a minor success, and was published under its original title in 1829. Wade's next effort, 'The Phrenologists', a farce based on the then popular pseudo-science, was performed at Covent Garden in January of 1830 and published that same year. 
Wade's next foray into drama was a defining moment in his career, and put to the test the Shelleyan liberalism that seems to have energized him. Called 'The Jew of Arragon, or, The Hebrew Queen', Wade's play told the story of a thirteenth-century Spanish king whose love for a Jewish noblewoman leads to a popular insurrection against the Jewish population of Aragon. A thinly veiled political parable, it is an impassioned plea for civil liberties for British Jews. The play was powerfully backed -- Charles Kemble again took the lead role, with his equally renowned daughter Fanny playing the Hebrew queen, Rachel -- but its debut, on 20 October 1830 at Covent Garden, was a disaster. 'The Times' reported (21 October 1830) the 'very loud disapprobation' and hisses of the audience, and Fanny Kemble, years later, was to recall the evening as her one professional failure. Wade, however, seems not to have been daunted by the play's reception; Fanny Kemble, in her 'Record of a Girlhood', remembers his composure, and quotes his remark to her father: 'Never mind for me, Mr. Kemble; I'll do better another time' (Kemble, 306). Indeed, Wade published the play in 1830, with a defiant dedication entitled 'To the Jews of England' and with the passages censored by the deputy play licenser restored and in capitals. 
Despite his courage, however, Wade seems not to have enjoyed 'another time' in the drama. He left behind two unacted plays: 'Elfrida', of which no copy exists, and 'King Henry II', which remains only in manuscript form. At this point Wade seems to have returned to verse, his Shelleyan politics converted into Shelleyan poetics. His most important collection of poetry, entitled 'Mundi et cordis, de rebus sempiternis et temporalis: carmina' (1835), is an uneven mixture of political verse, including stanzas on the 'Reform Bill' and on Shelley's death, and finely wrought nature lyrics such as 'The Coming of Night' and 'The Winter Shore'. Lacking Shelley's gift for formal experimentation, Wade found the confines of the sonnet congenial, and much of his later work is in that form. His subsequent works include 'The Contention of Death and Love', 'Helena', and 'The Shadow Seeker', all published in 1837. 
In this period Wade married the pianist and widow Lucy Bridgman, 'nee' Eager (died 1882), and shortly afterward left poetry for journalism, briefly editing 'Bell's Weekly Messenger'. When this financial venture failed, Wade retired to Jersey, where he edited the 'British Press' and continued to produce verse, including a number of sonnets and an unpublished translation of Dante's 'Inferno', until 1871. Throughout his career, whether in his poetry, his dramatic productions, or his journalistic work, Wade's writing is fired by a reformist zeal and progressive temper, an energy which was inspired by Shelley, who to the last remained Wade's ideal. Wade died in Jersey on 19 September 1875. 


@@@@@


doc= 28382


Wade, Sir Thomas Francis (1818-1895), diplomatist and Sinologist, was born on 25 August 1818 in London, the eldest son of Colonel Thomas Wade (died 1846) and his wife, Anne, daughter of William Smythe. In his youth Wade accompanied his father on military postings to Mauritius and southern Africa, and in 1832 he was sent to Harrow School. He went to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1837, but left after a year when his father bought him a commission in the 81st regiment of foot. In 1839 he exchanged into the 42nd highlanders, with whom he served in Ireland and Corfu. He was promoted lieutenant in 1841 and exchanged into the 98th regiment of foot, which was then bound for China to fight in the First Opium War. Always interested in languages and foreign cultures, Wade began to study Chinese on the long voyage to Hong Kong. After a short period of military action in China Wade fell ill with malaria and during his convalescence was made interpreter to the Hong Kong garrison (1843). After a period of sick leave in Britain, Wade was appointed interpreter in Cantonese to the supreme court of Hong Kong in 1845, and in 1846 he became assistant Chinese secretary to Sir John Davis, then superintendent of trade. Another bout of malaria returned him to Britain, after which he became vice-consul at Shanghai in 1852, and in 1855 was appointed Chinese secretary in Hong Kong, in which position he was responsible for the student interpreters' language studies. Apart from brief visits to Britain, Wade remained in China until his retirement in 1883. On one of his visits to England he married, on 28 July 1868, Amelia Herschel (died 1926), daughter of the physicist and astronomer Sir John F. W. Herschel. It was a happy marriage, and produced four sons, one of whom died in the South African War. 
Wade's diplomatic career was successful, if controversial. His rise in the service depended on his knowledge of the Chinese language, not diplomatic skills. As vice-consul in Shanghai in 1854 he assisted Sir Rutherford Alcock with the negotiations that led to the creation of the Maritime Customs Service, which collected customs duties for the Chinese government, then being besieged by the Taiping insurgents. Wade himself served as its first inspector, a role later taken over with great success by Sir Robert Hart. Lord Elgin also made use of Wade's linguistic abilities during the Second Opium War (1856-60). Together with Horatio Nelson Lay, and under Elgin's supervision, Wade did the actual work of negotiating the treaty of Tientsin (Tianjin) (1858), which secured the right of residence of foreign diplomats in Peking (Beijing), opened the Yangtze (Yangzi) River to foreign trade, and obtained for foreigners the right of travel under passport throughout China. In 1861 he was on the staff of the first British legation in Peking, and was twice acting charge d'affaires there (1864-5 and 1869-71). Wade was likewise involved in the negotiations undertaken by Alcock in 1867-9. The Alcock convention was ratified in Peking, but ultimately was rejected in London, principally because of English merchants' opposition to acquiescence in the continued levying of 'likin', or transit dues, in China. 
In 1871 Wade was appointed minister-plenipotentiary to Peking. In this role he strove to improve Sino-British relations, but ultimately could not prevent their deterioration; his own peppery temperament probably contributed to the situation. While in principle he was opposed to the use of force, and hoped to see China modernize and become an equal partner in diplomatic relations, he ended up threatening and bullying the Chinese negotiators. There were three significant incidents during his tenure of office: the audience question, the Formosa (Taiwan) crisis, and the Margary affair. Wade was insistent that the Guangxu emperor receive the diplomatic corps when he came of age in 1872. Chinese refusals were seen by Wade and others as attempts to maintain the old tribute system and as a refusal to meet on equal terms (the treaty of Tientsin had explicitly stated that foreign diplomats would no longer be obliged to perform the 'kowtow' to the emperor; this would be the first time that they had to honour the treaty terms). During the negotiations that dragged on between 1871 and 1873, Wade lectured and hectored the Chinese at length. The eventual audience, which took place on 29 June 1873, was a cursory affair, which left all sides frustrated. Wade played a more positive role in the Formosa crisis of 1874. When the Japanese invaded Formosa in reprisal for injuries suffered by Japanese fishermen, Wade acted as mediator, resulting in the payment of an indemnity by the Chinese and the withdrawal of Japan from Formosa. While the settlement advertised China's weakness, the agreement averted a war at that time. In 1875 Wade seized upon the Margary affair to attempt a broad settlement of issues in Sino-British diplomatic relations. A British vice-consul, Augustus Raymond Margary, had been sent up the Yangtze River to meet an expedition led by Colonel Horace A. Browne which had set out to travel from Burma into Yunnan province in south-west China. Although the mission had been sanctioned by the Chinese government, Margary was murdered and the Browne expedition attacked by guerrillas in Yunnan. Wade was instructed to gain redress from the Chinese, but was quick to broaden his demands to involve questions of diplomatic protocol in Peking, trade, travel, and taxes, as well as an investigation of the murder and an indemnity for Margary's family. Taking his cue from Japanese conduct during the Formosa crisis and from Lord Elgin's style of operation, Wade threatened force, sounded uncompromising, and withdrew the legation to Shanghai. Despite appearances, H. B. Morse suggested that Wade's move was less the result of a desire to break off diplomatic relations in preparation for war than of a wish to be at the end of a telegraph line to London. Robert Hart, who as inspector of customs was officially in the service of China, but who was also a long-standing dining partner of Wade's, was sent to Shanghai to mollify Wade. Negotiations began in 1876 in Chefoo (Yantai) between Wade and Li Hongzhang, the Chinese plenipotentiary who was assisted by Hart. The Chefoo convention of September 1876 settled the Margary affair, obtaining Chinese approval for frontier trade between Burma and China, and arranging for a mission of apology to London, which was to become the first resident Chinese legation abroad. Agreement was also reached on protocol and diplomatic etiquette in Peking, and a number of legal issues in cases which involved both Chinese and foreigners were settled. The convention opened up five further ports for trade, and secured the simultaneous collection of import and 'likin' taxes at the treaty ports. None the less, because Wade had agreed to the raising of taxes on opium and the continued imposition of 'likin' taxes outside the treaty ports, the convention ran into opposition in London, and was finally ratified in modified form in 1885. During further negotiations in Peking, Wade angered diplomatic colleagues of other countries as well as Chinese interlocutors. He had also made enemies in the Foreign Office; in 1882 he was recalled to London and retired the following year. Elements of the Chefoo convention continued to be effective in Sino-British relations until the fall of the Ch'ing dynasty in 1912. 
Wade's real love was not diplomacy, but the study of the Chinese language. The system of transliteration of Mandarin which he developed and which was modified by H. A. Giles (known as Wade-Giles) was the standard for English speakers for more than a century until the development of pinyin. He periodically sought to retire from the diplomatic service in order to extend his scholarly studies, but failed to do so. He nevertheless produced a number of books on China and Chinese, including the first standard texts on Chinese language, 'Wen-chien tzu-ehr Chi: a Series of Papers Selected as Specimens of Documentary Chinese' (1867) and 'Yu-Yen tzu-ehr Chi: a Progressive Course of Colloquial Chinese' (1867). A charter member of the Asia Society in Hong Kong, he wrote important articles on the Chinese army and Chinese government. In 1888 he became the first professor of Chinese at Cambridge University, but published no more and had no students. An avid collector of Chinese books from his earliest days in China, he donated his library to Cambridge University Library. Containing most of the classic works of Chinese philosophy, history, geography, and literature, the Wade collection laid crucial foundations for the serious study of China in Britain. 
Wade, who was made KCB in 1875 and GCMG in 1889, died on 31 July 1895 at his home, 5 Salisbury Villas, Station Road, Cambridge. Contemporary colleagues and observers such as Robert Hart and H. B. Morse describe Wade as an intelligent and hard-working man, whose tendency to throw tantrums made him his own worst enemy. Like Hart, he was a Victorian modernizer, hoping to instruct both Chinese and British officials in the ways of progress, and using his office for this end. Unlike Hart, however, his frequent offerings of advice and admonition were prone to cause offence. If he did want in some ways to conduct negotiations on a basis of equality, ultimately he did not resist the temptation to appeal to Britain's superior military power to implement his understanding of how China should develop, and how Sino-British relations should be structured. Yet Wade's interest in China was passionate, and he was firmly convinced that knowledge of the language and sensitivity to Chinese culture were essential to Sino-British relations. 


@@@@@


doc= 28383


Wade, Walter (c.1740-1825), surgeon, physician, and botanist, was the son of John Wade (died 1799), a Dublin apothecary (a descendant of Henry Wade of Clonebraney, co. Meath, Ireland) and his wife, Katherine. He was probably educated in Dublin, and was then apprenticed to a surgeon. By 1776 he was in practice as a surgeon and man-midwife in Bolton Street, Dublin, and from 1781 in Capel Street where his father had his pharmacy. On 25 July 1777 ten of Dublin's most eminent physicians, including Dr Edward Hill and Sir Nathaniel Barry, signed a testimonial (MSS, University of St Andrews muniments) recommending that he merited a 'Diploma to Practice physick' because they either had 'certain proofs of [his] capacity, skill and attention in his attendance on many persons committed to his care in the medical line' or had 'reason to believe him a person of medical experience'. On 27 June 1786 the senate of the University of St Andrews agreed to confer on him the degree of doctor of medicine on the basis of this nine-year-old testimonial. On 30 October that year, and on the following 23 April, he was examined by the King and Queen's College of Physicians in Ireland, after which he was admitted a licentiate. 
From the late 1780s Wade became prominent as a botanist, not a difficult achievement as there were few botanists active in Ireland at the time. He was an active member of the Experimental Society of Dublin for the Improvement of Natural Knowledge. In 1787 he tried unsuccessfully to publish by subscription 'Flora Dubliniensis', a handsome, illustrated work modelled on William Curtis's 'Flora Londinensis' (1775?-1798). During 1789 he advertised public lectures in his Capel Street house on midwifery and on botany. 
On 9 February 1790 a petition from Wade was presented to the Irish House of Commons by the solicitor-general, John Toler, 'that the Establishment of a Publick Botanical Garden in this City, or its Environs, on an enlarged plan, would be of the greatest National Advantage' (Wade). With the powerful support of the speaker, John Foster, Wade's scheme succeeded when, after much delay, on 25 March 1795 the Dublin Society's Botanic Gardens were founded at Glasnevin. Wade had assiduously cultivated the Dublin Society, ingratiating himself by presenting various botanical manuscripts, and was elected an honorary member in 1792. He was invited to undertake the layout of the new garden, and in 1796 was elected the society's professor of botany. He remained in control of the gardens until his death. 
Wade held other positions simultaneously, including physician to the Dublin General Dispensary and lecturer in botany at the Royal College of Surgeons. He failed on two occasions (1800, 1809) to obtain the chair of botany in the University of Dublin. He was ambitious, and careful to maintain the patronage he enjoyed from John Foster (1740-1828), who was a skilful politician and a passionate gardener. The first of Wade's publications, 'Catalogus systematicus plantarum indigenarum in comitatu Dublinensi' (1794), was dedicated to Foster, who was to eulogize his protege as 'a man of great worth, zeal and knowledge... no man could excel him in his perfect knowledge [of botany]' (Foster to Dublin Society, 7 Nov 1825, Belfast RO, Foster/Massereine MSS). On the other hand, Erinensis (Dr Peter Hennis Green) jibed that Professor Wade was 'an old-fashioned 'prig'... an old coxcomb' (Erinensis, 255). Wade was elected an associate of the Linnean Society of London (1792), a member of the Royal Irish Academy (1811), a fellow of the Royal Society of London (1811), and an honorary fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of Ireland (1811). He was deputy grand master of the Grand Lodge of Free and Accepted Masons of Ireland (1794-9). 
Wade visited various parts of Ireland in search of plants: in 1796 and 1805 he was in co. Kerry, and during 1801 in Connemara where he discovered pipewort ('Eriocaulon aquaticum'). His published works include the earliest catalogues of the plants cultivated in the botanic gardens, two sets of lecture notes on grasses (1808), an English edition of Francois Michaux's treatise on oaks (1809), and a monograph on willows (1811). 
Wade married Mary Chambers (1733/4-1831), a Quaker, in 1781; she was disowned by the Society of Friends for marrying a man 'not of our Society' (Nelson and McCracken, 23). The couple had no children. He died at Dublin on 25 July 1825, at which time he was described by a contemporary as an octogenarian. 


@@@@@


doc= 28384


Wadeson, Anthony (bap. 1573), playwright, was baptized on 1 March 1573 in the parish of St Peter-at-Arches, Lincoln, the son of James Wadeson (died 1593), blacksmith. Contrary to the speculation of Eccles, Anthony's father was not the James Wadeson who was rector of Custlerworth, Lincolnshire, in 1576, nor the James Wadeson who was at Cambridge between 1578 and 1586. On 15 October 1590 Anthony Wadeson of Lincolnshire, 'pleb. fil.', matriculated at Magdalen College, Oxford. However, he never received a degree, possibly because his education was interrupted by the death of his father in early 1593. James Wadeson's nuncupative will, made on 20 January, left his entire modest estate to Anthony's elder brother Edward ('b'. 1568). 
At some point during the 1590s Wadeson made his way to London and became involved in the theatre, writing plays for Philip Henslowe. In June and July 1601 Henslowe lent Wadeson a total of 30's'. for a play in progress for the Lord Admiral's Men called 'The Honorable Lyfe of the Humorous Earle of Gloster, with his Conquest of Portugall' (Foakes and Rickert, 165). This play does not survive and may not have been completed, but it was probably a sequel to the anonymous play 'Look About You', also written for the Lord Admiral's Men and printed in 1600. This historical comedy is one of the half-dozen 'Robin Hood' plays written for the Admiral's Men about this time, in which the folk hero Robert, earl of Huntington, is a central character. The witty earl of Gloucester also plays a prominent role, and promises at the end to go 'with an exceedinge zeale to Portingale' (L4'r') and free it from the Moors, suggesting the title of Wadeson's play. If Wadeson wrote the sequel, he may have written the original, though Henry Chettle is perhaps a more likely candidate. In July and September 1602 Henslowe lent money to 'Antony the poet' for a play called 'The Widow's Charm' (Foakes and Rickert, 205). This may be Wadeson, but a more likely candidate is Anthony Munday, also writing for Henslowe at the time. Wadeson may be the A. W. who contributed several poems to Francis Davison's 'Poetical Rhapsody' (1602). 
There is no evidence that Wadeson ever married, but he did have at least one illegitimate child. On 26 January 1600, 'Hellen, daughter of Anthony Wadson, base born of [blank] Slee' was baptized at St Giles Cripplegate, and two days later, 'Ellen the daughter of Anthony Weadson' was buried at St Mary Magdalen, Bermondsey (Eccles, 123). Wadeson is not traceable after 1602; he may have died soon after, or he may have eventually returned to Lincolnshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 28385


Wadeson, Richard (1826-1885), army officer, was born at Gaythorse, near Lancaster, on 31 July 1826. On 17 November 1843 he enlisted at Plymouth in the 75th (Stirlingshire) regiment (later 1st battalion, Gordon Highlanders). He was promoted corporal on 27 August 1846 and sergeant on 7 November 1848, and went to India in 1849. He was promoted regimental sergeant-major on 24 February 1854. Then the Indian mutiny broke out. The 75th made forced marches from Kasauli in the Himalayas to Ambala where, in May, it was part of the force ordered to Delhi, then held by the mutineers. On 2 June 1857 Wadeson was commissioned ensign in the regiment, without purchase, and was promoted lieutenant on 19 September. He served with the regiment throughout the mutiny campaign, including the battle of Badli-ki-sarai and at the siege of Delhi, after which he was mentioned in dispatches, and awarded the Victoria Cross. He was with the regiment and was wounded at the assault of Delhi on 14 September 1857. 
On 11 March 1859 he was appointed adjutant of the regiment, which position he retained until promoted captain on 9 December 1864. He was with the 75th during the Fenian disturbances of 1866-7, and served in Gibraltar, Singapore, Hong Kong, Mauritius, and the Cape, until promoted major on 11 July 1872. In 1873 the 75th returned home, and was quartered in England and Ireland, and there, on 18 December 1875, he was promoted to the command of the regiment, which he held at home and in the Channel Islands until his promotion to a brevet colonelcy on 18 December 1880. On 26 March 1881 he was appointed major and lieutenant-governor of the Royal Hospital, Chelsea, London, where he died on 24 January 1885, survived by his widow, Susan. He was buried with military honours at Brompton cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 28386


Wadham, Sir John (d. 1412), justice, was probably a native of Devon, though his background is obscure. Having entered upon a legal career, he is first recorded in 1367, as an attorney at Westminster, and prospered sufficiently to be returned to parliament as a burgess for Exeter in 1379. In January 1383 he was ordered to become a serjeant-at-law, and thereafter appeared regularly in the central courts as a pleader. In 1384 he was in receipt of livery from Edward Courtenay, earl of Devon, for whom he acted as a feoffee in the following year. A JP for Devon for the first time in 1384, he was a commissioner of array there in 1385, and was subsequently appointed to judicial commissions, and to be a justice of assize and gaol delivery, in many southern and midland counties. By June 1387 he had become a king's serjeant. The purge of the judiciary by the lords appellant in the following year provided Wadham with further opportunities for advancement. On 20 May 1389 he was one of three new justices appointed to the court of common pleas, receiving an annual fee of 50 marks as well as the usual salary of $40. For as long as he held this office he was invariably among the justices summoned to parliament, and seven times acted as a trier of petitions. 
The profits of success soon became apparent. Between 1384 and 1386 Wadham acquired the Dorset manor of Haydon. Following the exile of Sir John Carey in 1388, Wadham and his friend and fellow justice William Hankeford were able for $400 to buy Carey's estates at Hardington Mandeville, Chilton Cantelo, Merrifield, and Trent in Somerset. Other acquisitions included the manors of Harberton and Silverton, and half the manor of Lustleigh, all in Devon. Perhaps his rise prompted resentment, for in 1392 he fell foul of his former employer, the earl of Devon, who sent word to Wadham while he conducted a gaol delivery in Exeter, 'that he should sit more uprightly without partiality than he had at the last session' (Leadam and Baldwin, 77-81). The earl had to plead for the king's grace, and Wadham remained in favour, active as a justice both at Westminster and in the localities, regularly named as a commissioner, and appointed to the bench in counties as far apart as Devon and the North Riding of Yorkshire. By September 1397 he had been knighted. Even if Wadham did not always act upon his commissions, the demands of the king's business must have been considerable, and perhaps it is not surprising that on 10 May 1398 he should have been discharged from the common pleas at his own request and at once withdrew from an assize circuit in south-east England. For his good service Wadham was granted $20 a year for life. 
For the rest of his life Wadham was largely concerned with his affairs in the south-west, where he seems mainly to have resided at Merrifield. He was, however, returned as a knight of the shire for Devon in 1401, and he continued to be appointed to the county bench for Devon until 1408 and for Somerset until May 1410. In December 1407 he was appointed to investigate the sensitive issue of oppressions by royal officials in Somerset, but otherwise he withdrew from public business almost entirely. Provision for the descent of his estates to his wife and sons had been largely completed in 1397, but in 1404 he added to his earlier arrangements. Wadham drew up his will on 12 March 1411. It shows that he was a wealthy man, with a fine collection of plate, and enough cash ($835 in all) to allow him to bequeath $100 each to his wife, three of his sons, William, John, and Thomas, and his three daughters, Joan, Elizabeth, and Margery, who married John Stourton, first Baron Stourton ['see under 'Stourton family]. A fourth son, Walter, who was a priest, received only $40. Other bequests were less generous. William Hankeford received a silver cup with a cover, but Wadham's sister Cicely was left only $5, and his niece Agnes just 13's'. 4died A variety of small sums, and in one case ten sheep, were left to London friaries, local churches and roads, neighbours, friends, and servants. 40 marks were set aside for prayers for the testator's soul, but with the evident hope that the four chaplains stipulated for could be hired for less. Wadham died on 27 July 1412, leaving lands valued at $115 per annum. He had married twice. His first wife, Maud, and his eldest son, Robert, both predeceased him; before 1385 he had married his second wife, Joan Wrothesley, who outlived her husband. 


@@@@@


doc= 28387


Wadham, Nicholas (1531/2-1609), benefactor of Wadham College, Oxford, was probably born at the family seat, Merrifield, near Ilton, Somerset, the only son of John Wadham (died 1578) and his wife, Joan (died 1583), daughter of John Tregarthin and widow of John Kellaway. The Wadhams had been at Edge Manor, Branscombe, in south Devon since the late fourteenth century. Sir John Wadham (died 1412), justice of the common pleas, acquired extensive properties in Devon and Somerset, augmented through the fifteenth century by a series of marriages to heiresses. Nicholas Wadham's grandfather Sir Nicholas (died 1542) was at various times sheriff of Somerset and Dorset, of Devon, and of Wiltshire. Sir Nicholas's youngest son, also Nicholas (died 1551), was a member of Thomas Cromwell's household, subsequently holding court office as a gentleman pensioner, and commanding troops in Boulogne from 1544. John Wadham was less prominent than his father, but was sheriff of Somerset and Dorset in 1556-7 and retained a place on the Somerset commission of the peace until his death in 1578. 
A brief biography, written before 1637, has Wadham attending Corpus Christi College, Oxford, as a commoner ('commensalis'), evidently not taking a degree. He may also have lodged with the civil lawyer John Kennall, subsequently canon of Christ Church; Kennall was presented to the Wadham benefice of Silverton, Devon, in 1583, and eventually died a Catholic. The same biography has Wadham briefly at court ('vitam Aulicam aliquantisper ingressus est'). He is almost certainly the Nicholas Wadham of Brimpton, Somerset, admitted to the Inner Temple on 9 March 1553 'on the pledge of Richard Baker', shortly to be his brother-in-law. Baker was married to Catherine Tyrell, a stepdaughter of Sir William Petre, principal secretary to the king. Petre, of Devon origins, a protege and colleague of Thomas Cromwell, must have known the Wadhams. On 3 September 1555 Nicholas Wadham married Petre's eldest daughter, Dorothy (1534/5-1618), at St Botolph, Aldersgate ['see 'Wadham, Dorothy]. 
In spite of these court connections Wadham opted for a country life. Almost immediately after the marriage Sir Giles Strangways, married to Nicholas's sister Joan, made over his wardenship of Roche forest in Somerset to be held jointly with him. Wadham and his wife lived with his parents, and under their shadow, until his father died in 1578, at which point his mother moved to the dower house at Edge. Wadham was then appointed to the commission of the peace and to other minor commissions in Somerset. He appears as executor and overseer in the wills of other Somerset gentlemen. Only two personal letters have come to light: one is from Sir Amias Paulet, ambassador in France in 1577, remarking that Wadham was unlikely 'to be envious of our French news' and thanking him for his efforts about the leasing of Paulet's park (Ogle, 48-9); the other is to John Talbot of Grafton, married to Dorothy's sister Katherine -- again Wadham had used his good offices in negotiating a lease. 
Wadham was a shrewd property manager. By his death he had added lands worth at least $800 per annum to his inherited estate, worth some $3000 per annum, making him 'among the fifty or so richest men in England, and well up in the peerage class' (Stone, 118-19). He was renowned for his hospitality and maintained a magnificent household at Merrifield. Following his father's example, he arranged in his will for a full heraldic funeral, costing $500, and for alms to be distributed widely over the county. His old-fashioned views may help explain his Catholic inclinations, as do his wife's connections. After his death Thomas Moore, a Roman Catholic priest, described him as 'an ancient schismatic', implying that he attended Church of England worship. However, Wadham evidently generated suspicion. Some time between 1593 and 1596 he was removed from the commission of the peace; at about the same time he began to cede his rights of ecclesiastical presentation to others. (The 'Master Wadham' involved in 1597 in tracking an escaped priest may be his cousin Edward.) He seems never to have been convicted of recusancy, but came close in 1608 when the privy council ordered a 'stay of proceedings' against both Wadhams on that charge. Thomas Moore claimed him as 'dying a Catholic' (Questier, 63). 
Nevertheless, Wadham maintained good relations with his protestant neighbours. John Carpenter, the incumbent of Branscombe, dedicated his 'Contemplations; for the Institution of Children in the Christian Religion' (1601) to him, remarking on his 'gentle affability with all persons' and his material generosity rather than on any spiritual qualities. Wadham was probably responsible for the fine oak gallery at Branscombe church. The later story that he intended to found a college for English Catholics at Venice seems improbable, if only because the illegality and impracticality of such an action is at odds with Wadham's character. Childless, and with his inheritance due to pass to the children of his three sisters, Wadham was determined to use the additional wealth he had accumulated to perpetuate his name. In 1606 he founded an almshouse at Ilton for eight poor people. He had been setting money aside for the foundation of a college at Oxford for some time, but nothing was put on paper and Wadham's contradictory instructions on his deathbed were to sow confusion, ably resolved by his widow. His contribution was restricted to the financial, amounting to a munificent $19,000. Wadham died at Merrifield on 20 October 1609, aged seventy-seven, and was buried in the Wadham family chapel at St Mary's Church, Ilminster on 21 November. 


@@@@@


doc= 28388


Wadmore, James (1782-1853), art collector, was born on 4 October 1782 in Hampstead Road, London, the son of James Wadmore, who worked in the stamp office. He was educated at a school near Greta Bridge, Yorkshire, and joined his father in the stamp office, but resigned this position in order to become a land surveyor. After an apprenticeship to a land surveyor in Highgate, he set up on his own in Lisson Grove. 
Wadmore began to collect pictures; his first important purchase was Richard Westall's 'Hagar and Ishmael'. In 1815 he inherited a fortune from an uncle. The following year he moved to 40 Chapel Street, Marylebone, where he collected pictures by modern English artists including Turner, David Wilkie, and Thomas Webster, and by old masters; he also built up a good collection of English watercolours, as well as prints, books, and manuscripts. 
Wadmore moved to Upper Clapton late in life, and died there at his home, 1 Sheldon Villas, on 24 December 1853. He was buried in Highgate cemetery. After his death his collection of 186 pictures was sold at Christies, but only three of the seventy-five old masters fetched high prices; these included Carracci's 'Virgin and Child with the Figure of St Roch' and Gerrit Dow's 'Jewish Bride'. His collection of English pictures included George Vincent's 'View of Greenwich Hospital from Blackwall Reach', and three Turners -- 'Cologne', 'Harbour of Dieppe', and 'Guard Ship at the Nore' -- which fetched over 5000 guineas. 


@@@@@


doc= 28389


Wadsworth, James (c.1572-1623), Church of England clergyman and Roman Catholic convert, matriculated at Cambridge in 1586 as a scholar of Emmanuel College, where he was a friend and contemporary of William Bedell. He graduated BA in 1590, MA in 1593, and BD in 1600. After ordination, in June 1596, he served as vicar of Tharston, Suffolk, before being appointed rector of Pakesfield (1598-1603) and vicar of Cotton and Great Thornton (1600-07). He also served as chaplain to Bishop Redman of Norwich. He and his wife, Susannah, whom he married in Suffolk, had four children, the youngest of whom was born in 1604. In May 1605 he was appointed chaplain to Sir Charles Cornwallis on his embassy to Spain. In a letter to Bedell he later claimed that his religious views had been unsettled for three or four years before his departure, and his allegiance to the Church of England was further shaken in the course of controversy with English Jesuits at Valladolid. In August 1605 he left the embassy for Salamanca, where he was received into the Roman Catholic church. After a period of theological study at the University of Alcala de Henares he was granted a pension by the Spanish crown and given employment by the Inquisition. Wadsworth also converted his brother Paul, or Seth, who emigrated to Spain and was appointed consul of the English speaking community at Sanlucar de Barrameda in 1612. Wadsworth's emotive translation into Spanish of the parliamentary statutes enacted in the wake of the Gunpowder Plot, published in Madrid, gave offence to the British ambassador and embarrassed the Spanish authorities. 
Wadsworth's wife, two sons, and two daughters joined him in Spain in 1610. From 1610 to 1620 he kept up a friendly theological debate with William Bedell, who published their correspondence after Wadsworth's death. At Madrid he was tutor in English to the infanta Maria, for whom he may have prepared 'Grammar Spanish and English', published at London in 1622. His unpublished correspondence from 1618 with Sir Robert Phelips provides information about Prince Charles's visit to Madrid in 1623 and his negotiations for the Spanish match. Wadsworth died of consumption on 30 November 1623 and was buried in Madrid. According to the records of the English College, Madrid, his widow Susannah, was still living at Madrid in 1632. Their younger son James Wadsworth became a government informer who betrayed many of his former Roman Catholic brethren. Wadsworth's apologia, 'The Contrition of a Protestant Preacher', a meditation on 'Psalm 50', was published posthumously at St Omer in 1625. 


@@@@@


doc= 28390


Wadsworth, James (b. 1604), writer and government official, was the second son and youngest child of James Wadsworth (c.1572-1623), vicar of Tharston, Suffolk, and his wife, Susannah. His father departed for Spain in 1605 as chaplain to the ambassador but left the embassy when he became a Catholic, and after 1610 his wife and children joined him in Andalusia. James the younger attended schools in Spain until 1618, when he entered the Jesuit English College at St Omer in Artois. After four years alongside the sons of English recusants, he joined other former students in a voyage from Calais to Sanlucar. On 16 August 1622 they were captured by the Dutch, who transferred them to a Hamburg merchant ship headed southward. On 3 September they were captured by Moroccan pirates and held at Sale, near Rabat, until a ransom was pledged for their release and, finally, on 14 November the group reached Seville. Later in 1623 Wadsworth was asked to be an interpreter for courtiers in Prince Charles's entourage in Madrid. 
Following the death of Wadsworth's father on 30 November 1623, his older brother, Hugh, and his mother lived on his father's pension, while his two sisters entered convents: Katherine at Lisbon in the Bridgettines, and Mary at Cambrai in the Benedictines. James was granted by Philip IV a captain's commission in the army of Flanders, although he had slight interest in a career on a battlefield, but he enjoyed the use of the title of captain. Late in 1625 he returned to England where he publicly denounced popery and offered his services as a spy to the privy council. Sent to Paris and later Calais, his performance was not successful, for he was imprisoned in both cities. Eventually Wadsworth settled down in London, where he wrote a memoir of his escapades that appeared in 1629 as 'The English Spanish Pilgrime, or, A New Discoverie of Spanish Popery and Jesuitical Strategems'. Its popularity led to a second printing in 1630, and for its third he wrote a new prelude called 'Further Observations...'. Here he was eager to establish his protestant credentials by warning of the dangers of Spain and St Omer and to dwell on his success with the pirates at Sale in contrast to the Jesuits in Seville. A manuscript by William Atkins, of the original group on the voyage from St Omer, was printed with original evidence to contradict Wadsworth only in 1994. He ended the year 1630 with two new English translations. From an unknown Italian original he produced an essay entitled 'The Present State of Spayne' and a French text by Jacques Gaultier appeared in English as 'Miles gloriosus, the Spanish Bragadacio'. 
For over two decades Wadsworth was a pursuivant, or messenger, of the court of high commission and the privy council. Armed with their warrants, he arrested for a fee recusants and priests, several of whom he knew from his years overseas with Catholic students. In 1635 he was summoned to answer charges of corrupt practices before the high commission but escaped conviction. His petitions for reimbursement by the crown give examples of his activities. In 1634 he sought the costs of 'bringing jesuits and papists to conviction' ('CSP dom.', '1633-4', 319). In August and October 1643, Captain Wadsworth and two other messengers submitted their expenses for the 'priests indicted and attainted at the Old Bailey since 22 July 1640' ('Fifth Report', HMC, 102, 109). He produced two more translations in 1640-41: 'On the Nature and Quality of Chocolate' from an original by Antonio Colmenero and, under a pseudonym of Diego de Vadesfoote, a guide to the fairs of Europe called 'The European Mercury'. However, the fees of a pursuivant attracted him still. In December 1642 his testimony convicted his schoolmate at St Omer, the Jesuit Thomas Holland. He appeared at several other trials, including that of another Jesuit, Henry Morse, in January 1645. 
After the civil war the role of the pursuivants declined, so that a contemporary royalist observed an impoverished Wadsworth in 1656 to be a 'renegade, proselyte, turncote of any religion' who lived in Westminster as a 'common Hackney to the basest catchpole Bayliffs' (Sanderson, 491). The date of his death is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 28391


Wadsworth, Thomas (1630-1676), nonconformist minister and religious writer, was born in the parish of St Saviour's, Southwark, on 15 December 1630, the son of Thomas Wadsworth, who was a friend of Samuel Bolton, master of Christ's College, Cambridge, and lecturer at St Saviour's. Wadsworth attended school in Southwark, where he was taught by a Mr Woodward. On 22 June 1647 he was admitted as a pensioner to Christ's College, Cambridge, with a Mr Harrison and then William Owtram as his tutor. He graduated BA in 1651 and proceeded MA in 1654. He was elected a fellow of Christ's before Christmas 1652, but resigned his fellowship to take up the position of minister to St Mary's parish, Newington Butts, Surrey, to which he was appointed on 16 February 1653. He was ordained by the eighth London classis in the church of St Mary Axe. 
Young and inexperienced, Wadsworth wrote to Richard Baxter asking for his advice. Baxter later wrote that he 'had long much communication by Letters' with Wadsworth 'before I ever saw his face' (Baxter, foreword, sig. A4). Wadsworth organized his ministry along lines suggested by Baxter: 'with prayers and tears, not only publickly, but from one house to another, I have beseeched you to be reconciled unto God' ('Exhortation', sig. A3). According to Baxter, to Wadsworth's: 'constant Publick Preaching he added this work of 'Personal' and Family Instruction; not only to visit the sick, but to teach and Exhort his Flock in health, to prepare for death, 'and work out their Salvation', To Catechize them, and help them understand the words, and to get down the sweetness and power of the matter upon their hearts. (Baxter, foreword, sig. A7'v')' Wadsworth even 'hired another to help in that work; gave 'Bibles' to the poor People of his Parish, and expended... his Estate on these Works' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 3.95). 
Wadsworth published several expanded sermons and treatises, beginning in 1660 with 'A Serious Exhortation to an Holy Life'. The same year, however, on 29 September, he was forced to resign the living at St Mary's in favour of James Meggs, who had been sequestered by parliament on 20 June 1643, although he did retain a Saturday morning lectureship at St Antholin's, as well as a Monday evening lectureship at St Margaret's, New Fish Street Hill. On 29 January 1662 he was chosen by the parishioners of St Laurence Pountney in London to fill the perpetual curacy that was in their patronage, but was ejected when the 'Act of Uniformity' came into effect on 24 August 1662. Wadsworth's first wife, whose name is unknown but who was a younger daughter of Henry Hastings from Newington Butts, died during childbirth on 13 October 1661. In November 1663 he married Margaret (died 1668), daughter of Henry Gibs from Bristol, and widow of Thomas Sharp, a London merchant. Margaret had a son named Thomas from her previous marriage, but she and Wadsworth had no surviving children. 
'His health calling him to abide most in the Country', Wadsworth moved to Theobalds in the parish of Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, where he preached privately to a congregation of dissenters (Baxter, foreword, sig. B4). At the request of members of his former parish in Southwark he also quietly gathered a congregation there which met in Globe Alley. Wadsworth divided his time between these two congregations, but took no salary from either, living instead off his own income. He owned lands and properties in Hertingfordbury, Hertfordshire, and Pickle Herring Stairs, Globe Alley, and Deadman's Place, all in Southwark. He was also active in raising money to support the families of ejected ministers. 
During the plague of 1665 Wadsworth continued to minister in the London area, and after the fire of 1666 a timber meeting-house was built for his congregation in Deadman's Place. He resumed publishing with 'The Immortality of the Soul' and 'Faith's Triumphs over the Fear of Death', both in 1670, and 'Separation yet No Schism' (1675). His wife Margaret died on 3 January 1668, and in 1671 he married Anna, daughter of Colonel Markham; they had two sons, Thomas and Nathaniel, and two daughters, Anna and Hester. After Charles II's indulgence of 1672, Wadsworth was licensed on 1 May 1672 to be 'a Presbyterian Teacher' in Jonathan Pritman's house in Theobalds, which was also licensed as a 'Presbyterian Meeting-place' (Urwick, 509). 
Several weeks before his death Wadsworth moved from Theobalds back to his house at Pickle Herring Stairs in Southwark. He had suffered for some time from kidney and bladder stones, and was in poor health and constant pain. He died on 29 October 1676 and was buried at St Olave's, Southwark, on 6 November; his wife, Anna, survived him. His funeral sermon was preached by his Theobalds assistant, Robert Bragge, and published as 'The Life and Death of the Godly Man' (1676). Several of Wadsworth's works were published posthumously including 'Mr. Thomas Wadsworth's Last Warning to Secure Sinners' (1677), 'Wadsworth's Remains' (1680), and 'A Serious Exhortation unto Self-Examination' (1687). 


@@@@@


doc= 28392


Wafer, Lionel (d. 1705), surgeon and buccaneer, may have been of Huguenot descent. His knowledge of Gaelic, and a boyhood spent in Scotland and Ireland, may indicate that his father was a Scottish soldier quartered in Ireland, or that the family was one of those 'planted' in Ireland by James I or Oliver Cromwell. Wafer claimed to have been 'very young' (Wafer, 1) when, in 1677, he embarked as surgeon's assistant on the 'Great Anne', an East India Company vessel. After transferring into the 'Bombay Merchant' at Sumatra he visited Borneo before returning to England in March 1679. A month later Wafer left for Jamaica to visit his brother; he worked briefly as a surgeon in Port Royal before joining the privateer Captain Edmund Cook. Cook joined a squadron of buccaneering vessels at Golden Island, and it was here that Wafer first met William Dampier. On 5 April 1680 he disembarked as part of a force of some 330 buccaneers who intended to cross the Isthmus of Darien and raid Panama. On entering the Bay of Panama the buccaneers, led by Captain Bartholomew Sharpe, seized several armed vessels, and broke out along the Pacific coast from Costa Rica to southern Chile in search of prizes. 
On 17 April 1681, dissatisfied with Sharpe's leadership, Wafer, Dampier, and fifty-two others defected near the Isle of Plate and travelled nearly 600 miles, in three open boats, to reach the coast of Panama. On 5 May, during their subsequent return march overland, Wafer injured his leg when some gunpowder was accidentally ignited. Four days later a slave stole his medicines, his gun, and all his money, and Wafer 'was left among the wild Indians' (Wafer, sig. A3). 
The Cuna Indians cured Wafer's injury, and he in turn practised 'Physick and Phlebotomy'. After four months it became clear that the Indians intended Wafer to marry among them. On the pretext of travelling to England to fetch hunting dogs, and promising to return, Wafer escaped to the Atlantic coast where he boarded a French vessel commanded by Captain Tristian. Dampier, and others with whom he had defected, were on the vessel but none of them recognized the surgeon. 'I sat a while cringing upon my Hams among the 'Indians', after their Fashion', he writes in his journal 'painted as they were, and all naked but only about the Waist, and with my Nose-piece' (Wafer, 41-2). 
After cruising in the Caribbean with Captain Yanky, Wafer sailed with John Cook in the 'Revenge' to Chesapeake Bay, arriving in April 1683. On 23 August he and Dampier sailed from Virginia for the South Sea under Cook, and later, when off Sierra Leone, they transferred into a prize renamed the 'Batchelor's Delight'. From 19 March 1684 they kept company with the 'Nicholas' and in May they became the first English crews to visit the Galapagos Islands. In October the 'Batchelor's Delight' (Captain Eaton) joined the 'Cygnet' (Captain Swan), and both crews collaborated in an assault on Paita on 2 November. News of the imminent arrival of the silver fleet at Panama prompted both vessels to join nearly 1000 French and English buccaneers assembled at the Pearl Islands, in February 1685. Here Wafer participated in an indecisive action against a superior Spanish fleet at the end of May. 
The 'Batchelor's Delight' left the Bay of Panama in July 1685, and cruised north to Cocos Island, south to the Galapagos Islands, and south again to Juan Fernandez, where she spent Christmas 1686. In the autumn of 1687, having replenished once more at the Galapagos, the buccaneers rounded the Horn. As the ship sailed northwards towards the Caribbean, Wafer transferred to a vessel bound for Pennsylvania. After a brief stay in Philadelphia he and two others made for Point Comfort in Virginia where Wafer intended to settle. 
On 22 June 1688 Wafer and his companions were arrested by Captain Simon Rowe, commanding officer of HMS 'Dumbarton', as they crossed Chesapeake Bay in a small boat. They were imprisoned in Jamestown on suspicion of piracy. Wafer declared he had been a trader in the West Indies for seven years. He denied stoutly ever having been a privateer and he signed his depositions 'Delawafer'. His defence was weakened, however, by the inventory of his effects taken at the time of his arrest, which included thirty-seven silver plates, some silver lace, and three bags of Spanish money marked with his initials, containing about 1100 dollars. Despite calls by Lord Sutherland of the council of trade and plantation for Wafer to be prosecuted, he was released in September 1689, whereupon he returned to England after an absence of nearly eleven years. In March 1692 it was agreed that Wafer's property should be restored to him, but a royal order withheld $300, plus a quarter of the amount still in Jamestown. The moneys forfeited may have been applied to the building of the College of William and Mary in Williamsburg, Virginia. In November 1693 the council of Virginia invited creditors to come forward, perhaps indicating that full restitution had still not taken place at that date. 
In England Wafer established himself as the foremost authority on the Darien isthmus. Dampier deferred to Wafer for descriptions of Darien, claiming he 'is better able to do it than any man that I know' (Dampier, 24). On 2 July 1697, following Dampier's recommendation, Wafer was interviewed by John Locke and the other commissioners of the council of trade and plantation concerning Darien and the projected Scots' colony. Wafer's knowledge of Darien was also sought by the directors of the Darien Company, and the advice he gave them almost certainly influenced the siting of the disastrous Scots' colony in 1698. 
Wafer was invited to visit the company's directors in Edinburgh in the spring of 1698. He travelled to Scotland as Mr Brown of London, and stayed with Andrew Fletcher of Saltoun where he met the directors before removing to a secret garret in Edinburgh. Having been engaged by the company, Wafer ordered his affairs in preparation for a voyage to Darien, but a mysterious breach dissolved these plans. In the same year he provided the duke of Leeds with a report on the key ports along America's Pacific rim which might be seized from Spain if they remained shut to foreign traders. His analysis of the strategic and commercial advantages of securing the Chilean ports of Coquimbo and Valdivia, for English vessels rounding the Horn, bears striking resemblance to a scheme Daniel Defoe was to lay before Robert Harley in July 1711. 
Lionel Wafer is best known today as the author of 'A New Voyage and Description of the Isthmus of America' (1699), a work which retains interest for modern anthropologists because of its detailed descriptions of Darien and the Cuna Indians. In dedicating the second edition (1704) to the duke of Marlborough, Wafer stressed the feasibility of English settlement in Darien, despite the Scots' disaster. A popular figure among the buccaneers, Wafer was a resilient man of unquestionable intelligence, who may have enjoyed connections with the Royal Society after his return to England. Between 1699 and his death in 1705 he lived in London. 


@@@@@


doc= 28393


Wager, Sir Charles (1666-1743), naval officer and politician, was born at Rochester, Kent (not West Looe as is sometimes reported), after the death on 24 February 1666 of his father, Captain Charles Wager ('b'. 1630), who had started life as a boatswain in the merchant service and had become a lieutenant, then a captain, in the navy of the Commonwealth. His paternal grandfather was John Wager (died 1656) of St Margaret's, Rochester, who became a mariner after migrating from Charlton Kings, Cheltenham. Wager's mother was Prudence ('b'. 1640/41), daughter of Vice-Admiral William Goodson, who had come into the Commonwealth navy as captain of a merchant ship converted to a warship and became a renowned officer. With ample justification Wager remarked in 1731, 'On both sides I am related to the navy' (Coxe, 3.116). 
Wager's father had promptly accepted the Restoration. He commanded the 'Yarmouth' in the fleet that brought Charles II to England and quickly proved to be a capable, trustworthy, well-liked officer of the Royal Navy. Two years after the elder Wager's death, Samuel Pepys heard a friend who had been at Tangier contrast his conduct with that of others who had served in the Strait of Gibraltar, remarking, as Pepys noted, 'that above all Englishmen that ever was there, there never was any man that behaved himself like poor Charles Wager, whom the very Moores do mention with teares sometimes' (Pepys, 'Diary', 9.137). After her husband's death, Wager's mother married a Quaker, Alexander Parker, a London merchant. There was already an older sister, Prudence, and the marriage produced six more children. With his father dead and his maternal grandfather severed from the navy in 1660 (Goodson's radicalism was indelible), young Charles lacked the usual professional advantages of his parentage. 
Wager was apprenticed to a Quaker merchant captain of New England named John Hull, son of Tristram and Blanche Hull, both Quakers, of Barnstable, Massachusetts. Tristram was a sea captain and substantial citizen and John operated a transatlantic shipping service and eventually settled in Rhode Island. Wager's mother was a witness when John Hull married Alice Teddeman in the London Quaker Meeting in 1684. When Dr Teddeman Hull, their oldest son, visited London in 1742 he had a letter of introduction from Governor Richard Ward of Rhode Island which stated that he was 'the son of Captain John Hull, late of this colony, under whom Sir Charles Wager was educated' (Kimball, 1.215). There is clear evidence that the mature Wager continued to care about the Hull family, but how much time he spent in New England as a boy is not known. 
The earliest record of Wager's naval service is his listing as lieutenant of the frigate 'Foresight' on 1 August 1689. By 1691 he had become first lieutenant of the 'Dreadnought' (64 guns). On 8 December that year he married Martha Earning ('b'. 1664x6, died 1748), daughter of Anthony Earning, a Commonwealth navy captain who went into the East India Company's service after 1660 and died while captain of the 'George' in the Indian Ocean. Wager was in the 'Britannia', Admiral Edward Russell's flagship, in 1692, took part in the battle of Barfleur, and was made post captain on 7 June. 
The year 1693 saw Wager in command of the 'Samuel and Henry' (44 guns), in which he convoyed the New England trade. He was captain of the 'Newcastle' (48 guns) in 1694, and in 1695, after a month in the 'Mary', he was re-assigned to the 'Woolwich' (54 guns). In early March 1696 the 'Woolwich' was watching Dunkirk against a rumoured invasion. A month later Wager moved to the 'Greenwich' (50 guns) and commanded a small squadron for convoying the tobacco trade home from the Chesapeake. He stayed in the 'Greenwich' until she was paid off in late 1699. Finally, on half pay, he lived at Kilminorth near West Looe (in the Watergate cottages near the river), a place where he had already established his family by June 1699 when the ship was under repair at Plymouth. He immediately became a freeman of that borough. As he informed the Admiralty in June 1700, his residence was only 'about ten miles from his Majesty's Yard at Plymouth' and he could 'be at London in four or five days, if required' (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/2637-8). 
Evidently Wager was eager for employment and eight months later, in February 1701, he was appointed to the 'Medway' (64 guns). In the mobilization of January 1702 he was assigned to the 'Hampton Court' (70 guns) and remained her captain for the next five years. He commanded a squadron of four of the line and two frigates that cruised between Cape Barfleur and the Isle of Batz in early 1703. Later that year he went to the Mediterranean and in October he came under the command of Admiral George Byng (later Lord Torrington). The occasion having arisen for renegotiating England's treaty with the dey of Algiers, captains Wager and John Baker were the men Byng sent ashore to carry out negotiations and witness the signing. Going again to the Mediterranean in 1704, Wager was with the fleet under Sir George Rooke that captured Gibraltar. The 'Hampton Court' was on detached service and missed the battle off Malaga, but she was present at the capture of Barcelona in 1705. After wintering with Sir John Leake's squadron at Lisbon, Wager took part in the relief of Barcelona and the winning over of Ibiza and Majorca before returning home with Leake in late 1706. 
As a senior captain who had commanded detached squadrons Wager was a logical choice for the West Indies command. Appointed in January 1707, he left Spithead in the 'Expedition' (70 guns) on 28 March and reached Jamaica on 22 June. A French squadron under Admiral Ducasse was known to be coming from Europe, and Wager's initial deployments were designed to gain intelligence of its arrival and protect trade. He learned in December that Ducasse had gone to Havana, far to leeward; thus the French squadron (ten of the line) could neither surprise Jamaica nor shield the galleons at the isthmus, and if those galleons were to follow their usual practice of returning to Cartagena before proceeding to Havana, Wager would have a chance to intercept them after they loaded Peruvian silver at Portobello. The 'Expedition', 'Kingston' (60 guns), and 'Portland' (50 guns) plus a fireship left Port Royal in time to attain, on 23 May 1708, a position about 36 miles west of Cartagena. 
Five days later seventeen ships appeared to the south-west. Most proved to be armed; the broadsides of the three largest matched those of Wager's squadron. A shift of wind direction prevented the Spanish from steering for Cartagena. Though forced to tack to the northward, they did not try to flee; rather, they formed a loose line of battle under easy sail: the admiral in the 'San Josef' (64 guns) in the centre; the vice-admiral, also in a 64-gun ship, in the rear; and the rear-admiral in the 'Santa Cruz' (50 guns) in the van, the large warships spaced about half a mile apart with armed merchant ships in between. The Spanish admiral evidently did not believe that the small British squadron would dare oppose this force. 
Wager, however, did not hesitate. He ordered the 'Kingston' to attack the vice-admiral and the 'Portland' to attack the rear-admiral. The former closed sluggishly and the latter held back while Wager bore down on the admiral. The 'Expedition''s guns roared just as the sun was setting and the fighting continued as darkness fell. Suddenly, an hour and a half into the engagement, the 'San Josef' blew up. She sank instantly, carrying the admiral, officers, passengers, and crew -- almost 700 in all -- to the bottom along with most of the registered silver. Less than half a pistol shot away, Wager's ship was showered with large planks and fiery splinters, but the greatest hazard came from the wash of the blast when it flooded through the gun ports. As the crew feverishly put out fires and worked the pumps, the Spanish squadron scattered; the moon had not yet risen, but Wager could discern the shadow shape of a large ship not far off and steered for it. It was the 'Santa Cruz'. His first broadside blasted through her stern and took down the mizzen yards. Unable to manoeuvre and observing that the other British men-of-war had been drawn by the gunfire, the Spanish rear-admiral surrendered. Total British losses were six killed and eleven wounded, all in the 'Expedition'. The 'Santa Cruz' carried a great deal of unregistered treasure, the property of passengers and private merchants. 
Wager's flagship, having suffered damage, taken aboard 300 prisoners, and supplied a prize crew for the 'Santa Cruz', was unable to act against the remaining Spanish ships. He expected that they would turn back towards Cartagena, and just before sunrise he saw them. He signalled the 'Kingston' and 'Portland' to chase, a signal he had to repeat when, to his consternation, they broke off. The Spanish vice-admiral barely managed to find refuge in shoal waters. Back at Port Royal, Wager convened a court martial that deprived both captains, Timothy Bridges and Edward Windsor, of their commands. The Spanish authorities were so shocked by the attack that for the rest of the war Peruvian silver had to be transported in more difficult ways. 
Wager returned to England a rich man. He also came home a rear-admiral, the promotion having occurred by seniority on 19 November 1707. His wealth stemmed chiefly from the silver on the captured galleon, its value estimated at over $60,000, but also from his flag share of other prizes taken in the West Indies. Nevertheless Wager gained the merchants' praise for his conduct in protecting their trade. The action against the galleons made him a hero and he was knighted on 8 December 1709. At Portsmouth he was nominated for a by-election to parliament and was elected on 23 January 1710. 
Notwithstanding the tory landslide Wager was re-elected at Portsmouth in 1710, but the tory-dominated house overturned the result on petition. As a firm whig he could no longer expect an important command. Having spent all but two of the last twenty years in sea service and now possessing fame and fortune, he was prepared to spend the rest of his life ashore. There is no record of his residing again at Kilminorth though he served as MP for West Looe from 1713 to 1715. 
Two days after Queen Anne died Wager was ordered to take charge of the ships at Portsmouth, and in December 1714 he was ordered to go out to the Strait of Gibraltar and assume command of the Mediterranean Fleet. Instead he opted for civil employment ashore; he became comptroller of the navy, at the head of the Navy Board. In January 1715 he was once again elected MP for Portsmouth. Three years later, in March 1718, he moved to the Board of Admiralty, where he remained until almost the end of his life; his tenure on that board, twenty-four consecutive years, was longer than anyone else's in the eighteenth century. In 1720 Wager leased Hollybush, a stately brick house, evidently rebuilt in the Queen Anne style (demolished 1884) and situated at the south-east corner of Parson's Green, Fulham. He spent twenty-two years there and seems to have loved the place. He remained on the list of admirals and advanced by seniority. Except for a moment in 1722 when he was appointed to take a squadron to Lisbon (the mission was cancelled), he did not hoist his flag until 1726. 
Wager then began a period of intensive sea service. He commanded a large battle fleet sent to the Baltic to protect Sweden and Denmark from the threat of a recently mobilized Russian fleet. Stopping first at Copenhagen, he met with the court and completed arrangements for co-operation with the Danish navy. His report of 30 April 1726 evoked a glowing response from the secretary of state, Viscount Townshend: 'his Majesty has commanded me to let you know from Him, that he was before persuaded you was a very good Admiral, but he now sees that you are likewise an able Minister. All the answers you gave to the questions proposed to you at the Conference with the Danish Council were extremely right. (TNA: PRO, SP 42/81, fol. 47)' After calling on the Swedish court, Wager took his twenty ships of the line to Reval. He had orders to engage and destroy the Russian fleet if it came out. A frustrated and angry tsarina felt compelled to demobilize it instead. To reassure Sweden the British fleet stayed at Reval all summer, losing many men to sickness, and did not enter the Thames until 1 November. 
Within less than two months Wager was ordered back to sea; his destination was Gibraltar, against which the Spanish were preparing a siege. He arrived on 2 February 1727 with six ships of the line, two cruisers, two bomb-vessels, and additional troops for the garrison. The fleet helped cover the land approaches (Wager ordered two frigates and a bomb-vessel to 'the back of the Hill') and ensured resupply. Britain and Spain were undoubtedly at war. At one point in early May there was a furious artillery exchange, but usually the actions were cautious and desultory. It was chiefly a naval war, with prizes taken. The main burden was borne by Francis Hosier's fleet in the Caribbean, which suffered losses to tropical disease while successfully accomplishing its mission of preventing the galleons from leaving Cartagena. The Spanish king, destitute of the silver needed for his diplomatic commitments, agreed to a cessation of arms in mid-June, but gave no indication of actually yielding. Finally, in early March 1728, Spain agreed to a convention and Wager's fleet could be ordered home; he arrived on 9 April after sixteen months abroad. 
Wager resumed his regular attendance at the Admiralty board, but in May 1729 he was ordered to take command of thirty-three ships, which were soon joined by fourteen Dutch. This huge squadron never left Spithead and was popularly ridiculed as the 'stay-at-home fleet'. It was assembled because the court of Spain was acting as if the convention meant nothing and France, though an ally in this matter, was doing nothing about it. Parliament was dangerously impatient. The fleet remained in readiness until it was learned that Spain would sign a firm treaty. 
Wager's next and last deployment as a fleet commander arose from provisions of that treaty (signed at Seville on 9 November 1729). It confirmed the Spanish queen's title to certain parts of Italy, which she assigned to her son, Don Carlos; a right to install Spanish garrisons was also obtained. It seemed advisable to have a strong British fleet alongside the Spanish when the troops were to be landed at Leghorn. With Wager's flag in the 'Namur' (90 guns), the British fleet entered Cadiz Bay on 1 August 1731, and after many grand entertainments and reciprocating invitations, moved into the Mediterranean. The mission at Leghorn was accomplished without incident but only after much delay, so Wager did not get back to England until 10 December 1731. Upon arrival he reported his sense of 'pleasure to have a success where doubtful' (TNA: PRO, SP 42/82, fol. 395). Thus, for one brief moment this man who had blasted and captured galleons, whose thoughts had been and would continue to be focused on strategies for crushing the Spaniards, had done them good service, with cordiality reigning on both sides. 
Between April 1726 and December 1731 Wager had spent as many months flying his flag as he spent ashore. The missions he was asked to execute all involved diplomatic discretion as well as strategic acumen. In 1732, in a letter to a Gloucestershire acquaintance from the Admiralty office, he remarked that for many years he had been inclined to retire. 'But', he continued, 'I have been sent on several expeditions (not by my own choice), wherein I have succeeded so well, as to have the King's approbation, and very like may be put, in case of a Vacancy, at the head of this Board. ('Gloucestershire Notes and Queries', 1, 1881, 120)' Evidently he believed that his elevation, if it occurred, would stem from his successes as a fleet commander and diplomat, not his long experience in naval administration. 
When Lord Torrington died in January 1733, Under-Secretary Delafaye reported to a colleague: 'Every body looks upon Sir Charles Wager as the person who will now be at the head of the affairs of the navy; as indeed I may say he has been for some time' (Coxe, 3.128). It seems that Wager's administrative knowledge and talent did matter. The official appointment as first lord was dated 21 June 1733. He was popular enough to be nominated and elected MP for Westminster in 1734. 
Besides administrative capacity, Wager brought some important assets to the office. His character as a trusted senior admiral tended to subdue the incipient factions of the officer corps. The most prominent example of his candid professionalism was the strong plea he made to the leading ministers in December 1738 that Edward Vernon should be given the West Indies command, notwithstanding his unrelenting opposition in parliament. Wager was also a 'Parliament man', as he described himself to Sir Robert Walpole (Cholmondeley [Houghton] MS, 1881). In him Walpole had a staunchly loyal (they were personal friends as well as closely co-operating ministers of state) spokesman in the House of Commons who was well liked, well informed, and widely trusted; it was an advantage that Wager was not made a peer. Finally, no other first lord of the eighteenth century had so comprehensive a knowledge of maritime geography, seaborne commerce, and colonial circumstances. It seems that when anyone in government needed an opinion touching these subjects Wager was asked. Many of his responses, most of them written in his own hand, have survived (Vernon-Wager MSS); he was, in effect, a one-man bureau of maritime intelligence. 
Wager's reputation has suffered from a profoundly mistaken idea that the navy was then at a low ebb. In reality its numerical preponderance over other navies was greater than at any other time in the century, and its dockyard facilities, overseas bases (Wager was much involved in the development of new bases in the Caribbean), victualling organization, and central co-ordination were by far the most elaborate and advanced. Although British warship design was inferior to French in some respects, the real problem was an insufficiency of the versatile and seaworthy 60-gun ships, a class that Wager's Admiralty had chosen to augment during the 1730s but, as wartime experience would show, not aggressively enough. 
The great unsolved problem was manning. In May 1731 Wager had remarked: 'we have no difficulty but in getting men;... our Country being such a free Country, that every man does what he pleases: by reason of which, this Nation will be lossd ['sic'] one time or other, if it wont admit of a remedy. (TNA: PRO, SP 42/82, fol. 137)' Upon the outbreak of war the problem rapidly grew severe, and Wager, strongly encouraged by Admiral Sir John Norris, pressed for legislative measures; the government introduced bills to facilitate naval manning and Walpole supported them, but parliament would not pass anything meaningful. 
The strategy for defeating Spain, insisted upon by the duke of Newcastle, called for capturing a major objective in the West Indies, and thus a large fleet and army had to be sent to a region where tropical diseases were rife. Wager was not confident; he feared complications, and well knew the price of delay in that climate. He preferred strategies that could frustrate Spanish silver shipments while employing smaller forces. His favourite was to threaten the Peruvian coast from the 'South Sea'. The famous voyage of Commodore George Anson, who sailed from England in 1740, was a result of Wager's advocacy. 
The assault on Cartagena failed mainly because the forces succumbed to disease. Even before the expedition left England disease took its toll; the typhus epidemic of 1740 -- the worst of the century -- ravaged newly recruited seamen and spread through the fleet, seriously aggravating the manning problem and delaying departure. The profound disappointment of a public that had never doubted success was played upon by the fervid opposition to Walpole, and eventually (though not in the eighteenth century) Wager's reputation was injured. 
Claims that Wager had grown too old for his responsibilities can neither be proved nor disproved, but may be doubted. A captain who attended the great debate of 13 February 1741 on whether to petition the king to remove Walpole from office observed: 'Sir Charles Wager is as Hearty as I ever knew Him, spoke in the motion... at four in the morning, tho He had been there from seven the morning before'. On that occasion Wager issued a challenge, saying that if there were any mismanagements 'in the Office of Admiralty, He & the rest of the Board ought to answer it at their own peril, & not Sir Robert' (BL, Egerton MS 2529, fol. 122). He was fit enough to command the king's channel crossings in 1740 and 1741. (Wager's decision to turn back to Holland on a stormy night in December 1736 had probably saved the whole entourage.) Rumours that he was inattentive may be offset by his record of steady attendance at the board, cabinet meetings, in parliament, and by much else. 
The king's insistence on having Wager see him across the water in May 1741 was unfortunate politically because the voyage coincided with the Westminster election. Wager was still popular and his presence during the polling might have prevented the surprise nomination of Edward Vernon (who, in the West Indies, knew nothing about it and later apologized to Wager). As it happened the bailiff pre-emptively closed the poll, thus provoking a riot and inviting a challenge. The fiasco, which culminated in a voiding of the election on a very close vote in the House of Commons, contributed notably to Walpole's loss of parliamentary control. The year 1741 also witnessed some key strategic failures and in January 1742 Wager offered to resign as first lord. The king refused, but very soon after (11 February) his resignation was accepted when it became clear that Walpole was arranging to leave office. 
In December 1742 Wager was appointed treasurer of the navy, a handsome sinecure which served as a pension. He remained in parliament, having been elected for West Looe. He was reportedly living at Stanley House, Chelsea, when he died, peacefully, on 24 May 1743. Francis Gashry, long his right-hand man of business, arranged the monument in Westminster Abbey, and he was buried in the north cross of the abbey on 30 May. His chief heir was Charles Bolton, son of his sister, Prudence. His widow, Martha, was executor. They had no children, but numerous relatives, many stemming from his half-sisters, all of whom he is said to have helped financially or by appropriate patronage recommendations. Yet Wager was also known for spreading his generosity very widely, to individuals in need as well as philanthropic organizations. 
When Wager died Horace Walpole observed that he had 'left the fairest character' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 2.245-6), a judgement supported by every scrap of surviving evidence. A remembrance recorded many years later by Arthur Onslow, the respected speaker of the Commons, remains highly instructive: 'He was of the most gentle and humane disposition I ever knew, and spent almost the whole he got in generous acts of charity and compassion. I had a long and intimate acquaintance with him, and have seen where his temper has been tried by much provocation, but I never saw him discomposed. He had a very good understanding, great plainness of manners, and a steadiness of courage that no danger could daunt, with the same calmness in it that he shewed in the most ordinary acts of his life. He was indeed a person of most extraordinary worth, and the world bore him a respect that was due to it. His father was a captain of a man of war before the restoration, and very likely after that: but dying when this son was young, and the mother marrying a Quaker, he was bred up among that people; by which he acquired the simplicity of his manners, and had much of their fashion in his speech as well as carriage. And all this, with his particular roughness of countenance, made the softness of his nature still more pleasing, because unexpected at first. ('Bishop Burnet's History', 5.390)' Lady Wager died on 7 April 1748 and was buried next to him, in the north cross of Westminster Abbey. 


@@@@@


doc= 28394


Wager, Lewis (d. 1562), playwright, is of unknown origins. He first appears as a Franciscan friar in the Oxford convent, where he became a subdeacon on 21 July 1521. On 24 March 1536 he received a special dispensation to wear the habit of a Franciscan beneath the garb of a secular priest; two years later, the houses of the friars in Oxford were suppressed. Some time before 1538 the Church of England clergyman and playwright William Wager (1537/8?-1591) was born, who may very probably have been Wager's son. On 5 April 1560 Wager became rector of the parish of St James Garlickhythe, London. He died over two years later, and was buried on 18 July 1562 in his parish. His property was assigned to his widow, Elenore. 
The only work which is certainly by Wager, 'A new enterlude... of the life and repentaunce of Marie Magdalene, not onlie godlie, learned and fruitefull, but also well furnished with pleasaunt myrth and pastime, very delectable for those which shall hear or reade the same', was entered in the Stationers' register late in 1566 by John Charlewood, who printed it in 1566 and 1567. The play, doubled for four actors, was acted at the universities, and was influenced by Calvin's 'Institutes'. The Stationers' register attributed the fragmentary interlude 'The Cruel Debtor', entered about March 1566, to Wager (without forename), but this may be the William Wager who is thought to be his son. 


@@@@@


doc= 28395


Wager, William (1537/8?-1591), Church of England clergyman and playwright, was probably born in 1537 or 1538 (in 1579 he testified in chancery that he was '41 yeres and upwardes'), and was almost certainly the son of the playwright Lewis Wager (d. 1562). Although Greg and Chambers refused to accept that W. Wager of two title-pages was necessarily the same person as William Wager, the circumstantial evidence remains persuasive. 
Of Wager's education nothing is known. Eccles suggests that, given Wager's strong protestantism, he may have studied abroad during Mary's reign. On 26 October 1562 he married Ellen Godson at St James Garlickhythe, London (where Lewis Wager had been rector). By January 1567 four children had been baptized in the parish, of whom two boys can be traced: Edward at Magdalene College, Cambridge, and Thomas at St John's College, Oxford. 
Wager became rector of St Benet Gracechurch on 22 July 1567. He also held the living at St Michael Queenhithe, and the rectory of Cradley in Herefordshire. He was licensed to preach, as a lecturer, in any London parish from 6 May 1579, at a stipend of $8 per annum, and was known for his strong protestantism -- his 'hot words' and anti-papist attacks (Seaver, 80, 209). This is a link with the plays which can be attributed to him. 
The two plays bearing the name W. Wager are polemical protestant interludes. 'Enough is as Good as a Feast' shows the tragic, but sinful, downfall of Worldly Man, an extortioner who dies refusing grace. It was doubled for seven actors, and influenced by Tyndale and Latimer. It has seventy-four lines in common with the anonymous 'Trial of Treasure' (1567), and is valued as developing the conventional form of the interlude. Further experimentation continued with 'The Longer thou Livest the More Fool thou art', entered in the Stationers' register in April 1569. It was arranged for performance by four actors and was especially enlivened by the musical fool, Moros, who at one point sings 'the foot of many songs as fools were wont'. 
In public affairs, Wager earned praise for his preaching and was active in pastoral care. In 1569 John Sturgeon, haberdasher, bequeathed him and his churchwardens an annuity of 40's'. In 1573 he was appointed a governor of the queen's new grammar school at Barnet, and two years later he is found hearing petitions from inmates of three London prisons. His achievements suggest he was the 'Master Wager' who joined two wardens of the Stationers' Company on 4 September 1589 to receive the entry of a ballad on the assassination of Henry III of France (Arber, 'Regs. Stationers', 2.530). He was buried at St Benet's on 29 March 1591. 
Two fragments of a play called 'The Cruel Debtor', entered in the Stationers' register about March 1566 as by Wager, have survived, but as there is no forename in the record, the play may be the work of either William or Lewis (who had died in 1562). A further play attributed to W. Wager, 'Tis Good Sleeping in a Whole Skin', was said to have been burnt by William Warburton's cook in the eighteenth century. Greg has demonstrated that the former attribution of 'Tom Tyler' and 'The History of the Trial of Chivalry' go back to a palpable error by Edward Phillips in 1675 (Greg, 'Dramatic bibliographers', 325-7). Wager's reputation as a dramatist is now based upon the two extant lively and challenging polemical interludes which have appeal as vigorous examples of their genre, and which were, no doubt, acceptable, as well as contributory, to the expanding protestant culture of their time. 


@@@@@


doc= 28396


Waghorn, Martin (d. 1787), naval officer, from Deptford, had probably already been some years in the navy when, on 2 May 1756, he married Ann Marriott, at St Thomas's Church, Portsmouth; they had at least four children. On 16 December 1762 he was commissioned lieutenant on the 'Manila' by Vice-Admiral Sir Samuel Cornish. This ship was one of the prizes taken after the British capture of Manila from Spain. In August 1763 he was appointed, again by Cornish, second lieutenant of the frigate 'Liverpool', and in her he returned to England. 
Waghorn was put on half pay in November 1764 and during the long period which ensued before his next Royal Navy lieutenancy he served as first mate in the East India Company's 'Ponsborne' and 'Lioness', on four voyages to India and China between 1768 and 1777. On 19 March 1778 he was appointed third lieutenant of the 'Victory', then fitting for the flag of Admiral Augustus Keppel; Waghorn became second lieutenant on 29 April, and then, on 13 May, second lieutenant of the 'Prince George'. He returned to the 'Victory', as sixth lieutenant, on 16 February 1779, and remained with her until 15 August 1781, when he obtained his first command, the sloop 'Fly'. On 6 April 1782 Waghorn was promoted captain of the 'Royal George' (100 guns), in which Richard Kempenfelt, who may have known him in the East Indies, and was now a rear-admiral, hoisted his flag. 
On 29 August 1782 the 'Royal George' capsized and sank at Spithead while heeled to replace a blocked seacock. Waghorn, two lieutenants, and 330 men were saved, but his son William -- a midshipman on board -- was drowned, along with Admiral Kempenfelt, over 400 crewmen, and 360 women and children. Waghorn was exonerated by the court martial held on 7 September, it being concluded that there had been a structural failure in the ship's 'old and rotten' frame. However, it now seems that she was simply swamped through her open larboard lower gun ports, through which large rum casks were being loaded; there was a failure of communication and of supervision by the officers; and the procedure should never have been attempted in the first place. For all this, Waghorn must share much of the blame with the admiral. 
From September 1783 to July 1785 Waghorn was captain of Commodore Sir John Lindsay's flagship, 'Trusty', in the Mediterranean. He died on 17 December 1787, at Dover Place in Surrey, and was survived by at least two of his children: one daughter who died on 19 December 1798, and Eliza, who on 3 June 1799 married Captain Henry Blackwood (1770-1832). 


@@@@@


doc= 28397


Waghorn, Thomas (1800-1850), naval officer and self-publicist, one of ten children of Thomas Waghorn, a butcher, and his wife, Ann Goodhugh, was born in Chatham, Kent, on 20 June 1800. He entered the navy in 1812 as a midshipman but was paid off in 1817 before completing the six years required to qualify as a lieutenant. He sailed to Calcutta in 1819 as third mate on a merchant vessel, was employed as second mate in the Bengal pilot service in 1820, and married in Calcutta, on 11 June 1822, Elizabeth (1805-1834), daughter of William Bartlett. He took part in the First Anglo-Burmese War (1824-6). Although noted for his extraordinary energy and keenness, he had to wait for promotion since rank in the Bengal pilot service was determined by length of service. 
Developments in marine technology in the 1820s enabled vessels to make short sea voyages by steam: this aroused great interest in India, and rival 'steam committees' were set up to find the best route to England. Waghorn saw that there was money in the new technology, and, despite the failure of Calcutta's experiment round the Cape of Good Hope in 1826 and his own lack of experience in steam shipping, he went twice (1827-8 and 1828-9) to England to seek patronage for another attempt on the Cape route, but he failed to extract any money for what Sir Francis Freeling, chief secretary to the General Post Office, called his 'wild scheme' (3 Aug 1827; Sidebottom, 18). He returned to Calcutta via Egypt and the Red Sea, and landed in Bombay to find that the 'Hugh Lindsay', a steam warship built there and commanded by Captain J. H. Wilson, had just started on her first voyage (1830) between Bombay and Suez. The shorter overland route via the Red Sea was successfully demonstrated but Waghorn's mind remained fixed on the Cape route until 1831, when he travelled to London again. After driving to distraction every official in sight both in the government and in the East India Company, he resigned from that company after one of his many uncontrollable and sometimes violent displays of temper. He then completed his training as a midshipman, but was not promoted to lieutenant. Meanwhile, the 'Hugh Lindsay' continued to make voyages with a few important passengers aboard. Wilson escorted them to and from Suez and Cairo or Alexandria, and dispatched mails that were speedily conveyed by camels driven by Bedouin to the relevant port. In Egypt in 1833 Waghorn heard what Wilson was doing and decided to become a private courier himself. Here he showed that he lived in a fantasy world in which he could do anything and everything. In a pamphlet he claimed that he had opened the Red Sea route and could run up and down it throughout the year -- including the period of the south-west monsoon -- in a single small vessel. In fact, however, the first time he set foot on a steamer in the Red Sea was two years later, when he went aboard the 'Hugh Lindsay' to meet Wilson, but he never made a voyage in that vessel. 
In December 1834 Waghorn married Harriet Martin, a Kent miller's daughter, at All Saints, Snodland, Kent; they had no children. He built The Lodge, a gentleman's residence in Snodland, and mortgaged it. In 1835 Smith Elder & Co., traders in the East and Waghorn's publishers, allowed him to base his courier business in their premises at 65 Cornhill, London. 
Waghorn was adept at keeping his name in the public eye. Helped by people more educated than himself, he produced a number of pamphlets (1831-48) in which he heckled his dedicatees, always high-ranking aristocrats or prominent politicians, and offered useless advice. His evidence to the two select committees on steam communication to India (1834 and 1837) revealed his extraordinary ideas and gross ignorance. As a choice example, he maintained that he had surveyed the whole of the Cape and Red Sea routes by 'an eye sketch'. His appointment in 1837 as deputy agent in Egypt lasted only three months because of an explosive argument with his senior. Extending his private letter business into a passenger agency, he set up a partnership with George Wheatley at the Overland register office, 71 Cornhill. As more travellers chose to go overland to India, there were opportunities for entrepreneurs to facilitate the crossing. Waghorn tried to compete with the established Hill & Co. but instead was forced to merge with them by the arrival of the Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company (P. & O.). Having engaged Waghorn as a sub-agent and seen his ways, P. & O. paid him up in 1842, the year he was given the rank of lieutenant by the Admiralty. Never able to stay in the same place for long, he left Egypt for England in 1843, ill, almost certainly bankrupt and 'perfectly shattered by the fatigues and excitement he had undergone' (Wheatley, 353). He now announced, falsely, that he was responsible for 'promoting and achieving the Overland Route to India three years before the route was taken up' (T. Waghorn, 'Acceleration of Mails (once a fortnight) between England and the East Indies', BL, MS 1393, fol. 4) by the British government and the East India Company. 
In the last years of his life Waghorn was involved with the Austrian Lloyd Steam Navigation Company. It engaged him to make trial journeys to promote Trieste as a better mail port than Marseilles and to compete with P. & O. His journeys were closely charted by 'The Times' (1846), but publicity and enthusiasm did not convince the Admiralty that Ostend-Trieste was better than Calais-Marseilles for conveyance of mails. The Treasury refused to pay more than $4000 towards the cost of these expensive trials, which left Waghorn with a debt of $2000 added to those he had already incurred, and his public appeals failed to relieve him of all his troubles. Asked to convene a meeting in London to campaign for steam to Australia and to pave the way for the India and Australia Steam Packet Company, which would soon be formed by bankers, merchants, and Austrian Lloyd, Waghorn widened his fantasy world by telling his audience that his object was to have 'the honour of opening [the Australian] line in my own person as I first did the Indian one' ('Morning Advertiser', 3). His name appeared on the company's share lists in spite of his debts until the company's disappearance. 
In 1847, still working for Austrian Lloyd, Waghorn tried to persuade the Austrian government to build a railway between Trieste and Ostend. Lord Palmerston, who took an interest in this project because it would give British industrialists access to a huge German market, found that for political reasons Prince Metternich, the Austrian chancellor, was willing but other ministers objected both to British engineers and to the line Waghorn was pressing upon them. By this time Waghorn was worn out. P. & O. gave him a free ticket to Calcutta to enable him to wind up his affairs. He died on 7 January 1850 at Golden Terrace, Pentonville, London and was buried in the churchyard of All Saints, Snodland. 
Restless, hyperactive, crude, with ambitions far above his ability to achieve them, Waghorn was kept alive in the popular mind by chance. In the week of his death 'the moving Diorama of the Overland Route to India' was on show in Regent Street and attracted many visitors. The pictures confirmed Egypt as Britain's high road to India, and Waghorn's imaginary exploits served as symbols for Britain's expanding empire. Later, in 1884, the burghers of Rochester commemorated his 'achievements', but, apart from the terms 'pioneer' and 'originator', the real celebration was about Britain's recent triumph, the occupation of Egypt (1882). A statue of him, which was unveiled at Suez in November 1869 at the inauguration of the canal, was destroyed in 1956. Whether liar or simpleton, Waghorn had played no more than a minute off-stage part. 


@@@@@


doc= 28398


Wagstaffe, John (c.1633-1677), writer on witchcraft, was born in Cheapside, London, the son of John Wagstaffe of London; his mother's name may have been Elizabeth. He was educated at St Paul's School and went up to Oriel College, Oxford, as a Pauline exhibitioner in 1649; he matriculated in 1650, graduated BA in 1653, and proceeded MA in 1656. In 1660 he contributed a Greek poem and a Latin acrostic to the volume of verses published at Oxford to celebrate the Restoration. He incorporated at Cambridge in 1668. On the death of an uncle, who died without male children, Wagstaffe inherited his estate at Hasland, Derbyshire; he never married. 
Wagstaffe's first book, entitled 'Historical reflections on the bishop of Rome, chiefly discovering those events of humane affaires which most advanced the papal usurpation', published in 1660, gave a rather cynical account of the means by which papal hegemony was achieved at the expense of the susceptible barbarians in the early middle ages. His most famous work was his 'The Question of Witchcraft Debated' (1669; 2nd edn, 1671). This offered a robust critique of the belief in witchcraft, appealing to reason and invoking sarcasm to make his case that the power of witches was illusory. The thrust of his case was threefold: '1. That the opinion of Witchcraft is not to be found in Scripture. 2. That Politique interest hath founded it on fables. 3. That those fables discover themselves to be so, by their impossibility' (pp. 144-5). Echoing the theme of his earlier 'Reflections', he took the view that witch beliefs had been consciously embroidered by the clergy as a means of self-aggrandizement; in his view such priestly manipulation capitalized on the fact that 'all men have fear implanted in them by nature, the very strongest of all their passions' (p. 125), a notion almost certainly derived from Hobbes. In making his case he took a confident and iconoclastic line, appealing to 'any sober unbiased person; especially if he be of such ingenuity, as to have freed himself from a slavish subjection, unto those prejudicial opinions, which Custome and education, do with too much Tyranny impose' (p. 147). Moreover, alluding to the empirical evidence by which such store was set by contemporary defenders of witch beliefs like Joseph Glanvill, he argued: 'it is far more easie, and far more rational to believe, that witnesses are lyars and perjured persons, than it is to believe; that an old Woman can turn her self, or any body else into a Cat' (p. 146). 
Wagstaffe's book was attacked by one R. T. in a book entitled 'The Opinion of Witchcraft Vindicated' (1670), and by the veteran scholar Meric Casaubon in his 'Of Credulity and Incredulity; in Things Divine & Spiritual' (1670), both of whom asserted a more traditional view of the subject. The result was that in 1671 Wagstaffe brought out a greatly extended second edition of his book. In it he elaborated his case and, in his preface, defended himself against the 'ridiculous slander' that he was an 'atheist' (sig. A2), which evidently owed much to contemporary anxieties about the corrolaries of sadducism -- scepticism about witchcraft -- though it is also understandable in the light of Wagstaffe's iconoclasm and his somewhat deistic religious views. 
The importance of Wagstaffe's work as one of the very few open attacks on witch beliefs in its period is illustrated by the fact that it was twice reprinted in the early eighteenth century, first in 1712 as part of the controversy over the conviction as a witch and subsequent pardoning of Jane Wenham and then in 1736 in connection with the repeal of the 'Witchcraft Act'; in each case it provided the sole exposition of a strongly sceptical viewpoint. It was also translated into German in 1711. 
Apart from the notoriety associated with this book, relatively little is known about Wagstaffe's life. A few personal details come from Anthony Wood, who notes that he was 'a little crooked man, and of a despicable presence'; indeed, he looked 'like a little wizard', and his book on witchcraft accordingly caused mirth among the wits at Oxford. He died, according to Wood, aged forty-four or thereabouts, in London at his lodgings in Holborn, opposite Chancery Lane, on 2 September 1677, 'in a manner distracted, occasion'd by a deep conceit of his own parts, and by a continual bibbing of strong and high tasted liquors' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.1114). He was buried in the Guildhall chapel, City of London. 


@@@@@


doc= 28399


Wagstaffe, Sir Joseph (bap. 1611?, d. 1666/7), royalist army officer, was probably baptized on 13 August 1611 at Harbury, Warwickshire, and was probably the seventh and youngest son of Richard Wagstaffe ('b'. 1574) of Harbury, and his wife, Anne, daughter of John Hanslap of Stonythorpe in the same county. Thomas Wagstaffe the nonjuror and William Wagstaffe, physician, were relatives of Joseph Wagstaffe. 
Wagstaffe's early life is obscure, but at the beginning of 1642 he was a major in an Irish regiment in the service of France. In June 1642 he became lieutenant-colonel in the army destined by the parliament for the recovery of Ireland, and in the following autumn he held the same rank in John Hampden's regiment of foot in the earl of Essex's army. Taken prisoner by the royalists in January 1643, he changed sides and accepted a commission to raise a regiment for the king. He was wounded at the recapture of Lichfield Close by Prince Rupert's forces in the spring of 1643. Subsequently he was major-general of foot under Prince Maurice in the west of England, was knighted at Crediton on 27 or 28 July 1644, and distinguished himself by his soldierly retreat in the disastrous battle of Langport. In September 1648 he was placed under arrest on suspicion of plotting an uprising, but he escaped from confinement at Peterhouse prison, London, almost as soon as he arrived. At some point thereafter he fled to the continent. 
Wagstaffe returned in 1655 when the western royalists asked for him to be their leader in their part of an intended national rising against Cromwell, he being well known to them and generally beloved. Clarendon characterizes him as fitted: 'rather for execution than counsel, a stout man who looked not far before him, yet he had a great companionableness in his nature, which exceedingly prevailed with those who in the intermission of fighting loved to spend their time in jollity and mirth.' Despite the collapse of the conspiracy in other parts of the country on 8 March, Wagstaffe, with about 200 Wiltshire royalists, optimistic expectations of nationwide insurrection, and assistance from France, entered Salisbury early on 12 March 1655, and proclaimed Charles II. 
The judges on circuit and sheriff were seized in their beds, and Wagstaffe thought of hanging them as a seasonable example, but was prevented by the opposition of Colonel Penruddock and the country gentlemen. After leaving Salisbury with about 400 men, the royalists marched into Dorset, but gained few recruits on their way. When they entered Somerset their numbers began to diminish, and the few who remained were taken or dispersed by Captain Unton Croke at South Molton on the night of 14 March. Wagstaffe himself escaped all the searches made after him, and was back in Flanders by July. He survived the Restoration, petitioned for the reversion of an office which he did not obtain, and received a small grant of some of the late king's goods in 1662. He died between July 1666, when his will (which makes no mention of a wife or children) was written, and 12 February 1667, when it was proved. His place of burial is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 28400


Wagstaffe, Thomas (1645-1712), bishop of the nonjuring Church of England, was the son of Thomas Wagstaffe of Binley, Warwickshire, and his wife, Anne Avery of Bishop's Itchington in the same county. He was born either at Binley on 13 February or at Stafford two days later. He studied at Charterhouse School, London, before matriculating at Pembroke College, Cambridge, on 14 May 1660. He then migrated to New Inn Hall, Oxford, on 14 March 1663, graduated BA in 1664, and proceeded MA in 1667. He was ordained deacon by John Hacket, bishop of Lichfield, on 6 June 1669 and priest five months later, on 19 November, by Joseph Henshaw of Peterborough. Henshaw subsequently appointed him rector of Martinsthorpe, Rutland. Made chancellor and canon of Lichfield on 6 December 1684, the following year he was presented by Henry Compton, bishop of London, to the rectory of the united parishes of St Margaret Pattens and St Gabriel Fenchurch. 
During this period of advancement Wagstaffe published several sermons which were explicit statements of his tory Anglican loyalism. Those preached at Stowe, Buckinghamshire, in 1683 and at St Margaret Pattens in 1685 were the thanksgiving day sermons for the failure of the Rye House plot and the Monmouth rising. His defence of the Church of England at the Guildhall in November 1684 branded its critics as 'Rebels, Schismatics, Seditious, Turbulent, and unquiet' (T. Wagstaffe, 'A Sermon Preached before the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor... at the Guild-Hall Chappel on November the 23d. 1684', 1685, 29). The sermon that he delivered at St Mary-le-Bow on 24 November 1687 was more eirenic in tone. Its text, 'Be ye all of one mind, having compassion', exhorting his hearers to the spiritual virtues of Christian unity and charity, was no doubt apposite to its audience -- the annual feast for Warwickshire men living in London. But it was also the cry of a committed Anglican now urging a common protestant front against the threat posed by James II's Catholicizing policies. Protestant disunity was both shameful in itself and provided ammunition to the common Romish enemy: 'We must cease our Dissentions, and be as Good and Peaceable as our Principles. This will effectually answer all the clamors of our Adversaries, and do our Religion more right than all the Arguments of its Friends' (T. Wagstaffe, 'A Sermon Preached at a Meeting of the Natives and Inhabitants of the County of Warwick... Novemb. 24. 1687', 1688, 25). Their philanthropy, he added, amply disproved the charge that protestants had come to neglect the Christian obligation of charity when they abandoned belief in salvation by good works. 
Wagstaffe married Martha Broughton of St Margaret's, Westminster, by licence dated 4 February 1686. They had several children, including a son, Thomas Wagstaffe (1692-1770), who like his father became a leading member of the nonjuring community and served as an Anglican chaplain to the exiled Stuart court at Rome. A daughter married his kinsman, William Wagstaffe, who became a well-known physician at St Bartholomew's Hospital and a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians. 
Wagstaffe continued in his ecclesiastical positions until he was deprived in 1690 for refusing the oaths to William and Mary. Having studied medicine before taking orders, Wagstaffe now supported his family by taking up the practice of medicine in London, allegedly visiting his patients in full canonical attire. He also became a leading participant in the nascent nonjuring community in London, serving as an adviser and possibly as a physician to the deprived archbishop of Canterbury, William Sancroft. Having attended to the deprived archbishop before his death, Wagstaffe published an intimate account of Sancroft's last years and his death entitled 'A letter out of Suffolk to a friend in London giving some account of the late sickness and death of Dr. William Sancroft, late lord archbishop of Canterbury' (1694). There he gave an account of the archbishop's deportment and faith during his forced retirement, noting that contrary to rumour that Sancroft received pastoral care and the sacraments from conforming clergy, Sancroft received these only from nonjurors such as himself. 
Sancroft never accepted his deprivation, believing that the government had acted illegally and that his successor at Canterbury was an illegitimate usurper, thereby setting the stage for the continuation of the nonjuring separation. He granted to William Lloyd, the deprived bishop of Norwich, his metropolitan authority, which included the right to consecrate bishops for the nonjuring line. Therefore, with his primate's sanction, Lloyd and fellow nonjuring bishops Francis Turner of Ely and Thomas White of Peterborough looked to the interregnum for precedent in continuing the succession. Noting that the ageing Laudian bishops had conferred with the exiled Charles II and had gained his permission to continue the historic succession just before the Restoration intervened and made the action unnecessary, Lloyd sent George Hickes to obtain permission from James II to continue the nonjuring line. With approval from the exiled king, the bishops took advantage of Henry VIII's act, setting up two suffragan sees for the diocese of Norwich; they decided to fill these seemingly empty sees, which allowed them to continue the succession but avoid the problem of setting up rival sees. The purpose of continuing the nonjuring line was to offer the established church a pure church to return to when the cause of the schism had been resolved. While Hickes was nominated by Sancroft to fill the see of Thetford, Lloyd nominated Wagstaffe to the see of Ipswich, making them the only nonjuring bishops to fill titular sees. The two men were consecrated on 24 February 1694 by Lloyd, Turner, and White at the home of William Gifford at Southgate, Middlesex. 
Although he agreed to his consecration, Wagstaffe did not exercise his episcopal prerogatives, and refrained from participating in any ordinations. He none the less remained active in nonjuring affairs, writing in defence of the movement and helping to raise funds to support impoverished nonjuror clergy. For this activity he was arrested and appeared before the privy council, together with bishops Ken, White, and Lloyd and the nonjuror clergyman Nathaniel Spinckes. Released by order of the council on 23 May 1696, Wagstaffe, whose connections and medical practice provided him with sufficient income to support his family, remained actively involved in the effort to provide financial support for his less fortunate colleagues. 
Although he was not a prolific writer, Wagstaffe did write several short works and pamphlets in support of the Stuart dynasty and in defence of the nonjuring and Jacobite cause. A strong Stuart supporter and proponent of the principle of divine-right monarchy, he believed that former colleagues, such as William Sherlock, had acted inconsistently with the principles of the Church of England by taking the oath of allegiance to William and Mary, whom he considered usurpers of James II's proper title. His strong belief in divine-right monarchy is given voice in 'An answer to a late pamphlet entitled 'Obedience and submission to the present government' demonstrated from Bishop Overall's convocation book' (1690), in which he responded to an anonymous pamphlet that charged the nonjurors, such as Sherlock, with 'ignorance and malice' for 'reproaching those of the Church of 'England', who have taken the Oaths with deserting their principles'. He responded that it was indeed a malicious thing to be deprived of one's livings for keeping to principle (Wagstaffe, 'Answer', 1). Wagstaffe sought to show that the principal doctrines found in Bishop John Overall's convocation book included passive obedience and non-resistance. Thus, the principles of the Church of England insisted that once a government was settled it should be obeyed, therefore, subjects should 'obey their lawful governors, and upon no account whatsoever to resist them' (ibid., 21). 
Wagstaffe's most notable work was his defence of Charles I's authorship of the 'Eikon basilike', entitled 'A vindication of King Charles the Martyr; proving that his majesty was the author of 'Eikon basilike'' (1691, 1697, 1711), and his later 'Defense of the vindication of King Charles the Martyr; justifying his majesty's title to 'Eikon basilike'' (1699). In the controversy that re-emerged shortly after the revolution of 1688 over the book's true author, his was one of those tory and Jacobite voices that maintained it had been written by the martyr-king against the whig attribution of John Gauden. 
True to his reluctance to exercise his episcopal authority, Wagstaffe refused to perform any episcopal consecrations when George Hickes sought his assistance, first in December 1711 and then in February 1712, in continuing the endangered nonjuring succession after William Lloyd's and Thomas Ken's return to the established church removed the last of the English bishops consecrated before the schism. Wagstaffe rebuffed his colleague, claiming that age and illness, along with distance from London, prevented him from complying. He also told Hickes that he believed this venture 'to be impracticable, that it has no foundation to stand on, but that the least opposition that will or hereafter be made to it cannot fail, but it must sink under it and come to nothing, and that consequently we shall destroy and irrecoverably defeat what is designed to be built up. (Yould, 402)' With Wagstaffe's refusal to act, Hickes finally turned to the nonjuring Scottish bishops for assistance and continued the nonjuring succession by consecrating Jeremy Collier, Samuel Hawes, and Nathaniel Spinckes. 
In his later years, though retaining a London house in Charterhouse Yard, Wagstaffe had returned to Binley, where he continued his writing. It was there that he died on 17 October 1712 and was buried three days later. He was survived by his wife, Martha, and six children. The announcement of his death in the 'Postboy' spoke of him as: 'a man of extraordinary judgment, exemplary piety, and unusual learning; and had he not had the misfortune to dissent from the established government by not taking the oaths, as he had all the qualities of a great divine, and a governor of the Church, so he would have filled deservedly some of the highest stations in it. (Overton, 114)' The great whig historian Lord Macaulay called Wagstaffe and Hickes 'two fierce and uncompromising nonjurors' (Macaulay, 4.2008). Though there was a bitter barb in his comment -- he had just mocked Wagstaffe's providentialist reading of the death of Mary II in December 1694, which drew close parallels in the timing of the turns in her descent to the grave with the timing of her betrayed father's loss of his throne in December 1688 -- Macaulay also recognized Wagstaffe to be 'a writer whom the Jacobite schismatics justly regarded as one of their ablest chiefs' (ibid., 5.2472). 


@@@@@


doc= 28401


Wagstaffe, Thomas (1692-1770), clergyman of the nonjuring Church of England and theologian, was the son of Thomas Wagstaffe (1645-1712), bishop of the nonjuring Church of England, and Martha Broughton ('fl'. 1687-1692). He was probably educated at home by his father, and became a well-read divine and classical scholar. A superior Latinist, he could speak seven languages besides English, and was an able scholar in Hebrew, Arabic, and Syrian. He was ordained deacon in 1718 and priest on 25 April 1719 by the nonjuror Bishop Jeremy Collier at Roger Laurence's chapel in London. He served the nonjuror community as the keeper of records, succeeding Thomas Deacon. In that capacity he drew up a bibliographical list of tracts concerning the usages controversy within the nonjuror movement. Wagstaffe took over Deacon's congregation at Dunstan's Court, Fleet Street, London, in 1722, serving there for ten years. During that period he acted as London representative for the primus of the usager party, Thomas Brett. 
Wagstaffe formed, with his fellow usagers Laurence, Deacon, Francis Peck, John Rutter, and Samuel Jebb, a block that pushed usager party leaders Collier and Brett to emphasize the essential nature of the four usages -- the mixed chalice, invocation of the Holy Spirit, oblation, and prayers for the dead -- and to break communion with the nonusages party. He contributed several works to the usages controversy, including 'The Necessity of an Alteration' (1718) and 'The Reasonableness and Necessity of some Practices of the Reformation of the Church of England' (1720). Wagstaffe carried on a debate with Samuel Drake in Latin over the necessity of a mixed chalice containing both water and wine. In 1719 Drake denounced the practice in a Cambridge University sermon, 'Vino eucharistico aqua necessario admiscenda'. Wagstaffe's rejoinder of the same title (1719) led to Drake's 1721 response, 'Ad Thomam Wagstaffe', to which Wagstaffe responded in 1725 with his 'Responsionis ad concionem vindiciae'. 
Despite his insistence on the essential nature of the usages, Wagstaffe reluctantly agreed to the reunion of the two parties engineered by Thomas Brett and George Smith in 1732. Nevertheless, he criticized the concordat for abandoning the theological foundations of the usages, and believed that the abandonment of their communion office would lead to greater decline in the nonjuror movement's congregations, his included. Yet he did not feel comfortable with the party of Archibald Campbell and Thomas Deacon that continued to hold the essentialist position. Before leaving Dunstan's Court he warned his congregation not to secede to Campbell, whom he charged with holding heretical doctrines concerning hell. 
The discomfort with the concordat and the tension with Brett over his remarks concerning Campbell led Wagstaffe to withdraw from active involvement in the movement. His congregation at Dunstan's Court disappeared and he refused to take over the Scroop's Court congregation. In the spring of 1734 Wagstaffe left England for the continent. He joined the Stuart court in Rome, where he served as the Anglican chaplain to James III (James Stuart) and then to his son, Charles Edward. He lived in Rome very simply and spent his time in scholarly pursuits, producing a manuscript detailing the Greek manuscripts of St Paul's epistles held in the Vatican and Cardinal Barberini libraries, which was given to Sion College. 
Wagstaffe died on 3 December 1770 in Rome, where he was buried, respected by the Stuart court and the people of Rome who knew him. At his death he was described as a 'fine, wel-bred old gentleman', who was a pious and sincere Christian, whom the people of Rome 'were wont to say that had he not been a Heretic, he ought to have been canonized' (Overton, 338). 


@@@@@


doc= 28402


Wagstaffe, William (1683/4-1725), physician and satirist, was born at Cublington, Buckinghamshire, the only son of the Revd Thomas Wagstaffe, rector of Cublington. He was related to the Wagstaffes of Knightcote in Warwickshire, and was a relation of Sir Joseph Wagstaffe. He went to school in Northampton, and in 1700 entered Lincoln College, Oxford, where he graduated BA (1704) and MA (1707). 
In 1707 Wagstaffe moved to London, where his relative the Revd Thomas Wagstaffe (1645-1712) was a nonjuror, one of the Church of England clergy who refused to swear allegiance to William and Mary and who were deprived of a living. Although unlicensed, Thomas Wagstaffe practised physic without interference from the College of Physicians. William Wagstaffe acquired a taste for medical studies, and he also married Thomas Wagstaffe's daughter. She died soon afterwards and he married, secondly, the daughter of Charles Bernard, surgeon to St Bartholomew's Hospital. Wagstaffe graduated BM and DM at Oxford in 1714; he was elected a fellow of the College of Physicians in 1718, and was a censor in 1720. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1718. A reader in anatomy to the barber-surgeons since 1715, he was elected physician to St Bartholomew's Hospital in 1720, on the death of Salisbury Cade. He wrote 'A letter showing the danger and uncertainty of inoculating the small pox' (1722), and edited James Drake's anatomical manual. 
Wagstaffe's 'Miscellaneous Works' (1725) contains a biographical preface, suggesting that Henry Levett, a physician at St Bartholomew's, was its author. The pieces had appeared separately and it was thought by Dilke and Sir Henry Craik that Swift might have been their author, though the Revd Whitwell Elwin did not agree. The various pieces ridicule the praise of Chevy Chase in 'The Spectator' (nos. 70 and 74), and they attack Benjamin Hoadly, Marlborough, John Woodward, and Richard Steele, who credited Swift with this piece. Wagstaffe had no personal enmity against Steele, whom he did not know by sight. Daniel Turner, who had met Wagstaffe in consultation, praised his honesty and good nature. Wagstaffe was also a friend of John Freind, and may have met Swift at Charles Bernard's. He approved of Henry Sacheverell, and was a high-churchman and a hater of the whigs. 
Wagstaffe was a lover of good company but, spending more time in society than in study, he became impoverished and, in consequence, melancholy. The weight upon his spirits led to illness from which a contemporary said he 'might have recovered if he had unburdened his mind to some who had a more than ordinary value for him' (Nichols, 324). In March 1725 he obtained formal leave of absence from St Bartholomew's, and went to Bath for his health. He died there on 5 May 1725. 


@@@@@


doc= 28403


Wainewright, Thomas Griffiths (1794-1847), painter, writer on art, and putative poisoner, was born probably on 4 October 1794, the son of Thomas Wainewright (died in or before 1803) of Sloane Street, in the parish of St Luke, Chelsea, London, and his wife, Ann (1773-1794), daughter of Ralph Griffiths (1720?-1803), founder and editor of the 'Monthly Review', and his second wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Clark. His parents had married by special licence at St Nicholas's, Chiswick, on 13 December 1792. Thomas Wainewright senior was the second son of the twelve children of Robert Wainewright, a solicitor of Gray's Inn who lived in Hatton Garden. Though their father was a Unitarian, several of the elder Thomas Wainewright's brothers became Church of England clergymen, while others followed him into the legal profession. After their marriage Thomas and Ann Wainewright lived with her father at his home, Linden House, Turnham Green, Chiswick, where Wainewright probably was born. His mother died at his birth and his father died while he was still a child, before June 1803, when his grandfather Ralph Griffiths made his will. Ralph Griffiths, to whom Wainewright owed his second name and by whom he was brought up after being orphaned, left his grandson annuities of about $200 (the interest on a sum settled on his mother on her marriage and a further sum paid to his trustees on the death of his father) but no further capital or property, the bulk of which he left to his widow and the son from his first marriage, George Edward Griffiths, to whom he also left the proprietorship of the 'Monthly Review' and the responsibility of taking care of Wainewright, his half-sister's child. 
Wainewright was educated at Charles Burney's school in Greenwich. His talent for drawing the likenesses of his friends and masters led to his apprenticeship at the age of nineteen to his kinsman the fashionable portrait painter Thomas Phillips. He made a copy (City of Nottingham Museums, Newstead Abbey collections) of his master's celebrated portrait of Lord Byron (1813; priv. coll.). Boredom and 'giddiness', however, led him 'to postpone the pencil to the sword' (Hazlitt, 305). A brief spell (from April 1814 to May 1815) as an ensign in the Bedfordshire regiment of foot (more notable in the early nineteenth century for the glamour of its uniform than for any form of active service) induced in Wainewright a deep depression. From this manifestation of the instability that was to underlie his future behaviour he was gradually restored to health by the care of 'a most delicately affectionate and unwearied (though young and fragile) nurse' and the healing power of Wordsworth's poetry (ibid., 306). On 13 November 1817 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Trafalgar Square, he married his 'fragile nurse', Eliza Frances Ward, daughter of the first marriage of Mrs Abercromby, a widow who lived at Mortlake. 
Following his recovery Wainewright began to contribute to the 'London Magazine' under the pseudonyms Janus Weathercock and Cornelius van Vinkbooms. Under the editorship of John Scott, between 1821 and 1823 he regularly contributed 'Sentimentalities on the Fine Arts' and 'Dogmas for dilettantes', written in a fluent but facetious style. W. C. Hazlitt's attribution to Wainewright -- in his introduction to 'Essays and Criticisms of Thomas Griffiths Wainewright' (1880) -- of articles published under the pseudonym Egomet Bonmot has recently been challenged by Marc Vaulbert de Chantilly. In his last contribution to the magazine, 'Janus Weatherbound, or, The Weathercock Steadfast for Lack of Oil', Wainewright 'admitted the tawdry articles signed J. W. and C. V. V.' (Hazlitt, 304). Wainewright's connection with the magazine brought him into contact with Thomas Hood, Allan Cunningham, William Hazlitt, Thomas de Quincey, and Charles Lamb, who wrote of him as 'their best stay, kind, light-hearted Wainewright' (ibid., xxx). W. C. Hazlitt acknowledged that 'the literary criticisms of Wainewright are unquestionably the offspring of an acute and cultivated mind' (ibid., xxiv). Though many of his contemporaries wrote under a pseudonym in journals and magazines, Wainewright's literary guises, stylistically in keeping with T. N. Talfourd's description of him as 'a young man on the bright side of thirty, with an undress military air and the conversation of a smart, clever, lively, heartless, voluptuous coxcomb' (ibid., xxiii), may provide an indication of a deeper fragmentation of his personality. Within his reviews the two-faced Janus sometimes speaks directly to the more seriously minded van Vinkbooms, and vice versa, thereby creating a further level of literary 'deception'. Though they remained fairly thin disguises, these literary personae provided Wainewright with opportunities to explore a variety of identities. 
Known to have assisted in the compilation of exhibition catalogues at Somerset House, and to have contemplated the publication of 'An Art Novel' and two works on the various schools of painting, from 1821 to 1825 Wainewright was also an exhibitor at the Royal Academy. The titles of his exhibited works record their risque subject matter; they include 'Subject from the Romance of Undine, chap. VI'; 'Paris in the Chamber of Helen: 'There Jove-loved Hector Entered''; 'An Attempt from the Undine of de la Motte Fougue ['sic']: 'By degrees, outward terrors joined to inward misgivings, to punish Bertalda's passion for the husband of her friend''; and 'The Milk-Maid's Song: 'Come live with me and be my love'' (Graves, 'RA Exhibitors', 8.99). Talfourd commented that Wainewright's drawings of women were 'voluptuous, trembling on the borders of the indelicate' (Curling, 89). The British Museum holds a sepia drawing of his that confirms that his treatment of this subject, though not devoid of skill, was coarse. His interest in erotic images he explored with fellow artists Henry Fuseli and Theodore von Holst; the latter sold many of his 'private' drawings to the prince of Wales (later George IV). 
Of his circle of literary and artistic friends and patrons Wainewright stated that 'his pen and brush introduced him to the notice and friendship of men whose fame is European' (Blair, 263). Among these were Fuseli ('the god of his idolatry'), Stothard, Westall, Sir Thomas Lawrence, and Flaxman (Hazlitt, xix). His occasional work as a reviewer and artist, together with some art dealing, slightly increased his income; this derived mainly from the annuity from his grandfather but was not sufficient to sustain the lifestyle that he enjoyed from 1821 to 1828 in luxuriously furnished rented apartments at 49 Great Marlborough Street (formerly inhabited by the actress Sarah Siddons), where he formed a collection of prints and maiolica and entertained extravagantly. His guests included Lamb, Sir David Wilkie, William Macready, Charles Wentworth Dilke, Talfourd, and B. W. Procter (Barry Cornwall), who described Mrs Wainewright as 'a sharp-eyed, self-possessed woman dressed in showy, flimsy finery' (Curling, 218). Under mounting financial pressure Wainewright, in the names of his trustees, forged the signatures on a power of attorney instructing the Bank of England to pay him part of the capital sum on which, under the terms of his grandfather's will, he was entitled to the interest alone. According to Andrew Motion the forgery took place in 1822, ten days 'after the $5,000 Navy 5 per cent stock, which TGW had inherited from his grandfather, was converted to $5,250 New 4 per cent Annuities on 5 July 1822' (Motion, 129). On that occasion Wainewright fraudulently obtained $2250 and then 'committed a second forgery on 17 May 1823, and collected the remaining $3000' (ibid.). 
Again financially embarrassed, in 1828 Wainewright and his wife went to live with his uncle George Edward Griffiths, who had remained a bachelor, at Linden House, Chiswick. When Griffiths died, suddenly and intestate, on 16 January 1828, aged about fifty-six, his estate passed to Wainewright as his next of kin. On 4 June at St Nicholas's, Chiswick, Wainewright's son was baptized Griffiths Wainewright, after his recently deceased great-uncle (the gap of eleven years between his parents' marriage and the boy's baptism has led some commentators to suggest that he may have been illegitimate). Over the same period Wainewright's mother-in-law, Mrs Abercromby, and his wife's two half-sisters Helen Frances Phoebe ('b'. 1809) and Madalina Rosa Hibernia 
(Madeleine; 'b'. 1810)
also came to live at Linden House. Apart from the house itself, however, the value of George Griffiths's estate had amounted to about $5000 -- not enough to pay off all Wainewright's debts and maintain the property and his extended family -- and he entered into precipitous loan arrangements with a number of creditors. Under a warrant of attorney he owed $610 to a Mr Sharpus, to whom in July 1830 he granted a bill of sale for the furniture and effects of Linden House. Both the warrant and the bill were dated 21 December 1830. The house and estate he mortgaged to a moneylender to whom he was already heavily in debt. 
In March 1830 Wainewright, with his wife, persuaded her half-sister Helen Abercromby (of whom Wainewright made a portrait drawing; repr. Hazlitt, facing p. 29) to insure her life for two sums, of $2000 and $3000. Mrs Abercromby objected to further policies being taken out on her daughter's life, but in August of that year she herself died a sudden and agonizing death in Linden House. Further policies were taken out in Helen's name; her life was insured, in total for $18,000, with six different insurance companies. In each case Wainewright paid the premium. On 12 December the family moved to lodgings at 12 Conduit Street, London, where on the following day Helen made a will naming her sister Madeleine legatee and Wainewright executor. On 21 December, the day that Wainewright's bills fell due, Helen Abercromby died, aged twenty-one. Her symptoms, as recalled by the family nurse, Sarah Handcock, and the servant Harriet Grattan, were identical to those of her mother, but in contrast to her mother's sudden death Helen's condition, which led to dizziness, vomiting, loss of sight, and convulsions, had worsened over several days. Dr Charles Locock (who later attended Queen Victoria at the births of her children) had attended Helen in her illness and performed an autopsy on the day after her death. He observed some irritation to the stomach but attributed her death to the ill effects of a gastric chill and an indigestible supper of oysters and beer that Helen had consumed a few days before she died. At that date the means to detect strychnine as a cause of death had not been established, and her case is of interest in the history of toxicology. The suspicious circumstances of her death led the insurance companies to withhold payment, and Wainewright filed a bill in chancery to recover $3000 from one insurance company, the Imperial, before leaving for the continent. Mrs Wainewright, the boy Griffiths, and Madeleine Abercromby meanwhile went to live in Pimlico. 
In 1835 Wainewright's suit against the Imperial insurance company came before Mr Justice Abinger in the court of the exchequer. The judge directed the jury not to consider whether murder had been committed. They could not agree a verdict and the case went to a second trial, when the jury found for the defendants on the ground of concealment by Miss Abercromby. Throughout this period Wainewright had remained in France, where he had spent some months in prison in Paris; on his arrest the French police had found him to be carrying strychnine. In June 1837 he returned to London, even though in 1835 the Bank of England had discovered the forgery that he had committed over ten years earlier and had issued a warrant for his arrest. He was recognized by Forrester, a City runner, and arrested. On 5 July 1837 he at first pleaded not guilty to five indictments at the Old Bailey but then, after hearing that the Imperial would not press the three capital charges if he pleaded guilty to the two small charges, he changed his plea accordingly. He was sentenced by the recorder to transportation to Van Diemen's Land for life. Though strongly suspected, no charge of murder was ever brought against him. The anecdote, referred to by Oscar Wilde, that Wainewright confessed to killing Helen because she had such thick ankles, while supported by visual evidence in his drawings of women that he was fascinated by their ankles, remains unconfirmed by a first-hand confessional document. (Various sources mention that Wainewright left a diary but this has not come to light.) While in Newgate awaiting transportation he was recognized by Macready, who was visiting the prison with John Forster and Charles Dickens. 
Sent out on the convict ship 'Susan', Wainewright arrived in Hobart on 21 November 1837. He worked on the roads in a chain gang and later transferred from the prisoners' barracks to Hobart Hospital, where he worked on the wards. Following a decline in his health he was relieved of some duties and allowed to paint portraits of hospital staff, local officials, and members of their families. His portraits of women tend to show slender, smooth-haired, doe-eyed sitters in a hard outline resembling a fashion plate. Examples of these are in the Art Gallery of South Australia, Adelaide, and the National Gallery of Australia, Canberra. A self-portrait drawing that he made in the 1840s (repr. Curling, frontispiece) shows him almost full-face, with long, thinning, receding hair and a dark moustache. His eyebrows are sharply arched over deep-set eyes that do not confront the viewer directly but look away to one side. A dark line over the bridge of his nose gives the impression of a frown. His shirt is open at the neck and the collar of his jacket turned up in a slightly Byronic fashion. The drawing is inscribed, perhaps in Wainewright's hand, 'Head of a 'Convict', very characteristic of 'low cunning' & x 'revenge'!'. In April 1844 he fulsomely petitioned the governor of Van Diemen's Land, Sir John Eardley-Wilmot, for a ticket-of-leave. This was refused but he was granted a probation pass, and in November his name was announced in the Hobart 'Gazette' as one that would go forward to Queen Victoria for a conditional pardon (Motion, 277). In December 1845 his ticket-of-leave was granted. Wainewright died, of apoplexy, in St Mary's Hospital, Hobart, on 17 August 1847. 
A gentlemanly education, literary and artistic skills, and a cultivated taste for objects of high aesthetic quality, combined with the capacity for criminal acts including forgery and, apparently, poisoning, have made Wainewright an intriguing subject for fiction and biography; examples of the former include Edward Bulwer Lytton's 'Lucretia, or, The Children of the Night' (1846), Dickens's 'Hunted Down', and Hal Porter's 'The Tilted Cross' (1961). Melodramatic newspaper and magazine accounts of Wainewright that appeared after his death coloured later studies and biographical accounts such as those included in Talfourd's 'Final Memorials of Charles Lamb' (1848); Walter Thornbury's 'Old Stories Re-told' (1870); A. G. Allen's account in Thomas Seccombe's 'Twelve Bad Men' (1894); B. W. Procter's 'An Autobiographical Fragment' (1877); Oscar Wilde's essay 'Pen, Pencil and Poison: a Study in Green', in the 'Fortnightly Review' (1889); and W. C. Hazlitt's biographical essay in his collection of Wainewright's essays and criticisms (1880). In 'Janus Weathercock' (1938) Jonathan Curling set out to distinguish between the facts of Wainewright's existence and the layers of speculation and story-telling that have subsequently embellished accounts of his life. His conscientious use of primary sources corrected many errors but introduced others, and further records have subsequently come to light. Perceiving difficulties in the use of 'orthodox biographical methods' in recovering Wainewright's history, Andrew Motion experimented in 'Wainewright the Poisoner' (2000) with 'a mixture of different forms -- some imaginative, some factual' (pp. xvi, xviii). Although not 'designed to 'correct' [Wainewright's] Confession in any consistent way' (Motion, xviii) the notes at the end of each chapter contain unreliable information that undermines their usefulness in establishing the facts of Wainewright's existence. The recent discovery of further documents relating to Wainewright means that he continues to be the subject of biographical investigation. 


@@@@@


doc= 28404


Wait, Daniel Guildford (1789-1850), Hebrew scholar, was born in Bristol on 5 November 1789, the eldest son of Daniel Wait (died 1813), a banker who was mayor of Bristol in 1805 and founder of the Bristol Docks Company, and his wife, Mary. He matriculated from University College, Oxford, in 1809 but left in 1811; he was subsequently admitted in 1813 at St John's College, Cambridge, where he held the status of a fellow-commoner and graduated LLB in 1819 and LLD in 1824. He appears to have become a close friend of the organist Samuel Wesley (1766-1837) in Cambridge. While an undergraduate he married, on 10 February 1814, Priscilla Morgan Thorne, daughter of George Thorne, one of his father's banking partners; they had at least two children. He was ordained as curate in Pucklechurch, near Bristol, and on 12 March 1819 became rector of Blagdon in Somerset. Following the death of his first wife he married, on 15 December 1819, Eliza Wylde (died 1864), with whom he had numerous children. 
Wait's first scholarly contribution was his 'Defence of a Critique of the Hebrew Word Nachash' (1811), in which he defended the conclusion that Eve was deceived by a serpent and not by an ape, as Adam Clarke had suggested in the 'Classical, Biblical, and Oriental Journal'. His most important work, however, was 'Jewish, Oriental, and Classical Antiquities', which appeared in 1823. He also translated the 'New Testament' from the German of Leonard Van Hug into English, though his translation was superseded by that of Moses Stuart in 1836. Wait was essentially a comparatist, comparing Jewish scriptures with the 'New Testament', and looking at the influence of Hebrew texts on non-Christian philosophers. In addition he published sermons and psalms, and edited 'Repertorium Theologicum' (1829), of which only one edition was printed. He periodically resided at his Cambridge college, and in 1825 he was appointed to catalogue the oriental manuscripts in Cambridge University Library, but he appears never to have embarked upon the task. 
Wait's tenure as rector of Blagdon was controversial. His sermon preached at the first service held at the new church there, in April 1823, alluded to schism in the parish. A greater problem was his growing indebtedness, the causes of which remain uncertain: the charitable explanation was that his absorption in Hebrew texts caused him to neglect his financial affairs, though the scale of his debts (reckoned in 1832 to be $8000) pointed to more than oversight. In 1829 the proceeds of Blagdon rectory (valued at $500 a year) were sequestered by one of his creditors, and a curate was appointed to undertake his duties. Wait was imprisoned in Fleet debtors prison in 1832, but was discharged early in 1833 under the 'Act for Relief of Insolvent Debtors'. His claims for assistance from the Royal Literary Fund, in March and June 1834, were rejected on grounds of bad character; he then complained of calumnies spread about him. Caught between the conflicting demands of Wait's creditors and their liability for poor rates and taxes for the rectory as well as the arrears of salary due to the curate, the parishioners and tithe payers of Blagdon petitioned the House of Lords in 1835 to inquire into the case. George Law, the bishop of Bath and Wells, regretted that he was legally powerless to intervene and, as to Wait, 'would say nothing, because he could say nothing good of him' ('The Times', 7 April 1835). 
Wait died of heart disease at the rectory, Blagdon, on 30 September 1850 and was buried under the chancel of the parish church, where there is a memorial inscription. His widow survived him, along with eight of their children, six of whom were dependants; the Royal Literary Fund awarded her $50. 


@@@@@


doc= 28405


Waite, Thomas (fl. 1634-1668), parliamentarian army officer and regicide, was probably the eldest son of Henry Waite of Wymondham, Leicestershire. Thomas Waite was admitted to Gray's Inn on 5 March 1634, and may have been the Thomas Waite appointed king's receiver for the counties of Warwick and Leicester for 1640-41. Waite sided with parliament at the outbreak of civil war. By spring 1643 he held a captaincy from Lord Grey of Groby and was stationed with Sir Edward Hartop at Rockingham Castle, Northamptonshire. In December 1643 he raided royalist quarters at Waltham on the Wolds, Leicestershire, and defeated the royalists based at Belvoir Castle at Sproxton Heath in the same county. He was soon commissioned colonel of horse and governor of Rutland. 
In July 1644, while serving as governor of Burghley House, Northamptonshire, Waite became involved in a dispute with Lord Grey; articles were framed by Rutland gentlemen to suspend him from his governorship, while counter-petitions were presented in his favour. On 11 August 1645 parliament discharged him from further attendance upon the case and he returned to Burghley. However, the dispute lingered and on 14 October the committee of both kingdoms feared that, with the king nearby, unrest within the garrison might undermine its strength. The dispute was revived on 27 November and Waite was called to attend the House of Commons again on 3 December. The case was still being heard in June 1646. Nevertheless Waite was elected county MP for Rutland in July 1646, and on 9 January 1647 the House of Commons ordered that $2166 be paid him out of Rutland's delinquency fines. 
On 4 June 1648 Waite was dispatched from Leicester by Lord Grey with a commission to proceed with martial law to quell a royalist uprising around Peterborough and Stamford. Pursuing the insurgents to Woodcroft House, Waite's forces stormed the building on 6 June and killed the royalist leader, Dr Michael Hudson, for which Waite received parliament's thanks on 8 June. At the end of August, under the command of Lord Grey, Waite participated in the pursuit and capture of the duke of Hamilton, relating the affair to the House of Commons on 28 August 1648. He was among the witnesses at Hamilton's subsequent trial, where Hugh Peter openly accused him of lying over whether Hamilton had surrendered to Grey's or John Lambert's forces. Although not personally excluded, he disapproved of Pride's Purge and withdrew from the House of Commons on 13 December 1648. He returned to his estates, and later alleged that he suppressed republican petitions there before the threat of sequestration compelled him to return to London on 25 January 1649. Named to the high court of justice, he attended only three meetings, but was among the last of the signatories of the king's death warrant ['see also 'Regicides]. 
On 5 March 1650 Waite was appointed commander-in-chief of the Rutland militia's cavalry, but three years later, with the dissolution of the Rump Parliament, he retired from state affairs, and endeavoured to recover his wartime losses. On 31 July 1650, with over $400 still due to him, parliament had authorized his purchase of the duke of Buckingham's Rutland estates. On 13 March 1654 Waite's tenants at Hambleton petitioned the council of state complaining of Waite's doubling their rents, diverting their water supply, violating an earlier agreement by enclosing their commons, and endeavouring to evict eighty families. 
Waite did not return to the House of Commons until 1659, and was excepted from the Restoration's 'Act of General Pardon and Oblivion' on 9 June 1660. Four days later he obeyed the proclamation summoning the regicides to surrender themselves. He was brought to trial on 10 October 1660; pleading not guilty, he claimed that he had been tricked into attending court on 27 January 1649 by a note he thought had come from Lord Grey, but which had actually been sent by Oliver Cromwell and Henry Ireton. He claimed that he attended on 29 January only after he received assurances that the king would not be executed, and that Cromwell overpowered his objections, demanding 'These that are gone in shall set their hands, I will have their hands now' (Fraser, 287). Waite's absence from the house during much of December and January 1648-9 supports the case that he was a reluctant regicide. 
Nevertheless, Waite was found guilty and condemned to death. However, on 28 August 1660, because he had surrendered, his name was included on the list of those whose execution was not to take place without a special act of parliament. An act to accomplish this was passed by the House of Commons in January 1662, and Waite was summoned to the bar of the House of Lords on 7 February 1662 to plead for his life. He pointed out, quite truthfully, that he had no part in establishing the high court, but his contention that he was 'forced by Cromwell to signe a writing not knowing what was conteyned therein' ('Seventh Report', HMC, 167) remains unconvincing. The act was eventually dropped and his life was consequently spared, but he spent the rest of his life in prison while his wife, Jane, unsuccessfully appealed for his release, pleading her own ill health and the burden of her five children. He remained a prisoner in Jersey, where he was ordered to be committed to the old castle on 13 February 1668. No will survives and the eventual date of his death is not known. 


@@@@@


doc= 28406


Waithman, Robert (1764-1833), political reformer, was born at Wrexham, Denbighshire, Wales, the son of John Waithman (died 1764), a joiner, of Bersham, and Mary Roberts, who married on 29 January 1761. When Robert was only four months old, his father died; in September 1776 his mother married Thomas Mires, a furnaceman, of Bersham. At an early age Waithman was placed under the instruction of a Mr Moore by his uncle, before moving to Reading about the year 1778 where he worked as a shop assistant and then to London where he was apprenticed in the trade of a linen draper. In 1786 he opened his own store at the south end of Fleet Market, later moving his business to other premises at the corner of Fleet Street and New Bridge Street from which he reportedly amassed a considerable fortune by the time of his retirement. On 14 July 1797 he married his first cousin, Mary Davis (1761-1827), of Red Lion Street, Holborn, with whom he had several sons. 
The outbreak of the French Revolution aroused Waithman's interest in politics and he honed his oratorical skills about 1792 as a frequenter of a debating society at Founders' Hall in Lothbury, in the City. His first real taste of politics came as a liveryman of the Framework Knitters' Company when he was elected as a common councilman for the ward of Farringdon Without in December 1795, although his public career had begun on 23 January 1795 when he seconded a successful motion at a common hall against the war with France. Maintaining his position on peace, a petition for an end to the revolutionary war presented by Waithman was approved by the livery on 19 February 1800 and he published his arguments in the same year as a pamphlet entitled 'War proved to be the cause of the present scarcity, and enormous high price of every article of consumption, with the only radical remedies'. About this time, Waithman was involved in founding the Society of the Independent Livery of London, along with a number of prominent common councilmen and liverymen of the City of London as well as Thomas Hardy, the founder of the London Corresponding Society. The Independent Livery emerged as a significant lobbying group in City politics, championing the cause of the people at a time of high prices, pushing for a petition campaign against the war and for parliamentary reform, and seeking a repeal of income tax. Waithman was an influential member of the Independent Livery, frequently voicing his ideas on reform at this level, although he was unsuccessful in 1802 when he campaigned as parliamentary candidate for the organization. 
Waithman carried his reformist ideas further in 1805 when he proposed at a common hall that a petition be presented to parliament for an inquiry into fiscal management, successfully carrying a petition to parliament on this issue three years later as well as an address to George III for an investigation into the convention of Cintra. In 1808 he also published a 'Letter to the Governors of Christ's Hospital', which revealed that places in the school were being reserved for children of wealthy parents, in exchange for political patronage, rather than being left vacant for those with lower incomes. Within a year he had called for complete parliamentary reform and on 6 June 1810 he carried a motion to petition the House of Commons on the issue of political representation. He regularly supported radical occasions and dinner meetings; he was among a group of over 1200 people which assembled at a reformist dinner held in the Crown and Anchor tavern on 1 May 1809. Later that year he attended the anniversary dinner commemorating the acquittals at the treason trials of 1794 and at much the same time he became acquainted with the freethinking banker-brewer Timothy Brown, and with William Cobbett through a subscription committee for Gwyllym Lloyd Wardle. For six years, between 1809 and 1814, he was also convener of annual dinners of a group known as the Livery of London, Friends of the Constitutional Reform of Parliament, and one of his speeches to the common council on electoral reform and the management of public money was published in 1817. 
Despite his public reformist stance, Waithman made sure that he distanced himself from more radical elements of the reform movement during the Regency years. As such he conducted a running battle against the active Spencean movement, engaged himself in a prolonged confrontation with Henry Hunt, and disengaged himself from the philosophical tenets of Robert Owen. He did, nevertheless, openly support issues associated with the liberty of the press at a time when radical publicists such as Thomas Wooler, William Hone, and Richard Carlile faced prosecution. On 29 December 1817 he attended a dinner at the City of London tavern to celebrate 'trial by jury and liberty of the press' and he participated in opening a subscription for the embattled William Hone. 
With his success as a City politician, Waithman also acquired an interest in parliamentary politics. After two abortive campaigns in the early nineteenth century, he contested the 1812 election as a candidate for the City of London but was defeated. Six years later, however, he was voted as one of the four City representatives, defeating the tory candidate, Sir William Curtis. Making his debut in parliament on 25 January 1819, Waithman advocated a revision of the criminal code and a notable speech on parliamentary reform made on 1 July of that year was published in 1823. Soon after his election, in July 1818, he was chosen as alderman for his ward of Farringdon Without, replacing the deceased Sir Charles Price, but failed to regain his parliamentary seat in 1820. Despite this loss and his failure in 1831 to be elected city chamberlain, Waithman was successful, during the intervening years, in attaining the post of sheriff of London and Middlesex in 1820-21, during which time he sided with the popular radicals in support of Queen Caroline; he was re-elected to parliament in 1826 and retained his seat at the elections of 1830, 1831, and 1832. Moreover, he served as lord mayor of London between 1823 and 1824, a term of office satirized by his political opponents in 'Maxims of Robert, Lord Waithman, Somewhile Chief Magistrate of London' (1824). 
Throughout his political career, Waithman was a consistent advocate of peace, triennial parliaments, and an extension of the suffrage to taxpaying householders as well as a vocal anti-cornlaw campaigner. These sentiments alienated him from more conservative whigs and the tories stigmatized him as something of a rabble-rouser. By contrast, popular radicals such as William Cobbett and Henry Hunt, Waithman's long-time adversary, thought his reform programme was too moderate in not calling for annual parliaments and universal suffrage. Waithman's distance from most members of the radical fraternity is exemplified by the view expressed by Samuel Bamford, who, in recalling his introduction to Waithman about 1820, described him as 'a dissatisfied, bilious looking man. He had recently experienced some provoking opposition in the city, and seemed as if both mind and manners were soured. I had no desire to meet him again' (Bamford, 232). Most contemporaries, however, would have agreed with the assessment of Waithman's career offered by 'The Times' newspaper on the occasion of his death: 'The magistracy of London has thus been deprived of one of its most respectable members, and the city of one of its most upright representatives.... His natural parts, his political integrity, his consistency of conduct, and the energy and perseverance with which he performed his duties, placed him far above the common run of persons whose reputation is gained by their oratorical displays at meetings of the Common Council. ('The Times', 7 Feb 1833, 3)' Waithman died, at the age of seventy, on 6 February 1833 at his house in Woburn Place, London. Eight days later, an impressive cortege of twenty-seven carriages proceeded from the Guildhall to the church of St Bride, Fleet Street, where Waithman was buried. To perpetuate his memory, Waithman Street in London was named in his honour and a subscription was raised by the St Bride's Society to set up an obelisk as a testimonial to his political importance. The obelisk was erected in June 1833 at the southern end of Farringdon Street, opposite the site of Waithman's first shop, and following relocation to Bartholomew Close in 1951 it was resited in Salisbury Square in 1972 where it now stands. 


@@@@@


doc= 28407


Wake, Sir Isaac (1580/81-1632), diplomat and political commentator, was the second son of Arthur Wake ('c'.1543-1596), master of St John's Hospital, Northampton, and canon of Christ Church, Oxford, and his wife, Christian (died 1609), daughter of Sir William Wigston of Wolston, Warwickshire. His father had also been rector of Great Billing, Northamptonshire, from 1566 to 1573, when he was deprived of all his livings for nonconformity; he retired to Jersey for a period, but by 1576 had regained his positions at Oxford and Northampton. His elder son, Abraham, baptized at Wolston on 5 July 1577, was admitted to Christ Church early in 1593, and was soon joined by Isaac, who matriculated on 25 May, aged twelve. By this time the family was probably resident in Oxford: following his death on 12 July 1596 Arthur was buried in the choir at Christ Church. Still relatively young Isaac graduated BA on 23 July 1597, and the following year was elected a fellow of Merton College. 
Under the wardenship of Sir Henry Savile, Merton enjoyed vigorous direction and a lively fellowship, and the college both nurtured Wake's talents and provided patrons and friends. Older colleagues included Thomas Horne and Savile's kinsman Henry Wilkinson (1566-1647), who married Wake's sister Sarah, perhaps before 1601, when he became rector of Waddesdon, Buckinghamshire. Wake proceeded MA on 22 February 1603 and in 1604 became public orator to the university, a post he officially retained until 1621; his admission on 14 February 1604 to the Middle Temple, where his elder brother was a barrister, was evidently honorary. Anthony Wood learned from sources at Merton that Wake 'had his pen more at command in the Latin, English and French tongue than any of his time in the university' and 'that his speaking was majestic' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 2.539). On King James's visit to Oxford in August 1605 he delivered an oration in Christ Church which later appeared with a description of the entertainment as 'Rex platonicus' (1607), dedicated to Henry, prince of Wales. His funeral oration for the Mertonian Greek scholar and biblicist John Rainolds, given on 27 May 1607, was first published in 1608. Although the king is said to have found the accomplished Ciceronian style of Wake's delivery soporific, he rewarded him on 3 July 1607 with the reversion of the keepership of Ewelme Hospital, Oxfordshire. 
In 1609 Wake obtained leave to go to France and Italy; by the end of the year he was living in Venice. When in 1610 Savile's stepson-in-law, Sir Dudley Carleton, a near contemporary of Wake at Christ Church, was appointed ambassador to Venice, Horne became his chaplain and Wake his secretary. Drawn, like Carleton, into Savile's projected edition of Chrysostom, on 2 February 1612 Wake was commissioned to make a collation with a manuscript in Venice and on 27 March Merton granted him three further years' residence abroad. None the less in October/November he was dispatched to England by Carleton to renew contact with the latter's patrons and to press his case for promotion. While in Oxford in March 1613 Wake delivered the funeral oration for another Mertonian, Sir Thomas Bodley, published later that year. 
By mid-April 1613 Wake was back in Venice, having left behind a good impression. Thus when Carleton's longed for transfer to The Hague was announced in the summer of 1614 Wake was named as official agent until the new ambassador, Henry Wotton, arrived. His grasp of Italian was evidently better than Carleton's and the gratification he expressed to the Venetian senate at his posting to a city where in five years he had never received anything but kindness seems more than mere diplomatic politeness. When the reshuffle was delayed so that Carleton could negotiate a peace settlement between Spain and Savoy events worked further to Wake's advantage. Sent again to England by Carleton in spring 1615 he took the opportunity to cultivate his own patrons: his letter-book reveals that these included Archbishop George Abbot, Sir Horace Vere, and the lord chamberlain, to whom he acknowledged himself 'to be wholy apiece of your creacon' and 'the worke of your owne hands' (BL, Add. MS 18639, fol. 9'v'). Within a few days of his arrival in London he was appointed to succeed Albertus Morton as English agent in the Savoyard capital, Turin. Arriving back in Italy in midsummer he assisted Carleton with the successful conclusion of the peace of Asti, but when the latter was finally recalled in September they parted company with some coolness: Carleton's wife and sister apparently found Wake's industry officious or interfering, although he assured several correspondents that he had been 'a meere cifre' (ibid., fols. 8'r', 18'v'). 
The residency at Turin proved the most significant period of Wake's career. Initially, following the treaty, life in this third rank posting was dull, 'after a storme quite becalmed with peace and quiett, which to active Spiritts is as tedious as warre is dangerous' (BL, Add. MS 18639, fol. 19'v'), and on 20 August he wrote to Carleton requesting the forwarding of his books, 'there being as greate a scarcity of that commodity here, as there is plenty of it at Venice' (ibid., 38'v'). But soon the routine work of protecting and scrutinizing passing British merchants and travellers was overtaken by higher profile diplomatic activity. Wake's intellectual and professional powers became engaged by the complex political relations of the north Italian states and their neighbours in the Swiss Confederation, and his religious sympathies were awakened by the plight of beleaguered protestants in the area; both became lifelong concerns. In January 1616 he accompanied the Savoyard representative Gabaleoni to Bern as arbitrator in negotiations for an alliance between the two states. After what seemed to him an 'endlesse labyrinth' (BL, Add. MS 18640, fol. 45'v') of intricate mediation involving many interested parties, the treaty concluded in June 1617 represented a triumph. Previous attempts by Henri IV and others to broker a mutual defence pact had foundered on rival claims to the Pays de Vaud, conquered by Bern in 1536, but in return for carefully calculated promises of money and troops, Savoy now renounced its interest in the protestant territory on the far side of Lake Geneva. Wake's posthumously published 'A Three-Fold Help to Political Observations' (1655) attributed the untying of 'this Gordian knot' (p. 21) to the pious genius of James I, but his letters to secretary of state Robert Naunton reveal much of the initiative as his own. 
Duke Charles Emanuel of Savoy, whose priority had become the security of his territories in the French Alps and Italian valleys, regularly traversed by Spanish soldiers 'en route' between Genoa and the Franche Comte, was well pleased with Wake. John Pory, who visited Turin, reported to John Chamberlain early in 1618 that he kept 'a port and table... more like an ambassador than an Agent, and that he is in such favor with the Duke that he will do nothing without him' ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 2.139). In a deteriorating international situation Wake became indispensable to others too: strategically placed, he negotiated with Bern and other states the passage of Count Mansfelt's anti-imperialist mercenaries over alpine passes; when from June 1618 Savoy sent subsidies to James I's son-in-law Frederick, elector palatine, his proximity to the duke also gained importance back home. Wake himself built close relations with Mansfelt and Frederick, which shaped his later perspectives. Recalled for consultation he left Turin in late October/early November 1618, delegating business to his nephew, almost certainly the young John Wilkinson. Well received in Paris and London he was promised the succession to Wotton at the Venice embassy and knighted by the king from his sickbed at Royston on 10 April 1619. At Royston he developed or renewed contact with one of his most powerful patrons, James Hay, Viscount Doncaster, James's extraordinary ambassador. His subsequent letters to Doncaster (from 1622 earl of Carlisle), with those to William Trumbull, agent at Brussels and in the 'confraternitye in his Majesties service' (BL, Add. MS 72320, fol. 73) and his regular dispatches to successive secretaries of state, form a three-tier commentary on international relations at this period. 
Wake returned to Savoy in May 1619 via Brussels and Heidelberg, where he was delegated to confer with the princes of the German protestant union. Despite encountering 'many crocodiles' (BL, Egerton MS 2592, fol. 59) on his way down the Rhine, as he reported in his briefing to Doncaster, who was to follow him, he gained the princes' trust and commissions to press their case for assistance from Savoy. Once in Turin Wake tackled the difficult tasks of holding the duke to his protestant alliance when French marriage and imperial marriages were offered for his son, the prince of Piedmont, and his daughter, and of curbing his ambitions to control Geneva. Wake also found time for an unsuccessful bid for a fellowship at Merton for his nephew Wilkinson, now back in Oxford, and to become deeply interested in the fate of the Grisons (Graubunden). This area, sandwiched between the Swiss Confederation and Austria, encompassed the Valtelline and two vital alpine passes which gave Spanish military access to Lake Constance and to south Bavaria and Bohemia. John Chamberlain, one of Wake's regular correspondents, confessed to Carleton that he had never before heard of it, but, as Venetian observers noted, Wake was not only moved by the plight of persecuted Waldenses and protestants there, but also perceived that the Grisons' fate was an acid test of Spanish and papal power, the outcome of which was of critical concern for all of western Europe. If through their inaction and division the Swiss and their potential allies, 'those people who stand in the centre of Europe to serve the interests of all', allowed the Grisons to fall, the Spaniards, 'the enemies of liberty, from whom a universal domination is preparing' ('CSP Venice', '1619-21', 342), would then take not only Italy but also Germany. 
In February 1622 Wake suffered a set-back when his attempt to succeed Savile as warden of Merton failed, despite backing from the prince of Wales. The visitor, Archbishop Abbot, protested in a letter of 26 February that, as his conscience and the world knew, he wished Wake 'all the good that may bee in my power' (BL, Stowe MS 176, fol. 221), but he bowed to Savile's and the fellowship's desire to appoint Nathaniel Brent, another former secretary to Carleton who had resettled in England. By the summer, as he explained to Carlisle, Wake was pressed by the financial difficulties that beset diplomats: 'the Exchequer hath been lockt up against mee, almost three yeares' (BL, Egerton MS 2595, fol. 98). However, that summer rumours of his imminent promotion to Venice revived. Early in 1623 he obtained leave to return home; inevitably delayed he arrived in London in November. Here, before 6 December, with 'a very hansome and pithie collation' made by his brother-in-law Henry Wilkinson, he was contracted to marry his 'sweet-heart' and Chamberlain's 'auncient valentine' ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 2.495), Anna Bray ('b'. before 1593?, died 1642), stepdaughter of secretary of state Sir Edward Conway. The wedding took place on 18 December, after the arrival of the bride's uncle, Sir Horace Vere. As Chamberlain observed, it had been a long courtship: Wake had written to Anna in terms of close friendship in 1615. The daughter of Dorothy Tracy (died 1612) and her first husband, Edward Bray of Great Barrington, Gloucestershire, Anna seems to have spent part of her youth in the households of her kinsman, Sir Thomas Tracy (acknowledged by Wake as a patron in 1615), and of an aunt, perhaps Lady Vere. Wake's poverty and uncertain future, and the bride's delicate health, seem the most likely explanations for the delay; he had been comfortably fixed in her pious family circle. 
In January 1624 Wake was finally named ambassador to Venice. As Chamberlain informed Carleton, he had a 'large commission for all Italie, and to kepe agents in Piemont, Switzerland,... among the Grisons, and elsewhere as he shall find fit for the king's service'; he was 'to be a kind of ambassador paramount, or like an archbishop to many suffragans' ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 2.540). By the end of the month he had been chosen with secretary of state Sir George Calvert as member for Oxford University in the parliament that met in February. There he argued for the war against Spain on which his commission largely rested. Like Carlisle and Sir Robert Anstruther he lingered in London as long as possible to await the upshot, and left only as the session ended. His wife was to follow at leisure. 
The embassy at Venice began auspiciously enough. Venetians noted approvingly his close link with the secretary, Conway, and his own local knowledge, reassuring behaviour and sympathy for their interests. Wake, 'your magnifico of Venice' ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 2.467), knew how to play the part. However, ultimately he proved little more successful than his predecessors. Like them he had constant financial worries and fretted over maintaining goodwill at court: Conway was not always communicative and Carlisle, on his travels, was often elusive, although a visit from the latter's son Doncaster allowed Wake to gain favour through his careful attentions to the young man. When his friend Trumbull gained preferment in England he asked him wistfully to 'remember mee sometimes when you are in your kingdom' (BL, Add. MS 72323); later he sent one of his secretaries, Peter Moreton, to court to report back. There were problems too in Venice. Lady Wake disliked the local diet and, succumbing to a serious illness, nearly died in autumn 1627. Although Wake followed the practice of Carleton and Wotton in escaping frequently to the congenial university town of Padua, he also spent such prolonged periods in Savoy (including his first six months of embassy from July to December 1624) that the Venetians concluded, wrongly but damagingly, that he was a creature of the duke. Wake in turn concluded that papalist factions were gaining the upper hand over 'patriots' in the republic, to the detriment of his mission. 
Wake's official aim, verified with Conway in May 1625, was to secure the restoration of the palatinate. This involved continued liaison with Bern, Zurich, and Geneva, and justified his commitment to the Valtelline. In the unfolding tragedy of violent suppression there, graphically described to Conway in 1627 and 1628, he increasingly came to see the conspiratorial hand of France alongside that of Spain, and linked it to Cardinal Richelieu's plot with the pope for 'the extirpation of all the Protestants in France' (BL, Add. MS 34311, fol. 108'v'). As he saw it, 'the balance of power in Europe' (ibid., 241'v') lay in Charles I's hands: a particularly frank expression of 'private conceits' to Carlisle on 17 March 1629 urged his patron to move the king to act. Protestants must 'hereafter relye wholye uppon the protestation of God... accounting for true friends none but those of our owne Religion' (ibid., fol. 292'v'). 
By this time frustration had led Wake to leave Venice permanently for Savoy, and recurrent ill health had driven his wife home, but enforced inactivity while others attempted flawed peace negotiations with France continued to irk him. He wrote to Carlisle on 23 April 1629 that 'wee have had here much to do, & have done nothing: our business proved like the sheering of a Hogg' (BL, Add. MS 34311, fol. 316). Following the conclusion of peace and months of rumours, in January 1630 he received letters of credence as ambassador to France, a promotion. There was much scepticism about the likely effectiveness of this well-known opponent of French foreign policy, and thus much uncertainty through that year as he lingered, detained in Savoy by unfinished business. It was only after an outbreak of plague had removed thirteen of his household and replacements had been dispatched from England that he arrived in Paris in March 1631, only to place his household in quarantine. Further delays in gaining audiences with Louis XIII and Richelieu and the gulf between English and French objectives in Germany contributed to a general lack of progress. However, although Conway's death in January 1631 had removed a vital line of communication he was once again on good terms with Carleton (now Viscount Dorchester and secretary of state), who shared his perspectives. When Dorchester also died, on 15 February 1632, Wake enlisted Carlisle to argue his case to succeed as secretary, but this reward eluded him. He died suddenly in Paris of a fever on 10 June (31 May OS). His body was escorted to Dover, where it arrived on 6 July (OS) and was buried in the castle chapel, the funeral sermon being given by the minister, John Reading, who had known him at Oxford. 
Wake left his wife in straitened circumstances. An undated petition to the king from 'your Majesties poore handmaide in all humilitie casting her selfe downe at the feete of good Josia the king of Juda' supplicated for the pension and payment of arrears of expenses promised to the widow of a man 'knowne for abilities, honestie, and integritie to his Maister, to be a man of a Thowsand' (BL, Egerton MS 2597, fol. 112). Assisted by William Weld of Addle Street, London, an old friend of her husband, she obtained a $200 annuity from her half-brother Edward, second Viscount Conway, but was still short of money and entangled in a Star Chamber suit in February 1636. John Wilkinson also experienced difficulty in getting 'recompense' for the 'choice collection of papers' bequeathed him by Wake, '(being all he had to leave to his nearest kinsman)' ('CSP dom.', '1634-5', 525), which he had delivered up to the secretary of state Sir John Coke. In addition to his letter-books Wake had also accumulated notes of speeches and treaties of the 1620s in which he and Carleton were involved. It is not clear who edited for publication 'Divine meditations... whereto is adjoyned, a determination of... whether men ought to kneele at the receipt of the holy communion and an essay of friendship' (1641) or 'A Three-Fold Help to Political Observations' (1655). The latter, consisting of 'three discourses' 'concerning the thirteen cantons of the Helveticall League', 'declaring the state of Italy, as stood... about the year 1625' and 'touching the King of Sweden in his wars in Germany' testifies to the scope of his interests and to his taste for careful political observation and analysis, played out against a strong protestant faith. 


@@@@@


doc= 28408


Wake, Thomas, second Lord Wake (1298-1349), nobleman, was the son and heir of John, first Lord Wake (1268-1300), and Joan (died 1309), who was probably the daughter of Sir John Fitzbernard of Kingsdown, Kent. He was born about 20 March 1298. After the death of his father his lands and marriage fell into the custody of the crown and various of his estates were granted in wardship to his mother, Henry de Lacy, earl of Lincoln, Piers Gaveston, earl of Cornwall, and Queen Isabella, wife of Edward II. He married, before 9 October 1316, without the king's permission, Blanche, daughter of Henry of Lancaster, later earl of Leicester and Lancaster; Edward II, who had been hoping to organize a match with Joan, daughter of the deceased Gaveston, was initially angered at this breach of his rights and fined Wake $1000. However, on 6 June 1317 the king, at the request of Wake's father-in-law, showed Thomas favour by allowing him to take seisin of his estates while still under age. Although Wake supported actions against the Despensers and had to be instructed not to attend the meeting of the king's baronial opponents summoned by his wife's uncle Thomas, earl of Lancaster, at Doncaster in November 1321, he appears to have remained loyal to the king during and after the civil war of 1322. In 1325 he was referred to as 'the king's cousin' ('CDS', 3, no. 859); the marriage of his sister, Margaret, to Edward II's half-brother, Edmund, earl of Kent, in the same year, established a further link with the royal house. 
Wake held lands in Lincolnshire, where his family had long been established at Bourne, but he also inherited important estates in Yorkshire, especially in and around Cottingham. In addition he had extensive landed interests in Westmorland and Cumberland: the castle of Liddel in the latter county was regarded as his 'caput honoris'. Consequently he was much involved in the Scottish wars of Edward II and Edward III. He was regularly summoned to serve against the Scots between 1318 and 1323. He was expected to take forty men to the campaign of 1318, and although he was absent from Edward II's unsuccessful siege of Berwick in 1319, he again sent troops. In April 1323, when negotiations were under way for a thirteen-year truce, he was one of several English noblemen sent to Scotland to act as hostages for the Scots' ambassador, the earl of Moray. In December 1324 he was also summoned to serve in Aquitaine with John de Warenne, earl of Surrey (died 1347), during the war of St Sardos. 
By March 1326 the first signs of political disaffection became evident when Wake was reported to have disobeyed a summons to attend the king's council. It is not clear whether Wake was influenced by his father-in-law, by his own political judgement of the Despensers, or by his personal grievances against a regime which, by coming to terms with the Scots, had effectively deprived him of certain ancestral lands and rights north of the border. Whatever the case, Wake clearly supported the invasion of England by Queen Isabella and her lover, Roger Mortimer, in September 1326. He joined Isabella and Mortimer at Gloucester and was one of the barons who agreed on 25 October at Bristol that the king's eldest son should be made keeper of the realm. The benefits of office soon followed. Wake was justice of the forests south of the Trent from 10 November 1326 to May 1328 and keeper of the Tower of London from 9 December 1326 to April 1328; he was also appointed keeper of Hertford Castle on 9 December 1326. In the parliament that met at Westminster in January 1327 he was appointed as one of the members of a council set up under the presidency of his father-in-law to guide the administration of the realm during the youth of the new king, Edward III. It is possible that he also held the office of king's chamberlain for a short period during the early stages of the new reign. 
Isabella and Mortimer owed much to the support of the northern barons, and it is not surprising that they quickly determined to launch a campaign against the Scots. Wake responded in person to the feudal summons issued on 5 April 1327 and served on the ensuing ill-fated expedition. He was appointed a commissioner to treat with the Scots in the resulting peace negotiations. However, the treaty made at Edinburgh and confirmed by the parliament of Northampton in 1328 was a humiliating admission of English defeat and particularly irksome to Wake and the other disinherited, since it made no specific provision for the restitution of their lands in Scotland. These personal grievances, coupled with Roger Mortimer's rapid and alarming rise to power, explain why Wake joined Henry of Lancaster in refusing to attend the parliament of Salisbury in October 1328 and acted as his father-in-law's spokesman in meetings of the discontented barons at London in December. On 29 December the king announced his intention of moving against this mounting opposition, but promised to pardon all those who submitted before 7 January. Wake joined Lancaster and others in declaring that they would not proceed against the king, but this was to no avail and on 16 January the escheators were ordered to seize the estates of the rebels. About the same time the Lancastrian party was forced to submit near Bedford; Wake was allowed seisin of his lands by orders issued on 20 February, but only on condition that he bound himself to pay the enormous sum of 15,000 marks. A year later Wake was accused of complicity in the supposed conspiracy of his brother-in-law the earl of Kent, had his lands confiscated again, and was forced to flee to France. He remained in exile until after Mortimer's fall from power and Edward III's assumption of authority in October 1330. Thereafter the king was quick to restore him to favour: Wake was summoned home, formally pardoned, had his estates restored under orders of 9 December 1330, and his unpaid fine remitted on 12 December. Finally, on 30 December 1330, Edward III demanded restitution of Wake's Scottish lands from David II, a demand repeated, though to no avail, in February 1331 and April 1332. Wake's appointment as keeper of the Channel Islands from 18 October 1331 to 3 February 1333 was another mark of Edward's confidence in his ability and loyalty: Wake was frequently referred to as the king's kinsman in instruments of Edward III. 
In 1332 Henry Beaumont organized a campaign against the Scots on behalf of the disinherited and achieved a notable victory at Dupplin Moor. Wake's support for this enterprise is indicated by a petition he addressed to Edward III before 22 April, which declared his refusal to be bound by the treaty of Edinburgh until such time as he was restored to his Scottish lands. He was prevented from participating in the Dupplin Moor campaign by a violent feud with the abbot of Crowland. However, he took part in at least some of the later expeditions launched by Edward III against the Scots. He was summoned to the campaign of 1333 and was one of the witnesses to the letters patent of 12 June 1334 by which Edward Balliol, the English-backed claimant to the throne of Scotland, handed over sovereignty of the lowland shires to the king of England. In September 1337 he also led a twelve-day foray from Carlisle into Scotland. At the same time, however, he became increasingly involved in the diplomatic and defensive strategies that preceded the outbreak of the Hundred Years' War. In 1335 he was sent to France with the bishop of Norwich and others to discuss Anglo-French tensions and the projected crusade. Wake was part of a group of northern lords who remained in England after the king's departure for the continent in the summer of 1338 to defend the Scottish march and assist in the government of the realm. Wake became a particularly prominent member of the domestic administration after the king's brief return to England in the spring of 1340. He was appointed to the committees set up in the parliament of March-May 1340 to investigate the king's finances and to receive petitions and prepare legislation. In April he was pardoned all his debts to the crown and was appointed one of the assessors in the city of London for the new tax of a ninth granted in parliament. On 28 May he was selected as a member of the council appointed to run the country under the titular regency of Edward, duke of Cornwall, when the king once more left for the Low Countries. 
A late fourteenth-century St Albans chronicle claims that Wake was imprisoned by the king on the latter's unexpected return to England in December 1340 ('Chronicon Angliae', 10). However, no other source mentions Wake's name among the list of ministers dismissed and/or imprisoned during this political crisis, and it seems unlikely that Wake was treated in this way. In fact, he was appointed on 12 December to inquire into grievances brought against the king's ministers and was a member of the judicial commission set up in East Anglia to hear accusations of corruption against the local agents of the crown. The real focus of the king's wrath was John Stratford, archbishop of Canterbury. Although there is no evidence of Wake's response to the king's decision to exclude Stratford from the parliament of April-May 1341, Wake was one of the members of the lords' committee subsequently set up to hear Edward's charges against the archbishop; he also served on the legislative committee of 1341. 
Wake remained active in public life during the 1340s. He was a trier of petitions in the parliaments of 1341, 1344, 1346, and January 1348. In November and December 1342 he was asked to serve with the king in Brittany; later in the same year he received wages for keeping the northern march for three months with two knights and eighteen esquires. In February 1346 his castle of Liddel was besieged and his lands seized by Sir William Douglas, but in April 1346 he was excused from going north to fight on the grounds of ill health. Liddel Castle was captured by the Scots shortly before the battle of Nevilles Cross later in the same year and its keeper, Sir Walter Selby, was put to death. 
Wake died on 30 or 31 May 1349; although the cause of death was not specified, his demise coincided with the first outbreak of bubonic plague in England. He was buried at his own foundation of Haltemprice Priory, Yorkshire. Wake had demonstrated his personal piety by planning, and presumably undertaking, a pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela in 1341-2, and throughout his career he had shown a particularly keen interest in the religious orders. He had founded the Franciscan house at Ware, Hertfordshire, in 1338 and had planned to establish a house for the Crutched Friars at Kirkby Moorside, Yorkshire, in 1347-8, though nothing came of the latter plan. His proposal to alienate lands for the foundation of a religious house for an unspecified order at Great Harrowden, Northamptonshire, in 1338 also proved abortive, as did his declared intention of 'c'.1345 to establish a house of Dominican nuns in England. The failure of these schemes may be explained at least in part by lack of resources: Wake was often in debt, and in 1334 he was even accused of appropriating the chapel at Pontefract that contained the shrine of the unofficial saint, Thomas of Lancaster, in order to lay claim to the offerings made there. His principal foundation was therefore his first: namely a house of Augustinian canons, licensed in 1320 and first established in 1322 at Cottingham, Yorkshire, by members of the Augustinian priory of Bourne, Lincolnshire. In 1325 Wake obtained a licence from the pope, John XXII, allowing him to transfer this community to a more convenient location, and in January 1326 the canons moved to the nearby site of Haltemprice. The house, dedicated to the Virgin and Holy Cross, was intended to have a full quota of thirteen canons, but only three were recorded in 1328-9; the numbers had risen to nine by 1381. 
Thomas Wake left no children, and the Wake estates and barony passed via his sister Margaret to the earls of Kent and thence to the Holland family. His widow, Blanche, was involved in an acrimonious and violent quarrel with Thomas de Lisle, bishop of Ely, as a result of a land dispute between two of their servants. In the parliament of November 1355 Lady Wake appealed directly to Edward III for assistance, and the king announced that he was taking the matter into his own hands. He ordered the immediate seizure of the bishop's temporalities, and although his ministers successfully opposed this on the grounds that it contravened one of his own statutes of 1340, a judgment against Lisle in the king's bench in October 1356 gave Edward the legal basis he needed in order to confiscate the episcopal estates. The whole business suggests very close personal and family ties between Edward III and his cousin Lady Wake from which the latter's husband had undoubtedly benefited in his lifetime. Blanche herself died shortly before 12 July 1380 and was buried at the Franciscan convent at Stamford, Lincolnshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 28409


Wake, William (1657-1737), archbishop of Canterbury, was born on 26 January 1657 at Blandford Forum, Dorset, the son of Colonel William Wake (1628-1705), a royalist army officer, and his wife, Amie, the daughter of Edward Cutler. The Wake family was staunchly royalist: William's father, who was involved in John Penruddock's uprising, his grandfather, and his uncle were all imprisoned on numerous occasions for their loyalty to Charles I and Charles II. Just before his sixth birthday the young William entered Blandford Free School under Mr Welstead. On Welstead's resignation he moved to a private school which was opened at Iwerne by Mr Curgenven, the former usher of the free school, returning to Blandford when Curgenven was appointed headmaster. From Blandford he went to Oxford, where he matriculated as a commoner at Christ Church on 28 February 1673. Securing the favour of John Fell, the influential dean, Wake was admitted as a student (an equivalent post to fellow in other colleges) on 12 July 1675, before proceeding BA on 26 October 1676 and MA on 29 June 1679. Despite the wishes of his father that he return to Dorset and become a farmer, he was ordained deacon by Fell, at that time bishop of Oxford, on 25 September 1681 and was priested on 12 March the following year. Shortly afterwards he was appointed one of the four lecturers at St Martin's Church, Carfax, Oxford. 
Fell influenced Wake's career decisively once more, recommending him to Richard Graham, Viscount Preston, as chaplain for his embassy to France. Wake served in Paris from June 1682 until September 1685, cultivating a wide acquaintance among both the French Catholic clergy and the Huguenots. There were elements of Catholicism that appealed to him -- their 'Monastic way of living... The beauty and Ornaments of their Churches; The solemnity of their Service; Their Care and decency in the performance of it'. At the same time life in France confirmed him in many of the common protestant objections to that religion -- its 'plain, and notorious Idolatry', its denial of the right of private judgement, Latin services, 'Halfe Communion', the papal supremacy, and its 'narrow and uncharitable Spirit, in Confining Salvation only to their Own Church & Party' (Christ Church, MS 541A, pp. 10-11). Wake's personal experiences of Catholicism led him to compose his first major publication, 'An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England', which was a reply to Bishop Bossuet's 'Exposition de la doctrine de l'eglise catholique'. This engagement with the leading French controversialist won Wake applause from many leading churchmen. At the core of the pamphlet was a defence of the doctrine of the Church of England on those points where it differed from the Church of Rome. He dealt first with the adoration of saints and images and the doctrine of justification, before devoting long sections to the sacraments and to the authority of scripture, tradition, and the church. He summarized the position of the Church of England as one based on the twin principles of scripture and the practice of the primitive church, arguing that, while he and Bossuet were agreed on 'what is 'most necessary'' -- belief in God, in Christ, and in the same creeds -- they were separated by the innovations of the Church of Rome ('Exposition', 87). 
The 'Exposition' was written in France, but it was published only after Wake's return to England, in 1686, the year after James II's accession. Inevitably, its appearance propelled him to the forefront of the Catholic controversy generated by the new king's policies. Over the next two years he produced a sequence of polemical pamphlets, all of which concentrated on the theological differences between the Church of England and the Church of Rome -- 'A Discourse of the Holy Eucharist' (1687), 'Two Discourses of Purgatory and Prayers for the Dead' (1687), and 'A Discourse Concerning the Nature of Idolatry' (1688) -- and also two catalogues of the tracts produced during the controversy. Gilbert Burnet, indeed, saw Wake as the most important of the many clergymen who rallied to the church's defence in these years ('Bishop Burnet's History', 3.105). During this time Wake secured the friendship of a number of prominent London clergy, including Thomas Tenison and William Clagett. The recommendation of the former gained him appointment as afternoon lecturer at St Anne's, Soho, while, on the death of the latter in March 1688, the benchers of Gray's Inn elected him as their preacher, despite the opposition of the court. In the summer of 1688 he acted as secretary to the commission established by Archbishop Sancroft to consider liturgical revision as a means of comprehending moderate dissenters within the Church of England. On 1 October 1688 he married Ethelreda (died 1731), the daughter of Sir William Hovell of Hillington Hall, near Lynn, Norfolk. Ethelreda was the maternal aunt of the antiquary and natural philosopher Martin Folkes. The marriage was performed by another friend, Thomas Sharp, the future archbishop of York, emphasizing the extent to which Wake was at the centre of the powerful group of London clergy co-ordinating the clerical opposition to James II's policies. 
Wake's prominence during James II's reign surely entitled him to major preferment after the revolution. That he did not receive it might be explained by Thomas Hearne's claim that 'he was of nonjuring Principles' ('Remarks', 8.287). In fact, he had no problems in accepting the government of William and Mary, and at the beginning of their reign he was rewarded with a royal chaplaincy, the deputy clerkship of the closet, and a canonry of Christ Church. But the position he adopted at the revolution was a moderate one: unlike many, he had no doubts about the legitimacy of James Francis Edward, prince of Wales, and, while he took the oaths himself, he disliked their imposition on others. Consequently, he took no part in the nonjuring controversy and refused to accept any preferments vacated by the deprivation of nonjurors. Thus he declined the deanery of Worcester, the bishopric of Bath and Wells, and the bishopric of Norwich, while simultaneously feeling piqued at not being offered the deanery of St Paul's or the deanery of Canterbury. His 'nolo episcopari' created 'an intire Coldnesse' (Christ Church, MS 541 A, p. 43) between him and Archbishop John Tillotson and prevented further offers. 
Before his death William Clagett had tried to moderate Wake's polemical inclinations, warning him that such work 'took us off from other, and better, thoughts' (Christ Church, MS 541A, p. 20). It was advice that Wake took to heart. Over the next few years he avoided participation not only in the nonjuring controversy but also in the allegiance and trinitarian controversies. He had already established a reputation as a 'pious & excellent Preacher' (Evelyn, 'Diary', 4.543), but, from this time, his published sermons, apart from a few delivered on special occasions such as fast days, concentrated on pastoral topics. The piety which they revealed was 'unemotional and rational', emphasizing the 'truth and reasonableness of Christian belief and... the prudential wisdom of its practice' (Sykes, 1.54). Wake also threw himself into practical pastoral work as the rector of St James's, Westminster, to which he was appointed in 1695, having declined an offer of the same living in 1692 on the grounds of ill health. He established a weekly catechism and increased the frequency of daily prayers to four times in the parish church and twice in King Street Chapel. The most concrete outcome of his ministry at St James's was his catechetical treatise, first published in 1699 under the title 'The Principles of the Christian Religion Explained'. This quickly established itself as one of the most popular of the longer catechisms, intended for the instruction of more advanced pupils, and it continued to be used through the eighteenth century. Alongside his commitment to pastoral work, Wake hankered after a life of scholarly retreat. During a period of convalescence after illness he produced a translation of the 'Genuine Epistles of the Apostolic Fathers', which was published in 1693. Although reprinted twice, this was not a work of original scholarship but of popularization, making available to English readers texts which helped to demonstrate that the Church of England 'in all respects comes the nearest up to the 'primitive pattern' of any Christian Church at this Day in the World' ('Genuine Epistles', vi). 
The appearance of Francis Atterbury's 'Letter to a Convocation Man' in 1697 once more drew Wake into controversy. Prompted to investigate further the history of convocation, Wake was then encouraged by Archbishop Tenison to publish his findings. The central point of his 'Authority of Christian Princes', which appeared at the end of 1697, was that Atterbury had failed to recognize the crucial distinction between a parliamentary convocation and an ecclesiastical synod. By controverting Atterbury's parallel between parliament and convocation, Wake was able to undermine the case for restoring a sitting convocation, a conclusion which brought down on him the fury of the tory clergy. This criticism prompted him to publish the 'Appeal to All True Members of the Church of England' (1698), in which he defended what he saw as the traditional Anglican doctrine of the royal supremacy. Ironically, given his dislike of controversy, this pamphlet was written in a tone of which even some of his friends disapproved, Edmund Gibson lamenting 'the provocation given' (Bodl. Oxf., Ballard MS 6, fol. 13) to the clergy desiring a convocation. Atterbury's reply, 'The Rights, Powers and Privileges of an English Convocation' (1700), attacked Wake's scholarship and knowledge of the constitution. Wake's response was magisterial, a folio volume of over 860 pages entitled 'The State of the Church and Clergy of England'. Based on exhaustive historical research, it quickly established itself as the definitive account of the history of English synods since Anglo-Saxon times and is recognized as a 'complete demolition' of Atterbury's work (Sykes, 1.115). By the time 'The State of the Church and Clergy' appeared in 1703, however, the ministry had conceded a sitting convocation and the debate had moved on. Wake played no further role in the convocation controversy, but his exchange with Atterbury had established him as the hero of the whig clergy. 
It was, therefore, no surprise that the commissioners for ecclesiastical preferments offered Wake the bishopric of Bristol in April 1700. Once more he refused, professing himself content with his life as rector of St James's and bridling at hints from Bishop Burnet that he could expect no further offers of preferment. Archbishop Tenison was angered by Wake's behaviour, clearly feeling that he was putting his own interests before 'his duty to the Church' (Christ Church, MS 541A, p. 50). But a breach between the two was avoided, and in November 1701 Wake accepted nomination to the deanery of Exeter, though he was again irritated by the court's insistence that he resign his canonry of Christ Church. Over the next four years, however, it appears that he continued to devote most of his energies to his parish. He resided little in Exeter, and he certainly did not play the active part in the proceedings of convocation which might have been expected of one of the leading whig clergy in the lower house. 
In 1705 the whig interest at court was again strengthening after a period of tory dominance, and shortly after the death of James Gardiner, bishop of Lincoln, Tenison approached Wake with the offer of the bishopric of Oxford. On this occasion Wake accepted, as he did a week later when he was offered Lincoln instead. According to his own account he had two reasons for this change of mind. First, he received the consent of his dying father, and, second, he was concerned that, if he refused, political manoeuvrings at court might force Tenison to accept the nomination of someone 'very unacceptable, if not unfit' (Jones, 124). As it was, lobbying by other factions, both whig and tory, delayed Wake's promotion until the summer. He was nominated on 16 July and consecrated on 21 October, and he took up residence at the episcopal palace at Buckden, Lincolnshire. Throughout the next decade he was constantly at the centre of the influential group of whig clerics around Tenison, and he met regularly with leading whig politicians such as John, Baron Somers, and Charles Spencer, third earl of Sunderland. He attended both the House of Lords and convocation regularly, and he made a powerful and effective speech defending toleration during the trial of Henry Sacheverell in 1710; he also used his influence within the diocese of Lincoln to support whig candidates in parliamentary elections. None the less, despite the highly charged atmosphere of the latter years of Anne's reign, Wake avoided the kind of polemical pamphleteering on behalf of the whig cause that had characterized his involvement in the convocation controversy. 
If Wake performed the political duties of his new office conscientiously, he was no less energetic in his oversight of his diocese, which was the largest in the country, stretching from the Humber to the Thames and containing more than a thousand parishes. Indeed, he was a model of the new breed of post-revolutionary bishops, who were adapting to problems facing the Church of England in the conditions of 'de facto' religious pluralism brought about by the 'Toleration Act' of 1689. Like many of his colleagues, he placed fresh emphasis on effective episcopal oversight and the diligent performance of their pastoral responsibilities by bishops and clergy alike. He conducted ordinations regularly at least four times a year, he carefully supervised the examination of ordinands, he held regular triennial visitations (though his last, in 1715, was carried out by commissioners), and he confirmed vast numbers of people, more than 18,000 during the 1712 visitation tour alone. It was in the conduct of visitations that Wake revealed himself at his most innovative, shifting the emphasis away from the judicial towards the pastoral. At each of his visitations he circulated a series of written queries to all the parish clergy, which supplemented the traditional articles sent to churchwardens. The aim of these queries was to give the bishop a variety of information about the parish and its people, the provision of services, and the state of charities. The answers were extracted into a 'speculum', or diocese book, which provided the bishop with a manual for his administration of the diocese. Wake's practice was continued by his successor at Lincoln, Edmund Gibson, and rapidly spread through the church to become the model for eighteenth-century episcopal visitations. 
The same commitment to pastoral work was demonstrated by Wake after his confirmation as archbishop of Canterbury on 16 January 1716. Visitations were conducted regularly, in 1716, 1720, 1724, and 1728, following the practice developed at Lincoln. After 1719 Wake himself ordained clergy intending to serve within the diocese, in contrast to most seventeenth-century archbishops who had asked other bishops to ordain them on letters dimissory. Moreover, he continued the efforts of his predecessors to reform standards of clerical practice within the province. In 1716 he issued a circular letter containing instructions for bishops and clergy to tighten up on the admission of ministers to the church and to ensure that curates had an adequate maintenance. In 1724 he issued similar directions to ensure the decency of the administration of the rite of confirmation, and in addition he secured a royal letter to enforce the residence of royal chaplains who were also cathedral prebendaries. 
Wake's appointment as archbishop was warmly welcomed by many clerical whigs, who saw him as the natural successor to Tenison. Gibson commented that 'his intire interest in the prince and Princess, with his free Access to the King, and the benefit of speaking French fluently, seem to bid fair for a speedy establishm[en]t of all things upon the right foot' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Add. A. 269, p. 52). In fact, Wake was a less natural ally for the whigs than was apparent at the beginning of George I's reign. The bitterness of the convocation controversy had pushed him into the whig camp, and during the last years of Anne's reign he firmly believed that the protestant succession, and thus the church itself, was being threatened by the policies of her tory ministry. But he was still the same man who had refused to accept preferments vacated by nonjurors, and even at the time of the Jacobite rising in 1715 he found himself at a loss how to reassure clergy who believed that the church was in danger under the whig administration. The first public evidence of tension occurred in June 1716 when the 'Select Vestries Bill' came before the House of Lords. This bill, intended to reform the abuses of close vestries in London, reflected the inclinations of anti-clerical whigs by including provisions which would have removed clergymen from participation in parish government and excluded churchwardens from the new vestries. Wake launched such a powerful attack on this measure that he persuaded Lord Chancellor Cowper to admit that 'there was not one Sound part in its whole Composition' and to abandon his support of it, thereby ensuring its defeat (Christ Church, Arch. W.Epist. 7, fol. 125). At least as significant as his triumph in the Lords, however, were the facts that Wake had been forced to oppose a government-sponsored measure publicly rather than privately and that his efforts won him the applause of many tory clergy. 
The appointment in April 1717 of the Sunderland-Stanhope ministry, which was committed to a more liberal religious policy, highlighted the gulf that was developing between Wake and the government. In the same month Benjamin Hoadly's sermon, 'The Kingdom of Christ', appeared, provoking a storm of controversy about his extreme latitudinarian views, which seemed to call into question not merely the authority of, but even the need for, a visible church. Privately, Wake was incensed by the actions of the bishop of Bangor and his allies, and he denounced those 'pastors, bishops, who destroy with their own hands the Church in which they minister'. In particular, he singled out the threat from 'a set of Latitudinarian writers' who attacked clerical subscription as a form of ecclesiastical tyranny and were 'enemies... to the most fundamental articles' of the faith (Sykes, 2.150). But he found that he had little support from the new ministry, which, on 8 May, informed the primate that convocation was to be prorogued in order to shield Hoadly from the threat of synodical censure. Wake was left fuming about the way in which ministers put 'their politicall interests' above the 'Service of God, & his Church' (TCD, MS 1995-2008/1815). 
Some of Wake's clerical allies, who liked to describe themselves as 'Church Whigs', blamed the archbishop for a lack of leadership. Gibson urged him to attend court more often, reminding him of Tenison's advice that 'tho' he could do noe great good... yet he could hinder mischief' (Christ Church, Arch. W.Epist. 20, fol. 437). But there was probably little Wake could have done to influence the religious policy of the ministry, which was committed to legislating in favour of the protestant dissenters. Over the next eighteen months debate focused on the issue of the repeal of the 'Test Act'. Wake, like all the moderate whig bishops, was resolutely opposed to such a measure, regarding the act as an essential bulwark of the constitutional position of the Church of England and a necessary accompaniment to the toleration. By the end of 1717, however, divisions were opening up between Wake and some of his former allies, notably bishops Edmund Gibson, John Hough, and Lancelot Blackburne. The latter group came to accept the ministry's arguments that some concession had to be made to dissent for political reasons, and they were prepared to support the repeal of the 'Occasional Conformity and Schism Acts'. This group was also becoming concerned about Wake's growing contacts with tory bishops such as George Smalridge and Thomas Manningham, and they feared that he was abandoning the 'clear 'Church whig' bottom' adopted by his predecessor (University of St Andrews Library, MS 5219). 
Wake, however, would not countenance even this more limited measure. What is puzzling is why. After all, throughout Anne's reign both clerical and lay whigs had generally opposed tory attempts to outlaw the practice of occasional conformity, and Wake himself had entered his protest against the passage of the 'Schism Act' in 1714. The key to his behaviour seems to lie in changing circumstances. Whereas before 1714 the 'Occasional Conformity and Schism Acts' were seen as paving the way for further erosion of the freedoms granted to dissenters by the 'Toleration Act' of 1689, by 1717 Wake regarded their repeal as a prelude to further concessions to dissent by a ministry hostile to the established church. Thus, when the legislation finally came before the House of Lords in December 1718, the archbishop again found himself leading the opposition to a piece of ministerial legislation which he denounced as an assault on one of the 'Outworks' of the ecclesiastical constitution (Christ Church, Arch. W. Epist., 8/87). This debate, however, revealed the gulf dividing Wake from the ministry and the court much more starkly than the 'Select Vestries Bill'. Not only was his opposition ineffective, but he also found that his support on the bench of bishops came primarily from the tories, and he was deeply hurt by what he saw as the desertion of his former whig allies, bitterly denouncing them as 'betrayers of the Church' (Bodl. Oxf., Add. MS A. 269, pp. 73-4). 
Policy differences lay at the heart of Wake's exclusion from government counsels at the end of the 1710s, but they do not entirely explain it. First, his character made him an awkward colleague. There was, at times, an imperiousness about his utterances and a sensitivity to criticism which inclined him to treat differences of opinion as personal slights. Second, his only close confidant among the whig leadership was Earl Cowper, himself a slightly marginal figure who resigned in April 1718. The ministers most involved in ecclesiastical affairs, lords Townshend and Sunderland, knew Bishop Charles Trimnell far better and were often inclined to turn for advice to him and, increasingly, to Edmund Gibson, the young and politically astute bishop of Lincoln. Third, Wake became embroiled in the split at court between George I and the prince of Wales (afterwards George II). He had always been close to the prince and, especially, the princess (afterwards Queen Caroline), the latter of whom was widely credited with securing the archbishopric for him. When the prince of Wales was instructed to leave St James's in November 1717, Wake continued to wait on the prince and princess at Leicester House, in defiance of the king's instructions. It was hardly a course of action calculated to increase his influence at court. 
From 1719 Wake was 'pretty much in disgrace' (Herts. ALS, D/EP F62, fols. 90-91) at court and politically marginalized. There were occasional bursts of activity, but these served merely to emphasize how little influence he possessed. In 1721 he was involved in attempts to pass the 'Blasphemy Bill', a misleadingly named attempt to combat Arianism by reinforcing the provisions for clerical subscription. In the following year, supported only by John Potter among the whig bishops, he opposed the passage of the 'Quaker Affirmation Act'. In 1724 he did at least find support from most of his episcopal colleagues in a protest against masquerades. But by this time, as one observer noted, he was playing almost no part in 'Eccl[esiastical] affairs' (BL, Lansdowne MS 1018, fol. 9). In 1727 the archbishop did have some hopes that his influence would revive when George I died and Caroline, his old patron, became queen. However, within a few weeks it became clear that both Robert Walpole and his 'pope', Bishop Gibson, had survived the change of regime, and Wake retired once more to Lambeth. 
Wake stands out among eighteenth-century archbishops of Canterbury for his commitment to correspondence and engagement with the churches in Europe. Like many whig churchmen of the post-revolutionary era he expressed a strong commitment to the ideal of protestant union, both at home and with the reformed churches abroad. In large part this was an expression of his fear of the threat from Catholicism -- even after the flight of James II, he continued to interpret events such as the Nine Years' War as a struggle to defend 'the 'Protestant Religion'' against Louis XIV's efforts 'to root out the very memory of it from off the Earth' ('Sermon Preached in the Parish Church', 13). Importantly, he believed that protestants were already united 'in a 'common profession of the same Faith'', that what separated them were only differences over inessentials, and he thus saw no reason why they 'should not also be united in the same 'common Worship' of God' ('Exhortation to Mutual Charity and Union', 26). 
The elevation of Wake to the primacy was warmly welcomed by many foreign protestants, including Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz in Hanover, Daniel Ernst Jablonski in Berlin, Jean Le Clerc in Amsterdam, and Samuel Turrettini in Geneva. The new archbishop sought to build on these contacts, and he developed an extensive correspondence with leading protestants throughout Europe. Among the more important initiatives that resulted were the formal authorization of intercommunion with the church in Zurich and a series of interventions attempting to reconcile differences among the Swiss churches. Most notable, however, was his involvement, along with Jablonski, whom he had first met at Oxford in 1680, in efforts to bring about a union between the Lutheran and Calvinist churches in Germany. Jablonski, the religious counsellor to Frederick William I of Prussia, believed that the Church of England could act as a formal mediator in negotiations, and Wake responded positively to the suggestion, beginning a correspondence that lasted from 1717 to 1725. Ultimately, the initiative came to nothing, undermined as much as anything by inertia and political differences between the courts of Hanover and Prussia. But confessional distinctions were also a powerful force impeding moves towards union, a fact revealed clearly even by Wake himself, who, despite his belief that differences in inessentials were no barrier to union, could still complain to a foreign correspondent that 'there is no dogma more inimical to piety' than the Calvinist doctrine of predestination (Sykes, 2.59). 
Wake was unusual among eighteenth-century Anglicans in his commitment to engagement with foreign protestants; even more remarkable were his contacts with French Catholics. In February 1718 he responded favourably to overtures from Ellies Du Pin, a theologian of Jansenist sympathies at the Sorbonne, about a possible union between the Church of England and the Gallican church. However, what emerges clearly from the ensuing correspondence, much of which was carried on through William Beauvoir, the chaplain in Paris, is that Wake did not envisage a full union, but merely some form of intercommunion. Moreover, any agreement would have to be preceded by a breach between the Gallican church and the papacy. In retrospect, even this aim was clearly unrealistic. Both Wake and Du Pin were looking for doctrinal concessions, which the other party was unlikely to make. Wake, indeed, does not seem to have grasped that the differences between Gallican clergy and the papacy did not imply any dissatisfaction with those points of Catholic doctrine, such as transubstantiation, which were so offensive to protestants. In fact, no formal negotiations ever took place. Wake was nettled by the refusal of Cardinal de Noailles, the archbishop of Paris, to become involved, but Noailles's behaviour emphasizes the fact that Du Pin's initiative was essentially a personal one, on behalf of himself and a few professors at the Sorbonne, which had no support from either the French government or the ecclesiastical hierarchy. Finally, early in 1719, an abrupt end was put to the exchanges when the French secretary of state seized Du Pin's papers. 
None the less, Wake did continue to correspond regularly with two other French clergymen, Piers de Girardin, another professor at the Sorbonne, and Pierre Le Courayer. The correspondence with Le Courayer, which began in 1721, is of particular note, as it reveals that Wake gave considerable assistance to Le Courayer in the preparation of his 'Dissertation sur la validite des ordinations des Anglois' and then in the defence of that work after its publication in 1723. Wake clearly remained committed to the ideal of intercommunion, and he believed that could be advanced by convincing Gallicans that the Church of England enjoyed an unbroken episcopal succession. Significantly, however, he offered little help to Le Courayer in defending his discussion of the sacrificial character of the mass and in his attempts to reconcile the 'Book of Common Prayer' and 'Thirty-Nine Articles' to Roman teaching. On these issues, his attitude was that the Gallican church had to accept the position of the Church of England. Yet that was not going to happen -- these were precisely the issues which led to episcopal censures of Le Courayer in August 1727 and prompted his flight to England. 
Politically marginalized after 1719, Wake lived in semi-retirement at Lambeth and focused his attentions increasingly on preparation for the next life. He himself called his existence 'almost a monastic life' (Thomson, 2.85), which was not an inappropriate description of a regime which included divine service four times a day within his household. He continued to discharge the business of his diocese, he corresponded actively with his foreign friends, and he roused himself to organize the order of service for the coronation of George II and Queen Caroline in 1727, but he had been prone to illness throughout his life, and there is little doubt that his strength was declining. He performed his last visitation of his diocese in 1728 and carried out his last ordination in person in September 1730. That year he suffered a serious illness, prompting satires about the race to succeed him as archbishop, and on 15 April 1731 his wife died. In the following year he was experiencing severe difficulties in writing and he consecrated his last bishop -- thereafter all consecrations were carried out by commission. By this time Wake was relying heavily on his son-in-law John Lynch (1697-1760) in the administration of his diocese and as secretary. Lynch had married Mary, the sixth and youngest of Wake's daughters. As the only clergyman among the archbishop's immediate family -- the elder five daughters, Amy, Etheldred, Hester, Dorothy, and Magdalen, had all married gentlemen -- he accumulated some of the best preferments in his gift. Even in an age that accepted the responsibility of public figures to provide for their families, Lynch's extensive pluralism became a subject of some scandal in Wake's declining years; the most vivid of numerous attacks was a satire depicting him as an ass loaded with preferments. Wake died at Lambeth on 24 January 1737 and was buried on 9 February alongside his wife in the south chancel of Croydon parish church. The 'Gentleman's Magazine' estimated that he left 'upwards of $100,000', and among his bequests were $1000 for the charity school in his native Blandford ('GM', 1st ser., 7, 1737, 61). 
Wake was a distinguished historian. His 'State of the Church and Clergy of England' was widely regarded as the definitive account of English synods well into the twentieth century, while his researches enabled Le Courayer to provide an account of the consecrations of Archbishop Parker and Bishop Barlow, a crucial episode in the defence of the validity of Anglican orders, to which modern historians have been able to add little. He was also an innovative, reforming bishop, who established the model for eighteenth-century episcopal visitations. To contemporaries, however, he was probably most admired for that part of his career which he valued least, namely his work as a controversialist, first against popery in James II's reign and later in the convocation controversy. His role in the convocation controversy, and the attacks upon him by the 'high flying' clergy who supported Atterbury, ensured that he became identified with the whigs and the church party around Archbishop Tenison. Other things also drew Wake to the whigs and their low-church allies during the reigns of William and Anne. He was a strong supporter of the 'Toleration Act' of 1689, he adopted an eirenic approach to foreign protestants, he condemned those clergy who denounced lay baptism as invalid, and, in characteristically low-church fashion, he believed that the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' were framed so that 'they may, without an equivocation, have more senses that one fairly put upon them' (Sykes, 2.32-3). But the party labels of this period tend to obscure rather than reveal Wake's churchmanship, as other elements of his thought were more characteristic of high-churchmen. He was attracted to the beauty and solemnity of Catholic worship, he could appreciate the religious value of monasteries and nunneries, he could sympathize with the stand taken by the nonjurors, he placed considerable emphasis on the value of antiquity and tradition in elucidating Christian doctrine, and, despite his commitment to the principle of toleration, he could still regard English dissenters as 'a buisy, indefatigable generation' (TCD, MSS 1995-2008/1929). It is not surprising that he was an uncomfortable ally for whig ministries after the Hanoverian succession. 
Since Wake's death it is probably the enterprise that was closest to his own heart, his work for church union, that has attracted most attention. In the eighteenth century his correspondence with the Gallican church was seen as treading 'upon the heels of Popery' by latitudinarians such as Francis Blackburne, who believed that there had been 'few such renegadoes to' the principles of protestantism (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 3.12). Wake did not lack defenders, but from the mid-nineteenth century assessments have become more consistently positive as Anglican interest in dialogue with other churches has increased. Norman Sykes is typical of modern opinion in regarding his ecumenical work as 'the most outstanding of his achievements' (Sykes, 2.267). But the fact that he was accorded a two-volume biography by the leading twentieth-century scholar of the eighteenth-century church, the only Georgian bishop to be so honoured, tells us at least as much about the priorities of the modern Church of England as about its history in the decades after the revolution of 1688. Ultimately the singling out of Wake's foreign correspondence for special attention -- it occupies one-third of Sykes's biography -- is unconvincing. As W. R. Ward has suggested, it is necessary to locate that correspondence in the context of Wake's other concerns in the years after the Hanoverian succession. The search for church union should not be regarded as a precursor of the ecumenical movement of the twentieth century. Rather, it was another means of shoring up the church's defences in response to the threats from Arianism and Socinianism, from latitudinarianism among the clergy and from the liberal religious policies of some whig politicians. 


@@@@@


doc= 28410


Wakefield, Robert (d. 1537/8), Hebraist, was born in Yorkshire, probably to an influential Pontefract family; Thomas Wakefield was his brother. Nothing is known about his early life. He was admitted BA at the University of Cambridge on 9 June 1514, determining in arts in the following year. On 14 July 1516 he was elected to a fellowship of Clare College, Cambridge, and by 1518 he was already a friend of John Fisher, bishop of Rochester, to whom he taught Hebrew. On 16 November of that year he matriculated at the University of Louvain, where he acquired an MA degree which was incorporated at Cambridge in the following year. He then lectured in Hebrew at the trilingual college in Louvain between 1 August and 1 December 1519. In the same year or that following he became a fellow of Fisher's Cambridge foundation, St John's College, receiving a stipend there which was to continue until 1528. In 1520 or 1521 he was probably the 'Mr Wakefield' who acted as a guarantor on behalf of Cambridge University for John Siberch's new Cambridge press. 
Fisher granted Wakefield permission to go abroad again for the study of Hebrew. Probably during this period he taught in Paris and, while in Hagenau, he was invited to take up an appointment as lecturer in Hebrew at Tubingen, in succession to Johannes Reuchlin, the leading Christian Hebraist of his age; he did so in August 1522. Shortly afterwards he was known to Erasmus, who reported positively on his teaching to John Fisher. His lectures (at a salary of 104 florins per annum, which Erasmus thought generous, and including elementary Arabic and Aramaic as well) were so highly valued that the University of Tubingen wrote to Fisher, and Archduke Ferdinand of Austria wrote to Henry VIII, asking for the postponement of his return to Cambridge. This return took place, however, in 1523, when he was made Cambridge's first salaried lecturer in Hebrew, paid for by the king. By 1526-7 he was receiving a half-yearly wage of 56's'. 8died from the crown. 
Wakefield delivered his famous inaugural oration at Cambridge entitled 'Oratio de laudibus & utilitate trium linguarum Arabicae, Chaldaicae & Hebraicae' in April of 1524. The 'Oratio' was printed, probably after extensive revision, in 1528 or early 1529, by Wynkyn de Worde, in the changed circumstances generated by Henry VIII's desire to annul his marriage to Katherine of Aragon and marry Anne Boleyn. In 1527 Wakefield had been teaching Hebrew to Richard Pace in the Bridgettine house at Syon. From this period of study emerged both Pace's 'Praefatio in Ecclesiasten recognitum ad Hebraicam veritatem' (1527?) and Wakefield's own 'Paraphrasis in librum Koheleth' (1528?), a summary of the Hebrew text of 'Ecclesiastes'. It was at this time that Pace recommended Wakefield to the king, because of potential advantages which might accrue to the royal argument for the divorce from an examination of the Hebrew texts of scripture. In connection with the Henrician cause Wakefield had dealings with the royal servants Edward Foxe and John Stokesley, in whose home he stayed for some time, and also had an audience with the king. It must also be in the context of Henry VIII's 'great matter' that, as he claims in the 'Oratio', Wakefield taught Hebrew to James Boleyn, Anne's uncle, and to Reginald Pole, who was sent to him for this purpose by Henry VIII. 
All of this involved a fairly rapid change of allegiance for Wakefield, who, as the client of Bishop Fisher, Katherine of Aragon's leading intellectual advocate, had originally opposed Henry's case, later a matter of some embarrassment to Wakefield. The publication of the 'Oratio' is therefore closely connected to the royal campaign to secure an annulment of the marriage. Its wide-ranging and uncompromising case for the superiority of Hebrew to the other ancient languages, and especially the value of Hebrew for Christian theologians, was particularly apt for the king at this moment, when Wakefield was using precisely these special linguistic skills -- rare as they were in the England of his time -- to argue the royal case against Fisher, which he did more exactly in a series of closely related treatises which were central to the debates on the divorce. Some of these are now lost; one in manuscript (BL, Cotton MS, Otho C x, fols. 184'r'-198'r') demonstrates Henry's reliance on the Hebrew version of scripture from the outset of his campaign in 1527, and introduces to the debate the important issue of whether the marriage of Henry's late brother, Arthur, to Katherine had been consummated; and two were published after much revision as part of the royal campaign at a latter stage in its development. 'Kotser codicis', which was printed by Thomas Berthelet in 1534, contains a dedicatory letter to Anne Boleyn's father, Thomas, and another letter justifying Wakefield's behaviour to Bishop Fisher, and was part of a larger treatise in favour of Henry's case. 'Syntagma de Hebreorum codicum incorruptione' (printed by Wynkyn de Worde, also in 1534) contains, besides two other items, a defence of the Hebrew 'Bible' against the charge that the Jews had corrupted its text to reduce its Christological significance, and an untitled treatise on the divorce. In this work Wakefield's attitude to Fisher had noticeably hardened, and his tone towards his former patron is scornful. As a result of Wakefield's initiative in the divorce campaign, more Christian and Jewish Hebrew scholars from Venice were brought in on the king's side in 1530. 
Despite brief remarks in his works on the value of learning Hebrew in order to dispute with Jews and convert them (not likely to be a persuasive justification for studying the language in a country which officially had no Jewish population), as well as on Jewish wickedness, and on the unreliability of the 'Talmud', Wakefield displays considerable reverence for Jewish writers of the middle ages, especially Abraham ibn Ezra, David Kimchi, Maimonides, Nachmanides, and Rashi. He also believed that the biblical Hebrews were the originators of every art and science which were often claimed for the ancient Greeks, and that Hebrew is God's own language. These positions make him sympathetic to Jewish experience in a period when Christian condemnations of Jews habitually crossed intellectual and ideological divides. Some of this stems from having absorbed, less critically than a number of his northern humanist contemporaries, the cabbalistic interests of such Renaissance figures as Giovanni Pico della Mirandola and Johannes Reuchlin, whose works he cites. More pronounced in Wakefield's writings, however, is the orthodox Christian humanist's and grammarian's case for Hebrew: no Christian theologian can reach an authentic comprehension of the 'Old Testament' without studying it in its original language; and the same goes for the Greek 'New Testament', which contains many words derived from Hebrew. Christian scholastics, not Jews, are the most common objects of Wakefield's attacks, the church fathers his most frequent Christian allies; Lorenzo Valla's Greek philology is preferred over Pico's Hebrew scholarship which, according to Wakefield, was seriously flawed. In the 'Oratio' there are related cases for doubting the divine authority of the 'Vulgate' and 'Septuagint' and for the value of studying Arabic and Aramaic. The latter leads him in turn to strong condemnation of Luther's linguistic and therefore exegetical abilities. Since Wakefield's treatise 'On faith and works' -- if it was indeed by him -- is no longer extant, we must assume in the light of his criticism of Luther that he remained a Catholic, albeit one who came to accept the royal ecclesiastical supremacy. 
Clearly not all of Wakefield's writings are available to us, and his private library can only be imagined. Although many of the works attributed to him by the contemporary bibliographer John Bale were in fact by Robertus Britannus of Arras, Bale does mention an 'Institutiones Hebraicas' which is probably one of the Hebrew works which Wakefield, as he claims in the 'Oratio', hoped to publish when the printer developed more Hebrew type. In Archduke Ferdinand's letter to Henry VIII of 1523 it is stated that Wakefield took some of his works to be published to the Hagenau printing house of Thomas Anshelm. In the 'Syntagma' Wakefield denounces Richard Collier, former Carthusian and vicar in Sittingbourne, for stealing from his home many rare Hebrew, Aramaic, Latin, Greek, and Arabic books, including his own 'Lexicon Chaldaicum', as well as the 'Koran', works by Avicenna, and Adam Easton's fourteenth-century Latin translation of the Hebrew 'Bible'. According to John Leland, however, Wakefield himself pilfered from Ramsey Abbey a Hebrew dictionary which had been written by one of the abbey's early fifteenth-century monks, Laurence Holbeach. Wakefield was an admirer of the Hebrew printer Daniel Bomberg and probably owned some of his works. A number of Hebrew books belonging to his younger brother Thomas survive, and may have been given to him by Robert. 
Wakefield's change of allegiance from Fisher and Katherine of Aragon to the king and Anne Boleyn had a major impact on his income and career. By the end of 1528 he was being paid a quarterly wage of 100's'. by the treasurer of the king's chamber; in the following year he became regius praelector of Hebrew at Oxford at a salary of $6 13's'. 4died -- his inaugural oration is printed in the 'Syntagma', together with a letter from Oxford University thanking the king for his appointment. On 18 July 1532 he was made a canon and prebendary of Henry VIII College, about three months after the incorporation at Oxford of his Cambridge bachelorship in theology. He complained, however, that for seven years his annual salary of $20 had been denied him due to an unnamed enemy who has plausibly been identified as Edward Foxe, whom Wakefield believed to be envious of him; Thomas and Anne Boleyn seem to have helped him recover the money owing, which by about 1533 amounted to more than $100. 
Wakefield's students and admirers represent a diverse and influential group, including, by his own testimony, Thomas Hurskey, master of the Gilbertines, John Taylor, master of the rolls, John Stokesley, bishop of London, William Frisel, prior of the Rochester Cathedral chapter, William Tait, canon of Windsor and York, Thomas Lovell, canon of Bath and Wells, and Kaspar Amman, prior of the Augustinian house in Lauingen, Germany. We know from other evidence that he probably taught John Bale, the civil lawyer John Oliver, and the Liege humanist Paschasius Berselius. Through his teaching, publications, and influence with the king, he was the pioneering figure in the establishment of Hebrew study in Tudor England. One of the chief interests of Wakefield's life and writings is in demonstrating in a particularly well-documented fashion the opportunities offered to scholars and to new fields of scholarly endeavour by Henry VIII's divorce, as well as the intellectual conflicts, crises of loyalties, and ruptures of friendship and patronage this could engender. 
In the final years of his life Wakefield seems to have gravitated away from Oxford, residing around 1534 in Moorgate. His will, naming his brother Thomas as his executor, was dated 8 October 1537 and was proved in London on 13 May of the following year. His place of burial is not known. 


@@@@@


doc= 28411


Wakefield, Thomas (d. 1575), Hebraist, was born at Pontefract, Yorkshire. His brother was the renowned Hebrew scholar Robert Wakefield. In a marginal note in one of the books in his library he records that he was twice married and that he fathered nine children, but he does not name his wives. He was educated at Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1523. He is presumed to be the Wakefield granted leave of absence with pay from St John's College by John Fisher in 1523 so that he could continue his studies abroad. Writing to the master of St John's, Fisher expresses the hope that by going 'beyond the sea' Wakefield would become 'the more expolite and perfect in the tongue of Hebrew' and on his return would be able 'to perfect others in the same learning and do honour both to your college and to the whole realm' (Baker, 1.358). Of his subsequent career nothing is known until he was elected to the newly created regius chair of Hebrew on 9 November 1540, which carried with it membership of Trinity College. He was buried at Chesterton, near Cambridge, on 24 April 1575. His second wife, also buried at Chesterton, predeceased him in December 1570. 
Wakefield held the endowed chair in name but not in practice until his death. Though others were appointed to teach Hebrew between 1549 and 1553, and again between 1569 and 1575, his competence as a linguist was not in doubt. It is probable that he was disqualified from teaching because of his adherence to Roman Catholicism. His place was taken by a succession of religious refugees from the continent, notably Paul Fagius, Immanuel Tremellius, Anthony Chevallier, and Philip Bignon. However, there is little direct proof of his knowledge of Hebrew, for as far as is known he published nothing. His one extant work is an examination of phrases in the 'New Testament' which have an obvious Hebrew background: 'Locutiones seu phrases in novo testamento, quae videntur secundum proprietates linguae Hebraeae'. Dated 1544, it is dedicated to Henry VIII and preserved in manuscript in the British Library. The only other clue to his Hebrew scholarship is to be found in the marginalia of the books he inherited from his brother Robert (died 1537), some of which are now in Lambeth Palace Library. His copy of Felix Pratensis's Latin psalter, a translation from the Hebrew original, is heavily annotated. In the margin of Sebastian Muenster's Hebrew version of the gospel of 'Matthew', he identifies the source of the translator's note on a particular word as David Kimchi's 'Book of Roots'. While Reuchlin's 'De arte cabbalistica' was also on his shelves, it is not as well-thumbed as the Hebrew version of 'The Book of Joseph Ben Gorion'. His close perusal of the first three chapters of this latter work indicate considerable competence in post-biblical Hebrew and familiarity with the relevant texts. It would appear that Wakefield's Hebrew books were no mere ornaments. They were read and studied by one who was able to appreciate their contents. 


@@@@@


doc= 28412


Arthur Wakefield (1799-1843), colonist in New Zealand, was born at Burnham on 19 November 1799 and entered the navy in 1810. He served at Batavia, and in the Atlantic and Mediterranean, and rose to the rank of captain. In 1841 he became agent for the New Zealand Company's projected Nelson settlement. After selecting the site in November, he set about establishing the settlement. As he required more land for the growing number of settlers he sent surveyors to the Wairau district, Marlborough, in April 1843. The company's claim to the land was disputed by the Maori chiefs Te Rauparaha and Te Rangihaeata and was awaiting investigation by the land commissioner. Upset by interference with the survey, Wakefield attempted to arrest the chiefs on 17 June. In the fighting which broke out at Tuamarina that day about six Maori and twenty-two Europeans, including Wakefield, were killed. He was buried there on 23 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 28413


Wakefield, Daniel (1776-1846), barrister and writer on political economy, was born in the spring of 1776, in Tottenham, Middlesex. He was the youngest of three children in the family of Edward Wakefield (1750-1826), merchant, and his wife, the writer Priscilla Wakefield (1750-1832), daughter of Daniel Bell. Daniel Wakefield's elder brother was Edward Wakefield; Edward Gibbon Wakefield was his nephew. Wakefield was privately educated by scholars of some eminence. One tutor, Stewart Kyd, was later tried for high treason with Horne Tooke. His commitment to Quakerism, despite the influence of his mother, was not strong and he abandoned it for the Church of England at a relatively young age, partly in the hope of qualifying for employment with the government. In 1798 he did gain a part-time post in the naval pay office; but the wage was poor and he despaired of further advancement. Other attention-seeking schemes included pamphlets on political economy, urging poorly conceived reforms of the public finance system. Expensive schemes for the reclamation of Irish bogs similarly proved unrewarding. In 1799 he published the most important of his works, 'An Essay of Political Economy', an inquiry into the various French schools of writing on value. 
On 9 February 1802 Wakefield became a student of Lincoln's Inn. His commitment to the legal profession must, however, be doubted as various distractions, riotous living, and, according to his mother, unsuitable company prevented much headway. An ill-advised marriage on 3 June 1805 to Isabella Mackie, an adventuress and swindler, followed. It dragged him into a morass of debt and fraud that almost ended in bankruptcy and emigration. Remarkably, his legal career was not destroyed and he was called to the bar on 2 May 1807. A sullied reputation and an inadequate knowledge of the law, however, meant that clients were not plentiful and his financial dependence upon his parents and brother continued. Attempts to annul the marriage failed; then, in August 1813, Isabella committed suicide by taking poison. On 11 November that year Wakefield married Elizabeth Kilgour. Neither marriage produced children. Poverty had made him a diligent student and the past six years had not been wasted. With his newly acquired respectability and demonstrable skill, his practice flourished. He became known as one of the ablest equity draftsmen of his day and was often consulted in major cases. He was elected bencher of Lincoln's Inn on 15 January 1835, having become king's counsel during the previous Michaelmas vacation. His most famous brief was, perhaps, 'Attwood v. Small'. The dispute concerned the sale of an ironworks whose price was over $1 million. It was appealed to the House of Lords in 1838 and his successful argument won him a considerable reputation, a silk gown from the lord chancellor, and $5000 from the grateful John Attwood. 
Towards the end of his career, Wakefield became known for his philanthropy. At times, he refused payment for briefs and returned fees to clients in distress. His eminence was recognized by his involvement in the administration of the inn and in the planning and construction of the new hall. His country residence was at Hare Hatch, near Twyford, Berkshire, where he was magistrate and deputy lieutenant. Wakefield died suddenly on 19 July 1846, in London, while taking a shower. He was buried on 23 July 1846 in the crypt of Lincoln's Inn chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 28414


Wakefield, Edward (1774-1854), philanthropist, land agent, and writer on political economy, was born in Tottenham, Middlesex. He was the elder son of Edward Wakefield (1750-1826), merchant, and the writer Priscilla Wakefield (1750-1832), daughter of Daniel Bell. Daniel Wakefield was his younger brother. Edward, described by his nurse as 'born to make hearts ache', always had many female admirers. His first marriage was to 'the most beautiful girl in Essex', Susanna Crash, a farmer's daughter of Felsted in Essex, on 3 October 1790. They had ten children, of whom seven were boys; their eldest son was Edward Gibbon Wakefield, and their fourth was William Hayward Wakefield. Susanna died in 1817 and six years later, under mysterious circumstances, Edward married Frances Davies, daughter of David Davies, headmaster of Macclesfield grammar school. The marriage, solemnized in Paris on 3 August 1823, was not announced to either family, and Frances remained in her father's house for four years. 
Brought up a Quaker, Wakefield was privately educated and spent much of his youth at the farm of John Gurney, an uncle, in Earlham, near Norwich. Shortly after his first marriage, he decided to become a gentleman farmer: obtaining first by purchase, Romford Lodge, and secondly by lease, Burnham Wyck, Essex. Both enterprises failed badly and the latter was sold at a considerable loss. However, he had become friends with many of the innovating and influential farmers in the area, including Squire Coke, Lord Petre, the duke of Bedford, and C. C. Western. A short, financially unrewarding period at the naval arsenal, Northfleet, followed. He ceased attending Quaker meetings and became loosely affiliated to the Church of England in the hope of winning a more lucrative government post. For the next few years, while his family lived in Bury St Edmunds, he spent his time educating himself by visiting prisons (Elizabeth Fry was a cousin) and workhouses, and by travel, including an extended visit to Ireland. Despite a continuing lack of success in his business affairs, his friends considered him to be particularly knowledgeable about economics. He gave evidence to parliamentary committees on sugar imports (1808), bullion (1810), and agricultural depression (1821). There is some suggestion that he was consulted by William Pitt about Ireland and that he advised Henry Dundas, first Viscount Melville, when president of the Board of Trade. In 1808 John Foster, afterwards Lord Oriel, chancellor of the exchequer for Ireland, persuaded him to return to Ireland and write a book about that country's rural economy. The subsequent two-volume work, 'Ireland, Statistical and Political', published in 1812, was described by John Ramsay McCulloch as 'the best and most complete work on Ireland since Arthur Young's tour' ('DNB'). Although it does contain some inaccuracies and has a distinctly Malthusian tone, its candour, intelligent analysis, and relatively unbiased perspective have ensured that it remains a valuable source for Irish historians. 
In 1814, on the strength of his newly acquired reputation and the contacts made some fifteen years earlier, Wakefield opened one of the first land agencies in the country at 42 Pall Mall. He was soon occupied traversing the country, from Cornwall to Yorkshire, acting as the agent for, among others, David Ricardo, and as manager/adviser for several large landowners. As an adjunct to his estate management activities he engaged in the sale and purchase of parliamentary rotten boroughs, and did well at this secretive trade. His Irish book also provided an introduction into Benthamite and whig/radical circles in London. He formed close friendships with Francis Place, John Mill, and Henry Brougham. Two philanthropic causes, education and the condition and ill-treatment of lunatic asylum patients, attracted most of his attention. In the former case Wakefield strongly supported Joseph Lancaster's educational theories, introducing him to a number of wealthy patrons among whom, he later claimed, was George III. He helped organize several Lancastrian schools in London and cleverly manipulated public opinion to raise funds. His use of large public meetings, set agendas, and planted questions from the audience to create the right atmosphere was particularly sophisticated. For the latter cause, several visits to the lunatic asylum of Bethlem in 1814 and orchestrated publicity led to some celebrated evidence to a parliamentary inquiry in 1816. 
Wakefield stood as a tory candidate for Reading in the general election of June 1826, but a scandal involving his son's abduction escapade, in which his wife was involved, seems to have caused his retirement on the third day of the poll. In the 1830s and 1840s he became a warm advocate of Edward Gibbon Wakefield's colonization schemes, writing many letters to newspapers and lobbying the cabinet. Financial problems eventually resurfaced and, facing bankruptcy proceedings, he was forced to flee the country in the early 1840s. With the help of a loan from Lord Ashburton he lived comfortably for some years in Blois, France, where he managed a silk factory. Eventually the debts were paid and he returned to England. Wakefield died on 18 May 1854 in Knightsbridge and is buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 28415


Wakefield, Edward Gibbon (1796-1862), promoter of colonization, was born on 20 March 1796 in London. He was the second child and eldest son of Edward Wakefield (1774-1854), philanthropist, land agent, and writer on economics, and Susanna, 'nee' Crash (died 1817), a farmer's daughter from Felsted, Essex. His middle name was taken from his great-grandmother, Isabella Gibbon, a relative of the historian. The Wakefields were an old Quaker family, originally from Kendal in Westmorland. The family moved almost immediately after his birth to Essex, farming first at Romford then at Burnham Wyck. Financial problems and the serious illness of Susanna led to Edward Gibbon being sent to his grandmother in Tottenham. Priscilla Wakefield, a devout Quaker, was not impressed by her eldest grandson, a boy with 'an inflexible and pertinacious temper'. During the next five years Edward was expelled from three schools, Mr Haigh's school in Tottenham, Westminster School, and Edinburgh high school, for fighting and disobedience. His uncle, Daniel Wakefield, succeeded in having him admitted to Gray's Inn on 5 October 1813, but there is no evidence that he ever studied law. His father, who had been absent during much of his son's childhood, had to admit that, at seventeen, he had become incorrigible. Fortunately, Edward became acquainted with the Hon. William Noel Hill, the British envoy at Turin and son of Lord Berwick. He spent the winter of 1814-15 in Turin as Hill's secretary. In the summer he temporarily left Hill's employ to enjoy life as a king's messenger, travelling on several occasions to Paris. The first sign of an above average mind at last emerged with the publication in 'The Statesman' of his acute observations on the Bourbon restoration celebrations in that city. 
After wintering again with Hill in Turin, Wakefield returned with his employer to a house in Princes Street, off Hanover Square, London. Opposite lived a widow, Mrs E. A. Pattle, and her daughter, Eliza, a ward of chancery. Thomas Charles Pattle, a rich Canton merchant, had died in Macau the year before. Edward, recognizing the opportunity, wooed the seventeen-year-old heiress without the knowledge of her mother or uncles. On 13 June 1816 Wakefield eloped with Eliza, and the couple were married on 27 July in Edinburgh. The lord chancellor became involved, but following the intervention of several influential people, including Hill, the marriage was grudgingly accepted. A Church of England ceremony on 10 August and an immediate income of $600 a year out of the Pattle estate to maintain his wife sealed the affair. Eliza was to gain a further $30,000 on her twenty-first birthday and further sums were to accrue when obligations to other members of the family were satisfied. The gamble had succeeded and Wakefield's financial future was assured. For the next four years he was attached to the Hon. Algernon Percy, under-secretary at the British delegation in Turin, but spent more time with Hill, who was now in Genoa. A daughter, Susan Priscilla (known as Nina), was born on 4 December 1817 in Genoa (she died on 12 February 1836 of consumption). In 1820 the Wakefields returned to England where, on 25 June, a second child, Edward Jerningham ['see below'], was born. Eliza died ten days later, before she was twenty-one, of complications from the birth. In consequence, the $30,000 remained with the Pattles. For the next few years Wakefield travelled, spending much of his time in Paris. 
Despite being relatively wealthy from the proceeds of the chancery settlement, Wakefield's ambition, a seat in the Commons, demanded more. On 7 March 1826, with the connivance of his brother William Wakefield and his stepmother, Frances, he abducted an heiress, Ellen Turner, from her boarding-school near Liverpool. She was fifteen and the daughter of William Turner of Shrigley, a wealthy Cheshire manufacturer. Told that her father was dangerously ill, Ellen was bundled into a coach and taken to Gretna Green. A second lie, that her father's fortune depended on marriage to Wakefield, persuaded her to agree to a marriage ceremony. They were caught by angry relatives at Calais, 'en route' for Paris. William had already been arrested and, on his return to England in May, Edward was committed to Lancaster Castle. The trial was heard on 23 March 1827. Found guilty, the brothers were sentenced to three years apiece; William served his in Lancaster Castle, Edward languished in Newgate. An act of parliament was needed to annul the marriage because, according to Scottish law, it had been perfectly legal despite the fact it had not been consummated. The case had attracted immense attention, and the reputations of the brothers appeared for ever blighted. 
Prison life was difficult but not impossible for Edward. His children lodged nearby and made frequent visits; moreover, he enjoyed the ministrations of a procession of relatives including Elizabeth Fry. Imprisonment proved, ironically, to be Wakefield's salvation. Given the time for reflection, he began the transition from vain and arrogant gadfly to serious student of society and its ills, although he remained arrogant and ill-tempered. Part of his time was spent talking to prisoners and discussing the usefulness of imprisonment and, in particular, capital punishment. His ideas were later published in 'Facts Relating to the Punishment of Death in the Metropolis' (1831) and in evidence to the select committee on secondary punishments (1831). In both he condemned the use of capital punishment for all but the most serious crimes, and sought to emphasize the certainty of punishment as the deterrent rather than the harshness of the penalty. His other occupation, a corollary of his studies on the causes of crime, was to devise a programme of systematic colonization. 
Between August and October 1829 the 'Morning Chronicle' published in instalments Wakefield's 'Letter from Sydney'. In the newspaper no author was credited, but when it was reprinted as a book, 'Letter from Sydney, the Principal Town of Australasia', in 1830, Robert Gouger, with whom Wakefield had corresponded while in Newgate, was credited as editor. Wakefield also published a pamphlet, 'Sketch of a Proposal for Colonising Australia'. These brilliantly imaginative pieces -- the first was written from the point of view of a settler (although Wakefield himself had never been to Australia) -- offered a plan, based on six principles, to overcome the problems of over-population identified by Malthus. Colonies, he wrote, were unprofitable because they suffered from a scarcity of labour, the reverse of the situation in Britain. Emigration must therefore be encouraged. The plan's first principle demanded that land be sold for a 'sufficient price'. The proceeds of the sale and a land tax were to be used to provide the transportation of labourers to the colonies 'free of cost'. These people should be both men and women from all classes of society, not convicts or slaves, and should govern themselves at the earliest opportunity, under a viceroy. The weakest part of the plan lay in its definition of 'sufficient price'. Wakefield understood that it should not be placed too high. Ideally, it needed to be high enough so that labour was available to capital, but sufficiently low to allow labourers to acquire their own land after four or five years. Wakefield tended to put the price on the high side and the plan suffered criticism as a result. 
In May 1830 Wakefield was released from prison and began his campaign to win public acceptance of his ideas by forming the National Colonisation Society. Among the early members were Robert Gouger (a future colonial secretary in South Australia), Robert Rintoul (editor of 'The Spectator'), Charles Buller, and John Stuart Mill. Sir William Molesworth joined in 1833. Other notable members were Colonel Torrens, W. W. Whitmore, and William Hutt. Jeremy Bentham was also won over and offered some useful advice. The group's first success came when Lord Howick, son and heir of Lord Grey, the prime minister, read the 'Letters' and persuaded Lord Goderich, the secretary for war and colonies, to pass the Ripon regulations in January 1831. These ordered the abandonment of the free grant of land in New South Wales and its replacement by the sale of waste land at not less than 5's'. an acre. Two months later Wakefield gave evidence to the select committee on secondary punishments (1831) and cautiously emphasized the need to end the system of transportation. His intent was the creation of a colony in Australia that would not rely on convicts for labour. Taking advantage of favourable reviews, he and Buller then formed the South Australia Land Company. Various plans were proposed to Goderich but all were rejected, the last as a result of its overly enthusiastic endorsement of responsible government for the settlers. Wakefield was not disheartened and continued the pressure by publishing 'England and America' in 1833. It added to the debate by urging the benefits of high wages, in Britain as in America, and recommended the repeal of the corn laws, the first step on the road to free trade. By this date Wakefield had become a confirmed disciple of Adam Smith and published an edited version of the 'Wealth of Nations', in four volumes, between 1835 and 1839. The extensive commentaries that accompany each chapter clearly outline his thinking as he sought to create a model post-enlightenment society. A new joint-stock company, the South Australia Association, was formed and a fresh enabling bill was introduced in the Commons. Further recruits to the cause included George Grote, Henry George Ward, and, at one remove, the duke of Wellington. After several rewrites, the 'South Australia Bill' became law on 15 August 1834. The plan was essentially Wakefield's land scheme, including no convicts and self-government when the population reached 50,000. At this point, to his chagrin, he was pushed aside and virtually ignored as Gouger and others prepared to administer the new act. As might be expected, Wakefield thereupon found fault with most of their decisions: he considered the list of commissioners, chosen in 1835, to administer the colony unimpressive and the price set for the new land too low. Nine ships left England with the first settlers between 22 February and 23 July 1836. Wakefield, distressed by the death of his daughter, had intended to travel with them despite his grievances, but changed his mind at the last moment. The vision of a colony in a new country, New Zealand, over which he might gain more control now commanded his attention. 
Two rival committees competed to determine the future of New Zealand. The select committee on Aborigines met first, in July 1835, and was dominated by Thomas Fowell Buxton and spokesmen for the missionaries already resident in the country. The second, the committee on the disposal of lands in the British colonies, did not meet until June 1836. Wakefield, described in the prime of life as 'of middle stature, fair complexion, fine skin, fine intellectual forehead, apparently of fixed and decisive character', dominated it. Over three days of testimony Wakefield spent some time discussing the true meaning of self-government, particularly in connection with Canada. But his primary thrust was the reiteration of the need for systematic colonization as a means of relieving over-population. His clear and often spellbinding rhetoric won many friends and led to the creation, on 22 May 1837, of the New Zealand Association, under the chairmanship of Francis Baring. Its hopes were, however, quickly blighted as the select committee on Aborigines reported that it was opposed to all colonization in the south sea islands. Their opposition, coupled with renewed doubts about the legislative implications, ended with the defeat of the association's bill in the Commons in June 1838. Wakefield had anticipated defeat and had already left to join Lord Durham in Canada. 
Durham, involved in the failed New Zealand Company of 1825, had been recruited by Wakefield for the association on his return from Russia in July 1837. They had become friends and, before leaving to take up his position as governor-general and high commissioner of all North American colonies after the suspension of the constitution, Durham asked Wakefield to join his staff. On arrival he discovered that Lord Glenelg, secretary for the colonies, had denied him an official position. Durham, however, gave him the job of chief commissioner of crown lands, Charles Buller's nominal title. Upper and Lower Canada were in uproar, the mission was not a success, and against Wakefield's advice Durham soon resigned. His 'Report on the Affairs of North America', finished in January 1839, recommended that the two Canadas be united with an elected assembly whose powers approximated the British parliament. Durham was reluctant to submit the report to the Commons, but Wakefield forced his hand by leaking it to 'The Times'. Wakefield's contribution to the final version is debated, but Durham admitted to paying close attention to his advice. A popular epigram, coined from a jibe by Lord Brougham, put it crudely: 'Wakefield thought it, Buller wrote it, Durham signed it.' Before leaving Canada on 20 October 1838 Wakefield also completed his report on land and emigration. Attached to the report as Appendix B, it sought to apply his colonization system to British North America. 
Wakefield returned to Canada on three occasions. In 1841 he arrived in May as agent for the North American Colonial Association of Ireland. It planned to provide immigrants and encourage economic growth by building a canal through the seigneurie of Beauharnois, near Montreal; that it was a 'horrid swindle' was the first response of the governor-general, Lord Sydenham. This visit was brief, but he was back again in December and co-operated with the new governor-general, Sir Charles Bagot, in encouraging the government to include the French Canadians within the new constitution, through letters to the 'Colonial Gazette'. His participation in Canadian politics was further enhanced by his election to the assembly in November 1842 as the member for Beauharnois. His primary objective was to steer the canal and land project through the house; he reputedly made $20,000 from his work for the association between 1841 and 1844. But his interest in politics generally led, reputedly, to a role as secret adviser to Sir Charles Metcalfe, Bagot's successor, in December 1843. They enjoyed an excellent relationship, attested by the publication by Wakefield of two tributes to Metcalfe, a pamphlet entitled 'A View of Sir Charles Metcalfe's Government of Canada' (1843) and an article, '''Sir Charles Metcalfe in Canada', in' Fisher's Colonial Magazine' (1843). The latter is remarkable for its affirmation of his belief in the merit of a relatively narrow definition of responsible government, and a forecast that the colonial future lay in what might, in modern terms, be described as a commonwealth of nations. News of the death of his brother Arthur Wakefield ['see under 'Wakefield, William Hayward] at Wairau in New Zealand brought him back to England. 
The failure of the New Zealand Association's bill in 1838 had been followed by the creation of a land company built on his old association, on a colonization society formed by City of London interests, and on the 1825 company. The new company was determined to establish a colony with or without the government's blessing. Wakefield led the planning, and in May 1839 the 'Tory' left Plymouth for New Zealand under the leadership of his brother William and his son Edward, with instructions to seize as much land as possible to force the government's hand. Wakefield stayed in London seeking support. He gave evidence to the parliamentary committee on New Zealand in 1840, used the 'Colonial Gazette' to attack the Church Missionary Society's obstructionist tactics, and lobbied tirelessly for official blessing. The government refused to listen and had already, in a fit of concern for the Maori and in fear of French intentions, dispatched Captain Hobson to persuade the chiefs to accept British sovereignty. For some time there was the spectre of confrontation as William Wakefield's purchases on behalf of the company were in danger of being disallowed. The next five years were a mix of euphoria and despair, as successive governments attempted to deal with the colonies and their own perceptions of sovereignty, alternately giving and withholding favour. The death of Arthur Wakefield in 1843 at the hands of the Maori, for example, was greeted unsympathetically by the colonial secretary, Lord Stanley. Wakefield again gave evidence to a parliamentary committee in 1844 and kept up his pressure for greater legislative responsibility. On 18 August 1846 he suffered a stroke, and for some weeks it was thought he would die. A long period of convalescence was required and others took over the direction of the company. He resigned from it in 1849. 
Wakefield wrote 'A View of the Art of Colonisation' (1849) while resting at Chateau Mabile, near Boulogne, France. This rather disorganized work, in part an attack on past enemies, including Sir James Stephen and Lord Grey, proposed the establishment of colonies formed by different religious groups, in the manner of the seventeenth-century New England colonies in North America. The practical outcome of the idea to provide greater coherence for a colony and, incidentally, overcome missionary opposition, was a Church of England settlement at Canterbury, New Zealand. A second tactic was the creation, with the help of Charles Bowyer Adderley, of a new pressure group, the Society for the Reform of Colonial Government. The Canterbury Association, formed with the help of Lord Lyttelton and John Robert Godley, gained a charter in October 1849. Wakefield, after organizing several groups of settlers and steering the colony's constitution through parliament in 1852, himself landed in Port Lyttelton on 2 February 1853. Election in August to both the Wellington provincial council and the general assembly as member for the Hutt district followed. But his popularity declined when he became the confidential adviser to the acting governor, Colonel Robert Henry Wynyard, and seemed to be supporting a delay in the movement towards responsible government. The excitement proved too much and he suffered another breakdown in December 1854. He lingered a further seven years, dying on 16 May 1862 at Wellington, without making a will. He was buried in the Sydney Street cemetery, Wellington; the inscription merely provides his name, date of death, and age. 
Wakefield irrevocably altered the temper and style of the British empire in the nineteenth century. He brought to the subject a spark of imaginative genius, the vision of systematic colonization, and joined it to a far-sighted emphasis on the merits of colonial self-government. As Thornton Hunt wrote in Wakefield's obituary in the 'Daily Telegraph': 'administrative and constructive reform [in the empire] can scarcely be traced to the single hand of any other man'. In his lifetime his qualities were often overlooked: only in his close family was he able to inspire affection and loyalty. Critics pointed out that his New Zealand and South Australia colonies were small-scale endeavours, soon lost in the tide of nineteenth-century mass emigration. Others remembered his ill-temper, impatience, and reputation as an unscrupulous schemer. These judgements unfairly devalue his contributions and have led to the absence of suitable memorials in both South Australia and New Zealand. 
His only son, 


@@@@@


doc= 28416


Edward Jerningham Wakefield (1820-1879), settler in New Zealand, was born on 25 June 1820 in London. He received an unorthodox education, partly on the continent, partly in Newgate prison, and partly at Bruce Castle School, Tottenham. The castle curriculum was unusual in its emphasis on science and mathematics and its provision of a measure of student self-government. He attended King's College, London, 1836-8, before travelling, as his father's secretary, to Canada. The next year he sailed with his uncle to New Zealand to establish the Wakefield colony and remained there until reprimanded by Governor Fitzroy in 1844. According to his critics, most of his time had been spent in debauchery. His diary of these years, 'Adventure in New Zealand', and the accompanying 'Illustrations' were published in 1845, timed to coincide with the New Zealand Company's campaign against the Colonial Office. It is well written and offers perceptive commentary on the flora and fauna of the islands as well as the Maori. The observations on the settlers and government are, as might be expected, heavily biased. Four years later he again departed for New Zealand with the Canterbury settlers, leaving behind large debts. The political contributions of this intelligent but unstable man were few: he was elected for a Canterbury constituency in 1854 and was member of the executive council from August to September of that year, being elected again to the house of representatives in 1876. He married Ellen Roe, the daughter of a Wellington printer, on 3 October 1863, and had three daughters. Alcoholism destroyed the marriage and he died in distressed circumstances on 3 March 1879. 


@@@@@


doc= 28417


Felix Wakefield (1807-1875), engineer, born in Norfolk, married about 1830, in France, Marie Felicie Eliza Bailli, with whom he had nine children. In the early 1830s he became superintendent of public works in Van Diemen's Land. After returning to England in 1847, he assisted his brother Edward Gibbon Wakefield in his colonizing schemes. His report 'Colonial Surveying with a View to the Disposal of Waste Land', prepared for the New Zealand Company, was published in 1849. He joined the Canterbury settlement in New Zealand in 1851 and farmed near Christchurch. In 1854 he became principal superintendent of the Army Works Corps in the Crimea, with the rank of lieutenant-colonel, and built the railway from Balaklava to Sevastopol. Following his return to New Zealand in 1863 he was secretary to the government agent on the Otago goldfields from 1867 to 1870. A keen horticulturist, he published 'The Gardener's Chronicle for New Zealand' (1870). He died at Sumner, Canterbury, on 23 December 1875, and was buried on 26 December in Christchurch cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 28418


Wakefield, Gilbert (1756-1801), biblical scholar and religious controversialist, born on 22 February 1756 in the parsonage-house of St Nicholas's, Nottingham, was the third son of George Wakefield (1720-1776), rector of that parish and later vicar of Richmond and Kingston, and his wife, Elizabeth (1721-1800), whose grandfather had been twice mayor of Nottingham. From infancy, Wakefield showed a remarkable aptitude for learning, but his early education was erratic: passed from master to master, he made considerable progress after enrolling at the free school of Kingston in 1770. There he was among the last to study with Richard Wooddeson, who had counted George Steevens, Edward Gibbon, and William Hayley among his scholars. 
In April 1772 Wakefield entered Jesus College, Cambridge, having obtained a Marsden scholarship, established 'for the son of a living clergyman, born at Nottingham, both of which conditions were united in me' ('Memoirs of the Life', 1.62). As was customary, he divided his studies between mathematics and classics, preferring the latter, but applying himself to the former 'with all the assiduity that I could bear' (ibid., 1.83). When not engaged in formal study, he taught himself Hebrew, played cricket and fished, published a volume of Latin verse (1776), and befriended Robert Tyrwhitt and John Jebb (who also inclined to Unitarian views). He received his BA in January 1776, second wrangler and second chancellor medallist in classics. In April of that year he was elected fellow of his college. 
Wakefield spent the years of his fellowship dedicated to biblical studies, acquiring several oriental languages as he did so. In 1778 he was ordained deacon, in spite of growing doubts about matters of doctrine and scruples about the practice of subscription to the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' (several Jesuans, including Tyrwhitt, had recently resigned their fellowships over this practice). It was, he later wrote, 'the most disingenuous action of my whole life; utterly incapable of palliation or apology' ('Memoirs of the Life', 1.121). His clerical life lasted just over a year: he served as curate in Stockport, Cheshire, under a Mr Watson, then successively at St Peter's and St Paul's in Liverpool, all the while hoping to find employment as a schoolmaster. In Liverpool he crusaded against the slave trade and British privateering, and denounced both practices from the pulpit, angering many parishioners. This was the first sign of the political activism that was to characterize his later life. 
On 23 March 1779 Wakefield married Anne Watson (died 1819), the niece of his rector in Stockport. The couple had five sons and two daughters. Wakefield gave up his fellowship on marrying, and shortly afterwards he resigned his curacy as well because of doctrinal differences. Wakefield's study of scripture had led him to reject the doctrines of the Trinity and incarnation. Yet he embraced the teachings of Jesus Christ, whom he regarded as the greatest moral philosopher, sent by God to redeem mankind. Chief among these teachings was the mandate to love one another, and the corollary to it was service to the poor, respect for individual liberty, and the pursuit of peace. Initially he was opposed to all but defensive war, and later became a total pacifist. Although technically a dissenter or Unitarian, Wakefield never associated himself with any sect or congregation, being averse to most forms of worship. 
In the summer of 1779 Wakefield accepted an appointment as classical tutor at Warrington Academy, the prominent dissenting academy where Joseph Priestley had taught, and where John Aikin was tutor of divinity and William Enfield tutor of philosophy. The years at Warrington were the happiest of his life. There he began a lifelong friendship with the Aikin family (his beloved daughter Anne later married Charles Aikin), established valuable connections with wealthy dissenters, and was encouraged to pursue his theological enquiries. These began to appear, in pamphlet form, in 1781. Essays on baptism and inspiration gained him notoriety as a controversialist, while his 'New Translation of the First Epistle of Paul to the Thessalonians' (1781) announced his intention to produce a new translation of the 'New Testament', a project completed a decade later. The following year saw the publication of his first book-length work, 'A new translation of the gospel of St Matthew, with notes critical, philological, and explanatory' (1782). This work aimed to follow the idiom and phraseology of the original as closely as possible, and to apply the principles of classical philology to study of the 'Bible'. It is an interesting early example of historical criticism, but Wakefield's denunciations of Anglican doctrine and the American War of Independence made even his friends uncomfortable, and made him the object of ridicule in the periodical press. When Warrington Academy failed in 1783, Wakefield's outspokenness was thought to have been a partial cause; the next year, when his 'Enquiry into the opinions of the Christian writers of the three first centuries concerning the person of Jesus Christ' (1784) sold poorly, he ceased publication on theological subjects for several years. 
After leaving Warrington in 1783, Wakefield resided briefly at Bramcote, near Nottingham, and at Richmond, in Surrey, before settling in Nottingham in 1784, where he 'had three or four pupils on very handsome terms' ('Memoirs of the Life', 1.270). Over the next two years, a pain in the left shoulder 'harasst me beyond measure' (ibid., 277) so that he lost all but one of his pupils and was able to write little: an edition of the poetry of Thomas Gray appeared in 1786, and of Virgil's 'Georgics', published by Cambridge University Press, in 1788. Cambridge also published his 'Silva critica', the first volume of which appeared in 1789. The 'Silva', one of Wakefield's most important works, was intended to demonstrate 'the union of theological and classical learning... thus promoting in the world at the same time a profitable heathenism... and a rational theology' (ibid., 1.293). Unlike his earlier theological works, the 'Silva' was well received in both Anglican and dissenting circles; it was completed in five volumes in 1795. 
A new dissenting college had been established in 1786, eventually located at Hackney, and its founders, including the radical minister Richard Price, invited Wakefield to become classical tutor. He accepted, moving to Hackney in 1790. The appointment was not without controversy: Price and Priestley were initially opposed, ostensibly because of Wakefield's refusal to attend Christian worship. Wakefield himself was hesitant because he felt that the college's requirements in classical philology were insufficient for understanding scripture. A year later he resigned, defending himself in 'An Enquiry into the Expediency and Propriety of Public or Social Worship', where he argued that there was no gospel authority for public worship. This pamphlet was satirized in the Pittite press and sparked a public debate among liberal dissenters, to which Priestley, Anna Barbauld, and Mary Hays all contributed. Wakefield's 'Memoirs' (1792) was a product of this debate, designed as an apologia for his opinions and actions. 
After resigning from Hackney College, Wakefield could no longer support himself as a private tutor, and began publishing at an astonishing rate. His translation of the 'New Testament' was published in 1792 and went through several editions, including one in Cambridge, Massachusetts. 'Evidences of Christianity', a work of apologetics, appeared the next year. Companion editions of Horace (1794) and Virgil (1796), an edition, with extensive commentary, of selected Greek tragedies (2 vols., 1794), an edition of Moschus and Bion (1795), an annotated edition of Alexander Pope's Homer (12 vols., 1796), and, finally, his massive three-volume edition of Lucretius (1796-7), published at his own expense and dedicated to Charles James Fox, established Wakefield as one of the two leading British scholars of his time, the other being Richard Porson. Unlike Porson, however, Wakefield was excessively fond of emendation, always worked in great haste, and rarely took time for revision. Thus, although his critical remarks can show considerable brilliance and an unusual awareness of continental advances in scholarship (Wakefield seems to have been among the first Englishmen to promulgate F. A. Wolf's conclusions about Homer), his work is riddled with errors and was largely dismissed by the British Academy within a few years of his death. 
Wakefield also achieved notoriety as a political controversialist for his attacks on the Pitt government. He had come to believe that true Christian morality and Pittite policy were wholly incompatible, and that any church promoting such policy was the Antichrist. In the French Revolution, wrote John Aikin, the son of his colleague at Warrington, Wakefield saw 'the undoubted commencement of a better order of things, in which rational liberty, equitable policy, and pure religion, would finally become triumphant' (Aikin, 1.208), and was appalled by British attempts to subvert its progress. Of the several pamphlets he wrote on this subject, most notable were 'The Spirit of Christianity Compared with the Spirit of the Times in Great Britain' (1794), which influenced S. T. Coleridge, and 'A Reply to the Letter of Edmund Burke, Esq., to a Noble Lord' (1796), both of which went through three editions. But Wakefield could be as vehement against Tom Paine as against Burke, and in two pamphlets (1794 and 1796) attacked the deism of 'The Age of Reason' with such spirit that Pittite reviewers had to blink in wonder. These pamphlets circulated internationally, especially in America. Wakefield further incurred the displeasure of the government by organizing contributions for the defendants in the treason trials of 1794, and by defending William Frend against the charges brought against him by Cambridge University for publishing the pamphlet 'Peace and Union'. Wakefield's defence of Frend caused the university press to withdraw support from the 'Silva critica', and its last two volumes were published in London at Tyrwhitt's expense. 
By 1798 the prime minister, William Pitt (1759-1806), fearing a French invasion, had decided to silence political opposition, and Wakefield unluckily provided the occasion. In January of that year Richard Watson, bishop of Llandaff, published 'An Address to the People of Great Britain', supporting Pitt's proposal for an income tax. Wakefield responded in 'A Reply to some Parts of the Bishop of Landaff's Address', a pamphlet 'never written over twice, and... finished... in the compass of a single day' ('Memoirs of the Life', 2.117). In it, he argued that the government had provoked war with France, and that this policy had so hurt the British poor that, if the French were to invade, they would be unlikely to meet with resistance. 'For alas! the ground-floor of this grand and stable edifice, where myself, and my mess-mates of the swinish multitude, were regaling ourselves, as well as existing circumstances would possibly admit, on our cheese-parings and candles' ends; our ground-floor, I say, is sunk for ever in damps and darkness; only to make, forsooth! a more firm foundation for our aristocratical and prelatical superiors. ('Reply to the Bishop of Landaff's Address', 16)' For this pamphlet Wakefield, together with his publisher and booksellers (including Joseph Johnson), were indicted on an information and convicted. Their convictions, thought Charles James Fox, meant that liberty of the press was dead. At the trial Wakefield eschewed the offer of legal assistance from the radical Scottish lawyer Henry Erskine (1746-1817) and represented his own case, casting himself as a latter-day Socrates or Jesus. Henry Crabb Robinson, who witnessed the event, wrote that 'his delivery of his own defence must have been one of the most gratifying treats which a person of taste or sensibility could enjoy. His simplicity quite apostolic, his courage purely heroic' ('Henry Crabb Robinson', 1.36-7). Upon conviction, Wakefield was sentenced to two years' confinement in Dorchester gaol and a fine of $500. A fund was established to support his family, and $5000 was raised almost immediately, largely from Foxite whigs and liberal dissenters. Wakefield, who was never rich, remarked that he owed his fortune to his majesty's attorney-general ('Memoirs of the Life', 2.156). 
In prison, Wakefield became a celebrity among the politically disaffected. Fox, the duke of Bedford, and Lord Holland all visited him in his cell and took measures to ease his conditions. The friendship with Fox was especially rewarding, as the two had corresponded for several years, chiefly about classical literature. Wakefield led Fox to a new discovery about the dating of Lycophron, explained and defended his theories about the Homeric poems, and chided Fox gently about the evils of hunting and the virtues of vegetarianism. But, despite celebrity, the prison years were disheartening: in the first year Wakefield's mother died; in the second he suffered a recurrence of the debilitating shoulder ailment, spent much of his time attending to capital prisoners, and, just before his release, lost his youngest child to illness. Although he completed a translation of essays by Dio Chrysostom (1800), and a short work on Greek metres ('Noctes carceriana', 1801), his main project, a Greek-English dictionary, was abandoned for lack of public interest, and a scholarly controversy with Porson grew increasingly mean-spirited. 
Wakefield was released from prison on 29 May 1801 and returned to Hackney. It was at this time that William Artaud painted a large oil portrait of him, later housed at Dr Williams's Library, London. It shows a keen-eyed scholar at work in his study, a pamphlet open on the desk before him, the large folios of his Lucretius in the shadows. Wakefield barely lived to see the finished work: in late August he showed the first signs of typhus fever, and by 1 September was delirious. He died on 9 September 1801 at Hackney, in the company of family and close friends, having refused all medical assistance. Survivors included his wife and five of his children. The body was borne with great ceremony through the streets of London and interred on 18 September at St Mary Magdalene's, Richmond, where his brother, Thomas, was vicar. A tablet to Wakefield's memory hangs on the south wall of the church, erected by his brother. He was memorialized in prose by John Aikin, and in Latin and English elegies by Lucy Aikin, George Dyer, and Alexander Geddes. Three years later J. T. Rutt and A. Wainewright issued their two-volume 'Memoirs' of Wakefield, which remains the standard account of his life. 


@@@@@


doc= 28419


Wakefield, Peter of (d. 1213), hermit, was a simple unlettered man, living on a diet of bread and water and with a popular reputation as a prophet. According to Higden: 'Christ appeared to this Peter twice at York and once at Pontefract, in the likeness of a child between the hands of the priest, inspiring him and saying 'Peace, peace, peace' and taught him many things, which afterwards he showed to bishops and people of evil life.' In the latter part of 1212 -- probably on his northern journey of that year -- King John heard that the hermit had prophesied that by the following Ascension day, 23 May 1213, the crown would have been transferred from him and his line. Summoned to the king's presence, Peter maintained his conviction of the veracity of his prophecy, adding that were it not true the king could do with him as he pleased. 
John committed the prophet to William de Harcourt to be kept in chains at Corfe until the truth of his words should be proved. The prophecy, which is said to have spread even to France, was very generally believed, or at least feared, and the king himself, as the day approached, was evidently nervous. Matthew Paris asserts that this fear hastened John's submission to the papal nuncio, Pandulf, which was completed by the act of homage on the eve of Ascension day 1213. John celebrated the Ascension in state, but some now claimed that the prophecy referred to the calendar anniversary of the king's coronation, Ascension day (27 May) 1199. When this passed, the king ordered Peter, together with his son, to be dragged by horses to Wareham and there hanged. 
The story is significant as an illustration of popular opinion in regard to John's act of submission to the pope. The chroniclers are fairly unanimous in declaring that Peter's famous prophecy had indeed been fulfilled, though in a sense other than had been expected. 
It is possible that behind Peter's prophecy was a more directly political cause. In 1209 John de Lacy, heir to the honour of Pontefract, was in treasonable correspondence with Philip II of France and was clearly viewed with suspicion by King John when he inherited the honour in 1211; once freed from his heavy relief payments John de Lacy joined the northern rebels in the spring of 1215. Wittingly or not, as the prominent local holy man, Peter may have been a spokesman for rebellion. 


@@@@@


doc= 28420


Wakefield, Priscilla (1750-1832), author and philanthropist, was born on 20 November 1750 in Tottenham, Middlesex, the eldest of six children of Catherine Barclay (1727-1784) and Daniel Bell (1726-1802), coal merchant. She was a great-granddaughter of the Quaker martyr Robert Barclay, author of 'An Apology for the True Christian Divinity'; the maternal 'Barclay blood' was said to have produced many strong women with force of character. Priscilla was raised in Stamford Hill, Tottenham High Cross, a semi-rural and prosperous Quaker centre 4 miles north of London. Educated at home under maternal supervision she learned Latin and Greek and, as the eldest daughter, she helped to teach her sisters; her brother recalled that they were considered 'a knot of clever women' (Bell, 40). On 3 January 1771, aged twenty, Priscilla married Edward Wakefield (1749-1826), a merchant from a Quaker family with Irish connections. He inherited a business from his father in London, where he and Priscilla lived from 1771 to 1796. During that time three children were born to them: Isabella (1773-1841), Edward Wakefield (1774-1854), and Daniel Wakefield (1776-1846). Having returned to Tottenham High Cross in 1796 the family lived at Ship Yard, in the High Street, for the next two decades. Grandchildren lived with them at various times, including Edward Gibbon Wakefield. When scant family finances and health matters forced Priscilla and Edward to move in 1812 they found a haven near their daughter, Isabella Head, in Ipswich, Suffolk. 
Wakefield wrote seventeen books, principally moral tales, introductory works of natural history, and travelogues. She was well known as an author for the rising generation at a time when the developing field of children's literature offered welcome opportunities to women. Her career began in the early 1790s, when she was more than forty years old and her husband's business was in difficulty; by the end of 1798 she had four books in print. Financial need and legal costs from the unhappy marital entanglements of both her sons led her to put pen to paper for the next twenty years. Proud of the fruits of her own industry she continued writing even when immediate business pressures eased. A busy writer who learned on the job, she published first with Elizabeth Newbery and Joseph Johnson, and then extensively with the Quaker firm of Darton and Harvey; many of her books also appeared in American editions. 
Wakefield succeeded because she produced improving and didactic works of non-fiction that middle-class parents were choosing to buy. Unlike Romantic writings that celebrated imagination and fantasy Wakefield's books have a deliberate moral tone, are filled with information, and focus on real-life experiences in the present day. Characteristically they have a family setting and promote a new-style progressive pedagogy based in domestic conversations; mothers often teach their own children, and girls receive attention as much as boys. Wakefield's books were meant for reading in the home schoolroom but also for leisure. She shaped several age-specific miscellanies that combined moral tales and substantive knowledge. In 'Mental Improvement, or, The Beauties and Wonders of Nature and Art' (3 vols., 1794-7; 13th edn, 1828) children from the ages of nine to sixteen have evening conversations with their parents that serve as 'rational amusements' and exemplify moderation, diligence, and toleration. In 'Conversation 12' the father says, 'Endeavour, children, to increase your stock of useful knowledge daily, by attention to everything you see and hear' (p. 94). Their topics for discussion include whales, sugar, slavery, glassmaking, and woollen manufacture. Wakefield continued this successful and popular format in other books. 'Domestic Recreation, or, Dialogues Illustrative of Natural and Scientific Subjects' (1805) features a mother and her daughters talking about such topics as the human eye, rainbows, and sea anemones. When the daughters wonder how to spend their time one rainy evening mother replies: 'None but the idle need want employment: there is always a great variety of pursuits, that are both useful and agreeable, for those who are disposed to fill their leisure properly' (p. 96). 
Wakefield also wrote expository natural history books that are part of the Enlightenment history of disseminating science to new audiences. 'An Introduction to Botany' (1796) is an account of Linnaean botany in the form of letters between sisters; in print until 1841 it was adapted for the American market and translated into French. Wakefield continued that successful format in 'An Introduction to the Natural History and Classification of Insects' (1816). She was most widely known, however, as a pioneering travel writer for young readers. 'The Juvenile Travellers' (1801; 19th edn, 1850) initiated a series of six books about an English family journeying around Europe to promote the general improvement of their children. Wakefield was only an armchair traveller but she did her research, cites sources, and includes maps. 'A Family Tour through the British Empire' (1804; 15th edn, 1840) is replete with geographical details about England, Scotland, Ireland, and Wales. Other books take the young people of the Middleton family around London and to America, Canada, Africa, and Asia. 
Personally and politically Wakefield shied away from radicalism but she advocated reform in many areas of public and private life. Her books contain extended criticisms of the slave trade and cruelty to animals; letters to magazines weigh in on social topics such as the plight of apprentices and equal wages for women and men. Wakefield believed that education was the key to the improvement of individuals and society. In 'Reflections on the Present Condition of the Female Sex' (1798; 2nd edn, 1817), her one book for an adult audience, she called for more educational and occupational opportunities for women. Advocating economic self-sufficiency she offered practical and vocational suggestions, such as establishing institutions to train teachers and encouraging women to be farmers. Wakefield did not contest the division of society into social classes; she directed her ideas about female improvement to women of the nobility, the middle classes, and the labouring poor. Nor did she contest gendered ideas about the 'female character'. She wrote: 'There are many branches of science, as well as useful occupations, in which women may employ their time and their talents, beneficially to themselves and to the community, without destroying the peculiar characteristic of their sex, or exceeding the most exact limits of modesty and decorum. (P. Wakefield, 'Reflections', 8-9)' Nevertheless she worked hard to make the benefits of education available to all and was disappointed that a reviewer of 'Reflections' thought her ideas applied only to women. Like Mary Wollstonecraft she believed that improvements in education and employment opportunities for women brought benefits to men as well. 
The Friendly spirit of usefulness and social service that characterizes Wakefield's writing was evident in her philanthropic work on behalf of children, women, and the poor. Starting in 1791 she organized maternity charities to cover expenses for midwives and provide bags of linen to lying-in women. She supported the educational system of Quaker Joseph Lancaster for teaching reading and writing to the labouring poor, and regularly visited a school for the daughters of poor parishioners. In October 1798 she established a female benefit club at Tottenham High Cross to give pensions to the labouring poor at the age of sixty-five; honorary members paid 12's'. annually and benefited members paid 6died or more monthly, depending on their age. In that same year she formed a penny bank, into which children deposited 'any sum above one penny'. She also established a 'frugality bank' to encourage deposits from labourers and servants; the bank received sums above 1's'. and gave 5 per cent interest for every 20's'. held for one year. Because these philanthropic projects gave practical form to ideas that had been circulating in England at that time Wakefield can be considered the founder of the first English savings bank. In 1847 her son Edward organized a campaign to erect a monument to her as a founder of savings banks. 
Priscilla Wakefield was a lifelong Quaker but disagreed with some Quaker habits of dress, language, and behaviour. 'True religion is of sterling value', she wrote in her journal for 27 June 1799, 'but I long to be set free from the slavish shackles of the prejudices of my infancy and the false lights of enthusiasm'. She was spunky and resilient, and loved theatre and dancing. An engraved portrait shows a small woman with a lively and direct gaze. Oral tradition records that when their house caught fire her husband, who was given to 'hysterics' in times of stress, fled to a corner in tears and she, 'with her usual energy', organized the rescue efforts. 
Illness, increasing lameness, invalidism, and widowhood characterized the final years of Wakefield's long life. She died at her daughter's home, Albion Hill, Carr Street, in Ipswich, on 12 September 1832 and was buried on 20 September in the Quaker burial-ground of the New Meeting-House in Ipswich. 


@@@@@


doc= 28421


Wakefield, William Hayward (1801-1848), colonist in New Zealand, was born at Burnham, Essex, on 8 August 1801, the fifth of the ten children of Edward Wakefield (1774-1854), a farmer, and his wife, Susanna Crash (died 1817). He was educated at Haigh's School, Tottenham, Middlesex, and was later attached to the British embassy in Turin. On 23 March 1826, in Paris, he married Emily Elizabeth, the daughter of Sir John Shelley Sidney. For assisting his brother Edward Gibbon Wakefield in the abduction of Ellen Turner in 1826 he was sentenced in 1827 to three years' imprisonment in Lancaster Castle. Emily died on 12 August 1827; a daughter, Emily Charlotte, had been born in February that year. From 1832 to 1834 Wakefield served in the Portuguese army, where he was made a knight of the order of the Tower and Sword. He then joined the British Auxiliary Legion of Spain, and in 1837 attained the rank of colonel. He commanded the 1st regiment of lancers in 1836-7 and the 3rd legion in 1837-8. For distinguished service he was created a knight of the order of San Fernando. 
In May 1839 Wakefield sailed in the 'Tory' to New Zealand as the leader of the New Zealand Land Company's preliminary expedition. On 27 September he purchased the site for the company's settlement at Port Nicholson (Wellington harbour), and by 8 November had bought large areas on both sides of Cook Strait. In all, he acquired nominally about 20 million acres from the Maori in exchange for goods such as muskets, umbrellas, and Jews' harps. Acting on the express directions of the company, he reserved a tenth of his purchases for the Maori chiefs. These transactions, and the departure of the first emigrant ships in September 1839, took place before Britain had assumed sovereignty over New Zealand. Realizing the immigrants would lack British protection, the company appointed a committee, with Wakefield as president, to maintain order in the new settlement. The committee functioned after the settlers arrived in early 1840, but following the signing of the treaty of Waitangi on 6 February that year Lieutenant-Governor Hobson began acquiring sovereignty for the crown from the Maori chiefs. On hearing of the committee's activities on 21 May he immediately proclaimed sovereignty over the whole country, and on 23 May declared the committee illegal. 
Meanwhile, the validity of the company's land purchases was being questioned. According to the system of Maori land tenure, any transfer of territory required the express and public sanction of every member of the tribe, including those temporarily absent. In his haste to acquire land, Wakefield had on occasions ignored this condition, which rendered his title invalid according to Maori custom. Moreover, on 14 January 1840 Hobson's superior, Sir George Gipps, had issued a proclamation announcing that commissioners would be appointed to investigate past purchases of Maori land. A commissioner from Britain began investigating the company's claims in 1842. At Wakefield's suggestion it was agreed that the commissioner would also decide where compensation was due to the Maori. Wakefield none the less obstructed the investigations until 1843, when tension over land in the Wairau district led to a tragic clash between Maori and a group of Nelson settlers. During the investigations it became clear that Wakefield's principal interpreter had had difficulty translating the deeds of purchase and that many Maori had not understood the implications of the transactions. In 1845 the company's entitlement was cut to 266,400 acres and the Maori were awarded $3500 compensation. 
The land problem affected race relations and political life in the company's settlements for some years. In March 1847 the 'Wellington Independent' strongly attacked the company's land policy, sparking off a duel between Wakefield and the editor, Isaac Earl Featherston. After Featherston had fired and missed, Wakefield fired into the air, commenting that he would not kill a man with seven daughters. 
Wakefield was a member of the general legislative council of New Zealand in 1841. As the company's principal agent he supervised the settlements at Wellington, Wanganui, Nelson, and New Plymouth, and investigated sites for the New Edinburgh settlement at Otago. A connoisseur of cigars, cheroots, and continental wines, he was regarded by contemporaries as a shrewd negotiator and a competent administrator. Called 'Wideawake' by the Maori, he was known among the colonists for his reticence: no one knew what he really thought or meant to do. He died of apoplexy in Wellington on 19 September 1848, and was buried on 22 September in the city's Bolton Street cemetery. He was survived by his daughter, who in 1846 had married Edward William Stafford, a future premier of New Zealand. 
William Hayward Wakefield's elder brother, 
William Hayward and Arthur's younger brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 28422


Wakeman, Sir George, baronet (b. 1627), physician, the son of Edward Wakeman (1592-1659), barrister, of Beckford, Gloucestershire, and his wife, Mary (died 1676), daughter of Richard Cotton of Warblington, Sussex, was born in Hampshire on 20 October 1627. He had at least five brothers and an unknown number of sisters. Wakeman belonged to a Roman Catholic family and was educated at home before being sent in 1642 to the English Jesuit school at St Omer in Spanish Flanders. After five years of studying rhetoric at St Omer, Wakeman, together with his brother Edward, entered the English College at Rome, where he remained until 1650. On joining the college, he claimed he was the son of 'noble Catholic Parents, impoverished by the evilness of the times and of the soldiery' (Kenny). He was at this time undecided about his career. On leaving Rome he went to Padua, and from there may have gone to Paris to study medicine. On his return to England about 1658 he became involved in a plot against the protector, and was imprisoned until the eve of the Restoration. In 1661 Wakeman was created a baronet by Charles II, though it seems that the patent was never sealed. 
The first trace of Wakeman's professional activity is in August 1668, when he appears to have been attending Sir Joseph Williamson. He seems to have owed his appointment some two years later as physician-in-ordinary to Catherine of Braganza mainly to the fact that he enjoyed the best repute of any Roman Catholic physician in England. In their perjured 'Narrative' of the Popish Plot of 1678 Titus Oates and Israel Tonge declared that Wakeman had been offered $10,000 to poison Charles II. It was pointed out that he could easily effect this through the agency of the queen. Wakeman, however, obstinately refused the task, and held out until $15,000 was offered. The temptation then, according to the 'Narrative', proved too strong; he attended the Jesuit consult on 30 August 1678, received a large sum of money on account; and, with the promise of the further reward of a post as physician-general in the army, he agreed to poison the king. Wakeman was a man of high reputation, and from the first the charge against him was repugnant to many. John Evelyn wrote in his diary that he was 'well acquainted' with the physician and took 'him to be a worthy gentleman abhorring such a fact' ('Diary of John Evelyn', 2.351). The government, too, was reluctant to allow any steps to be taken against him. But after their successes in the trials of the early part of 1679, the whig leaders were eager to continue the pursuit of the 'plotters', knowing that a successful prosecution of Wakeman would almost certainly incriminate the queen. The government was forced to yield to the pressure. Both parties felt that the trial would be a test one, and it proved to be a turning point in the Popish Plot episode. 
Wakeman was indicted for high treason at the Old Bailey on 18 July 1679, the case being tried by Lord Chief Justice Scroggs. With Wakeman were arraigned three Benedictine monks, William Marshal, William Rumley, and James Corker. The chief witnesses for the prosecution were William Bedloe and Oates. The latter swore he had seen the paper appointing Wakeman to be physician-general and also his receipt for $5000 (on account of the $15,000), though it was elicited from Oates in the course of the proceedings that he was incapable at the time in question of identifying either Wakeman's person or his handwriting. Wakeman objected that Oates's accusation was based entirely on hearsay, and brought evidence to prove that incriminating documents produced in the case were forgeries. He pointed out the absurdity that a man in his position would take into his confidence a person such as Bedloe, who swore that Wakeman had been on intimate terms with him. He also drew attention to his family's loyalty to the crown. Not only had he himself been imprisoned because he was 'suspected to be a favorer of the Royal Party' and had 'conspired with Captain Lucy and several others to attempt something for his majesties Restauration' but his brother Richard had raised a troop of cavalry for the king and his father 'hath suffer'd very much to the value of Eighteen thousand Pounds and more for the Royal Family' ('Tryals', 60). Scroggs commented severely on the character of the evidence, and the jury, after asking if they might find the prisoners guilty of misprision of treason, and being told they could not, found all the prisoners not guilty. 
Charles II is said to have wept with joy at the outcome (Hutton, 378), which caused a good deal of surprise, not least because it was the first acquittal of any of those tried for their involvement in the 'plot'. Narcissus Luttrell wrote of the judge's conduct of the trial that it was 'worth takeing notice off and compareing the tryalls of Mr. Coleman and this about sir George Wakeman together, and you will find the lord chief justice Scrogs to be infinitely chang'd from what he was in Colemans tryall, even in the same things' (Luttrell, 1.18). The effect of the acquittal was considerable in dealing a direct blow at the 'plot' and the credibility of its sponsors, and at the same time it freed the queen from suspicion. On the day following the trial the Portuguese ambassador called and thanked Scroggs. 
A few days later, Wakeman went to Windsor to see the king and queen, and soon after left for Brussels. The verdict was supported in a pamphlet of 'Some Observations upon the Late Tryals by Tom Ticklefoot' (1679); but this was answered in a similar production, entitled 'The Tickler Tickled' (1679), and there is little doubt that the verdict was unpopular. It was openly said that Scroggs had been bribed, while Bedloe and Oates complained bitterly of the treatment they had received in the summing-up. Scroggs was ridiculed in 'A Letter from Paris from Sir George Wakeman to his Friend Sir W. S.' (1681). The jury was termed an 'ungodly' one, and the people, said Luttrell, 'murmur very much'. It is noteworthy that in the course of evidence given at subsequent trials, Oates entirely ignored the verdict, and continued to speak of the bribe offered to and accepted by Wakeman. 
Wakeman was back in London before 1685, when he was seen by Evelyn at Lady Tuke's; and he had the satisfaction of giving evidence against Titus Oates on 8 May 1685, on the occasion of his first trial for perjury. Nothing is known of his further career. 


@@@@@


doc= 28423


Wakeman, John (d. 1549), abbot of Tewkesbury and bishop of Gloucester, was probably born in Worcestershire. He was educated at Oxford, where he supplicated for the degree of BTh in 1511. He had been ordained acolyte in 1501, deacon in 1503, and priest in 1504, but otherwise little is known about him before he entered Tewkesbury Abbey in 1531. In all likelihood he had been a Benedictine monk for some time, since he soon became prior and was elected abbot on 27 April 1534. This was a turbulent time for monasticism in England, and impending religious change would be the main challenge facing the new abbot. On 31 March 1534, just a month before he gained royal assent to his election, Wakeman joined with others attending a meeting of convocation in subscribing to the royal supremacy, and in August 1535 Cromwell's commissioners arrived to 'peruse the inventory, appropriations and other muniments' of Tewkesbury Abbey ('LP Henry VIII', 9.3). Five and a half years later the information gained during that visit would facilitate the surrender of that house. 
In the intervening years Wakeman seems to have done all in his power to mitigate the possible future damage to his community and to his own career. His election as abbot, however, seems to have been the subject of some concern since he subsequently expressed his gratitude to both Thomas Cromwell and Sir William Kingston, constable of the Tower and a prominent figure among the Gloucestershire gentry, for their support. Wakeman sent Kingston a letter of thanks, but he gave Cromwell a gelding and $5 towards the purchase of a saddle. Wakeman then had the opportunity to demonstrate his loyalty to the king by receiving Henry VIII and Anne Boleyn during their progress through Gloucestershire in the summer of 1535. In the end, however, John Wakeman was not able to prevent the dissolution of his monastery, and he surrendered the abbey to Cromwell's commissioners on 9 January 1540. His ecclesiastical career was none the less to continue. On 3 September 1541 the diocese of Gloucester was established, with John Wakeman as its first bishop. Perhaps his efforts to ingratiate himself had been a success, or quite possibly his administrative experience and knowledge of the region made him the best candidate. 
To some scholars it appears that Wakeman was given the bishopric as something of a 'retirement package', perhaps in thanks for some perceived loyalty during the tumultuous 1530s. In any event he repaid the king for his appointment by dutifully conforming to the changing official religious policies of Henry's last years, and by visiting his diocese on a regular basis. None the less, Wakeman's episcopate was less energetic than those of either his predecessors, Hugh Latimer and John Bell, in the diocese of Worcester, or his successor, John Hooper, in the diocese of Gloucester. Bishop Wakeman did conduct the requisite visitations, but there is no evidence of vigour. Perhaps he was a 'time-server', merely going through the motions and occupying the office of bishop to fund his retirement, or maybe his actions reflected the apparent ambiguity in official religion during that portion of Henry's reign. However, his performance as bishop can be read in another way. He was the first bishop of a new and very poor diocese. It may have taken some time to establish the ecclesiastical structure needed to administer the see effectively. Early in Edward VI's reign Wakeman conducted a more thorough visitation, perhaps owing to the increased clarity of religious policy under Protector Somerset. On the other hand, the difference may have been a result of the establishment over the previous seven years of a more effective diocesan administrative structure. In either case, the later visitation still fell far short of the standards set by Latimer or Bell, and Wakeman seems to have continued to turn a blind eye to traditional practices which he was supposed to discourage as harmful, even though they were not explicitly forbidden. 
Focusing on Wakeman's episcopal administration, however, may misrepresent his role in the religious life of mid-Tudor England. Thomas Cranmer valued his learning sufficiently to ask him to participate in the project to create a new English translation of the 'Bible', and he was one of nine bishops chosen to 'attend upon the conduct of... [Henry VIII's] corps' during the king's funeral (Strype, 2/2, 291). John Wakeman's own death came in Forthampton, Gloucestershire, on 6 December 1549, nearly three years after Henry's, and he was probably buried in a small private chapel there. He had drawn up his will on 30 July that year, appointing as his executors his brothers Thomas and Richard, and making bequests to three nephews and a niece, as well as to servants. He also left 20 nobles to one Thomas Poyner, a student at Magdalen College, Oxford. Wakeman died a dutiful member of the English ecclesiastical hierarchy, but although he was careful to bequeath his soul to the Trinity alone, he was definitely not a proponent of evangelical reform. 


@@@@@


doc= 28424


Wakering, John (d. 1425), administrator and bishop of Norwich, was from Great Wakering, Essex, where he provided for prayers for the souls of his parents and brothers. While he had poor relations there, two other kinsmen served as master of St Bartholomew's Hospital, Smithfield, which had the patronage of Great Wakering church. The bishop's own first preferment was St Benet Sherehog. 
On 13 April 1380 a chaplain named John Wakering was pardoned his outlawry after failing to appear in the London hustings court on a charge of illegal retaining. However, the certain career of the bishop can only be traced from 1392 when he was already a senior member of the administration of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster. In March of that year Wakering appears as deputy to the chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster. He was chancellor of the county palatine by 4 August 1395, and probably even a year earlier, while in 1394-5 he held also the privy seal of the duchy. He then began to work for the king as well. First termed a royal clerk in October 1394, he was a master in chancery in 1395 and acted as a receiver of petitions for Gascony in both parliaments in 1397. However, when the king banished Gaunt's heir, Henry Bolingbroke, in 1398, Wakering was naturally appointed on 8 October as one of the attorneys to care for the exile's interests. Richard reneged on this agreement when Gaunt died, and confiscated the duchy and county palatine. 
When Henry Bolingbroke took the throne, his long-standing confidence in Wakering was demonstrated at once. On 15 October 1399 Wakering was reappointed as chancellor of the county palatine, a post he still held in February 1403 and probably retained until March 1405, and from 25 November 1402 he was also paid as chancellor of the duchy. Between 1400 and 1402, moreover, he acted as a duchy attorney in chancery, of which he was still a master. On 2 March 1405 the king brought him wholly into the royal administration as keeper of the rolls of chancery, an office he would hold for ten years. 
Wakering's ecclesiastical preferments had been augmented steadily by Gaunt and Bolingbroke, the rectory of Orpington, Kent, being the one he remembered especially on his deathbed, but on 10 March 1409 he was granted no less than the archdeaconry of Canterbury by the crown. Although he was admitted promptly to the confraternity of Christ Church, Canterbury, and could offer the cathedral useful connections in its legal and other administrative dealings with the crown, his inevitable absence from his responsibilities as archdeacon (which were considerable) is unattractive. This archdeaconry, at least, was usually provided with a full-time occupier. Wakering's regular duties in chancery engaged him in such occasional work as acting as proctor for various ecclesiastical bodies and prelates in parliaments between 1404 and 1416, acting as a receiver of petitions for England there in May 1413 and April and December 1414, deputizing for the dean of St Martin's-le-Grand, London, in January 1411, and acting three times as custodian of the great seal (19-31 January 1410, 10/12-20 June 1411, and 20 December 1411-17 January 1412) while the king and prince of Wales contested for control of the chancellorship and government. 
On his accession Henry V was content to continue Wakering in office, even while dismissing those who had served his father in the greatest offices. Wakering was granted letters of attorney on 8 October 1413 because he was going abroad, but nothing more is known of this proposed journey. On 3 June 1415 Wakering was appointed as keeper of the privy seal to succeed John Prophete, who had himself served nine years in that office. Unlike his seven immediate predecessors, Prophete had not obtained a bishopric, by his own account because he refused to intrigue for one. Wakering, by contrast, had instant success. The king's close friend Richard Courtenay, bishop of Norwich, died at the siege of Harfleur at the age of thirty-three. The monks were given licence to elect on 3 November 1415, and royal assent to their choice of Wakering (no doubt by nomination from the crown) was given on 24 November. The Council of Constance was then in session, and on the following day the crown wrote to the papal curia, as being located there, to signify the choice of Wakering. However, John XXIII had been deposed, Gregory XII had resigned, and Benedict XIII was an unrecognized renegade. After some hesitation, the king wrote on 7 April 1416 to the archbishop of Canterbury, instructing him to confirm Wakering's position; Chichele did so on 27 May, and the temporalities were restored on the same day. Wakering was consecrated in St Paul's Cathedral on 31 May. He thus became the first bishop in England for seventy years not to be papally provided to his see. Looked at in another way, he was to be the last non-graduate 'civil servant', of a kind so familiar in the previous century, to achieve episcopacy. 
Wakering resigned as keeper of the privy seal on 7 July 1416, but not in order to turn to diocesan life. On 20 July he was appointed as a royal delegate to the Council of Constance where Henry V intended to strengthen the English presence substantially, and also to rein in Bishop Robert Hallum's reforming enthusiasm by making him share the leadership of the delegation with four bishops who had risen through the royal administration and would serve the king's will. Wakering did not return to England until about February 1418, and only in the following month did he finally enter his diocese. 
Wakering held no more offices of state, but he did continue to be used as a councillor, and still more so after being appointed to the council of regency for the infant Henry VI on 9 December 1422. It has been assumed that this made him a gross absentee from his diocese, but his register proves otherwise; he was a vigorous commuter and managed to spend most of his time in his see. Until March 1419 he chose Hoxne, Suffolk, as his base, making tours of primary visitation in May and September-October 1418. Thereafter he lived almost entirely at Bishopthorpe; his career had quite probably given him a distaste for administration by wagon train. Indeed, his handling of his diocese seems exactly as might be predicted from his career: competent and uneventful. This should, however, be contrasted with the unsavoury feuds with Norwich Cathedral and city, and with the town of Lynn, which his two predecessors sustained; it would be surprising if Wakering simply found peace by lethargy. It must be noted that in the valleys south-east of Norwich towards Lowestoft lived scores of Lollards whom Wakering's successor, William Alnwick, had no difficulty scouring out in 1428-31. Wakering accepted the compurgation in July 1424 of the chaplain, Hugh Pye of Loddon, Norfolk, who was to prove a leading figure in this sectarian network, and of two other men whose kin were to prove implicated. He delved no further. On the other hand, Alnwick only acted with vigour when the archbishop told him to. 
Wakering returned to Bishopthorpe from his last trip to London in early March 1425. His will (29 March) was predictably long and meticulous, and carefully remembered his earlier benefices, his family, and his servants. He had a collection of his own sermons to bequeath. There is, however, more than this to Wakering's final thoughts. Throughout the will there is persistent attention to paupers, not so much for those at his own funeral (for whom he left just 20 marks), but notably in his own properties, past benefices, and especially those in hospitals and across his diocese, these last being left no less than 1000 marks. Furthermore, the bishop recalled the celebrated aphorism of St Augustine of Hippo that funerals were more a solace for the living than help to the dead, and asked for unpompous rites on the day of his death, but 1000 masses on that same day if possible. Wakering died on 9 April 1425. He had, of course, arranged his burial site, tomb chest (still extant, though without its brass), and chantry in the cathedral, on the south side of the presbytery by that of the founder. 


@@@@@


doc= 28425


Wakley, Thomas (1795-1862), medical journalist and politician, was born on 11 July 1795 at Land Farm, Membury, Devon, the youngest son in the family of eleven children of Henry Wakley (1750-1842), a prosperous farmer, and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Minifie. He went to good grammar schools at Chard and Honiton, and at the age of ten was sent to Calcutta on a ship captained by a family friend. Although he never spoke of his experiences at sea, they probably affected his later campaigns against flogging and brutality in the armed forces. He returned to school, possibly at Wiveliscombe, Somerset, until he was apprenticed from the age of fifteen to a succession of medical practitioners: an apothecary in Taunton, a surgeon in Beaminster, and Mr Phelps, his brother-in-law and a surgeon in Henley-on-Thames. 
In 1815 Wakley went to London to complete his medical education. He remained primarily in the metropolis for the rest of his life. He enrolled as a pupil at the united hospitals of St Thomas's and Guy's, and also studied at the private anatomy school in nearby Webb Street run by Richard and Edward Grainger. He qualified for membership in the Royal College of Surgeons in 1817 and set up a private practice in the City, living in Gerard's Hall, Basing Lane. Two years later his prospective father-in-law, Joseph Goodchild, a wealthy lead merchant from Hendon, helped him purchase a fashionable practice in the West End and a fifteen-room house at 5 Argyll Street, near Oxford Circus. On 5 February 1820 he and Elizabeth Goodchild (1799-1857) were married at St James's, Piccadilly. He seemed set fair for the comfortable life of a successful London practitioner. Six months later, his life was in complete disarray. 
On 27 August 1820 Wakley was assaulted in his own home. He had had a headache and had applied leeches to his temple, wrapping his head in a tourniquet. A man knocked on his door and asked him to see a former patient of his and then requested a glass of cider. When Wakley went to the basement to fetch it, the man apparently admitted some masked companions. They knocked Wakley unconscious with a blow to his head, the tourniquet probably saving his life, and kicked and stabbed him. When he came to, the house was on fire. He escaped through the roof light, but the house and its wedding contents, which were heavily insured, were destroyed. The insurance company suspected Wakley of deliberate arson and refused to compensate him. 
The incident attracted much attention in the newspapers. Although the assailants were never identified, it was suggested that they were members of a radical political gang whose leader, Arthur Thistlewood, and four associates had been executed in May 1820. Wakley was rumoured to have been the anonymous surgeon who had beheaded the victims after hanging. There is suggestive evidence that the Newgate beheader was actually a hospital porter and body snatcher named Parker, but the assault and fire forced Wakley and his bride to find another house in less genteel Norfolk Street, off the Strand. Wakley took the insurance company to court, where in June 1821 he obtained full compensation and costs. 
His recuperation and the legal entanglement disrupted Wakley's medical practice, which among the poorer folk around Norfolk Street was in any case less lucrative. His wife expected more, and apparently suggested that he consider abandoning medicine for another career. At about the same time, he acquired the friendship of William Cobbett, the radical journalist, writer, and reformer. A visit in 1823 by Dr Walter Channing, a Boston physician and one of the founders of the 'New England Journal of Medicine and Surgery' (1812), also prodded Wakley to consider establishing his own weekly journal in London. Channing may even have helped fund 'The Lancet', first published on Sunday 5 October 1823. It was Wakley, however, who made this journal what it was, and the journal was the making of him. 
Wakley chose the title of his periodical carefully. As he pointed out, a lancet was not just a surgical instrument for cutting out the dross, it was also an arched window, for letting in light. It was successful from the very first issue, almost a quarter of which was devoted to a lecture by Sir Astley Cooper, London's leading surgeon, and a consultant at Guy's Hospital. The early issues were edited anonymously, although Cooper suspected Wakley and had his suspicions confirmed by going to Wakley's house disguised as a patient and discovering his former pupil correcting proofs. 
Three features help explain the journal's immediate and continuing impact. First, it was published weekly, which allowed it to carry news of topical interest, to foster a correspondence column, and to encourage readers to anticipate its publication each week. Although 'The Lancet' spawned other rival medical weeklies, in 1823 no other British medical periodical appeared more frequently than monthly, and several of them were irregular. This in effect allowed Wakley quickly to dominate the field. 
Second, Wakley always aimed his journal at a wide audience. As a former general practitioner himself, he identified with the rank and file of the medical profession. Didactic lectures by eminent London teachers dominated the early volumes, which offered medical students and others the substance of these lectures without the necessity of paying the requisite fees. Initially, these were reproduced without the permission of the lecturer, Wakley or one of his collaborators attending and taking down the spoken words, usually in shorthand. Cooper had permitted the publication of his lectures, but John Abernethy, senior surgeon at St Bartholomew's Hospital, objected to seeing his own in print, grammatical infelicities and all, and took Wakley to court in December 1824. Initially Abernethy's injunction was denied, but a second application, in June 1825, was upheld, only to be overturned on Wakley's appeal in November, on the grounds that public lectures delivered in a public place were for the public good and therefore were public property. Wakley's version of these legal proceedings was fully and colourfully reported in 'The Lancet'. Eventually, medical teachers began to co-operate with Wakley, delivering copy of their lectures for reproduction in the journal. 
In addition to publishing lectures by prominent teachers, Wakley also hoped to increase circulation in the early issues with general news items, including theatre reviews and a chess puzzle, two of his own passionate interests. 'The Lancet' soon establishing itself, these non-medical features disappeared, as Wakley concentrated on a third successful ambition, using his journal to catalyse medical reform. He has been described as an improbable radical, but he retained his radicalism throughout his adult life. Reform was always top of his agenda, even after he became assimilated into the British establishment. 
The first few volumes of 'The Lancet' sought medical change through an aggressive, bombastic style. In the editorials and articles in his journal, Wakley assaulted nepotism, complacency, and secrecy within medicine. He campaigned for hospitals to make public their cumulative statistics of treatments and cures, and a series of articles, entitled 'Hole and corner surgery', exposed to ridicule surgeons who had bungled operations. A fatal lithotomy operation carried out in 1828 by Bransby Cooper, Sir Ashley's nephew, attracted much attention, especially after Cooper sued Wakley for libel. Wakley defended his own case and although he lost the legal battle, Cooper was awarded only token damages, which with costs were paid by public subscription. Characteristically, Wakley and Cooper became friends in later life. Wakley made frequent appearances in court during the decade, defending himself against libel charges brought by the surgeon Frederick Tyrell and Roderick Macleod, editor of the 'London Medical and Physical Journal'. Wakley himself obtained libel damages from James Johnson, editor of the 'Medico-Chirurgical Journal', for the latter's malicious reference to the fire which had destroyed Wakley's house. 
Wakley also attempted to open up to greater democracy the medical corporations, especially the Royal College of Surgeons, of which he was a rank-and-file member. The college's council was a closed, self-perpetuating oligarchy, whose members ran the college, approved each other's anatomy and surgery courses as obligatory for medical students wishing to obtain the college's qualification, and collected the lucrative fees for examining these new recruits. In a series of meetings, all of them animated and some of them violent, Wakley sought to put pressure on the college to reform itself, in addition to petitioning parliament to revoke the college's charter. The surgeons proved resistant to rapid change, especially as some of Wakley's earlier supporters, such as William Lawrence, began to modify their demands as they themselves achieved positions on the college's council. Significantly, Wakley himself was never elected to the fellowship of the college, created in 1843 partially as a means of expanding the number of doctors who could participate in running the affairs of the Royal College of Surgeons. 
During the 1830s Wakley also attempted to create a radical alternative to the older medical corporations. His proposed London College of Medicine would have provided the basis of a universal medical qualification for general practitioners and consultants alike. He envisioned it as overseeing and improving educational and examination standards within medicine, an issue to which Wakley continued to devote much energy, both through his journal and, after 1835, as a member of parliament. The London College of Medicine never got beyond the blueprint stage. 
Wakley continued to use his journal to publicize other medical and social issues that he wished to see reformed. These included the system of poor relief and its medical services, the adulteration of foods, public health, medical quackery, and flogging and other forms of corporal punishment in the armed forces. His strategies became more subtle than the blockbuster tactics of the early 'Lancet', and also more effective. A number of individuals helped Wakley conduct his journal. These included J. F. Clarke, William Lawrence, William Cobbett, and, before Wakley exposed his mesmeric experiments on two young female mediums, John Elliotson. He was not always liked, but he was admired by many, including Charles Dickens, William Thackeray, Henry Brougham, and others outside the medical profession. He was in effect the first full-time medical journalist who demonstrated how powerful the medical press could be. 
Medical politics infused 'The Lancet' from the very beginning, and by the time of the 'Reform Act' of 1832, Wakley had acquired a substantial reputation. He published from 2 January 1831 until late in 1832 a political weekly called 'The Ballot'. This both reflected his wider political interests and more actively involved him in the radical political scene surrounding the debates about extending the franchise and reforming parliament. He also realized that his own ambitions had a better chance of being achieved with him inside parliament rather than simply as a critic of it. With Cobbett's backing, he agreed to stand as an independent radical for Finsbury, London, in the first general election after the 'Reform Act', in December 1832. Although his own financial situation necessitated a low-key campaign, he made a creditable showing, which encouraged him to stand again in 1834. He was successful in his third attempt, in January 1835. In June that year he made a great impression in the House of Commons with an impassioned speech on behalf of six Dorset labourers (the 'Tolpuddle martyrs') sentenced to transportation for combining to resist the reduction of their wages. Shortly after entering parliament, he published from 23 April to 22 May 1836 another short-lived political periodical, 'A Voice from the Commons'. He remained a popular and conscientious member for Finsbury until ill health forced his retirement in 1852. 
Wakley had consistently campaigned for parliament as an independently minded citizen who wished to extend the franchise, facilitate local democracy, increase parliamentary accountability, and reduce the rates. He was true to his word, and although he obviously took matters of medical reform most seriously, he participated in a wide range of parliamentary matters, attending sittings regularly and voting in the majority of divisions. His early speeches were usually brief, but he developed sufficient oratorical skills to bring himself into national notice. He addressed many of the leading questions of the day, including the reform of the law courts, prison and workhouse conditions, taxation, the state of the railways, church reform, copyright law, and Chartism. 
Inevitably, however, medical matters preoccupied Wakley. With Henry Warburton and others, he helped draft and comment on the successive medical acts that were debated in parliament through the late 1830s and 1840s. These were eventually to culminate in the 'Medical Act' of 1858, which legally defined the medical practitioner, and created the Medical Register and a professional regulatory body, the General Medical Council. Although Wakley had by then retired from parliament, the act disappointed him in perpetuating the variety of medical educational and licensing bodies, and in its failure to address directly the issue of quackery. It embodied a public recognition of professionalism within medicine, however, a subject always near the top of Wakley's agenda. 
Wakley had earlier been successful in helping shape several pieces of medically related legislation. The 'Medical Witnesses Act' of 1837, which gave coroners more power in requiring doctors to assist at inquests, also mandated payment for their professional services. He was much concerned with the public health implications of burial-grounds and with the 'Public Health Act' of 1848. He used both his position in parliament and his journal to publicize the scandals in the Andover workhouse, and the death, following flogging, of a young private named Frederick John White in 1846. In the 1850s he created through 'The Lancet' an Analytical Sanitary Commission, whose work exposed extensive adulteration of many foods and drinks and led to regulatory legislation beginning in 1860. 
In addition to editing a weekly journal and representing Finsbury constituency in parliament, Wakley found the time and energy to offer himself for election as coroner in 1830. Lawyers had traditionally occupied this ancient post; Wakley was the first medical man to seek it. Unsuccessful at first, he was elected coroner for West Middlesex in 1839, a position he held until his death. It was his sixth campaign of the decade (four for parliament as well as the earlier one for the coronership), but Wakley was easily elected in 1839 on a platform of extending the powers of the office, investigating every case of suspicious death in the large and populous district, and of publicly exposing crime whenever he found it. This he subsequently did, finding his position more powerful as a result of the 'Medical Witnesses Act' that he had helped push through parliament. 
Wakley's insistence that determining the cause of a sudden or suspicious death was essentially a medical matter brought him into conflict with magistrates and their clerks. His determination to hold inquests on every appropriate occasion, and to pay his medical witnesses, meant that his expenses were much greater than those of his predecessors. However, a parliamentary committee of 1840 supported Wakley's view of the office. The use of deputy coroners was also queried early in Wakley's tenure of office, as was his right to commit individuals determined during the course of his coroner's inquest to have been guilty of murder. He also ran foul of workhouse officials by insisting that accidental or violent deaths of inmates should also be subject to coroner's inquests, which in several instances revealed negligence or maltreatment. Since Wakley and his journal had ever been critical of the new poor laws of 1834, and their medical provisions, neither Wakley's energetic use of his coroner's powers, nor the publicity he gave scandals in 'The Lancet', endeared him to officialdom. He believed that the health of incarcerated paupers would improve were the poor-law infirmaries to be better provisioned, and poor-law medical officers given more power, status, and income. 
Industrial accidents and railway injuries and deaths provided another highly contentious arena for Wakley's enterprise. He was able to use the ancient law of deodand to impose fines on employers or industrialists found guilty of causing death through negligence until the 'Deodants Abolition Act' of 1846 abolished this possibility; although it was accompanied by a 'Fatal Accidents Act', tighter legislation relating to industrial accidents and injuries was not passed until after Wakley's death. 
Above all, Wakley used his coroner's office as a platform to campaign for medical coroners as a matter of course. He was accused of being self-serving, but the stance was entirely consistent with his more general belief that doctors were undervalued, and that collective professional advancement was the way forward. He sought less to denigrate medical elites than to raise the rank and file, through improvements in education, better conditions of employment, and more social respect. 
Despite his personal historical visibility and the continuing importance of the journal he founded, Wakley remains enigmatic. He was ever indignant at social or political injustice, and he never lost his concern for the plight of the ordinary individual. He hated cant and humbug, which endeared him to Charles Dickens. At the same time he was personally ambitious, with a highly developed sense of his own worth. He maintained a home in Bedford Street, London, and an estate, Harefield Park, and entertained lavishly, even while remaining abstemious himself. He seemed addicted to the rough and tumble of turbulent public life, but he remained a devoted family man. A lifelong radical, he was also an active Anglican. His wife's death in 1857 affected him deeply. A daughter died young, but he was intensely proud and supportive of his three sons. Two of these, Thomas Henry Wakley (1821-1907) and James Goodchild Wakley (1827-1886), followed him into medical journalism, continuing 'The Lancet' as a family business until the twentieth century. The middle son, Henry Membury, became a barrister and deputized for his father as a coroner. 
Wakley was a large man with enormous energy, who routinely worked sixteen-hour days. In his early life he acquired fame as an accomplished boxer. In 1851, following a strenuous day involving seven inquests and attendance at the House of Commons until midnight, he was found unconscious outside the 'Lancet' office, where he had gone to continue working. This episode convinced Wakley to slow down, and although he left parliament, he retained the coronership and 'The Lancet', which his sons joined him in editing. Their take-over was probably gradual, and Wakley retained the official editorship until his death. 
In the late 1850s Wakley enjoyed a brief period of better health, and he contemplated running again for parliament. However, in late 1860, signs of active pulmonary tuberculosis supervened. He spent the winter of 1861-2 in Madeira, where his lungs began to heal. He had made arrangements to return to England, but on 11 May 1862 he slipped on the beach, the haemoptysis recurred, and he died on 16 May. His embalmed body was brought back for burial beside his wife and daughter in Kensal Green cemetery on 14 June. 


@@@@@


doc= 28426


Walbran, John Richard (1817-1869), antiquary, son of John and Elizabeth Walbran, was born at Ripon, Yorkshire, on 24 December 1817, and educated near by at Whixley. After leaving school he became assistant to his father, an iron merchant, before entering business as a wine merchant in Ripon. His antiquarian interests led to his becoming local secretary of the British Archaeological Institute, which he addressed in 1846 'On the necessity of clearing out the conventual church of Fountains'. Publication of the paper resulted in excavations at Fountains Abbey, carried out under his personal direction, which marked the beginning of the modern archaeological study of that important site. Walbran also studied the documentary sources, publishing the first volume of 'The Memorials of the Abbey of St. Mary of Fountains' for the Surtees Society in 1864. This was followed by a second, posthumous volume completed by James Raine in 1878. The first volume of another uncompleted work, his 'History of Gainford, Durham', was published in 1851 with the support and assistance of his friend William Harrison, printer, of Ripon. Walbran embarked on other substantial local antiquarian studies, but did not see them to completion. He did, however, have success as a writer of popular guides of a scholarly type. His 'Guide to Ripon', which included Harrogate and the abbeys of Fountains and Bolton, was published in 1844 and went through nine editions, under various titles, during his lifetime. He also shared the contemporary taste for the picturesque, publishing 'A Summer's Day at Bolton Abbey' in 1847, which combined his antiquarian knowledge and a sensitive evocation of the landscape, complete with quotations from Wordsworth. 
Walbran married, on 3 September 1849, Jane, daughter of Richard Nicholson of Ripon, solicitor and left two sons, the elder of whom, Francis Marmaduke Walbran of Leeds, was the author of works on angling. Walbran was elected FSA on 12 January 1854, and in 1856 and 1857 was mayor of Ripon. In April 1868 he was struck with paralysis, and died on 7 April 1869. He was buried in Holy Trinity churchyard, Ripon. After his death his manuscripts were purchased by Edward Akroyd of Halifax, and deposited at York Minster Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 28427


Walburg (c.710-779?), abbess of Heidenheim, was born in Wessex 'c'.710. She was the sister of Willibald and Winnebald and probably a kinswoman of Leoba. Walburg inherited the Benedictine monastery of Heidenheim in southern Germany from Winnebald, its founder, in 761, and brought a group of nuns, including Hugeburc, to the foundation with her. Heidenheim thus became the only double monastery established on the continent by the Anglo-Saxon mission. Walburg was in Germany already, probably summoned by Boniface, perhaps with Leoba, to the mission field in the early 740s. The abbess encouraged Hugeburc to compose the lives of Walburg's two brothers and in particular Hugeburc drew on Walburg's own report of the miracles accompanying the death of Winnebald. 
There is no life of Walburg; Wolfhard von Herriede's 'Miracula S. Waldburgis Monheimensia', composed 'c'.899, is the earliest attempt at a biography, but Wolfhard knew little about his subject's early life and so depicts Walburg as a stereotypical model nun and abbess. Walburg died on 25 February, probably in 779. The body was translated to Eichstatt on 21 September, probably in 879, marking the official recognition of her cult. Her relics were taken in 893 to Monheim, where a miracle-working oil still exudes from her shrine. The saint has become conflated with a female fertility figure, banisher of the spirits of winter, in southern German superstition: on Walpurgisnacht, the eve before May day (the anniversary of Walburg's canonization), witches dance and evil spirits roam abroad. 


@@@@@


doc= 28428


Walcher, earl of Northumbria (d. 1080), bishop of Durham, was the Lotharingian priest chosen by William the Conqueror to succeed in 1071 to the troubled see of Durham, following William's harrying of the north in 1069 and 1070 and the rebellion and outlawing of the previous bishop, the Anglo-Saxon AEthelwine. In the tenth and eleventh centuries Lotharingia was prominent as a centre of ecclesiastical reform and Walcher was not the first of his contemporaries to join the English episcopacy; he was preceded, for example, by Duduc of Wells (1033-1061?) and Giso of Wells (1061?-1088). Nothing is known of Walcher's background except that he was a clerk at Liege when William invited him to come to Durham. 
In 1071 Walcher began his journey to the embattled north complete with bodyguard, accompanied as far as York, according to the principal source, Symeon of Durham, by the housecarl Eilaf and 'many other leading men'. From York he was escorted to Durham by the Northumbrian earl, Gospatric. The next year, 1072, William the Conqueror, in a further attempt to break rebel networks in the north dismissed Gospatric, appointing Waltheof of Huntingdon in his place. Waltheof had local ties but at the same time was bound by marriage to William and initially at least was prepared to work with Walcher. Symeon gives a picture of their beleaguered co-operation: the Conqueror had built a castle at Durham 'where the bishop might keep himself and his people safe from the attacks of assailants. Bishop Walcher and earl Waltheof were very friendly and accommodating to each other; so that he, sitting together with the bishop in the synod of priests, humbly and obediently carried out whatever the bishop decreed for the reformation of Christianity in his earldom' ('Sym. Dur., 'Opera'', vol. 2, s.a. 1072). Recent excavations give some indication of how formidable Walcher's castle really was. The moat was at least 19 yards wide, 164 yards long, and 6 yards deep. In the building no expense seems to have been spared; William I had given Walcher an estate at Waltham, Essex, and it is likely that he used its revenues to further the castle's construction. 
Symeon's rosy picture notwithstanding, within three years of Walcher's arrival Waltheof had joined a rebellion against the Conqueror which was to cost him his life. The earldom was now given to Walcher. The office required, to use Symeon's words, skill 'in difficult affairs'; how far Walcher possessed this it is hard to tell. According to Symeon, Walcher was 'a man worthily beloved by all for the honesty of his life and the sobriety and gentleness of his nature; yet he too displeased the natives by permitting his followers unrestrainedly to do whatever they pleased, nor did he check them when they acted wrongfully. Moreover, his archdeacon [Leobwine] swept away from the church many of its ornaments and much of its money and distributed them among his own friends and relations' ('Sym. Dur., 'Opera'', vol. 1, c. 58). 
It is around archdeacon Leobwine that the final drama of Walcher's life centres. Leobwine, so Symeon relates, had become jealous of the place in Walcher's affection and counsels of Ligulf, a local nobleman without whose advice Walcher would not carry out the greater matters of secular business. In 1080, on Leobwine's orders, Ligulf and most of his family were slain in their beds. The murder was laid at the door of Walcher, perpetrated as it had been, not only by the plotting of his archdeacon, but also by the complicity of his deputy and his knights. Despite protestations of innocence Walcher could therefore neither expect, nor did he receive, any mercy. On 14 May 1080, at Gateshead, where they had gone for an alleged peace meeting, he, his entourage -- a hundred French and Flemish according to the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle' -- and Leobwine were killed. Walcher thus became the tenth Northumbrian earl since 993 to have met a violent end. Murky though the details are, it is clear that behind his death lay a history of feud that predated not only his own accession to power but also the conquest itself. According to John of Worcester, Walcher's murderer was Eadwulf Rus, a man who came from the same house as Ligulf's widow (the house of Bamburgh) and who had scores of his own to settle; his father had been killed by Tostig, the earl Edward the Confessor had imposed on Northumbria in 1064. William the Conqueror's reprisals to the deaths at Gateshead were both savage and decisive. Northumbria was once again ruthlessly harried and terrorized and a new castle -- the Newcastle of the future -- built on the site of Walcher's murder. 
As a bishop, Walcher's career was not, however, simply dominated by the politics that beset his earldom. In his insistence that his cathedral clergy should sing canonical rather than monastic offices he may have shown himself to be unsympathetic to the traditions of his see but against this can be offset his encouragement of the revival of Northumbrian monasticism. In the early 1070s a small band of monks from Evesham and Winchcombe, fired by their reading of Bede's 'Historia ecclesiastica', had set off to the north to recreate the way of life of the first Anglo-Saxon monks. Their arrival was welcomed by Walcher who gave them first Bede's monastery at Jarrow to repair and resettle and then, after their successful establishment of a community there, the Anglo-Saxon foundation of Whitby. Melrose, in Scotland, was their next destination but Walcher, under pain of excommunication, recalled the monks who had gone there so they would remain in Northumbria and restore the other Bedan monastery of Wearmouth. Under Walcher's protection, according to Symeon, monasticism, destroyed two hundred years earlier by viking incursions, could now flourish again; 'like a loving father' Walcher frequently visited the monks and 'liberally bestowed upon them whatever they required' ('Sym. Dur., 'Opera'', vol. 1, c. 57). Had he lived, he had plans to introduce a monastic community into his cathedral to act as the guardians of St Cuthbert's shrine and to himself become a monk. At his death, it was the monks of Jarrow who came to fetch his body. The buildings of Jarrow erected during Walcher's episcopacy can be associated stylistically with Lotharingian models and it has been suggested that Walcher may have employed in Northumbria masons from his homeland. There would seem to be no doubt that Walcher's commitment to the cause of monastic reform was both deep and of long standing; this would not, of course, have precluded, but rather strengthened, his appreciation that if Norman power was ever to become acceptable in the north it would only be through the intercession and veneration of local saints and shrines. 
Walcher was buried in his cathedral; but under the circumstances it was, to Symeon of Durham, 'a funeral less honourable than became a bishop' ('Sym. Dur., 'Opera'', vol. 1, c. 59). 


@@@@@


doc= 28429


Humphrey Walcot (1586-1650) of Walcot, Shropshire, and Anne (died 1675), daughter of Thomas Docwra of Putteridge, Hertfordshire. Humphrey Walcot, presumably the son and heir of Humphrey Walcot (died 1616?), matriculated from Clare College, Cambridge, at Easter 1604. He was receiver of Shropshire in 1625 and high sheriff in 1634. Thomas was born at Walcot on 6 August 1629. He entered Trinity College, Cambridge, on 16 May 1646 and the Middle Temple on 12 November 1647, being called to the bar on 25 November 1653. By that date his father, a distinguished royalist, had died, on 2 June 1650. In 1655 he seems to have come into possession of Bitterley Court, Shropshire, which he made his home. He married, on 10 December 1663, Mary (died 1695), daughter of Sir Adam Littleton, first baronet, of Stoke St Milborough, Shropshire. They had one child, Thomas, who died as an infant, and the lack of an heir may account for Walcot's decision to sell Bitterley to his elder brother, John, in 1672, on condition that he could retain it as a residence until his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 28430


Walcot, Sir Thomas (1629-1685), judge and politician, was the second of the three sons of 
Walcot's first important judicial appointment came on 15 February 1662, when he was made attorney-general of Denbighshire and Montgomeryshire. In the same year he became a freeman of Ludlow. In 1671 he became recorder of Bewdley, Worcestershire, a post he held until his death, and on 11 November 1671 he became a bencher of the Middle Temple. In April 1676 Walcot was appointed second justice of the north Wales circuit and a member of the council in the marches of Wales. As a Welsh judgeship did not preclude a Westminster legal practice, he continued to pursue his career as a barrister in London. Walcot was elected to parliament for Ludlow on 23 September 1679. He was created a serjeant-at-law in May 1680, his patrons being his brother-in-law, Sir Thomas Littleton, second baronet, and the lord chief justice of common pleas, Sir Francis North. On 21 November 1681 Walcot was knighted and became chief justice of north Wales, which he retained until his appointment as a judge in king's bench on 22 October 1683. In the interim, on 19 July 1683 he had been granted the king's licence to act as a justice of assize in his native county 'non obstante statuto'. The earl of Danby described him as 'much at the devotion' of the duke of York, and he presided over the trials of Thomas Rosewell, Titus Oates, Algernon Sidney, and Sir Thomas Armstrong. Walcot was reappointed to the bench on the accession of James II, but he died in York on 6 September 1685 and was buried on the 8th at Bitterley. Litigation from Armstrong's widow revealed that Walcot had died intestate and insolvent. His widow was buried at Ludlow on 1 December 1695. 


@@@@@


doc= 28431


Walcott, Mackenzie Edward Charles (1821-1880), ecclesiologist, born at Walcot, Bath, on 15 December 1821, was the only son of Admiral John Edward Walcott (1790-1868), MP for Christchurch in the four parliaments from 1859 to 1868. His mother was Charlotte Anne (1796-1863), daughter of Colonel John Nelley. Entered at Winchester College in 1837, Walcott matriculated from Exeter College, Oxford, in 1840. He graduated BA in 1844, taking a third class in classics, and proceeded MA in 1847 and BD in 1866. He was ordained deacon in 1844 and priest in 1845. His first curacy was at Enfield, Middlesex (1845-7); he was then curate of St Margaret's, Westminster, from 1847 to 1850, and of St James's, Westminster, from 1850 to 1853. On 20 July 1852 he married Roseanne Elizabeth, second daughter of Major Frederick Brownlow and niece of Lord Lurgan, at St James's Church, Piccadilly. In 1861 he was domestic chaplain to his relative Lord Lyons, and assistant minister of Berkeley Chapel, Mayfair, London, and from 1867 to 1870 he held the post of minister at that chapel. In 1863 he was appointed precentor (with the prebend of Oving) of Chichester Cathedral, and held that preferment until his death. Always at work on antiquarian and ecclesiological subjects, he was elected FSA on 10 January 1861. He died on 22 December 1880 at 58 Belgrave Road, London, and was buried in Brompton cemetery. He left no children. 
Walcott contributed articles on his favourite topics to numerous magazines and to the transactions of the learned societies, and he was one of the oldest contributors to 'Notes and Queries'. His works mainly comprised historical accounts and guides to the English cathedrals and other ecclesiastical buildings in the British Isles. His account of 'William of Wykeham and his Colleges' (1852) was the first of several works on the early constitutions of ecclesiastical foundations. He contributed to the Revd Henry Thompson's collection 'Original Ballads' (1850) and an article entitled 'Cathedral reform' to the Revd Orby Shipley's 'Church and the World' (1866). He presented to the British Museum manuscript materials for a history of cathedrals and conventual foundations in England. 


@@@@@


doc= 28432


Waldby, Robert (c.1335-1397), archbishop of York, is generally accepted as having come from Yorkshire. His ordination as priest in 1362 suggests a birth date of the mid-1330s, at the latest. He was related to the preaching friar John Waldby (died 1372), probably as nephew or cousin rather than brother (as has been claimed). Of his early life nothing is known. He took orders, from acolyte to priest, in ordinations in York diocese between March 1361 and March 1362, when he was already an Augustinian friar. His epitaph links him with their house at Tickhill, but the ordination lists assign him to York. He is assumed to have attended the studium at Oxford, and (because he is called 'Tholosanus' in 1382) to have moved on to Toulouse, possibly in accordance with Pope Urban V's instructions to the Augustinian friars in 1365 to send some of their students there. In 1383 he appears as both master of theology and 'sacre theologie professor'; his epitaph also suggests legal education, and (unless mistranscribed) that he knew medicine. 
Waldby's early administrative career is obscure, but probably focused on Aquitaine and service to Edward, the Black Prince (died 1376). Later, on 1 April 1383, he was named among envoys to Aragon. On 20 August 1389 he was appointed keeper of the seal for the seneschal of Aquitaine, a post he still held in 1390. (The suggestion that he was chancellor of Aquitaine by 1389 seems to be based on a misreading.) This bureaucratic activity was rewarded on 4 June 1386, when Pope Urban VI ('r'. 1378-89) made him bishop of Aire (not Sodor, as sometimes erroneously reported) by provision, his title sometimes being extended to Aire and St Quittiere. Gascony had remained loyal to the Roman line of popes in the great schism, while most of France accepted the antipopes of Avignon. Aire was not a wealthy see; from 1388 Waldby supplemented his resources by acquiring the farm of various alien priories, whose endowments had been seized by the crown during the French wars. On 14 November 1390 he was translated to Dublin. He showed no anxiety to visit his new archbishopric, and on 30 October 1391 received royal permission to absent himself from Ireland for life. Although appointed chancellor of Ireland in February 1392 (the nomination being repeated in July), he remained an absentee; indeed, he is several times recorded as attending the king's continual council in the early months of that year. In March 1394 he received further permission to stay in England; but later that year joined Richard II's expedition to Ireland, and he briefly had custody of the Irish great seal in 1395. That year he was again involved in diplomatic activity, among the envoys to Charles VI of France whose negotiations resulted in Richard II's marriage to Isabella of France. 
On 3 November 1395 Waldby was again translated, to Chichester. This was presumably to give greater access to Richard II, although Thomas Walsingham suggested additional advantages: the move entailed a drop in status, from archbishop to bishop, but Chichester was worth more than Dublin. Just under twelve months later he was moved once more, being provided on 5 October 1396 to succeed Thomas Arundel, who had been translated to Canterbury, as archbishop of York. The St Albans chroniclers report that his appointment was against the wishes of all the York clergy; but their veracity cannot be tested. A hostile verse does, however, hint at simony. As far as is known, he never visited York. The diocesan government was conducted solely by vicars-general, whose register is the sole survivor of the many Waldby's career must have generated (a register of his York 'acta extra diocesim' never returned there). He died on 27 December 1397, probably in London (although the Kirkstall chronicler places his death at Gloucester, of a diseased shin bone), and certainly in financial difficulties. As a mark of royal favour he was accorded burial in Westminster Abbey, in the chapel of St Edmund and St Thomas the Martyr, where his funerary brass still exists. 
Waldby was an active academic and campaigner against heresy. Bale ascribes to him several works that reflect his academic and theological careers: four books of lectures on the 'Sentences', a book of 'quaestiones ordinariae', a book of quodlibets, a book of sermons for the year, and (potentially most interesting of all) a volume 'Contra Wiclevistas', with 'alia plura' (Bale). None of these is now known to exist. In 1382 he was among the theologians at the Earthquake Council at Blackfriars which condemned ideas extracted from the works of Wyclif; and in 1392 he participated in the Council of Stamford. In 1391 he and other Irish bishops were given powers to arrest heretical preachers, although this may have been directed against preaching in support of the antipope Clement VII ('r'. 1378-94) rather than doctrinal deviation. His benefaction to support the rebuilding of the chapel of University College, Oxford, was commemorated in a window inscription that survived until a later seventeenth-century rebuilding. 
From the late 1380s Waldby's career was tied to his association with Richard II. The epitaph description of him as 'medicus' has led to assertions that he was the king's personal physician. This seems unlikely: he clearly had other qualities that recommended him to Richard. Although praised by the historian of the York archbishops, Waldby remains a rather shadowy figure. Confusion with John Waldby has led to exaggeration of his intellectual activity; conversely, the apparent loss of all of his own works makes it extremely difficult to render a complete and accurate assessment of his contribution to church life in the latter part of the fourteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 28433


Waldegrave, Sir Edward (1516/17-1561), courtier and administrator, was the eldest son of John Waldegrave and his wife, Laura (died in or after 1545), daughter of John Rochester, and the grandson of Sir Edward Waldegrave of Bures, Suffolk. His father died in 1543, and two years later he succeeded his grandfather in the family estates. In 1546 he bought the manor of Borley, Essex, which was to become his principal residence. In religion and politics he had strong conservative connections through his marriage (before 1551) to Frances (1518/19-1599), the daughter of Sir Edward Neville of Addington, Kent, who was executed with the Poles and Courtenays in 1539, and through his uncle Sir Robert Rochester, a member of Princess Mary's household. By 1549 Waldegrave had joined his uncle in Mary's household, and by 1551 he had become one of her inner circle of servants. In August of that year, along with Rochester and Sir Francis Englefield, he was summoned before the privy council and ordered to terminate the celebration of mass in Mary's household. When they reported the order to Mary, she refused to obey, sending them back to the council with a letter to Edward VI. Ordered to go back with a second order, the three men refused to obey and were sent first to the Fleet and then to the Tower. Following an attack of ague and the intercession of his wife, Waldegrave was removed to a house nearby and then his own home until his final release on 24 April 1552. As a member of Mary's household and a landholder in Suffolk he was among those who arranged her successful escape to the safety of Kenninghall and Framlingham during the succession crisis of July 1553. His advice to her during those perilous days was rewarded with a seat on her council, the keepership of the great wardrobe, and a knighthood. 
An active member of the council and trusted adviser, Waldegrave allied himself with the conservatives led by Stephen Gardiner, and, perhaps due to his wife's influence, he soon outdid his uncle in opposition to the queen's Spanish match. He argued forcefully against the marriage on the grounds that it would cause a war with France, but was unable to persuade the queen. Once it was clear that Mary could not be moved, most of her councillors, including his uncle, acquiesced, but Waldegrave did not. He continued his support for Edward Courtenay as the queen's consort, and Renard, the Spanish ambassador, reported that he and Sir Edward Hastings had joined the opponents of the marriage to Philip in the Commons. According to rumour, Waldegrave considered leaving the queen's service, and he remained close to Courtenay until Wyatt's rebellion finally ruled him out as a possible husband for Mary. Renard continued to regard him with suspicion, and erroneously suspected that Waldegrave's support for the Catholic restoration and Cardinal Pole's early return to England were all part of a plot to prevent the marriage. Earlier Rochester had advised Renard against offering his nephew a monetary reward from Philip, but after the marriage he accepted a pension of 500 crowns. 
Waldegrave attended the council on a regular basis and served on numerous committees and commissions. In 1557 he replaced his uncle as chancellor of the duchies of Cornwall and Lancaster, and in 1558 he served on the council of finance. In her will Mary named him one of her six assistant executors. He also sat in four of Mary's five parliaments, representing Wiltshire in 1553, even though he was not a major property holder in that county, and Somerset, where he was accumulating manors, in both parliaments of 1554. In 1558, after his uncle's death, he was a knight of the shire for Essex. Robert Wingfield dedicated his account of the 1553 succession crisis to Waldegrave, describing him as 'modest' and a man noted for his 'good fellowship' (MacCulloch, 252), but his religious conservatism did not recommend him to Elizabeth I and his career at court ended. He did not accept the religious settlement of 1559, and in April 1561 he and his wife, who had been one of Mary's gentlewomen, were indicted at Brentwood, Essex, on charges of hearing mass and harbouring priests. Waldegrave died in the Tower on 1 September 1561, aged forty-four, and was buried at St Peter ad Vincula, Tower Green, two days later. His widow later erected a monument to him in Borley parish church. A committed opponent of the Elizabethan settlement, in 1565 Frances was questioned after two of their daughters tried to escape to the continent, where no doubt it was intended they should receive a Catholic education. Later Waldegraves persisted in recusancy until the eighteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 28434


Fortescue, Frances Elizabeth Anne Parkinson- (1821-1879), political hostess, was born on 4 January 1821 at 3 Tavistock Square, London, the third child and eldest daughter of John Braham (1777?-1856), singer, and his wife, Frances Elizabeth, 'nee' Bolton (1799-1846). She had four brothers and a sister. She was baptized at St Pancras church in the following August: Braham had long forsworn his Jewish background. She was allowed to run wild as a child, but her mother had high ambitions for her. John Braham made a fortune as a singer, but lost it as a theatre manager, and Frances was to redeem the family by a prosperous marriage. In fact, the fair-haired, exuberant Fanny Braham married four times. Her first husband was John James Henry Waldegrave (1814-1840), the illegitimate son of the sixth Earl Waldegrave. They married on 25 May 1839; eleven months later he was dead from a combination of 'delirium tremens' and epilepsy. Five months later, on 28 September 1840, she married George Edward Waldegrave, seventh Earl Waldegrave (1816-1846), her first husband's legitimate brother. They spent six months of the first year together in the queen's bench prison, whence Waldegrave had been committed for assaulting a policeman before the marriage. In 1842 Waldegrave put up for auction the contents of Horace Walpole's Gothic villa, Strawberry Hill, Twickenham, which he had inherited from his aunt, and took his countess to live in Switzerland for two years. On their return to England he manifested signs of liver disease and mental breakdown, and he died from cirrhosis of the liver on 28 September 1846. Like his brother, he left all his estates to his widow. 
Lady Waldegrave (she retained the title throughout her life, formally styling herself Frances, Countess Waldegrave) married for the third time on 30 September 1847; her new husband was George Granville Vernon Harcourt (1785-1861), a widower of sixty-two, with a daughter five years Frances's senior. This was a very different proposition from the Waldegrave marriages: the brothers were typically wild young men, their family socially marginal despite their estates and titles, and Frances had had little to do with aristocratic society while they lived. Harcourt, by contrast, was the very acme of respectability: a Peelite MP, son of an archbishop of York, and cousin of the duke of Sutherland. Under his tutelage, Frances acquired polish, and soon became an accomplished hostess at his houses, Nuneham Park, Oxfordshire, and in London (initially in St James's Place, then at 5 Carlton House Terrace, and, from 1853, at 7 Carlton Gardens), making a feature of amateur theatricals. Harcourt was not an easy man to live with, for although he rejoiced in his wife's social success, he was snobbish, jealous, and insecure, and never wholly put aside the role of tutor. The diplomatist Robert Morier described their relationship as belonging to a Louis XV vaudeville, with Harcourt 'the old Marquis, heir to palaces and broad acres, a genealogy 'as long as my tail', and an ungovernable temper', and Frances the young wife, 'with immense fortune, beauty, accomplishments, whims without end, gigantic animal spirits, the world-spoiled child, with every denomination of admirer flitting about her, really fond of the old 'Marquis' but determined to stand no humbug' (Wemyss, 115). It was at least in part to give herself a refuge from him that Frances decided to restore Strawberry Hill. She carried out extensive building works, bought items which had previously been in Walpole's collections, and began a portrait gallery of her friends in imitation of Walpole's. From 1856 'Friday to Monday' parties at Strawberry Hill were a regular feature of the London season, and as time passed they took on a more pronouncedly political character. 
Frances Waldegrave had been interested in politics from the time of her second marriage. Waldegrave had been a tory in so far as he had political opinions, and Harcourt was a follower of Sir Robert Peel. That Frances developed into one of the most prominent whig-Liberal political hostesses stemmed in some measure from the fluidity of party allegiances in the 1850s; Frances herself became and remained more of a whig than a Liberal. Until 1865 the pre-eminent political hostess was Lady Palmerston, who entertained on behalf of her husband's coalitions with verve and enthusiasm. Frances's guests were more eclectic than those of most London hostesses: alongside politicians, aristocrats, royalty, and diplomats were to be found artists, journalists, musicians, and actors. She had her critics, who thought that her parties lowered the tone of society by admitting such lesser mortals, but she also inspired deep attachments. Her admirers included most of the members of her husbands' families, the duke of Newcastle (whom she aspired to make prime minister), Lord Chelsea, the duc d'Aumale (son of the deposed Orleanist king, Louis Philippe) and his duchess, who lived near Strawberry Hill at Orleans House, Lord St Germans, the marquess of Lansdowne, Edward Lear, and a bevy of young men and women including Julian Fane, William Vernon Harcourt (Harcourt's nephew), Mary Bulteel (later Lady Ponsonby), and the young Irish MP Chichester Samuel Fortescue, later Parkinson-Fortescue, from 1874 Baron Carlingford (1823-1898). It was not just as a hostess that Frances was in demand: her advice was widely sought by her adherents, who gave her drafts of speeches to comment on, brought their articles for publication to her for approval, and came daily to discuss debates in parliament and events in the political world. Her contacts with the press made her especially useful to aspiring authors, and she did not hesitate to encourage her friends to write on particular issues for the editors who were also among her guests, notably J. T. Delane of 'The Times' and J. D. Cook of the 'Saturday Review'. 
Chichester Fortescue was obsessively in love with Lady Waldegrave from 1850, and preferred the often uncomfortable position of being the confidant of both husband and wife to the alternative of shunning her company. There was always gossip about Lady Waldegrave, and she enjoyed her reputation as a matchmaker, but despite her worldliness and pleasure in the admiration of men, she was also genuinely religious and was shocked by sexual immorality and infidelity. When Harcourt died five days after the prince consort, on 19 December 1861, speculation was rife about who would succeed him as Lady Waldegrave's husband. Like her first two husbands, Harcourt left everything he could to Frances (Nuneham was entailed), along with a glowing commendation of his wife in his will, advising her to remarry. The duke of Newcastle was widely thought to be the favourite, but it was the faithful Fortescue -- Newcastle's junior at the Colonial Office -- whom she married on 20 January 1863. (Shortly afterwards Fortescue changed his name to Parkinson-Fortescue, on inheriting land in Ireland from his aunt.) 
Lady Waldegrave devoted the next twenty years to promoting Parkinson-Fortescue's political career and the interests of the Liberal Party to which he belonged. Like the political hostesses of earlier generations, she used her phenomenal energy, her personal tact and sympathy, her hospitable instincts, her considerable wealth, and her open houses to drum up and maintain support for the party, and to find support for her husband's career. When Parkinson-Fortescue was sent to Ireland as chief secretary (1865-6, 1868-71), Frances accompanied him; her entertainments in Dublin were on a lavish scale not seen for years as she set about wooing support for the ministry. She made at least one enemy, Lord Kimberley, who was lord lieutenant, and whose wife was completely outshone by Lady Waldegrave. With Parkinson-Fortescue's chief, W. E. Gladstone, Frances had a difficult relationship: he frequented her parties in the 1860s, but they came into conflict over policy, as Frances and Parkinson-Fortescue were always more conservative than Gladstone. She was determined that Parkinson-Fortescue should shine and felt aggrieved when Gladstone first took over the development of policy on the disestablishment of the Irish church and the 'Irish Land Act' of 1870. She threatened to bring down the government, which vastly overestimated both her influence with the party and Parkinson-Fortescue's necessity to it; but she was not a negligible figure, and her social influence had to be taken into account as a factor promoting the cohesion of the Liberal Party. The real difficulty was that Parkinson-Fortescue had probably been promoted beyond his capacities; unlike Lady Palmerston, Frances threw her weight behind a man who fatally lacked ambition and had no more than moderate talents. 
Throughout the 1870s Lady Waldegrave and Baron Carlingford (as Parkinson-Fortescue became in 1874) continued their relentless round of entertaining, at Strawberry Hill, at Dudbrook House in Essex, at Chewton Priory in Somerset, and at 7 Carlton Gardens. The prince and princess of Wales kept up the royal connections, especially after the Aumales (who had been such frequent guests as to become a positive menace) returned to France in 1871. She had never been politically exclusive: Conservatives as well as Liberals and whigs were welcomed to her parties -- Disraeli was a regular guest, slipping into Carlton Gardens from the neighbouring Carlton Club. Late in June 1879 Frances was taken ill, initially with a cold, but she began having heart problems and congestion of the lungs. She died at 7 Carlton Gardens on 5 July 1879 and was buried at Chewton Mendip parish church, Somerset. Carlingford was devastated by his wife's death, and spent his remaining twenty years mourning her, his political career effectively ended by the passing of her ambition. 
Frances, Countess Waldegrave, was an extraordinary figure in Victorian society. With her origins in the theatre, she was herself an intensely theatrical, larger-than-life individual: no truly satisfactory portrait of her was ever taken. She aroused strong emotions; many adored her, others considered her an upstart adventuress. She was widely supposed to have been the model for Anthony Trollope's Madame Max Goestler in the Palliser novels; Phineas Finn owed much to Carlingford. The Somerset and Essex estates that had come to her from her first marriages returned to the Waldegrave family under the terms of her will. Carlingford could not bear to live at Strawberry Hill without her, and in 1888 a second Strawberry Hill auction took place. 


@@@@@


doc= 28435


Waldegrave, George Granville, second Baron Radstock (1786-1857), naval officer, eldest son of William Waldegrave, first Baron Radstock (1753-1825), and his wife, Cornelia (1762/3-1839), second daughter of David Van Lennep, of the Dutch factory at Smyrna, was born in London on 24 September 1786. In 1794 his name was placed on the books of the 'Courageux', commanded by his father, but he seems to have first gone to sea in 1798 in the 'Agincourt', his father's flagship at Newfoundland. After eight years' service, on 16 February 1807, he was made captain. From 1807 to 1811 he commanded the 'Thames' (32 guns), in the Mediterranean, and from 1811 to 1815 the 'Volontaire' in the Mediterranean, and afterwards on the north coast of Spain. During these eight years he was almost constantly engaged in attacking the enemy's coasting trade, in destroying coast batteries, or in cutting out and destroying armed vessels. After paying off the 'Volontaire' (38 guns), he had no further service. On 4 June 1815 he was made a CB. 
Waldegrave married, on 7 August 1823, Esther Caroline (1800-1874), youngest daughter of John Puget of Totteridge, Hertfordshire, a director of the Bank of England; they had one son and two daughters. On 20 August 1825 he succeeded his father as Lord Radstock. From September 1831 to November 1841 he was naval aide-de-camp to the monarch, and on 23 November 1841 was made rear-admiral. He became vice-admiral on 1 July 1851. 
During his last forty years Radstock was active in the administration of naval charities, promoted the study of the French wars, and formed a valuable collection of books and pamphlets on naval history. This was presented by his widow, Esther, Lady Radstock, to the library of the Royal United Service Institution. Radstock was a tory, with strongly held views on naval subjects, shown by his commissioning a new biography of Earl Howe, to refute whig aspersions in Edward Brenton's 'Naval History of Great Britain'. 
Radstock died on 11 May 1857 at 26 Portland Place, London, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. He was succeeded by his son, Granville Augustus William Waldegrave, third Baron Radstock (1833-1913), lay evangelist and philanthropist, who visited India, 'distributing Bibles among the natives in memory of Queen Victoria' ('Annual Register', 1913, 122). 


@@@@@


doc= 28436


Henry Waldegrave, first Baron Waldegrave (1661-1690), a court official, the son of Sir Charles Waldegrave, third baronet (died 1684), and Helen Englefield. Henry and Henrietta married on 29 November 1683, and in January 1686 Henry was created Baron Waldegrave of Chewton by his father-in-law, James II. A year later he was made comptroller of the royal household. From a staunchly Roman Catholic family, Henry was a zealous supporter of the king. In November 1688 he went as his envoy to France and remained there in exile, still as comptroller, until his death at Chateauvieux, St Germain-en-Laye, aged only twenty-eight, on 24 January 1690. He was survived by his wife, Henrietta, who later married Pierce Butler, third Viscount Galmoye and Jacobite earl of Newcastle. The validity of this marriage was contested by the Waldegrave family. She died, aged sixty-three, at the Waldegrave estate of Navestock, Essex, on 3 April 1730. 


@@@@@


doc= 28437


Waldegrave, James, first Earl Waldegrave (1684-1741), diplomatist and politician, was the eldest son of Lady Henrietta Fitzjames (1666/7-1730), the eldest illegitimate daughter of James, duke of York (later King James II), and Arabella Churchill, the sister of John Churchill, later first duke of Marlborough. His father was 
James, named after his royal grandfather, inherited the barony as a child, and was groomed to follow his father's path. He received a Catholic education in France, in the household of his uncle James Fitzjames, duke of Berwick, and at the Jesuit college of La Fleche in Anjou. His education was finished by a residence in Florence, at the court of Grand Duke Cosimo III, between 1704 and 1706. In May 1714 James married Mary Webb (1695/6-1719), the second daughter of the nonjuring Jacobite Sir John Webb, bt, of Hatherop in Gloucestershire. In March the following year they had a son, James Waldegrave, later second Earl Waldegrave, who was followed by a daughter, Henrietta (1717-1753), who married the actor and singer John Beard (1716/17-1791), and two brothers, both born in Ghent and both named John, as the first died within a day of his birth. They seemed set to perpetuate a recusant dynasty. 
Waldegrave, however, broke sharply with this tradition after his young wife died on the night on 21/2 January 1719, a few days after she suffered a miscarriage. He was prominent among the Catholic peers and gentry who negotiated to create for patriotic Catholics a 'modus vivendi' with the Hanoverian regime. These talks had failed by December 1719, and Waldegrave now chose Hanover and a public career over Catholicism. On 12 February 1722 he declared himself a protestant, swore the oaths of allegiance to the crown, and took his seat in the House of Lords. His abjuration, which scandalized his family and connections, brought him the reward of a bedchamber post in George I's household in June 1723. Lord Townshend, along with Horace and Robert Walpole, seem to have seen Waldegrave as a promising colleague. Genteel, worldly, and pleasure-loving, he also had a great capacity for the intensive bursts of work and correspondence that punctuated a diplomat's life. His French education and intimate Jacobite connections were also potential assets. He remained on intimate terms with his uncle Berwick, a significant figure at the court of Louis XV, for whom even the elder Horace Walpole while at the Paris embassy acquired a 'particular attachment & freindship' (Walpole to Waldegrave, 13 June 1734, OS, Waldegrave MSS). Late in August 1725 he was given credentials for a mission of compliment to Louis XV on his marriage. He arrived in Paris in mid-September and left once more a month later, having had, as Horace Walpole briskly said, 'no preparation to make besides a Suit of Cloaths' (Walpole to Newcastle, 4 Sept 1725 NS, Waldegrave MSS). He was assured by Townshend that this employment would be 'an Earnest of further favours to you from his Maty. which I shall be always desirous to promote' (25 Aug 1725, BL, Add. MS 46856, fol. 160'v'). 
A full diplomatic appointment did not follow until May 1727, when Waldegrave was appointed ambassador-extraordinary and plenipotentiary to the emperor, to sign the preliminaries of peace. He was obliged to seize the opportunity and hurry away, leaving his 'private affairs in the greatest confusion', and relying heavily on the help of Townshend (Waldegrave to Townshend, 5 July 1727 NS, Waldegrave MSS). Waldegrave reached Paris on 14 June 1727 NS, with instructions to go no further than Strasbourg until he was assured of a welcome in Vienna. These orders were overtaken by the death of George I on 11 June, when all appointments were plunged into uncertainty. Not only his ministerial friends but also his mother lobbied energetically on Waldegrave's behalf 'at a time when all the world was pushing for themselves or for those they had the most concern for' (Waldegrave to Townshend, 19 Nov 1727 NS, Waldegrave MSS). In the event, although he lost his bedchamber post, in exchange for which he received only a promise of a future governorship of Barbados, Waldegrave was repeatedly assured by Horace Walpole that the new king and queen spoke highly of him. He was directed to remain for the time being at Paris, and began his diplomatic career by acting together with Walpole in the embassy there. He at once began cultivating informants in a way that was to characterize his later tenure of the Paris embassy. It was here that he met Montesquieu, a friend of Berwick and soon a friend and dining companion of his own. In this city of diversion and intrigue, he also earned the dubious tribute of being known as a man of pleasure. In December 1727 he had already taken a formal leave of the French king, but when Walpole was needed in parliament he had Waldegrave placed in charge of affairs in Paris, from 22 January to 17 March 1728. Waldegrave was trusted and valued, and his conduct of the embassy was approved at home, but he was not yet truly established in his diplomatic career. Indeed, his position was highly tentative, George II having agreed to send him to Vienna only if the emperor nominated a minister of equal rank to come to Britain. On Cardinal Fleury's pressing to have Waldegrave sent to Vienna to exchange the ratifications, George II ordered him to go, 'out of regard to the Cardinal, and to facilitate the Conclusion of this Affair'. However, he was to present his full credentials only if an imperial ambassador was named, 'that it may appear you were sent to Vienna for that purpose only, and that His Maty. had not made too great an Advance towards the Emperor' (Newcastle to Waldegrave, 15 Feb 1728, BL, Add. MS 32754, fols. 303-4). 
Waldegrave travelled in company with Montesquieu, arriving on 25 April in Vienna, where he was in fact able to present his credentials in form as ambassador. Waldegrave's assurances of the British ministry's support and goodwill for the empire secured the ratification of the preliminary articles of peace with Britain and France, and laid the ground of the better relations secured during the mission of his successor, Thomas Robinson. As throughout his service, Waldegrave's 'prudent and judicious Conduct' was praised by the king, along with his 'Attention & Diligence to give exact Accounts of what passes' (Townshend to Waldegrave, 23 Aug, 18 Oct 1728, Waldegrave MSS). Eager to keep himself in his royal master's eye, he obtained permission to attend the king in Hanover in summer 1729. His success in a strained and distrustful situation was rewarded on 13 September 1729, when he was created Viscount Chewton of Chewton and first Earl Waldegrave. In April 1730, when Townshend resigned from the ministry, Waldegrave was given the prestigious Paris embassy, although the appointment was at first kept secret. Horace Walpole suggested the appointment, acting on a recommendation from Berwick, though Newcastle was not slow to claim a share of the credit. Soon afterwards Waldegrave was given leave to return to England to attend to his family concerns, and Robinson was moved from Paris to take charge of affairs in Vienna. Waldegrave's personal business at home arose from the fact that his mother, Lady Henrietta, died intestate on 3 April 1730 and his grandmother Arabella a few days later. In effect, and despite the fact that he did not actually go back to England after all, this compassionate leave was the end of Waldegrave's Vienna mission, and he went to Paris, arriving on 21 June 1730 NS. Townshend had ordered Waldegrave not to take a formal leave at Vienna, and, in order not to arouse suspicion that he did not intend to return, he had to shoulder the expense of keeping a full 'family' there for some months, even when he had actually taken up his duties at Paris. 
In his new post Waldegrave met at first with suspicion and hostility from Cardinal Fleury and, especially, from the 'garde des sceaux', Germain Louis de Chauvelin. His task was to secure a general peace despite bitter European divisions and, if possible, to negotiate a new 'treaty of equilibre' while preventing France from using it to dominate affairs and redistribute territories. Waldegrave's standing with George II was so high at this time that his bedchamber post was restored by the king in October 1730, unsolicited by and even unknown to the Walpoles. Paris was a crucial diplomatic centre for the exiled Stuart court, and from the outset Waldegrave closely followed Jacobite affairs, assiduously cultivating spies and diplomatic analysts such as the 'Sicilian abbes', Caracciolo and Platania. In February 1731 he had the tricky diplomatic task of informing Fleury that Britain had conducted peace negotiations with the emperor without concerting plans with the French. He pleased George II by skilfully mollifying the French cardinal, and by promptly sending his servant to Madrid to contradict false reports, spread by the Spanish minister in Paris, about the British negotiation. 
Working urbanely but persistently to build a personal relationship with Fleury and to persuade him of British goodwill, Waldegrave at the same time was forthright in countering the blustering antagonism of Chauvelin. He won the approval of the king for showing 'a Spirit becoming an English Ambassador' (Newcastle to Waldegrave, 9 Dec 1731, BL, Add. MS 32775, fol. 277'r'). Horace Walpole, however, frequently urged Waldegrave to give a sharper edge to his 'complaisance & good nature'. He deplored 'that 'supplesse' wch is so natural to you, and makes you all things to all men, wch is always agreable to those you talk to, but is not always profitable or usefull on all occasions for ye publick interest' (28 March 1734, Waldegrave MSS). The ambassador's suavity and address, though, enabled him to take into his pay the needy and extravagant Francois Bussy, who had known Waldegrave in Vienna, and who now transcribed Chauvelin's letters. In October 1734 the king authorized Waldegrave to attempt this 'Affair of the greatest Consequence' (Newcastle to Waldegrave, 24 Oct 1734, BL, Add. MS 32786, fol. 59), which could have been seriously embarrassing if Bussy had refused, and divulged the approach. By the following summer, Bussy (codenamed 101) was in Waldegrave's pay, and he continued to supply the British ministry with information and diplomatic evaluations until the outbreak of war between the two countries ten years later. 
Sir Robert Walpole's refusal to enter the War of the Polish Succession made it hard for any British diplomatist to influence Fleury's successful treaty making and reshaping of power relationships at the end of the conflict, and it was probably only Horace Walpole's customary impatience that led him to blame the French advantage on Waldegrave's 'supple & mild temper' (Walpole to Lord Harrington, 2 Oct 1735 NS, Weston MSS, vol. 2). In October 1736 a great stroke of luck gave Waldegrave direct proof of Chauvelin's Jacobite dealings, when the French minister in error handed him a letter from James Edward Stuart, the Pretender, urging France to take the lead in a pro-Stuart alliance with the emperor. It gave him a lever to use against Chauvelin himself, but also allowed him, without betraying Chauvelin, to confront Fleury about France's encouragement of the Pretender. Queen Caroline praised Waldegrave's 'great Prudence and Discretion' in making the most effective use of this diplomatic windfall (Newcastle to Waldegrave, 8 Oct 1736, BL, Add. MS 32793, fol. 26). The incident stirred the regency council at home, and Walpole urged that only Britain's inclusion in a general renewal of treaties could scotch Jacobite intrigues overseas and popular disorders at home. 
Notwithstanding his success in Paris, Waldegrave complained of the usual tendency of ministers to forget their absent friends. A preferment promised in 1731 for his chaplain and secretary Anthony Thompson had still not materialized six years later, and Waldegrave declared that to neglect Thompson, who had been with him since 1722, looked like a reproach to himself. His discontent was soon soothed with the promise of a Garter. At the French court, his favoured standing was shown when Louis XV invited Waldegrave to a day's hunting and made him a generous present of game, the first instance of such complaisance to a foreign ambassador, and much talked of at court. From February to late April 1738 he was on leave in England, and witnessed the popular agitation over Spanish depredations. While there, in February, he received the blue ribbon of a knight of the Garter. 
Waldegrave's well-placed informants continued to bring diplomatic benefits, as when he secured early notice of an intended double marriage alliance between France and Spain, and later detected a new French agent, Silhouette, opening a ciphered correspondence with the British opposition. Waldegrave drew on Walpole directly for the funds that kept open these valuable channels. Bussy, however, became ever greedier, while the quality of his intelligence varied greatly. As the prospect approached of a war with Spain, and perhaps France also, Waldegrave dared not dispense with 101's information, but he registered increasing exasperation with his demands: 'surely' as he put it to the duke of Newcastle on 29 January 1739 NS, 'there is not a more brazen-faced wretch' (BL, Add. MS 32800, fol. 54). He had to place a further spy, Guyot, to check on Bussy's reports. The Franco-Spanish rapprochement and prospect of war strengthened doubts at home about the value of such a very amiable and obliging ambassador at the French court. Horace Walpole senior once again murmured, in a letter to Robert Trevor, that 'his Lordship's credit has, I'm afraid, arisen from nothing else but because his Eminence [Fleury] found him too easy, and tractable' (28 April 1739 NS, 'Buckinghamshire MSS', 28). 
Increasingly troubled with asthmatic symptoms, Waldegrave was in any case less able to perform his functions. In the dangerous state of European affairs, Newcastle feared that Waldegrave's disorder was obstructing business more than the ambassador himself realized, and he secretly approached Anthony Thompson to supplement the official dispatches. Thompson confirmed that his superior was indeed very ill, the physicians divided over both causes and cure. In early October 1740 Waldegrave begged leave to return to breathe his native air, and to consult physicians whom he could trust. He complained of experiencing asthma and convulsions on any exertion. He returned to London, leaving Thompson in charge of affairs in Paris, a post which he retained until his recall in 1744 on the eve of war with France. Waldegrave's own diplomatic career was over, and the air of England did not in the event restore his health. In November Waldegrave was in London, gravely ill and dropsical. He took himself to the house he had built in the 1720s at Navestock, Essex, where he died on 11 April 1741 and was buried seven days later. 
Waldegrave, with his Catholic, Jacobite, and freemasonry connections, was a risky choice of ambassador to the court of France, and in 1742 one of the articles of Walpole's attempted impeachment charged him with placing a nephew of the Pretender in that post. English suspicions were always likely to revive when events drew attention to his Catholic background, as friends in the ministry reminded him. He found the truth of this in 1732, when he brought his sons over to have them under his eye and complete their education in Paris. He was obliged vigorously to counter rumours, fostered not least by his ambitious secretary of embassy Thomas Pelham, that he intended to bring them up in his old faith. On balance, however, the Hanoverian regime benefited from his relationships in Jacobite circles, and his intimate knowledge of their outlook and beliefs. His courtesy and noble demeanour secured acceptance in the elite world of the French court, and his shrewd judgement and diplomatic skills may be seen in the quality of his ambassadorial letters. Thompson, succeeding him as charge, had neither the flair of his master nor even the same caution in dealing with the Jacobites. Very soon after Waldegrave left, Thompson conversed freely with one of the Pretender's leading correspondents, giving him a detailed breakdown of the diplomatic analyses of 'those Lord Waldegrave most depended upon' (George Robinson to James Edward Stuart, 14 Nov 1740 NS, Royal Archives, Windsor Castle, Stuart MS 228, 129). By contrast, Waldegrave's own discretion and his judicious and sceptical evaluations of French intentions and the characters of the ministers and diplomats in Paris were of great value to his country, and his correspondence was both thoughtful and professional. He seems never to have wavered in his allegiance to the house of Hanover or in the protestant religious principles that he adopted. No surviving evidence supports the pious Catholic story, preserved at third hand into the following century, that on his deathbed Waldegrave put his hand on the tongue that had abjured his religion and cried: 'This bit of red rag has been my damnation' (G. Oliver, 'Collections illustrating the history of the Catholic religion in the counties of Cornwall, Devon, Dorset, Somerset, Wilts, and Gloucester', 1857, 69-70). 


@@@@@


doc= 28438


Waldegrave, James, second Earl Waldegrave (1715-1763), courtier and politician, was born on 4 March 1715, the eldest of the three sons of James Waldegrave, second Baron and first Earl Waldegrave (1684-1741), of Navestock, Essex, and his wife, Mary (1695/6-1719), the second daughter of Sir John Webb of Hatherop, Gloucestershire. The name is often spelt Waldgrave or Walgrave, evidence of its pronunciation. The Waldegraves were a Catholic family, with a Jacobite tradition, and the first baron died in exile in 1690 at the Stuart court of St Germain. The second baron, who had a Catholic wife and a Jacobite father-in-law, renounced this religious and political allegiance of his family about 1722, but these antecedents sometimes haunted his son. Conversion to the Church of England opened the path to political advancement. In 1723 the second baron was appointed a lord of the bedchamber, a post he held until his death in 1741, and one that gave him access to the sovereign. The $1000 salary was welcome, for in the reign of George I the combined income of the Waldegrave estates, Navestock and Borley in Essex and Chewton in Somerset, was under $3000. He served as ambassador to Vienna from 1728 to 1730, and then at Paris until 1740. Among his rewards were the titles in 1729 of Earl Waldegrave and Viscount Chewton, the latter being used as a courtesy title by his son James, who left Eton College in 1732 to assist his father in the Paris embassy, soon as his confidential secretary. 
James succeeded to his father's titles and estates on 11 April 1741 and took his seat in the Lords thirteen days later. He followed in his father's steps as a courtier, and George II evidently took to the young second earl, appointing him a lord of the bedchamber in 1743. 'It looks as if it was His Majesty's own doing', the duke of Newcastle, accustomed to dispense patronage, informed a disappointed applicant (McCann, 132). Waldegrave held the post until 1752, taking his turn at personal attendance on the sovereign. In parliament he sided with the Pelham ministry, refusing an invitation to join the Leicester House opposition of Frederick, prince of Wales. Waldegrave preferred social life to politics, White's Club to Westminster; however, he combined with his delight in eating and gambling an interest in literature and philosophy, Montesquieu being a favourite author. In the 1750s he had to abandon pleasure for politics, and even wrote memoirs that form a chief historical source for the period; first published in 1821, they reappeared in a scholarly edition of 1988. George II had plans for Waldegrave, and vainly sought to make him ambassador to Paris, like his father, so as to qualify him to be secretary of state. The prime minister, Henry Pelham, and his brother the duke of Newcastle thought him unsuitable for high office. The earl, wrote Pelham in 1751, was: 'as good-natured, worthy and sensible a man as any in the kingdom, but totally surrendered to his pleasure; and I believe that mankind, and no one more so than himself, would be surprised to see him in such an office. ('Memoirs and Speeches', 49)' The death of the prince of Wales that year enabled the king to do something for Waldegrave, for the duchy of Cornwall reverted to the crown. On 18 April 1751 George II appointed Waldegrave lord warden of the stannaries, a post, worth $450 a year, connected with the tin mines and with much patronage in Cornwall. The next year he was given a far more significant post, governor to the new young prince of Wales. After Lord Harcourt resigned it several others refused before Waldegrave accepted that onerous post, one that brought him membership of the privy council but involved much anxiety and attention. He gave up his comfortable bedchamber place for one of only the same salary. Contrary to some reports he did so willingly. Newcastle was the intermediary because, as Waldegrave noted, 'his Majesty did not chuse to speak to me himself, that I might be at full liberty to either accept or refuse as I liked best' ('Memoirs and Speeches', 57 n. 179). He was governor of the future George III as the prince grew from fourteen to eighteen. The princess dowager in 1753 had 'a very good opinion of him, that he was very well bred, very complaisant, and attentive, etc., and the children liked him extremely' ('Political Journal of... Dodington', 202). 
Waldegrave's friendly character and enjoyment of royal favour made him an obvious political broker in the crises of the mid-1750s. In 1754 he helped Newcastle to secure the support of Henry Fox for the ministry he formed on Pelham's death. But he was obviously the ministry's man at Leicester House, and he fell out of favour there when the prince's court went into opposition at the end of 1755. A decision had to be made when the prince came of legal age on his eighteenth birthday, 4 June 1756, for the post of prince's governor would then lapse. George II pushed for Waldegrave to be head of the prince's household as his groom of the stole, but the prince wanted his mother's friend Lord Bute. Waldegrave escaped from a difficult situation by securing royal permission to resign from the prince's household: he also gave up his post of lord warden of the stannaries. He was offered and refused an Irish pension, but accepted the reversion of a lucrative tellership of the exchequer, which fell in during February 1757. Waldegrave gained revenge on his foes at Leicester House by fanning current rumours about an illicit relationship between Bute and the princess dowager, a scandal that persisted into the next century, being zealously retailed by Waldegrave's friend Horace Walpole. It was probably resentment at Waldegrave's role in this respect that caused George III to recall him in 1804 as 'a depraved worthless man' ('Memoirs and Speeches', 53). 
As the confidant of George II, Waldegrave was the intermediary in the prolonged negotiations of 1757 preceding the formation of the Pitt-Newcastle coalition ministry. He was the conduit of correspondence between the king, Newcastle, and Fox. When matters seemed to have reached an impasse, with Newcastle insisting on the inclusion of Pitt, whom George II detested, Waldegrave himself agreed on 8 June to be first lord of the Treasury in a ministry wherein Fox would be the leading figure: since he never formally took up the appointment, however, he cannot be listed among British prime ministers, and the 'Dictionary of National Biography' errs in stating he was 'premier' for five days. On 11 June he advised George II to accept Pitt, and he quit politics for social life, being rewarded for his services on 30 June with the Garter. Waldegrave now found time to get married, and Horace Walpole claimed the credit for the match. The bride was Walpole's niece Maria (bap. 1736, d. 1807) ['see under 'William Henry, Prince], the second illegitimate daughter of Sir Edward Walpole and Dorothy Clements. 'A month ago', Horace wrote on 11 April 1759, 'I was told he liked her -- does he? -- I jumbled them together, and he has already proposed. For character and credit, he is the first match in England -- for beauty, I think she is' ('Letters of Horace Walpole', 4.254). The marriage took place on 15 May 1759, the bride at twenty-two being half the age of the groom. Three daughters were born, but politics soon obtruded on the domestic bliss at Navestock. 
When George II died on 25 October 1760 Waldegrave was one of the few men closely acquainted with the new monarch, and eased his embarrassment at his first privy council by chatting to him. George III evidently did not at this time harbour any grudge against his former governor. Soon the king planned to enlist Waldegrave's support for the peace terms negotiated by the Bute ministry in 1762, and Fox was sent to enquire whether he would attend cabinet if asked. 'The Earl, who had been bred a courtier, who was of too gentle manners for opposition', Horace Walpole wrote, 'desired time to consider.' He consulted the duke of Cumberland, the king's uncle and Bute's enemy, and then 'wrote to Fox to desire the proposal might not be made to him' (Walpole, 'Memoirs', 1.155-6). But he approved the peace terms, and told Cumberland, 'as to opposition in general, I may oppose measures which I think wrong. But I shall never enter into engagements with any factions' (BL, Add. MS 51380, fol. 107). He spoke for the peace on 9 December. 
When in March 1763 Bute's decision to resign led to the planning of a new ministry, Waldegrave was again considered for high office. Fox put him forward as 'a man of strict honour, will go through what he engages in without any indiscretion, has great firmness, with great gentleness of manner, is by his friends both respected and beloved, has few enemies, and no view to popularity' (Fitzmaurice, 1.143). But George III dismissed the suggestion, writing that 'he would fairly be but a chip in the porrige' ('Letters... to Lord Bute', 199). Waldegrave opposed the Bute ministry in the Lords debate of 28 March on the cider tax. Yet the very next day Fox, who had earlier proposed Waldegrave to Bute as lord lieutenant of Ireland, vainly offered him the ambassadorship to Paris. Death then suddenly put an end to all such ideas. On 30 March Waldegrave contracted smallpox, against which he had not been inoculated when young, as 'the eldest son and weakly' ('Letters of Horace Walpole', 5.303). He died at Albemarle Street, London, on 8 April, to the consternation and dismay of high society, after dedicated nursing by his wife, whose uncle Horace Walpole was astonished 'to see so much beauty sincerely devoted to a man so unlovely in his person' (ibid., 5.297). He was buried in Navestock church. His estate produced only $2300 a year, but out of his tellership income he had saved enough to endow his three daughters with about $8000 each, and they later married well. His widow was married secretly in 1766 to the king's younger brother, the duke of Gloucester, and died on 22 August 1807. 
Waldegrave's titles and estates passed to his only surviving brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 28439


John Waldegrave, third Earl Waldegrave (1718-1784), army officer and courtier. Born on 28 April 1718 at Ghent, he also left Eton in 1732 for Paris. 'My youngest would never be a scholar', wrote his father ('Memoirs and Speeches', 30), and so John entered the army in 1735. Like his brother he was a member of White's Club and enjoyed a busy social life. In 1751 'by the intrigues of the Earl of Sandwich', so Horace Walpole wrote, 'Colonel John Waldegrave stole Lord Gower's daughter' (ibid., 41). His bride, against her father's wishes, was Elizabeth Leveson-Gower (1724-1784), the fifth daughter of the first Earl Gower; they had two sons, including William Waldegrave, first Baron Radstock, and two daughters. This was a valuable political connection, for the duchess of Bedford was his wife's sister. But the Waldegraves were first and foremost courtiers, and John was appointed a groom of the bedchamber in 1747, with a salary of $500, a post he retained, into the reign of George III, until his peerage in 1763. In 1747 he was also appointed aide-de-camp to the duke of Cumberland and brought into the House of Commons for the government borough of Orford. In 1754 he transferred to the Gower borough of Newcastle under Lyme, which he represented until his elevation to the Lords. None of this prevented John Waldegrave enjoying a successful military career: he served in the wars of 1740-48 and 1756-63, rising steadily in rank from ensign in 1735 to major-general in 1757. He was the British hero at the battle of Minden on 1 August 1759, where his success in leading the British infantry against the French cavalry was the crucial factor in the famous victory. His wife boasted to Bedford on 4 August, 'Mr Waldegrave is not only adored by the army, but by all the country' ('Memoirs and Speeches', 86). His rewards included promotion to lieutenant-general, a colonelcy in the dragoon guards, and in 1760 appointment as governor of Plymouth. Made a full general in 1772, he took offence when in 1770 secretary at war Lord Barrington told the House of Commons that there was no military officer fit to be appointed army commander-in-chief. Waldegrave retired from active service when the end of the Seven Years' War coincided with his peerage. He voted with the Bedford party in the Lords, as against the repeal of the 'Stamp Act' in 1766, but always with government after they returned to office in 1767 -- apart from the Fox-North coalition. He died on 22 October 1784, suddenly of apoplexy at an inn near Reading, and was buried at Navestock on 30 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 28440


Waldegrave, Sir Richard (c.1338-1410), courtier and speaker of the House of Commons, was the son of Sir Richard Waldegrave of Brant Broughton, Lincolnshire, who was knight of the shire for Lincolnshire in 1335, and died late in 1339. A minor at his father's death, the younger Richard Waldegrave eventually succeeded to the Lincolnshire estates and to family lands at Walgrave, Northamptonshire. About 1363 he secured further lands, and entry into Suffolk society, by marrying Joan, widow of Sir Robert Bures, who brought him substantial estates in Suffolk, Essex, and other counties. Joan's daughter by her first marriage was Alice Bryene, who later became a prominent landowner. As a young man Waldegrave served in the household of William and Humphrey (IX) de Bohun, successive earls of Northampton, and during the 1360s he fought in France, Italy, and Prussia under Bohun leadership; in 1365 he was knighted during a campaign against the Turks. His association with the Bohuns led to his forming friendships which would be important in his later political career. Waldegrave first represented Suffolk in the Commons in 1376, and was to sit in parliament on a further eleven occasions between then and 1390. In 1377 he became a knight of the king's household, where Guy, Lord Brian, a former associate of the Bohuns, was the newly appointed chamberlain. During the next fifteen years Waldegrave retained political influence partly through his links to other men who had been connected with the Bohuns, supporters both of Richard II and his opponents. 
In June 1381 Waldegrave's life and property came under threat in Suffolk following the outbreak of the peasants' revolt. He may have been targeted due to his appointment to a commission investigating poll tax evasions in that county four months earlier. This experience probably influenced his term as speaker of the Commons after his election to that office in November 1381. On 18 November, when the house was divided over rescinding earlier royal concessions to the rebels, Waldegrave asked to be excused from the speakership. When his request was refused he demanded a repudiation of the Commons' 'charge' for the session, and spoke perceptively of the causes of the rising. Waldegrave's attempted resignation may have been due to a reluctance to voice the Commons' criticisms of the administration; certainly his analysis of the origins of the rising drew attention to the faults of the royal household, and also emphasized the obstruction of justice in the furtherance of their disputes by magnates and gentry. 
In the politically turbulent 1380s and 1390s Waldegrave became increasingly closely attached to the court, and he accompanied Richard II on his Scottish campaign of 1385, though he also continued to maintain links with some of the king's opponents. His appointment to the royal council in 1393 marked the high point of his association with Richard II. But the king's actions against his former opponents during the first session of the parliament of 1397-8 led to Waldegrave's distancing himself from the royal cause, and in November 1397 he left the king's council, after obtaining a general pardon and letters of exemption from service in royal office. His departure from the council proved timely; unlike Richard II's more infamous councillors Waldegrave was to retain influence after their master was deposed in 1399, though after 1400 he was less active in government. The contrast between his 1404 confirmation of exemption from office, and the grant of this privilege in 1397, illustrates Waldegrave's altered fortunes, for the later confirmation represented essentially a peaceable and self-imposed withdrawal from government, due to old age. Waldegrave died on 2 May 1410 and was buried later that month in the parish church of Bures St Mary, Suffolk. He was survived by a son. 


@@@@@


doc= 28441


Waldegrave, Robert (c.1554-1603/4), printer, was the son of Richard Waldegrave, yeoman, of Blackley, Worcestershire. He was apprenticed to William Griffith, stationer, of London, for eight years, starting on 24 June 1568, by which date his father was dead. Waldegrave would have gained his freedom by 1576, a year for which the Stationers' Company records have been lost, but the first record of him as a licensee occurs on 17 June 1578, when he was licensed to publish a book of prayers, 'The Castle for the Soule', printed for him by Thomas Dawson in the same year. This first licence was a taste of what was to come during a long career of printing and publishing religious and theological texts. 
Waldegrave printed in London for ten years, mostly at premises 'Without Temple Bar in the Strand', near Somerset House, although in 1583 he was briefly located at Foster Lane and in the late 1580s occasionally published at The Crane in St Paul's Churchyard. His device was a swan within an oval medallion. Although printing overtly until 1588, he quickly gained a reputation as a printer of puritan material. Books by dissenting English clergymen, such as Dudley Fenner, Laurence Chaderton, and the leading presbyterian John Field were printed by Waldegrave, as were editions of Luther, Calvin, and Knox. According to later anonymous tracts printed by Waldegrave, he was imprisoned twice in the 1580s in the White Lion prison at Southwark, the longest spell being one of twenty weeks in 1586-7 (a date sometimes confused with autumn 1588 when he was clearly at liberty). In fact there is no supporting evidence for the longer imprisonment, and it must be remembered that Waldegrave had a taste for dramatic propaganda. None the less he was despised and pursued by the episcopacy in England, and Thomas Cooper, bishop of Winchester, described him as 'a notorious disobedient and godelesse person' (Cooper, 41). Clerical influence in Star Chamber secured a decree in February 1588 aimed at ending his press activity. On 16 April the officers of the Stationers' Company entered his premises and confiscated his press and most, though not all, of his type, along with anonymous copies of John Udall's 'The State of the Churche of England Laid Open...' (otherwise known as 'Diotrephes'), a tract extremely offensive to the bishops. A month later the books were burnt and his printing materials destroyed, but Waldegrave himself retreated underground and avoided arrest. 
Even before these events Waldegrave had decided to begin covert printing activity and he received encouragement from the puritan John Penry. In May-June 1588 Waldegrave and Penry took sanctuary at the East Molesey home of Mrs Elizabeth Crane, the widow of Anthony Crane, master of the queen's household, conveniently sited near John Udall's parish in Kingston upon Thames. There Waldegrave printed anonymously some tracts by Penry and Udall and also in October the first mocking pamphlet under the pseudonym Martin Marprelate, Penry's 'Oh Read over D. John Bridges' (known as 'The Epistle'). As the officers of the Stationers' Company began searching the area, in November Waldegrave, his family, and materials moved to Northamptonshire and to the home of the puritan supporter Sir Richard Knightley at Fawsley. There Waldegrave disguised himself as Knightley's clerk and printed 'The Epitome'. However, to keep ahead of the authorities, at the turn of the year the press was again on the move, this time to the house of another sympathetic patron, John Hales of Coventry. There in March 1589 Waldegrave's last Marprelate tract 'Hay any Worke for Cooper' was printed, and it reveals much bitterness at his treatment by the authorities. Then, either out of fear of arrest or because he tired of tactics now disowned by some puritans, Waldegrave abandoned Marprelate activity in spring 1589, leaving it to some lesser printers who would not be so lucky in avoiding authority. Subsequently Waldegrave is known to have arrived in Scotland by the spring of 1590, but the intervening period is something of a mystery. He may have gone briefly to Devon and more likely on to La Rochelle in France, where he may have printed books by Penry and Job Throckmorton. Penry himself reported Waldegrave in La Rochelle in May 1589. The fact that puritan activists at this time tended to leave false trails to protect themselves from arrest makes it difficult to be certain of his movements. None the less the fact that Waldegrave was awarded a printing licence in Edinburgh in March 1590 confirms that he was by then in Scotland. 
Long before he arrived in Scotland Waldegrave had direct and indirect contacts with that country. Both Penry and Udall had strong Scottish associations, Penry joining Waldegrave in Scottish exile in 1589. Moreover Waldegrave had earlier printed for the Scottish reformed church, including Knox's confession of faith in 1581. When he came to Scotland he was welcomed as the first printer of the puritan 'Booke of the Forme of Common Prayer' (1584-5), a book banned by the English Star Chamber. But Waldegrave impressed James VI as well as the kirk, and on 9 October 1590 he was appointed to the vacant position of king's printer and came under royal protection. Over the next thirteen years, at an undiscovered Edinburgh address, he printed over 100 works, making him the most prolific Scottish printer of the sixteenth century. His 'puritan' output did not cease overnight and he produced two anonymous editions by Penry (1590) and openly printed the works of committed Scottish presbyterians like John Davidson and James Melville. As well as the writings of puritans and presbyterians, Waldegrave published William Welwood's 'The Sea-Law of Scotland' (1590), the earliest British book of maritime jurisprudence, John Napier's popular millenarian work 'A Plaine Discovery of the Whole Revelation of Saint John' (1593), and much else. His press is best known, however, as the mouthpiece of the major works of King James: his 'Poetical Exercises' (1591), 'Daemonologie' (1597, reprinted 1600), 'The Trew Law' (1598), and 'Basilikon doron' (1599, reprinted 1603). 
Waldegrave's 'pirated editions', such as Sir Philip Sidney's 'Arcadia' (1599), were not pirates in the Scottish market. Nevertheless, these editions were resented by the Stationers' Company, just as his Edinburgh-produced puritan tracts were by the English government. Both types of production were subject to confiscation when they crossed into England. In general Waldegrave introduced a measure of Anglicization to the Scottish press, both in language and manners, such as the greater incidence of printed dedications. He suffered little government interference in Scotland, though King James was angered by some of Davidson's views. None the less, in February 1597 Waldegrave was charged with 'tressonabill imprenting' an act of parliament (Pitcairn, 2.2). He was, indeed, the only Scottish printer to be tried for treason. Waldegrave's crime was to print, without permission, a version of the so-called 'Golden Acts' of 1592 authorizing presbyterianism, and in a form too embarrassing for the increasingly Erastian regime of 1597. He was found guilty by the high court of justiciary, but the charge was set aside when it was found that a clerk of register had furnished him with the act. 
Leaving his wife to continue printing in Edinburgh, in 1603 Waldegrave followed King James to London. This was a return he had hoped for during all his years in Scotland, but it was to be brief. He obtained a licence with the Stationers' Company in June that year, but had died by February 1604. The following month his widow sold certain of his Scottish printing privileges to Thomas Finlason, who also took possession of Waldegrave's printing materials. His office of royal printer, held for life only, reverted to the crown. In spite of generalized information conveyed by the Marprelate pamphlets very little is known in detail about his family. Presumably he married his wife Mary 'c'.1580, as they had six children before they came to Scotland. A seventh child, Robert, was born in Edinburgh in September 1596. No will and testament has survived and his place of burial is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 28442


Waldegrave, Samuel (1817-1869), bishop of Carlisle, was born at Cardington, Bedfordshire, on 13 September 1817, the second son of William Waldegrave, eighth Earl Waldegrave (1788-1859), and his first wife, Elizabeth (died 1843), daughter of Samuel Whitbread. Elizabeth Waldegrave was an evangelical and led her son, at an early age, to faith in Christ. He was educated at Cheam School under Charles Mayo, an evangelical, before entering Balliol College, Oxford, in 1835. His tutor, A. C. Tait, cared for him during a serious illness, becoming a lifelong friend. After obtaining first-class honours in classics and mathematics he graduated BA in 1839 and MA in 1842. He was elected to a fellowship of All Souls College in 1839. He remained in Oxford, and was public examiner in mathematics between 1842 and 1844. 
Waldegrave was ordained deacon in 1842 and priest in 1843, serving as curate of the working-class parish of St Ebbe's, Oxford, where, in conjunction with his fellow curates Charles Thomas Baring and Edward Arthur Litton, he promoted the erection of Holy Trinity, which opened as a district church in 1844. In that year he was appointed to the All Souls living of Barford St Martin, Wiltshire. After relinquishing his fellowship he married in 1845 Jane Ann (died 1877), daughter of Francis Pym of The Hasells, Bedfordshire; they had two children. At Barford his views brought him into conflict with the bishop of Salisbury (Walter Kerr Hamilton). 
In 1854 Waldegrave delivered the Bampton lectures at Oxford, in which he countered the popularly held premillennialist view of the second coming of Christ (a literal belief in the 1000 years predicted in Revelation 20) with a powerful presentation of the amillennialist (non-literal) position. The eight lectures were published in 1855 as 'New Testament millenarianism, or, The kingdom and coming of Christ as taught by himself and his apostles'. Waldegrave regarded premillennialism as unscriptural, a 'bewitching phantasy' which needed to be refuted. 
Palmerston appointed Waldegrave a canon residentiary of Salisbury Cathedral in 1857, and then bishop of Carlisle in 1860. Waldegrave built on the work of his predecessor (H. M. Villiers), and spent much of his time in diocesan administration and securing the position of the evangelical party in his diocese. He appointed evangelicals as archdeacons and attracted a number of evangelicals into the diocese, supporting the patronage work of Alfred Peache. He was the first bishop to ordain men from the London College of Divinity. Waldegrave was particularly vigilant over the selection, examination, and ordination of ordinands, and like Villiers tried to improve the academic quality of the candidates. He was also concerned about the housing and salary of his clergy, a particular problem in a diocese where half of the livings were valued at under $100 a year. The Carlisle Diocesan Church and Parsonage and Benefice Augmentation Society (founded in 1862) raised money from local sources as well as obtaining grants from the ecclesiastical commissioners. His aristocratic connections were used to good effect; Angela Burdett-Coutts, the duke of Westminster, and Waldegrave's stepmother, Sarah, the Countess Waldegrave, gave financial support to church building in the diocese. 
Waldegrave and Francis Close were united in their opposition to the English Church Union, an Anglo-Catholic body in Barrow in Furness. Waldegrave erected an evangelical church to counter the union's activities, and in his third charge (1867) made a strong attack upon ritualism. Although not a frequent speaker in the House of Lords, he supported Lord Shaftesbury's efforts to legislate against extreme ritualism and vigorously defended the law of Sunday observance. Waldegrave was a gentle, quiet-spoken, sensitive, devout, and hard-working bishop, held in high regard by his evangelical contemporaries. J. C. Ryle described him as a man 'of rare gifts and graces' (S. Waldegrave, 'Christ the True Altar', 1870, vi). 
In December 1868, exhausted, Waldegrave developed a brain tumour. During his prolonged illness the diocese was in the hands of Bishop David Anderson, the vicar of Christ Church, Clifton, Bristol. Waldegrave died at Rose Castle, Carlisle, on 1 October 1869 and was buried in the graveyard of Carlisle Cathedral. A monument was erected to his memory in the cathedral in 1872. He left a son, Samuel Edmund Waldegrave (1856-1907), rector of Oborne, Dorset, and a daughter, Elizabeth Janet (1858-1890), who married Richard Reginald Fawkes, vicar of Spondon, Derbyshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 28443


Waldegrave, Sir William (1636?-1701), physician, was perhaps a son of Sir Henry Waldegrave, second baronet (1598-1658), the grandfather of the first Lord Waldegrave; he was apparently closely connected with this branch of the family. He received the degree of doctor of medicine at Padua on 12 March 1659, and was admitted an honorary fellow of the College of Physicians, London, in December 1664. He was created a fellow of the college by the charter of James II in 1686, but does not appear to have been admitted as such at the 'comitia majora extraordinaria' of 12 April 1687, which was specially convened for the reception of the charter and the admission of those who were thereby constituted fellows. 
In 1689 Waldegrave was one of the seven fellows named by the college to the House of Lords as being 'criminals or reputed criminals' (apparently Jacobites, Cook, 217). He was one of the physicians to Queen Mary of Modena and was hastily summoned, along with Sir Charles Scarburgh, to the queen in 1688, shortly before the birth of the prince of Wales, when she was in danger of miscarrying. Waldegrave was knighted by her bedside on 10 June 1688, shortly after the delivery of James Edward. He accompanied the queen and the prince on their flight to France, being at that time called first physician to the prince. He was a member of the exiled court and was appointed first physician to the king in 1695. He was married to Elizabeth Ronchi (the queen's almoner or confessor was named Giacomo Ronchi), who, in 1698, was described as a lady of the bedchamber to the queen. She was presumably also the Madam Walgrave who was one of her bedchamber women in 1684 and died at St Germain aged fifty in 1706. Waldegrave mentions no children in his will. He was described by Roger North as 'a prodigy of an arch-lutanist' (North, 123). Waldegrave died, aged sixty-five, in the old chateau at St Germain about June 1701, and was buried on 9 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 28444


Waldegrave, William, first Baron Radstock (1753-1825), naval officer, was born on 9 July 1753 in Kensington, London, second of the two sons and two daughters of John Waldegrave, third Earl Waldegrave (1718-1784), general and MP ['see under 'Waldegrave, James, second Earl Waldegrave], and his wife, Lady Elizabeth Leveson-Gower (1724-1784), daughter of the first Earl Gower and Evelyn Pierrepoint. On 17 May 1766, after seven years at Eton College (1759-65), he joined the 'Jersey' (60 guns), flagship of Commodore Richard Spry, commander-in-chief, Mediterranean. Waldegrave's three years in her were broken by nine months' leave in England. He returned home in the 'Dorsetshire' (70 guns) and in August 1769 sailed in the frigate 'Quebec' (Captain Francis Reynolds) for the West Indies where he served for three years, including a year in the sloop 'Spy' and eight months in the 'Montagu' (60 guns), flagship of Rear-Admiral Robert Man; in her he returned home as a lieutenant (promoted 1 August 1772). In January 1773 he joined the 'Portland' (50 guns), and sailed again for the West Indies where he transferred to 'Princess Amelia' (80 guns), before returning to England in September. 
In March 1774 Waldegrave was appointed first lieutenant of the 'Medway' (60 guns), Mediterranean flagship of Rear-Admiral Man who promoted him to commander on 23 June 1775 with command of the sloop 'Zephyr'. Less than a year later he was promoted captain (30 May 1776) and in August assumed command of the 'Rippon' (60 guns). Despite his mother's instruction to Lord Sandwich that her son should not be sent to the East Indies, Waldegrave sailed for that destination in September in the 'Rippon', flagship of the commander-in-chief, Commodore Sir Edward Vernon. After fifteen months Waldegrave's health broke down, obliging him to return home. 
Waldegrave commissioned the frigate 'Pomona' in September 1778, sailed for the West Indies, and in January 1779 captured the 'Cumberland', a large and troublesome American privateer, and four other prizes before transferring in June to the larger frigate 'La Prudente' and returning to England. In July 1780 'La Prudente', belatedly assisted by the frigate 'Licorne', captured the large French frigate 'Capricieuse' after a four-hour battle in the Bay of Biscay, taking over 200 prisoners of war; so shattered was the 'Capricieuse' after her gallant resistance that Waldegrave was obliged to burn her. In April 1781 'La Prudente' was at Admiral Darby's relief of Gibraltar -- 'Waldegrave is a very attentive good officer' (Darby to Sandwich, 20 June 1781, Barnes and Owen, 4.46) -- and in December he was at the capture by a squadron under Rear-Admiral Richard Kempenfelt of twenty sail of a French convoy in the Bay of Biscay. In March 1782 Waldegrave transferred to the frigate 'Phaeton', in Howe's fleet which in October again relieved Gibraltar. 
Waldegrave paid off the 'Phaeton' at the peace in April 1783 and was unemployed until 1790. He travelled widely for his health, and at Smyrna on 28 December 1785 he married Cornelia Jacoba (1762/3-1839), daughter of David Van Lennep, chief of the Dutch factory. They had three sons (two of them became naval officers, including George Granville Waldegrave, second Baron Radstock) and four daughters. He returned to England in 1786 and commanded the 'Majestic' (74 guns) for three weeks during the Spanish armament of 1790. 
On the outbreak of war in 1793 Waldegrave commissioned the 'Courageux' (74 guns) and sailed to the Mediterranean. After the occupation of Toulon that August Lord Hood sent him home with dispatches, travelling by frigate to Barcelona, overland to Corunna, and by sea to Falmouth. He rejoined the fleet via the Netherlands, Germany, and Italy with orders for Hood. After promotion to rear-admiral on 4 July 1794 he returned home and from May 1795 commanded a small squadron in the channel. On 1 June 1795 he was promoted vice-admiral and in November he returned to the Mediterranean in the 'Barfleur' (98 guns) to join the fleet under Sir John Jervis (later earl of St Vincent) whom he did not please: 'Vice-Admiral Waldegrave is so very troublesome to me', Jervis wrote to the first lord, 'that I must request Your Lordship to remove him to some other service' (letter of 29 July 1796, Corbett, 2.43). Nevertheless Waldegrave remained to take part, as third in command, at the battle of Cape St Vincent on St Valentine's day 1797. The second and fourth in command were made baronets, an honour Waldegrave declined, the rank being junior to his own as the son of an earl. 
Waldegrave returned to England in April 1797 before embarking for Newfoundland where for the next three years he was governor and commander-in-chief and, according to an early history of the colony, he 'rendered his administration remarkable by his zeal for the public welfare' (Bonnycastle, 1.138-9). On 27 December 1800 Waldegrave was created Baron Radstock in the Irish peerage; he was promoted admiral on 29 April 1802, but had no further employment. On 2 January 1815 he was created GCB. His speedy promotion to flag-rank in twenty-eight years compared with, say, Collingwood (thirty-eight years) illustrates the advantage of influence as an earl's son. 
Waldegrave died of apoplexy in Portland Place, London, on 20 August 1825. He was buried on 26 August in Navestock church, Essex, where there is a memorial to him with a portrayal of his gold medal for Cape St Vincent. 
Not only the earl of St Vincent found Radstock difficult. Barham when first lord found him 'unreasonable' when seeking an appointment for his son (letter to Lord Collingwood, 12 Dec 1805, 'Letters and Papers of... Barham', 3.348); and one of his officers in the 'Barfleur' remarked on his 'very distant manner to the officers of the ship who were not desirous of the day of invitation to his table' (letter of 13 Jan 1803, Farington, 'Diary', 5.1960). 


@@@@@


doc= 28445


Walden, Roger (d. 1406), administrator, archbishop of Canterbury, and bishop of London, was from Walden (later Saffron Walden), Essex, and disdained by some contemporaries as of low birth, possibly the son of a butcher. While this may have been the family's trade, they could still have been, and do appear, quite prosperous and of standing. 
The Waldens certainly had close associations with St Bartholomew's Priory, Smithfield, where two branches of the family actually had homes within the close and to which the bishop left the manors of Tottenham, Middlesex, and Dedham, Essex, if his brother had no male heirs. Indeed, this brother, John Walden esquire (died 1417), married Idonea Lovetoft (died 1425) and had just two daughters. He may have been only a half-brother to the bishop, for Isabelle Walden, who was living with John in 1400, was said to be only stepmother to the bishop. The surname was common around London and Essex: Sir Alexander Walden, for example, had a brother John in 1394-5; it might well be possible to construct an extended pedigree from intensive research. There was a later suggestion that the bishop himself married in early life and even had a son, but there is no contemporary evidence for this, especially not in the bishop's will. Walden did not attend university, and, despite his evident administrative talent, critics such as Thomas Walsingham derided his lack of academic education. 
Walden had entered royal service as a clerk before 6 September 1371, when he was presented to the rectory of St Helier, Jersey. He may, therefore, already have been serving in the Channel Islands, although in 1376 he was appointed as attorney in England for Robert Ferrour, who was going to Ireland. On 26 August 1378 he was appointed as attorney in the Channel Islands for various persons staying in England, while on 8 December 1379 he had a writ of protection as he set out for Jersey with Sir Hugh Calveley, warden of the islands. On 15 March 1382 he had custody of the estates of Sir Reginald Carteret on Jersey during the minority of the heir. About 1383-4 he was formally entitled 'locum tenens seu deputatus' (deputy warden) of the Channel Islands. On 24 June 1386 he was ordered to secure the king's share from five recently captured Castilian ships, and on 5 May 1387 he paid over $100 for the 'St John', a similar capture. 
Given Walden's special favour from Richard II later, caution must be applied to the reasons for his considerable career enhancement which began in 1387. Hitherto lightly endowed, he became archdeacon of Winchester by royal grant on 22 July 1387, and dean of St Martin's-le-Grand on 21 January 1390, enjoying the income without doing the work in both cases. There followed five rectories and six prebends, most held concurrently, in the next seven years. However, he was, as Adam Usk was to grumble later, 'better versed in military matters and the ways of the world than in church affairs or learning' ('Chronicle of Adam of Usk', 81-3). From 20 March 1387 he was treasurer of Calais, presumably by appointment of the controversial commission appointed in 1386 to supervise the king's affairs; this position he still held on 21 October 1391, resigning before October 1393. He became, besides, captain of the march of Calais from 6 October 1387 to 10 October 1391. He had added the bailiwick of Guines by 1 February 1390. All in all, he had become a powerful administrator in a key sphere at a very sensitive time, and gained the confidence of both the king and his critics. Being necessarily away from the centre so much probably helped him to avoid faction. He is to be found included in negotiations with France and Flanders throughout. 
Walden acted as proctor for Bishop Thomas Brantingham of Exeter in parliament in January 1393, and for the chapter of Exeter in the concurrent convocation (so perhaps too in parliament). This shows he was in England at the time, and possibly even free of his various posts across the channel. He became king's secretary by 16 October 1393, but it has never been established that he held his Calais offices until that time or, indeed, when exactly he did join the king, who had not been allowed a secretary since 1387. Richard II's confidence in him cannot be doubted. Walden went with the king on his expedition to Ireland in 1394, returning with messages to the council in early January 1395. He was nominated by the king for the see of Exeter in that month, but this was in contradiction to a crown nomination already made of the keeper of the privy seal, Edmund Stafford, which the chapter and pope stood by. At least Walden secured Stafford's deanship of York in August (resigning his archdeaconry). The keeping of Portchester Castle, Hampshire, granted to him on 12 May 1395 and jointly with his brother John on 1 February 1397, was profitable as well as responsible work; it was forfeited in September 1399. 
On 25 September 1395 Walden became treasurer of the realm, retaining the position until 22 January 1398. In a mild flirtation with ecclesiastical matters, he had joint custody of Beaulieu Abbey from 16 March 1397 to settle disputes in the house, and on 12 April 1397 he, Archbishop Thomas Arundel, and bishops Stafford and Richard Medford (Salisbury) were appointed to hear a dispute between the bishop and cathedral of Norwich, a predictably tortuous business, given the personalities involved, which still engaged him on 1 March 1399. This business was the only sign that he was seen as appropriate to the weightiest matters of the church. 
On 25 September 1397 Richard II banished Archbishop Arundel from the realm as party to the supposed treason of his brother, the earl of Arundel, and others, both in 1386-8 and recently. By 8 November Boniface IX had agreed to translate Arundel to the schismatic see of St Andrews and provide Walden to Canterbury. On 21 January 1398 Walden received the temporalities, with effect from 25 September previous. He was consecrated on 3 February and enthroned on 24 March. There had been no immediate promotion to Canterbury since 1349. 'Modest, pious and courteous' though he was, 'practical and sensible in his conversation' ('Chronicle of Adam of Usk', 81), Walden's career had been extremely secular, with almost literally no experience of church matters, and not even a formal academic qualification amid an episcopal bench bristling with doctorates. 'He rose by leaps and bounds, far too hastily in fact' ('Chronicle of Adam of Usk', 83). It is very hard to see his appointment as a wise one by the king, especially in such controversial circumstances. There is no sign that Richard had tried but failed to entice any more senior figure to fill the office (but nor is there evidence, it should be said, that the pope had any qualms); presumably Richard was determined to stifle any objections from the English church to his treatment of Arundel or other actions in its direction, but he was being supremely optimistic if he thought Walden could enjoy credibility. The new archbishop was present at Coventry in September 1398, to witness the king's halting of the Mowbray-Bolingbroke duel, and was named as a supervisor of the wills of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster (3 February 1399), and of the king himself (16 April). 
There was no time to discover how Walden intended to approach his unexpected primacy, although despite the absence of a register it can be discovered from various sources that he spent all the time he could in his diocese. He was arrested in Westminster by the London authorities in August 1399, once they heard of Richard II's capture by Henry Bolingbroke. Arundel, who was with Bolingbroke, had resumed as archbishop 'de facto' as soon as they invaded England, and formally from 1 October. Walden's possessions were distrained in Arundel's favour forthwith, the return of stolen goods as it were. Walden himself was placed rather surprisingly in the friendly custody of William Colchester, abbot of Westminster, through whom he apparently became associated with the conspiracy leading to the 'Epiphany plot' in 1400. He was committed to the Tower of London on 10 January and put on trial shortly after the 28th; he pleaded privilege as a consecrated bishop, but this was denied and apparently he was found guilty on 4 February. However, he was then freed immediately and even acquitted by the crown, being granted full restitution of his property as early as 23 February. On 12 July 1400 the king even granted him two tuns of Gascony wine a year. He probably took up residence in London. 
It can only be supposed that, although he had made an improbable archbishop, Walden's previous administrative career had been an honest and respected one, that his elevation to Canterbury was seen as an involuntary submission to Richard's determined mood in 1397, that he personally had not been an intimate or political crony of the disgraced king, and that it was his misfortune, not fault, if even his gaoler fell under suspicion of treason. Certainly, Archbishop Arundel bore him no ill will, as indeed he may generally have been instrumental in the forgiving attitude of the dynasty to those several bishops embarrassingly close to the late king who would by recent practice have suffered seriously for it. 
Walden's last episode, however, is the most curious. He was apparently the king's choice for the see of Rochester in 1404, as too of Arundel once the archbishop's first-choice candidate had declined his election. However, Boniface IX translated Richard Young, replacing him at Bangor with an adherent of Owain Glyn Dwr. Unsurprisingly, the king blocked this. Then Bishop Robert Braybrooke of London died on 28 August 1404. Arundel certainly urged the king to promote Robert Hallum, his own principal officer, claiming later (not very convincingly) that he was unaware that Henry IV wanted to make a nomination. Of course he did, and Thomas Langley, his keeper of the privy seal, soon to become chancellor, was elected on 10 October 1404. Yet on 10 December Walden was provided by the new pope, Innocent VII. This infuriated the king, who came to listen to stories that Arundel and Hallum had swung behind Walden in curial machinations to frustrate Langley. Hallum himself had to go to Rome to have the pope declare their innocence. Things hung fire for six months. Then everything changed on 8 June 1405. The king executed Archbishop Richard Scrope of York as a traitor in arms. Arundel was appalled by the canonical consequences of the king's deed, which had been perpetrated in open contradiction of his own urgent advice. Henry was defiant, not only defending himself but wanting Langley to have York. However, he realized that all possible had to be done to minimize the pope's reaction to the execution. On 24 June Walden was allowed to have London. He made his profession to the archbishop five days later, and was enthroned the next day. 
Thereafter, Walden took with interest to this, his native diocese. Indeed, he even had the energy to be at Worcester with the king in October, probably helping to receive (or perhaps deliver) clerical and lay subsidies. It was sudden sickness, not old age, that obliged him to make his will at Much Hadham, Hertfordshire, on 31 December. He died on either 9 or, more probably, 11 January 1406. John Prophete described in a private letter his lying-out in St Bartholomew's and the procession to All Saints' Chapel in St Paul's Cathedral for the interment on 14 January and, having himself uncovered the bishop's face, how much better he looked than in life. He added that Walden, whom he had known well for over twenty years, had never bemoaned his bad times or gorged in his good ones. Arundel added his own tribute to Walden's honesty of life and his thought for his priestly duties. Even Usk was to agree that he had been a pleasant and popular participant in public life. This perhaps is the key to what might otherwise, from just official records, seem a characterless and partisan career. 


@@@@@


doc= 28446


Waldhere (fl. 694-704/5), bishop of the East Saxons, often (later) called bishop of London, must have been appointed between 688, when Bishop Earconwald, named as an adviser in the law code of Ine (688-726), was still in office, and 694. In that year, Bede relates, Waldhere gave the religious habit to Sebbi, king of the East Saxons, who brought to him a large sum of money for the poor and, later in the same year, asked that Waldhere be one of only three people present at his deathbed. 
Surviving extracts from later copies of apparently genuine charters show that grantors to Waldhere included AEthelred, king of the Mercians (675-704) and Offa, who was among the kings of the East Saxons at some time after Sebbi. Some doubt hangs over another of these grants, authorized by Cenred, king of the Mercians, and dated 701 -- Cenred did not succeed until 704. The only grant to Waldhere for which there is a full text, made in 704 by Swaefred, king of the East Saxons, and one Paeogthath, is known only from a document whose artificial hand, of uncertain date, raises doubts about its authenticity. 
In 704 or 705 Waldhere wrote a letter to Berhtwald, archbishop of Canterbury, which is both the earliest letter on parchment to survive in the original anywhere in Europe and the earliest closely datable example of the script known as insular minuscule. The tie which originally closed it, indicated by a gap between two words in the address on the dorse, was no guarantee that no one would open it. When Waldhere explained to Berhtwald that he was communicating in writing to preserve confidentiality, he must have expected that his messenger would be unable to read the letter -- an indication, perhaps, of the exclusivity of Latin at the time. The same desire for secrecy meant that he could not have employed a scribe: the letter is therefore in Waldhere's own hand. The bishop could write well, the high standard of his Latin probably owing much to the influence of continental figures like Berhtwald's predecessor, Archbishop Theodore (died 690). 
The letter sought Berhtwald's advice on a critical problem for Waldhere: he had been called upon to help resolve apparently long-running disputes between the king of the West Saxons (Ine, not named here) and the rulers of the East Saxons (also not named, probably Sigeheard and Swaefred); but a synod in the previous year had forbidden the bishops to communicate with the West Saxons while the latter failed to carry out Berhtwald's decree on the consecration of bishops. While the letter implies that the West Saxons had been the aggressors, it is significant that both parties were trying to settle their disputes by negotiation. Although the precise points at issue between the East and West Saxon rulers are obscure, this evidence for negotiation between them corrects the emphasis of other sources which devote themselves entirely to the East Saxons' relations with the powerful Mercian kings. The letter reveals the high status of bishops in secular politics and their role as acceptable mediators: both parties had agreed to assemble at a meeting at Brentford on 15 October and had promised to observe the conditions of the pact agreed between Waldhere and the bishop of the West Saxons. 
But most striking is Waldhere's deference to his metropolitan, Berhtwald, whom he addressed as 'ruling the government of all Britain' ('totius Brettaniae gubernacula regenti'; Birch, no. 115, p. 169; 'English Historical Documents', 1.729), a valuable confirmation of the pre-eminence which the see at Canterbury had attained by this time. Waldhere had not attended a meeting called by Cenred of Mercia about the reconciliation of a certain AElfthryth because he had not known the archbishop's views on the matter. He told Berhtwald that he wished to 'remain ever of the same opinion as you'. Waldhere was clearly anxious to abide by the decree of the archbishop on the consecration of West Saxon bishops -- probably a reference to the division of the West Saxon diocese. Since the letter envisages only one West Saxon bishop, the enactment of this division in 705 following the death of Bishop Haedde provides its 'terminus ante quem'. It is also the last reference to Waldhere. The probably genuine witness list to an otherwise spurious charter indicates that his successor, Ingwald, was in place by 716. 


@@@@@


doc= 28447


Eaton, Charlotte Anne (1788-1859), writer, was born on 28 September 1788, the second of the three daughters of George Waldie of Hendersyde Park, Roxburghshire, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Ormston, eldest daughter of Jonathan Ormston of Newcastle upon Tyne. Charlotte also had two brothers, and her elder sister Maria Jane married Richard John Griffith (1784-1878), the distinguished geologist and valuator. Little is known about Charlotte's education but at a young age she began to write a novel in the Gothic style, 'At Home and Abroad', which she abandoned in 1814 because of similarities to Maria Edgeworth's 'Patronage'. She published a letter in the 'Monthly Magazine' (2, 1814) addressing the points of resemblance. 
In June 1815 Charlotte visited Brussels, the hastily established headquarters of Wellington's army, via Bruges and Ghent with her brother John and sister Jane ['see below']. They were evacuated to Antwerp because of the rapid French advance, and visited the battlefield at Waterloo before returning to England after six weeks away. Charlotte wrote an account of the battle published first as 'Circumstantial detail' by 'a Near Observer' in 'The Battle of Waterloo' (1815) which was accompanied by panoramic sketches by Jane Waldie. In 1816 Charlotte and Jane met John in France and continued with him to Italy. In 1817, while she was still in Italy, Charlotte's family published a more extended account based on her own experiences in 'Narrative of a Residence in Belgium, During the Campaign of 1815, and of a Visit to the Field of Waterloo. By an Englishwoman'. It was noted for its liveliness and its unflinching account of the horror of the battle, vestiges of which were still very much in evidence when Charlotte visited Waterloo: 'the effluvia which arose from [the grave pits], even beneath the open canopy of heaven, was horrible; and the pure west wind of summer, as it passed us, seemed pestiferous, so deadly was the smell that in many places pervaded the field. (pp. 270-71)' It was also a staunchly patriotic piece of writing, which revelled in 'English greatness and glory', and was considered one of the best contemporary accounts by a non-military writer. 
Charlotte Waldie was in Italy until 1818, and in 1820 she anonymously published the very popular and acclaimed 'Rome in the Nineteenth Century', which remained in her lifetime the definitive guide to the city. On 22 August 1822 she married Stephen Eaton, a banker, of Ketton Hall, Stamford, Rutland. They had two sons and two daughters. Charlotte Eaton anonymously published 'Continental Adventures' in 1826, which integrated factual travel writing with 'a fictitious story and imaginary characters', and in 1831 revised and published her early 'At Home and Abroad'. After her husband's death on 25 September 1834 Eaton revised 'Narrative of a Residence in Belgium' as 'The Days of Battle, or, Quatre Bras and Waterloo; by an Englishwoman Resident in Brussels in June 1815' (1853) prior to her own death from breast cancer at 17 Hanover Square, London, on 28 April 1859. A further edition of the 'Narrative' was issued in 1888 as 'Waterloo Days'. 




@@@@@


doc= 28448


Jane Watts (1793-1826), artist and author, showed a taste for painting at an early age, and studied under Alexander Nasmyth. She painted many pictures, mostly landscapes inspired by the scenery surrounding her home in Roxburghshire. The result of her travels with her sister Charlotte was 'Sketches Descriptive of Italy in 1816-17; with a Brief Account of Travels in Various Parts of France and Switzerland' (1820). In 1819 she exhibited 'The Temple at Paestum' at Somerset House. On 20 October 1820 she married Captain (later Rear-Admiral) George Augustus Watts of Langton Grange, Staindrop, Darlington. After losing her only child, she died at Langton Grange on 6 July 1826. 


@@@@@


doc= 28449


Waldron, Francis Godolphin (bap. 1743, d. 1818), actor and playwright, was probably the Francis Godolphin Wallderan baptized on 30 November 1743 at St Peter's, Liverpool, the son of George Wallderan. Nothing further is known about his family circumstances. An early nineteenth-century source suggests that he was apprenticed to the woodcarver Hayworth (the uncle of Samuel De Wilde, who later painted his portrait in character). He acted at Edinburgh in 1766 and 1769, when he also appeared in Richmond, Surrey. Garrick then engaged him for the 1769-70 season at Drury Lane, where he stayed as a player of secondary roles, often in comedy, until 1796. On his London debut, as Scrub in George Farquhar's 'The Beaux' Stratagem', the Drury Lane prompter William Hopkins commented on his 'mean figure' and 'a small impediment in his speaking' (Highfill, Burnim & Langhans, 'BDA', 15.202). Waldron's lisp seems to have limited his professional success, and his roles in some plays that are still revived are a fair indication of his status: Justice Shallow in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor', Corin in 'As You Like It', the Second Grave Digger in 'Hamlet', and The Beggar in 'The Beggar's Opera'. The 'Biographia dramatica' described him as 'an actor of very useful, rather than splendid talents'. 
Little is known about Waldron's actress wife, even her name. They were presumably married by 1770, when their son Francis Waldron was baptized on 18 September; a second son, George, was baptized on 18 August 1771 and became an actor. After 1788 Waldron was estranged from his wife and set up house with Sarah Harlowe (1765-1852), a much younger actress, with whom he had four children. 
Despite his limitations as an actor, Waldron was usually well employed during the summer months: he returned to Edinburgh and Richmond in 1770, and was at Birmingham in 1774 (he was there again in 1797, 1799, and 1800). At Drury Lane in 1774 he was one of the committee that established the Drury Lane Theatrical Fund, a pension scheme for old and ill theatrical personnel. Waldron first tried to acquire the lease of the Richmond theatre in 1776 but failed to raise the total required, despite appealing to Garrick for help. He lost the considerable sum of $722 that he had paid as a deposit, but was acting at Richmond again in 1777 and 1778, when he also appeared in Brighton (as he did in 1791). He did acquire the Richmond lease in 1778 and managed seasons there until 1783 (also taking the company to Windsor); he appeared at Richmond as late as 1790. Waldron also ran a company at Hammersmith in 1785 and 1786, when he played more substantial characters, wisely eschewing heroic roles for eccentric parts such as Old Hardcastle in Oliver Goldsmith's 'She Stoops to Conquer', Shylock, and Polonius. 
In 1793 Waldron joined the Haymarket summer company, working mainly as prompter but playing a number of small parts such as Erpingham in 'Henry V', Tubal in 'The Merchant of Venice', and Lucianus in 'Hamlet'. He stayed at the Haymarket until 1805 but also worked at Drury Lane again from 1800. In 1806 he claimed a pension from the Drury Lane fund that he had helped to establish, although he made a few appearances at the Haymarket and in Brighton in 1807. 
Waldron developed a second, albeit undistinguished, string to his bow as a playwright from relatively early on in his career. His first comedy, 'The Maid of Kent' (played for his benefit at Drury Lane, 17 May 1773; revised as ''Tis a Wise Child Knows its Father', 1795), was based on a story in number 123 of 'The Spectator' and was described by the 'Covent Garden Magazine' (May 1773) as 'the hasty production of an unskilful writer'. None of Waldron's theatrical works was particularly successful: 'The Prodigal' (adapted from Aaron Hill's 'The Fatal Extravagance') achieved twelve performances at the Haymarket in 1793-4, but 'Heigho for a Husband' (also known as 'The Imitation, or, The Female Fortune Hunters' and, originally, as 'The Belle's Stratagem') was his most performed play. A lively romantic comedy inspired by Farquhar's 'The Beaux' Stratagem', but substituting two young women for Aimwell and Archer, its general approach is faintly redolent of 'She Stoops to Conquer', another play that acknowledges its intertextual debt to Farquhar. Stock characters and stock situations are handled deftly and the dialogue is well crafted. 
Waldron's strong literary and antiquarian interests were manifested in his completion of Ben Jonson's 'The Sad Shepherd' (1783) and in editions of John Downes's 'Roscius Anglicanus' (1789), Chaucer's 'Troilus and Criseyde' (1796), and Thomas Lodge's 'Rosalynde' (1802). His 'The Virgin Queen', an unperformed sequel to 'The Tempest', published in 1797, is generally regarded as one of the worst pieces of drama inspired by Shakespeare. However, according to the 'Authentic Memoirs of the Green Room' it was intended as a contribution to the Ireland Shakespeare forgeries controversy, aiming 'to expose the vile and well-known forgeries practised on the public by the pretended discovery of certain manuscript plays' by imitating Shakespeare's style and thereby demonstrating that 'the forgeries in question are not entitled, even on the plea of 'ingenuity', to the praise so inconsiderately bestowed upon them' (Roach). Waldron was also co-author, with Charles Dibdin, of 'A Compendious History of the English Stage' (1802). 
Waldron died in March 1818 at his home in Orange Street, Red Lion Square, London. He left all his property (in a will made in 1805) to Sarah Harlowe and their four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 28450


Waldron, George (1689/90-1726x31), antiquary, was the son of Francis Waldron of London who was descended from an ancient Essex family. He attended Felsted School and on 7 May 1706 he matriculated from Queen's College, Oxford, when he was stated to be 'aged 16'. On 28 November 1711, at St James's Church, Clerkenwell, he married Theodosia Clift (died in or after 1731). Most of the information about his later life comes from snippets in his published works. 
Waldron lived in adult life on the Isle of Man, where he acted as commissioner from the British government to watch and report on shipping in an attempt to stop Dutch, Irish, and East India vessels unloading their cargoes on Man, later to be smuggled into Britain, thus escaping British excise duties. In 1726 Waldron wrote and published his 'Description of the Isle of Man', which is of particular note for its retelling of the legends and folklore of the island. Waldron was the earliest author to record the traditional tales of the fishermen and country people of Man, though he rendered them in standard English without the characteristic expressions used by Manx people. He had lived on the island for nearly twenty years and evidently took pleasure in Manx culture, though he says little about the island's topography or geography. Waldron died in England in or before 1731, just after he had obtained a new deputation from the British government and just before his 'Compleat Works in Verse and Prose' (1731) was printed for the 'widow and orphans'. The dedication to William O'Brien, earl of Inchiquin, is signed by Theodosia Waldron. The first part contains 'Miscellany poems' and the second consists of 'Tracts, political and historical' and includes Waldron's main work, 'A Description of the Isle of Man', detailed above. His 'Description' was reprinted in 1744, with a new edition in 1780, and in a scholarly edition with an introductory notice and notes by the Manx antiquary William Harrison (1802-1884) for the publications of the Manx Society (vol. 11, 1865). Sir Walter Scott made extensive use of Waldron's 'Description' while writing 'Peveril of the Peak', and transferred long extracts from it to his notes to that romance. He described Waldron's work as 'a huge mine, in which I have attempted to discover some specimens of spar, if I cannot find treasure' ('DNB'). Waldron also published various speeches and poems declaring his loyalty to the Hanoverian succession. 


@@@@@


doc= 28451


Wale, Sir Charles (1763-1845), army officer, was born on 5 August 1763, the second son of Thomas Wale (1701-1796) of Shelford, Cambridgeshire, and his wife, Louisa Rudolphina, daughter of Nicholas Rahten of Luneburg, Hanover. The family claimed descent from Walter de Wahul, recorded in 'Domesday Book' as a landholder in Northamptonshire. Several members of the family acted as sheriff of that county. A Sir Thomas Wale was knight of the Garter in Edward III's reign, and another Thomas was killed at Agincourt in 1415. A branch of the family migrated to Ireland late in the twelfth century and founded Walestown. The branch to which Sir Charles belonged acquired Shelford in the seventeenth century. His father, Thomas Wale, an eighteenth-century squire, kept a notebook, extracts from which were printed by the Revd H. J. Wale in 'My Grandfather's Pocket-Book' (1883). 
Charles Wale was sent up to London in 1778 to learn arithmetic and fencing. In September 1779, much against his father's wish, he accepted a commission in a regiment which was then being raised by Colonel Keating, the 88th foot. He went out with it to Jamaica, but on 13 April 1780 his father purchased him ('cost $150') a lieutenancy in the 97th which went to Gibraltar with Admiral Darby's fleet in April 1781, and served throughout the latter part of the defence. 
Wale obtained a company in the 12th foot on 25 June 1783, but was placed on half pay soon afterwards. On 23 May 1786 he exchanged to the 46th, and served with it in Ireland and the Channel Islands. He married in 1793 and retired on half pay, becoming adjutant of the Cambridgeshire militia on 4 December. On 1 March 1794 he was made major, and on 1 January 1798 lieutenant-colonel in the army. He returned to full pay on 6 August 1799 as captain in the 20th, and served with it in the expedition to The Helder in the autumn. On 16 January 1800 he was promoted major in the 85th, and on 9 October to lieutenant-colonel of the 67th. He joined it in Jamaica, and brought it home at the end of 1801. In 1805 he went out with it to Bengal, but returned to England and exchanged to the 66th on 16 June 1808. 
Wale did not serve long with the 66th. He had been made colonel on 25 April 1808, and in March 1809 he was appointed a brigadier-general in the West Indies. He commanded the reserve in the expedition under Sir George Beckwith, which took Guadeloupe in February 1810, and was wounded in the action of 3 February. On 4 June 1811 he was promoted major-general, and on 21 February 1812 was appointed governor of Martinique, and remained so until it was restored to France in 1815. He was made KCB on 2 January 1815, promoted lieutenant-general on 19 July 1821, and general on 28 June 1838, and made colonel of the 33rd foot on 25 February 1831. In politics he was 'of the high Conservative party' ('GM'). 
Wale was three times married: first, in 1793, to Louisa, daughter of the Revd Castel Sherrard of Huntington; second, in 1803, to Isabella, daughter of the Revd Thomas Johnson of Stockton-on-Tees; third, in 1815, to Henrietta, daughter of the Revd Thomas Brent of Croscombe, Somerset. Wale died at Shelford, Cambridgeshire, on 19 March 1845. He was survived by his third wife, seven sons, and five daughters. 
Wale's eighth son, 


@@@@@


doc= 28452


Frederick Wale (1822-1858), army officer in the East India Company, entered the East India Company's service in 1840, and was posted to the 48th Bengal native infantry on 9 January 1841; lieutenant 23 February 1842, captain 1 October 1852. He was appointed brigade major at Peshawar on 19 August 1853, and was serving there when his regiment mutinied at Lucknow in May 1857. He took command of the 1st Sikh irregular cavalry (known as 'Wale's horse'), and served in the relief of Lucknow, and in the siege and capture of it in March 1858. His unit formed part of the 2nd cavalry brigade, and the brigadier reported that Wale 'showed on all occasions great zeal in command of his regiment, and on 21 March led it most successfully in pursuit of the enemy till he was shot' ('London Gazette', 21 May 1858). Lord Roberts wrote that he was 'a gallant officer' (Roberts, 227). He had married Adelaide, daughter of Edward Prest of York; they had two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 28453


Wale, Samuel (1721?-1786), painter and book illustrator, is said to have been born in Yarmouth, Norfolk, possibly on 25 April 1721, the son of Samuel and Margaret Wale. His background is obscure, however, and certain sources give his place of birth as London. Apart from producing a handful of oil paintings, he is chiefly remembered as one of the most prolific book illustrators of the eighteenth century and as a founder Royal Academician. He was apparently apprenticed to a goldsmith in 1735 and is said to have gone on to study drawing at the St Martin's Lane Academy. He reportedly painted decorative designs for ceilings (although none survive) and tradesmen's signs, and in the 1740s he presented three views of London hospitals to the Foundling Hospital, where they still remain. Possibly also in the 1740s he painted a historical scene in oils of the Norfolk insurrectionary Robert Kett: entitled 'Under the Oak of Reformation at his Camp on Mousehold Heath, Norwich', it is now in the Norwich Castle Museum. About 1751 Wale designed a series of prints of Vauxhall Pleasure Gardens, including a rococo 'General View of Vauxhall Gardens', engraved by Johann Sebastian Muller (copy in the Victoria and Albert Museum). 
Wale's chief occupation throughout his career was book illustration, and he produced designs for more than 100 publications. Unlike many of his contemporaries, he chose not to engrave his own designs, preferring to pass them on to engravers such as Charles Grignion. Although this may have reduced Wale's profit (designers were given one-off payments while engravers were paid for the time spent on the work), it had the effect of distancing him from the mechanical part of the trade and increasing his output. Despite often producing schematic designs (on at least one occasion, too -- when illustrating Thomas Percy's 'Reliques of Ancient English Poetry' (3 vols., 1765) -- he worked to the author's direction), Wale's range was broad. His 'oeuvre' included dense allegorical work for the 'Oxford Almanack' in 1753 and 1755 (original drawings are in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford); extensive religious illustrations (for instance, for 'The Liturgy of the Church of England', 1755, and J. Fleetwood's 'Christian's Dictionary', 1775); and graphic illustrations of violent crime for John Cooke's 'The Tyburn Chronicle' (4 vols., 1768) and 'The Newgate Calendar' (5 vols., 1773). Many of Wale's original drawings, usually in pen, ink, and wash, for the latter two publications survive in the British Museum, the Victoria and Albert Museum, Nottingham Castle Museum, and the Tate's Oppe Collection. 
Wale was an active participant in every major effort of the mid-eighteenth century to establish an academy of the arts in London. In 1749 he assisted the architect John Gwynn with his 'Proposals for Erecting a Public Academy', and in 1755 both men were involved in an early abortive effort to found such an institution. In 1759 Wale was on the committee of artists chaired by Francis Hayman which successfully made an approach to the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce to request the use of their rooms to mount the first major exhibition of contemporary art in Britain. When the artists split after the first exhibition in 1760, Wale exhibited with the breakaway Society of Artists of Great Britain, and produced a vignette of 'The Genius of Painting, Sculpture, and Architecture Relieving the Distressed' for the catalogue of their 1761 exhibition. Other than in 1765, Wale exhibited at the Society of Artists every year until 1768, when he was among the twenty-two artists who petitioned the king to found a royal academy. After the foundation of the academy he was appointed as the first professor of perspective, on 17 December 1768. According to Edward Edwards, Wale possessed 'a good deal of science in the accessary parts of his art' (Edwards, 116), and he had demonstrated his skill in architectural drawing in the designs which he published with Gwynn for the decoration of St Paul's Cathedral in 1752: these were engraved by Edward Rooker, and a 1755 print from the series is held in the Victoria and Albert Museum. As a professor, Wale delivered six lectures a year for an annual salary of $30, and he remained in the post for the rest of his life, despite reportedly being a very timid and diffident lecturer. 
At both the Society of Artists and the Royal Academy, Wale showed 'stained drawings' (pen and wash), including original designs for book illustration, and designs for 'an altar-piece for a gothic chapel'. Over half of his exhibited works were scenes of British history, including 'The Widow of Sir John Grey Petitioning Edward IV' (exh. Society of Artists, 1760) and 'King Alfred Making a Code of Laws' (exh. RA, 1771); both were engraved by Grignion for Thomas Mortimer's 'New History of England' (1764-6). Wale was probably the most prolific illustrator of native historical scenes in the eighteenth century: although many designs were repeated in several historical texts, he produced more than 150 different designs for works such as Rapin-Thoyras's 'History of England' (vol. 5, 1744-7), Mortimer's 'New History of England', and W. H. Mountague's 'New and Universal History of England' (2 vols., 'c'.1771). The artist was described as 'the celebrated Wale' on title-pages, and his narrative scenes of dramatic and sometimes obscure episodes in British history enlivened what were sometimes mediocre and derivative texts. His work appears to have influenced senior academicians such as Benjamin West, whose painting of 'Oliver Cromwell Dissolving the Long Parliament' (exh. RA, 1783; Montclair Art Museum, New Jersey) is compositionally very similar to Wale's illustration of the same scene for Mortimer's 'New History of England'. 
In 1778 Wale suffered a paralytic stroke and became the first recipient of the Royal Academy's benefit fund for artist members incapable of work. He continued to serve as professor of perspective, but because of ill health was allowed to deliver his lectures from home. In 1782 he was also given the post of librarian of the Royal Academy, which he held until his death, on 6 February 1786 at his home, Little Court, Castle Street, Leicester Fields. Wale was apparently unmarried and childless and left his copperplates, prints, and belongings to his friend John Gwynn, with whom he shared his house, and his nurse, Mrs Mary Gurpin. He was buried in St Martin-in-the-Fields. 


@@@@@


doc= 28454


Walden, Sir Humphrey (d. 1330/31), administrator, probably took his name from Walden in Essex. Nothing is known of his parentage. Recorded as a king's clerk on 8 February 1290, he had earlier entered the service of Eleanor of Castile, perhaps in the late 1270s, acting as her bailiff in several counties, and being entrusted with the administration of her lands after her death. He served Edward I, too, primarily as an administrator of estates; in 1295, for instance, he was the keeper of Stogursey Castle and Cannington hundred in Somerset, from 30 January 1302 to 4 February 1303 he had custody of the see of Worcester, while between 8 June 1306 and 26 March 1307 he was custodian of the archbishopric of Canterbury. Following Edward I's second marriage, to Margaret of France, in 1299, he served the latter as he had served Queen Eleanor, being recorded early in 1305 as keeper of the queen's gold and receiver of the farms and issues of her lands. In 1304 he was an assessor of tallage in Cambridgeshire, Huntingdonshire, Hertfordshire, and Essex. Two years later, on 19 October 1306, he was appointed a baron of the exchequer, taking the oath on 7 November following. Walden certainly acted as a baron in the remaining months of Edward I's reign, but equally certainly left that office early in the next reign. There is no evidence that he was disgraced, and his leaving the exchequer should probably be linked to the protection he received on 1 December 1307 to cover an anticipated journey to France with Queen Margaret. 
Walden remained in Queen Margaret's service at least until 1314, and he also became the earl of Hereford's steward. Although he was sometimes referred to as a clerk, there is no evidence that he took even minor orders. By 25 March 1310 he had been knighted, and he was appointed to a number of oyer and terminer commissions, most often in Essex. It was probably Margaret's death, on 18 February 1318, that brought Walden back into central government. A household knight in the year 1319-20, his experience as an estate administrator made him increasingly useful to Edward II. On 31 March 1320 he was summoned to attend the king, 'to give his counsel upon certain of the king's affairs, whereof the king believes he can be informed by him' ('CClR, 1318-1323', 226); less than a month later, on 26 April, Walden was appointed steward of a number of royal estates, for whose revenues he was to account directly to the king's chamber. Four years later, on 8 March 1324, the number of estates was significantly increased, and Walden acquired a colleague. In the meantime he was also involved in the administration of lands forfeited by opponents of Edward II's regime, and was close enough to the king to have heard allegations against supporters of Roger Mortimer in Edward's own presence in 1323. His links with an unpopular government may have had repercussions for Walden, who in July 1322 complained of having been assaulted in both Hertfordshire and Surrey. But they brought him further office, for on 18 June 1324 he was again appointed a baron of the exchequer. His appointment formed part of a scheme for reform of the exchequer involving its division into two departments, northern and southern -- Walden worked in the latter. He was active in the exchequer until at least 6 July 1326, but although he was among the justices and exchequer barons summoned to the parliament of January 1327 at which Edward II was deposed, he did not act as a baron thereafter. He did not otherwise suffer from the change of regime, and on 28 March 1330 was appointed a commissioner of oyer and terminer in Essex. He had died by 8 April 1331. Many of his lands, which were concentrated in Essex, were held for life only. There is no evidence that he married; his heir was his nephew, Andrew Walden. 


@@@@@


doc= 28455


Walerand, Robert (d. 1273), administrator, was the eldest son of William Walerand of Whaddon in Wiltshire, and Isabel, daughter of Roger de Berkeley of Dursley, Gloucestershire, by her second marriage. He had two brothers: William, who married the elder daughter and coheir of Hugh of Kilpeck, Herefordshire, and John, a clerk, who joined Robert in the king's service in the 1250s. 'Maud, sister of Robert Walerand' entered Romsey Abbey near Robert's bailiwick in the New Forest in 1253, and may be the Alice Walerand who became abbess in 1268. Another Alice, Robert's half-sister by his mother's first marriage, was the mother of Alan de Plugenet. 
By 1242-3 Robert Walerand had already succeeded to his patrimony at Whaddon, part of the Domesday barony of Walerand the Huntsman, whose descendants had often held the New Forest and the Forest of Clarendon in fee. The family's tradition of forest service and connections with the southern marches of Wales set the pattern of Walerand's early years as a royal servant. In 1243 he appears as the knight of the marcher baron, William (II) de Cantilupe, steward of the king's household. In 1244 he was granted 20 marks annually at the exchequer for his maintenance, and commissioned to take four crossbows from the Tower of London to the castle of Cardigan. On the death of Anselm, the last Marshal earl of Pembroke, in 1245 he was made custodian of his lands in west Wales, including the castle of Pembroke. From 1246 to 1250 he was also keeper of Gloucester Castle and sheriff of Gloucestershire; in 1247 he was made custodian of the bishopric of St David's; from August 1248 to February 1254 he held the castles of Carmarthen and Cardigan, for the strengthening of which he was commissioned to extract regular payments from the abbot of Strata Florida; and from August 1250 to May 1251 he was warden of Lundy island. He was commissioned to settle disputes between marcher lords, to stop English and Welsh landlords from harbouring malefactors from the other nation, and to hear forest pleas, special assizes, and pleas of trespass in western counties. In the 1250s his forest responsibilities widened: by June 1253 he held the stewardship of the New Forest in fee; in November 1255 he was made keeper of the Forest of Dean and constable of St Briavels Castle for five years; and in September 1256 he was appointed steward of the king's forests south of Trent and to exercise all the duties of justice of the forest, with a stipend of 100 marks a year. 
Walerand was unique in his many-sided service to the king. By 1256 he had also been for five years a steward of the household. In 1253 and 1254 he was with Henry III in Gascony, where he was surety for the king's agreements with Gascon lords and merchants, and witnessed many royal grants immediately after the king's family and any earls present. Then in March 1254 Henry accepted the papal offer of the crown of Sicily for his second son, Edmund, and began to use Walerand on the business that helped to precipitate the barons' war. The chroniclers describe how the steward and Peter d'Aigueblanche, bishop of Hereford (died 1268), tricked English bishops and abbots into adding their seals to blank charters on which large sums of money could be entered at Rome, in order to persuade the pope that Henry was in a position to finance his Sicilian ambitions. Matthew Paris represents Richard, earl of Cornwall, as bitterly rebuking the bishop and the steward in a parliament at Westminster in October 1255 for 'so wickedly persuading the king to subvert the kingdom' (Paris, 'Chron'., 5.521). In the following year Walerand was given custody of all vacant bishoprics and abbacies so as to raise money for the 'Sicilian business'. Between August 1255 and the spring of 1257 he was also engaged on missions with Richard de Clare, earl of Gloucester, Simon de Montfort, earl of Leicester, John Mansel, and others to Scotland, to the princes of Germany, and to the king of France. He was one of the king's four chief ministers who in June 1257 entered into a bond for the repayment of the king's debts to Montfort, the extraordinary terms of which accepted that they should be excommunicated in case of default. In the same month he was ordered to levy 1000 marks from the vacant bishopric of Ely to repay the king's debt to Prince Edward. The money was actually received from the late bishop's executors by John Walerand, 'the king's clerk', and sent to Robert, who was in Wales with Edward on campaign. It was in this year that Robert's brother William obtained half of Hugh of Kilpeck's barony, including the manor and castle of Kilpeck and the keepership of the Hay of Hereford. By December 1259 these had passed to Robert, who may have purchased them in 1257 when he married Matilda, daughter and heir of Ralph Russell of Derham, Gloucestershire. 
It was Robert Walerand who 'swore on the king's soul' in May 1258 that the state of the realm should be reformed as the magnates demanded (Sanders, 74). At the beginning of the reform he was given custody of Salisbury Castle, commissioned to seize for the king's use the treasure of Henry's expelled half-brothers, and attended Hugh Bigod, the baronial justiciar, on eyre at Winchester. In July 1259 he was probably appointed to fill a vacancy in the council of fifteen, which committed Edward's castle of Bristol to him. But on his departure to France with the king in November 1259, he was replaced as steward of the forests south of Trent by a baronial partisan, and Edward took Bristol away from him. Walerand was busy at this time in negotiations for a settlement of Montfort's grievances over the dower of his wife, Eleanor, Henry's sister, which were holding up the conclusion of a treaty between the kings of England and France, and for the maintenance by Louis IX of 300 knights in Henry's service. In April 1260 he was sent back to England with the chancellor, Henry Wingham, and John Balliol (died 1269) to declare Henry's 'state and intentions' and prepare for his return, which heralded a worsening of relations with the baronial leaders. The mayor and citizens of London were instructed to admit to the city only such as Walerand and Philip Basset should tell them, and Walerand became, with Mansel and Peter of Savoy, one of Henry's chief advisers at the Tower of London as the king made his move to shake off the regime of the provisions. This involved for Walerand appointment in July 1261 to the strategic sheriffdom of Kent and custody of the castles of Rochester and Canterbury; to membership with Basset, the justiciar, and Walter of Merton, the chancellor, of a commission with the task of choosing new sheriffs generally; and to the wardenship of the Cinque Ports and the custody of the castles of Dover, Ludgershall, and Marlborough. In July 1262 Walerand again accompanied Henry to France. For a time in September he had custody of the king's seal when many of Henry's entourage at St Germain were laid low by plague. But on 10 October the justiciar and his 'bachelors' in England were instructed to give unhesitating faith to Robert Walerand over the message he was bringing from the king, which was perhaps in connection with the threat of Llywelyn ap Gruffudd to break the truce that Walerand had sworn to on the king's behalf in 1260. 
In the event it was Simon de Montfort who brought general war in June 1263, his partisans first seizing Aigueblanche in his own cathedral, then Walerand's castle of Kilpeck and the towns of the marches from Bristol to Shrewsbury. In the following month, as Montfort closed on London, Walerand appeared in the company of Edward when the prince sought to gain control of the king's treasure at the Temple. His old association with Aigueblanche in extorting money for the 'Sicilian business' still figured prominently in the barons' case as it was presented to King Louis in January 1264. But he recovered his lands on renewing his oath to the provisions, and was able to re-establish himself in the marches and lead Edward's castellans to redeem the situation when King Henry and his son were captured at the battle of Lewes on 14 May. After the defeat and death of Montfort at Evesham in August 1265 Walerand allegedly proposed the disinheritance of those who had fought against the king, and imposed a huge fine on the city of London. But he was one of the authors of the dictum of Kenilworth which provided in October 1266 'for the state of the realm especially in the matter of the disinherited' (Sanders, 319). In his remaining years he continued to attest royal writs, serve on special assizes, and negotiate truces with the Welsh. In 1269 he was again in Paris with Edward to make arrangements with King Louis for a crusade, and he was one of the five, headed by Richard of Cornwall, appointed in 1270 to look after the prince's interests while he was away. In this role he was soon replaced by Robert Burnell, the future chancellor of King Edward, and he died in late January or early February 1273, before the new king's return. 
Royal service brought Walerand extensive properties, some in Ireland, others (notably Hugh de Neville's borough of Stogursey in Somerset) from the disinherited. But he had no children, and his heir was his brother William's seventeen-year-old son, Robert, an idiot for whom Walerand was reputed to have secured the royal ordinance that removed the overlord's rights of wardship in such a case and transferred the safeguarding of the idiot's interests to the king. In fact, long before his death, Walerand had enfeoffed his half-sister's son, the staunch royalist Alan (II) de Plugenet, with the castle and manor of Kilpeck and the family lands in Wiltshire, taking them back as life tenancies. 


@@@@@


doc= 28456


Wales, James (1747-1795), portrait painter and archaeological draughtsman, was born in Peterhead, Aberdeenshire. He moved early in his life to Aberdeen, where he was educated at Marischal College. It was there that he also began painting modest portraits on tin plates. Apparently self-taught, Wales benefited from the early patronage of Francis Peacock in Aberdeen. By 1783 Wales had moved to London, where he exhibited two portraits at the Society of Artists, with the catalogue recording his address as Little St Martin's Lane. Wales exhibited one more portrait at the Society of Artists in 1791 and three paintings at the Royal Academy between 1788 and 1789, but stiff competition encouraged him to seek employment in India. He applied to the East India Company for permission to work in Bombay in 1790, was granted permission on 5 January 1791, and arrived in Bombay on 15 July of the same year. Wales left his wife, Margaret (died 1795), and their daughters in Hampstead, Middlesex, although he soon encouraged them to go to Bombay after learning of his six-year-old daughter's death in 1792. Wales's family arrived in India some time in 1793, but Margaret died in childbirth in May 1795, leaving the artist to provide for five daughters. 
While Bombay was a smaller and less affluent market than Calcutta or Madras for a British painter, Wales was fortunate enough to meet Sir Charles Warre Malet, the resident at the Maratha court in Poona from 1786 to 1797. In addition to painting portraits for Malet, Wales painted a number of remarkable portraits of the Maratha chiefs and their ministers. The most impressive surviving example is a group portrait, 'Madhu Rao Narayan, the Maratha peshwa with Nana Fadnavis and Attendants' (1792; Royal Asiatic Society, London). Unfortunately, the subsequent Anglo-Maratha wars of 1803-5 and 1817-18 encouraged the destruction of many of Wales's Indian portraits. 
In March 1793 Wales met the artists Thomas and William Daniell, who encouraged him to continue his detailed drawings of Indian caves and temples. On a 1795 drawing expedition to the Kanheri caves, Wales became ill and was carried back to Bombay, where he died on 18 November. The majority of Wales's work would have been lost or forgotten had it not been for the diligence of his friend and patron Charles Warre Malet. On 16 September 1799 Malet married Wales's eldest daughter, Susanna, in England, and in 1800 he published twelve of Wales's views of Bombay. Wales's most ambitious undertaking was a series of studies begun in 1792 for a history painting depicting Malet's negotiations for a British treaty with the Marathas. Malet made these studies available to Thomas Daniell, who exhibited the finished work at the Royal Academy in 1805 under the title 'Sir C. Malet, bart., the British resident at Poonah, in the year 1790 concluding a treaty in the durbar with Souae Madarow the peshwa or prince of the Mahratta empire' (priv. coll.). A collection of Wales's drawings is in the collection of the Yale Center for British Art, New Haven, Connecticut. 


@@@@@


doc= 28457


Wales, William (bap. 1734, d. 1798), astronomer and mathematician, was baptized at Warmfield in the West Riding of Yorkshire on 1 March 1734, the son of John Wales, of humble circumstances. He is said to have 'walked to London with a Mr Holroyd... Plumber to George 3rd' ('Journals', 885). Nothing is known of his early years or education, but by the early 1760s he was no mean mathematician, and contributed to the 'Ladies' Diary', a journal specializing in advanced mathematical problems. On 5 September 1765, at Greenwich, he married Mary, the youngest sister of a fellow Yorkshireman, Charles Green, who had recently been assistant at the Royal Observatory. Through Green he met Nevil Maskelyne, the new astronomer royal, who in 1766 commissioned Wales to assist in computations for the first few issues of the 'Nautical Almanac'. 
In 1767 Wales told the council of the Royal Society that he was willing to go abroad to observe the forthcoming transit of Venus but would prefer a warm climate. In the event, he sailed with Joseph Dymond (Maskelyne's assistant from 1765 to 1766) in May 1768, over-wintered at the Churchill River on the north-west coast of Hudson's Bay with temperatures down to -43 degree F, successfully observed the transit in June 1769, and reached London again in October. 
In 1771 plans were being made for Captain Cook to go on a second voyage of discovery in the southern hemisphere, the main object of which was to prove or disprove the existence of a great southern continent in temperate latitudes. On 14 December 1771 the board of longitude appointed Wales and William Bayly to go as astronomers, in the 'Resolution' (Captain Cook) and 'Adventure' (Captain Furneaux) respectively, 'to make Nautical & Astronomical Observations, and to perform other Services tending to the Improvement of Geography & Navigation' ('Journals', 724). Wales took as his 'servant' George Gilpin (died 1810), who was to be Maskelyne's assistant at Greenwich (1776-81) and clerk to the Royal Society (1783-1809), and was to succeed Wales as secretary of the board of longitude (1799-1810); he married Lydia Green, a niece of Mrs Wales, in 1781. One of the important secondary objects of the voyage was the trying-out of the new longitude timekeepers; Larcum Kendall's copy of Harrison's prizewinner was one of two taken by Wales. 
The two sloops sailed together from Plymouth on 13 July 1772. During the 'Resolution''s three-year voyage around the world, twenty-one months of which were spent in the Pacific, Cook came to rely heavily on Wales for all matters astronomical and navigational -- for ascertaining geographical position, for making scientific observations ashore and afloat, for instructing junior officers. 'For Mr Wales, whose abilities is equal to his assiduity, lost no one observation that could possibly be obtained', wrote Cook in his journal in November 1774 off New Zealand, continuing: 'Even the situation of such Islands as we past without touching at are by means of Mr Kendalls Watch determined with almost equal accuracy' ('Journals', 580). The 'Resolution' reached Spithead on 30 July 1775. 
In the same year Wales was appointed master of the Royal Mathematical School (RMS) within Christ's Hospital, founded by Charles II in 1673 specifically to train boys in navigation to become ships' officers. One of his first tasks was to curb the rowdy behaviour of the RMS boys, older than most others in the school, whose loutish behaviour by 1775 had become a byword. Within a very few years discipline was restored. Charles Lamb, a pupil, described him as a severe but genial man with 'a perpetual fund of humour, a constant glee about him, which, heightened by an inveterate provincialism of north-country dialect, absolutely took away the sting from his severities' (Lamb, 30). During the Gordon riots of 1780, Wales single-handedly dissuaded rioting prisoners newly freed from Newgate prison from entering Christ's Hospital and looting it because they considered it papist. 
Wales was elected fellow of the Royal Society in November 1776. On behalf of the board of longitude he edited his own and Bayly's observations taken on Cook's 1772-5 voyage (published 1777); the observations taken on the 1764-71 voyages of Byron, Wallis, Carteret, and Cook (1788); and 'Tables Requisite to be Used with the Nautical Ephemeris' (with Maskelyne, 1781, 1802). On his own behalf he published new editions of John Robertson's 'Elements of Navigation' (1780, 1796); his own 'An Inquiry into the Present State of Population' (1781); and 'Method of Finding Longitude at Sea by Time-Keepers' (1794, 1800). He was appointed secretary of the board of longitude in December 1795. 
Wales died in Christ's Hospital (where he was subsequently buried) on 29 December 1798, leaving his wife, Mary, and five children, the eldest of whom, Sarah, married Arthur William Trollope, headmaster of Christ's Hospital from 1799 to 1826. 


@@@@@


doc= 28458


Waley, Jacob (1818-1873), barrister and Anglo-Jewish community leader, was the elder son of Solomon Jacob Waley (died 1864), of London, and his wife, Rachel Hort. Simon Waley, pianist and composer, was his brother. Educated in London at Mr Neumegen's school in Highgate and at University College, in 1839 he graduated BA at the University of London, coming top of his year in both mathematics and classics, a feat which earned him a gold medal. His initial ambition was to practise as a solicitor, but after a year he determined on a career at the bar, and entered Lincoln's Inn, where he became a pupil of Lord Justice Rolt; he was called to the bar on 21 November 1842, one of the earliest professing Jews to achieve this distinction. On 28 July 1847, in a ceremony conducted by the chief rabbi, Dr Nathan Adler, Waley married Matilda, third daughter of Joseph Salomons and his wife, Rebecca, sister of Sir Moses Montefiore. There were several children of the marriage, including Julia Cohen (1853-1917). Another daughter, Rachel Sophia, married the economist and Fabian socialist David Frederick Schloss; their children included Arthur Waley and Sir David Waley. 
Waley specialized in conveyancing, becoming in time one of the most respected conveyancers of his day. Although conveyancers rarely appeared in court, he was several times summoned in cases of particular difficulty and acted as conveyancing counsel for the Bedford estates. In collaboration with T. C. and C. D. Wright he edited Davidson's 'Precedents and Forms in Conveyancing' (5 vols., London, 1855-65). In 1870 he was appointed one of the conveyancing counsel of the court of chancery. He had previously, in 1867, served as a member of the royal commission on the transfer of land; the legislation on this subject, approved by parliament in 1874, was based substantially upon his opinions. 
Waley was a stereotypical 'emancipated' Jew, one of the generation of British Jews who took full advantage of the atmosphere of tolerance and civic equality which characterized the Victorian age. He was an expert in political economy, acting as examiner in this subject for the University of London; in 1853 he was appointed professor of political economy at University College, London, a post he was compelled to resign some thirteen years later owing to pressure of other work. He was also, until his death, joint secretary of the Political Economy Club. 
A nephew by marriage of both Sir Moses Montefiore and Sir David Salomons, Waley was centrally placed within 'the cousinhood' which ruled Anglo-Jewry in the nineteenth century, and he played a substantial part in its communal affairs. He was one of the originators of the scheme (approved by parliament in 1870) to amalgamate the major Ashkenazi (German-speaking) synagogues in London to form one United Synagogue, whose constitution he drafted. The following year he helped to found the Anglo-Jewish Association -- a sort of Anglo-Jewish ministry of foreign affairs -- and became its first president. He was also president of the Jews' Orphan Asylum and a member of the council of Jews' College, London, which was established in 1859 as a training centre for the Anglo-Jewish ministry. He was prominent in the Hebrew Literary Society and in the Jewish Board of Guardians. He took much interest in the treatment of Jews abroad and in 1872 wrote a brief preface to 'The Jews of Roumania', published by the Anglo-Jewish Association, in protest against the persecution of Jews in that country. 
Waley died of liver disease at his home, 20 Wimpole Street, London, on 19 June 1873, and was buried in the United Synagogue's West Ham cemetery. He was survived by his wife. It was a measure of the communal esteem in which he was held that the funeral was attended by both Sir Moses Montefiore and Sir Francis Goldsmid, lay leaders respectively of the Orthodox and Reform Jewish communities in Britain, and by Chief Rabbi Adler. 


@@@@@


doc= 28459


Waley, Simon Waley (1827-1875), composer and banker, was born on 23 August 1827 at Stockwell, London, the younger son of Solomon Jacob Waley (died 1864) and his wife, Rachel Hort; Jacob Waley (1818-1873) was his elder brother. He became a prominent member of the London stock exchange, with offices at 2 Angel Court from 1858 to 1873, and at 13 Copthall Street from 1873 to 1875, and a leading figure in the Jewish community during the period of the emancipation of the Jews from civil disabilities. He was very interested in international traffic, and at the age of sixteen he wrote his first letter on the subject to the 'Railway Times'. He contributed at length to the correspondence columns of 'The Times' under the signature W. London, advocating Boulogne as the postal route between England and Europe, and he sent a series of letters on 'A tour in Auvergne' to the 'Daily News' in 1858, which were later incorporated into John Murray's 'Handbook for Travellers in France'. 
Waley was a highly gifted musician as well as a shrewd man of business. He began to compose before he was eleven years old, and many of his childhood compositions showed great promise. His first published work, 'L'arpeggio', a piano study, appeared in 1848. He had piano lessons from Ignaz Moscheles, William Sterndale Bennett, and George Alexander Osborne, and lessons in theory and composition from William Horsley and Bernhard Molique. In addition to being a brilliant pianist -- he performed regularly at concerts of the Amateur Musical Society conducted by Henry Leslie -- Waley was a prolific composer. His published compositions include a piano concerto (op. 16), two piano trios, in B[flat] and G minor (op. 15 and op. 20), marches and caprices for piano, and many songs, including 'Angels' voices' and 'Sing on, sing on, ye little birds'. He also wrote orchestral pieces, which were not published. One of his finest works is a setting of 'Psalms 117 and 118' for the synagogue service. 
Waley married Anna, the daughter of P. J. Salomons, and they had eight children. He died at his home, 22 Devonshire Place, Marylebone, London, on 30 December 1875, and was buried at the Jewish cemetery, Ball's Pond. 


@@@@@


doc= 28460


Waleys, Henry le (d. 1302), merchant and mayor of London, may have originated at Chepstow, Monmouthshire, but moved to London with other members of his family, including his brother Walter, who also became active in the city. Like many London merchants of his day Henry le Waleys dealt in a variety of goods, importing hides in 1267, and trading in cloth at St Ives fair in 1287. But he made his fortune as a vintner, dealing in exceptionally large quantities (300 tuns of St Emilion wine in 1284), and importing wine directly from Gascony. He came to be styled 'king's merchant', selling wine to the royal household from 1252 until the early 1280s, with sales whose yearly value averaged about $100. This interest in the wine trade explains his involvement in an unsuccessful attempt to reduce brokers' charges on wine, and he was later accused by the men of other towns of having restricted to city freemen the right to sell wine in London during his mayoralty. Prosperity brought social advancement, which his marriage confirmed; his wife, Joan, daughter of William of Haddestock and Avice of Basing, and granddaughter of Adam of Basing (mayor of London 1251-2), belonged to a family prominent in London since the early twelfth century. At his death he had property scattered all over London, including a house called Le Hales near London Bridge and a large mansion in Stepney, where a great council summoned by the king met in March 1299. He also owned property in Berwick and Boston, as well as the manor of Beckenham in Kent, and land in several other counties, including Somerset. 
Waleys was one of the leading figures in the government of London in the late thirteenth century. After an unsuccessful attempt to become bailiff in 1265, he was alderman of Cordwainer ward from 1269 to 1294, sheriff in 1270-71, and mayor in 1273-4, 1281-4, and 1298-9. He represented London on several occasions, going to Paris in 1274 to consult with Edward I on his approaching coronation, and attending the Shrewsbury parliament of 1283. His first term as mayor was marked by action against former supporters of Simon de Montfort; in January 1274 he secured the annulment of the charters which Walter Hervey, who had dominated the city in the late 1260s, had granted to the craft guilds, and later engineered Hervey's final exclusion from public life. But his policy went far beyond the defence of traditional and vested interests. As mayor Waleys directed inquiries into and promulgated ordinances on various trades, including masons and carpenters, but above all those concerned with victualling -- he was clearly well aware of the connection between public order and the food supply. In his first mayoralty he had new vessels provided for the official and public measurement of corn, and in his second introduced the practice of dragging bakers convicted of fraud through the city streets on a hurdle. He was also responsible for ordinances creating a watch and keeping a check on strangers, while in 1283 he had a new prison, the Tun, built on Cornhill for curfew breakers and men caught in fornication. He expanded the paving of city streets in the direction of Westminster, and was instrumental in extending the wall of the city near Blackfriars. In 1282 he took decisive action towards the repair and maintenance of London Bridge by setting up a trust to finance it: the trust consisted of a new market for the victualling trades to the north of St Mary Woolchurch, known as The Stocks, and a housing development next to St Paul's Churchyard, on which Waleys later attempted to speculate for his own profit. He may also have had a role in the creation of the London Puy about 1300. His policies were backed by Edward I, but were unpopular with some Londoners, who considered that the city's franchise was being infringed, and in October 1284 Waleys lost the mayoralty. The government of the city was taken into the king's hand shortly afterwards, and the Londoners had to wait for a reversal of royal policy until 1297, when that year's political crisis led to the restoration of the city's liberties, along with the abolition of the Tun and of Waleys's edicts for the corn trade. In April 1298 the mayoralty was restored, and the Londoners elected Waleys, although he appears to have resigned his aldermanry four years earlier. The election was intended to placate the king, and Waleys was not re-elected the following year, but disappeared thereafter from the city's governing circle. 
Waleys had already benefited from royal favour during the reign of Henry III, even though his record during the barons' wars was ambivalent. His connections with the court, and with Edmund, earl of Cornwall (died 1300), in particular, enabled him to obtain exemption for life from all royal levies in 1266, and from being put on assizes and made sheriff against his will in 1267. He may have been knighted by the king in 1281; in 1283 he was given the wardship of John de Neville by the queen mother, Eleanor of Provence, and her cousin Amadeus, count of Savoy. He was also a friend of the chancellor, Robert Burnell (died 1292). The inevitable corollary of royal favour was royal service. Waleys was nominated to a number of judicial commissions, and in the 1280s may have been involved in the works at Westminster. In 1284, along with Gregory of Ruxley (died 1291) and Itier d'Angouleme, he was appointed to enforce edicts on the clipping and falsification of money. He was several times employed by Edward I on commissions for town planning, for instance at New Winchelsea in November 1281, while in January 1297 he was advising Edward on the rebuilding and development of Berwick. Waleys also frequently went abroad, on his own business or in the king's service. In 1275 he was appointed mayor of Bordeaux, but Waleys, unable to govern a city divided by internal strife, had to resign in the autumn of the same year. In July 1284 he was appointed farmer of the revenues of six Gascon bastides (planned new towns), while in February 1286 he represented the king's interests in court at Rouen. He also either had interests of his own in Ireland, or was active there in the king's service in 1294. Moreover, Edward employed him in his Scottish wars, in October 1297 commissioning him to levy 1000 men in Worcestershire. 
Henry le Waleys died in London on 29 June 1302, and his will was proved in the court of husting on 16 July following. A patron of the mendicant orders, he was buried on 5 July in the church of the London Minoresses outside Aldgate, and was also a benefactor of the city's Franciscans, building the nave of their church, giving timber for its altars, and leaving them a large legacy. His son, Augustine Uxbridge, became keeper of the exchange under Edward II, and married Margaret, the sister of Richard Conduit. Waleys had another son, Henry, mentioned in 1276, who probably predeceased his father. 


@@@@@


doc= 28461


Walford, Cornelius (1827-1885), writer on insurance, was born at 79 Curtain Road, Shoreditch, London, on 2 April 1827, the eldest of five sons of the naturalist Cornelius Walford (died 1883) of Park House Farm, near Coggeshall, Essex, and Mary Amelia Osborn, of Pentonville, London. He was educated at Felsted School, Essex. After working as a solicitor's clerk at Witham, Essex, and then as a local journalist, Walford qualified as a barrister in 1860 at the Middle Temple, but found his metier as an insurance inspector and agent, initially at Witham. He became a director of the East London Bank in 1862, and also undertook the management of the ailing Unity Fire and Life Association. Four years later he was elected to the board of the Accident Insurance Company, and remained a director until his death. Walford made the first of many visits to the USA in 1861, and this led to a number of North American connections: he founded the Colonial Assurance Corporation in 1867, and from 1870 managed the European business of the New York Insurance Company. 
By that time Walford was established as an authoritative writer on insurance and actuarial affairs. He published anonymously in 1857 his 'Insurance Guide and Handbook', and this was widely pirated in the USA; it had large sales, and the second edition carried his name. His 'Insurance Year Book' appeared in 1870, but his great work was the 'Insurance Cyclopaedia', six volumes of which appeared between 1871 and 1880. In addition to giving a definitive account of Victorian professional practice, Walford discussed the pioneers of the insurance industry. He also wrote the majority of the articles in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' about actuaries and insurance men. An active historian, he also published studies of guilds (1879), the Hanseatic League (1881), fairs, plagues, and the effects of famine. 
Walford was an associate and then a fellow of the Institute of Actuaries, and was on the council of the Statistical Society. A lifelong interest in shorthand led in 1881 to his becoming president of the newly founded Shorthand Society. In December 1884 he was awarded the Samuel Brown prize of the Institute of Actuaries for his paper on the history of life insurance. Married three times, Walford was the father of three sons and six daughters. He died at his house at 86 Belsize Park Gardens, London, on 28 September 1885 and was buried on 3 October in Brookwood cemetery, Woking; he was survived by his third wife, Laura Walford. 


@@@@@


doc= 28462


Walford, Edward (1823-1897), writer and compiler of reference works, was born on 3 February 1823 at Hatfield Place, near Chelmsford, Essex, the eldest son of William Walford (died 1855) of Hatfield Peverel, rector of St Runwald's, Colchester, and his second wife, Mary Ann, daughter of Henry Hutton, rector of Beaumont, Essex, and granddaughter of Sir William Pepperrell. He was educated at Hackney Church of England school and Charterhouse School where, in 1840-41, he won a Latin hexameter gold medal. He gained an open scholarship at Balliol College, Oxford, in 1841 and in 1843 won the chancellor's prize for Latin verse. He graduated BA (third class) in 1845 and MA two years later. At Balliol with Matthew Arnold, Walford was made deacon in 1847 and ordained priest by Bishop Samuel Wilberforce in 1848, gaining the Denyer theological prize in both years. 
Walford spent a year as assistant master at Tonbridge School, then moved to Clifton, near Bristol, and London, preparing private pupils for Oxford, publishing Latin and Greek grammars, and writing theological books. In Clifton, on 8 August 1847, he married Mary Holmes Gray (1824/5-1851). A daughter, Mary Louisa (later Mrs Colin Campbell Wyllie), was born in 1848. Walford had joined the Roman Catholic communion as a lay member by 1852, and married Julia Mary Christina Talbot (1822-1895), the daughter of Admiral Sir John Talbot, on 3 February 1852. The eight years from 1853 saw the birth of their children; Julia Marion (later Mrs Philip Conron), Edith (later Mrs Frederick Waddy), and Ethel were born in Clifton, and Alice (1857-1870) was born in Westminster, and Edward and Philip in Hampstead. 
In 1855 Walford had started his long career in biographic journalism when he compiled the first editions of the annuals 'Hardwicke's Shilling Baronetage and Knightage', 'Hardwicke's Shilling Peerage', 'Hardwicke's Shilling House of Commons', and 'Hardwicke's titles of courtesy containing an alphabetical list of all those members of titled families whose names do not fall within the scope of peerage, baronetage or knightage'. Taken as a whole this series detailed the 'top ten thousand' of Victorian society. In 1860 he compiled the first edition of his comprehensive 'County Families of Great Britain' which was published annually for sixty years. In 1860 the Walford family moved into a substantial Georgian house at 17 Church Row, Hampstead, from where, for some twenty-six years, Edward wrote, edited, and compiled his biographical, topographical, and antiquarian books and his articles for a range of magazines and newspapers. 
In 1858 Walford started contributing to Charles Knight's 'Cyclopaedia', but his forte was producing biographies at short notice, his 192-page biography of the prince consort arriving on the streets within twenty-two days of Albert's death in 1862. He produced similar biographies of others including Palmerston, Louis Napoleon, and Disraeli. Moving into periodical journalism, Walford became sub-editor and then editor of 'Once a Week' (1859-65). He edited the 'Gentleman's Magazine' in 1866 and strongly objected to the proprietor Joseph Hatton's decision to change the character of that magazine. Walford resigned and started his own 'Register and Magazine of Biography', but this failed within a year. Writing as Londoniana he then concentrated on topographic articles for 'The Times' and leading periodicals. In 1874-6 Walford edited Charles Knight's six-volume 'London', so he was the natural choice of the publisher Cassell & Co. when Walter Thornbury, the author of its 'Old and New London', died in 1876 having written only the first two volumes. Walford completed the final four volumes of what became the standard popular work describing the history and growth of the metropolis. Originally published in monthly parts in 1873-8, this lavishly illustrated series was frequently updated and reissued, as was Walford's equally successful two-volume 'Greater London' (1882-3). A 1968 overview of publications on London noted: 'for light bedside reading these books are admirable; they were obviously produced for the beginner who did not want his text cluttered with learned references' (Rubinstein, 124). But their popularity continues, and both series remain available in London reference libraries. 
Within months of moving to Hampstead, Walford returned to the Church of England, but in 1870 he reverted to the Roman Catholic faith, resigning his holy orders in 1886. In the 1880s Walford edited the new journal 'The Antiquary', but he was soon engaged in another acrimonious dispute with his proprietor, Elliot Stock, over the latter's treatment of him, and both protagonists published their case in the dispute. Walford retired from his journalistic duties in 1886 although he continued writing legal obituaries for 'The Times' until 1891 and contributed to 'Notes and Queries' until the month of his death. Walford retired to Ventnor, Isle of Wight, in 1891, was awarded a civil-list pension for his literary work in 1892, then continued his literary output by compiling the eight-volume 'Windsor Peerage' (1890-97). In his ''Patient Griselda' and other Poems' (1894), which contains a good likeness of himself, Walford included acerbic verses satirizing his former proprietor Elliot Stock and calling him Ellicott Skinflint. A journalist contemporary of Walford's annotated his copy of 'Patient Griselda' by assessing his former Hampstead neighbour as 'part author of 'Old and New London'... a very cantankerous sort of man, always quarrelling' (Woolven, 25). 
After years of illness and at the age of seventy-four, Walford died of a stroke in Ventnor on 20 November 1897. He was buried at Holy Trinity, Ventnor, on 24 November. Although it was reported that he had finally returned to the Church of England, his grave is in the Catholic area of the churchyard. He was a fellow of the Royal Historical Society, a member of the Royal Archaeological Institute and of the Genealogical Society, and was a council member of the Society for Preserving the Memorials of the Dead. The British Library catalogue lists some eighty-seven books written, compiled, or edited by the industrious Edward Walford. 


@@@@@


doc= 28463


Walford, Thomas (1752-1833), antiquary, born on 14 September 1752, was the only son of Thomas Walford (died 1756) of Whitley, near Birdbrook in Essex, and his wife, Elizabeth Spurgeon (died 1789) of Linton in Cambridgeshire. He was an officer in the Essex militia in 1777, and was appointed deputy lieutenant of the county in 1778. In March 1797 he became a captain in the provisional cavalry, and the following May he was promoted major. In February 1788 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, in October 1797 a fellow of the Linnean Society, in 1814 a member of the Geological Society, and in 1825 a fellow. In 1818 he published 'The Scientific Tourist through England, Wales, and Scotland'. In this he described the principal objects of antiquity, art, science, and the picturesque in Great Britain, under the county headings. The work was too comprehensive to be exhaustive, and its value varied with Walford's personal knowledge of the places he describes. 
Walford died, apparently unmarried, at Whitley on 6 August 1833, and was buried at Birdbrook parish church. He published several papers in 'Archaeologia', 'Vetusta monumenta', and 'Transactions of the Linnean Society' and left several manuscripts, including a history of Birdbrook in Essex and another of Clare in Sussex. 


@@@@@


doc= 28464


Walkden, Peter (1684-1769), Presbyterian minister and diarist, was born at Flixton, near Manchester, on 16 October 1684. Nothing is known of his parents. He was educated at a village school, then from 1706 at the academy of James Coningham, minister of the Presbyterian chapel at Manchester. From 1 May 1709 he served as pastor at Garsdale, Yorkshire. At the end of 1711 he became minister of two congregations at Newton in Bowland, Yorkshire, and Hesketh Lane, near Chipping, in a poor and sparsely inhabited part of rural Lancashire. He remained there until 1738, when he moved to Holcombe, near Bury, in the same county. In 1744 he was appointed to the pastorate of the Old Tabernacle, Stockport, Cheshire. 
Walkden's diary for the years 1725, 1729, and 1730 presents a vivid picture of the hard life of a poor country minister. Passages from his correspondence and commonplace books have been printed, as well as most of the extant part of his diary. 
Walkden was twice married: his first wife died in December 1715. One of his wives was named Margaret Woodworth, and he had eight children. Walkden died at Stockport on 5 November 1769, and is buried in his chapel there. One of his four sons, Henry, followed him in the Presbyterian ministry and wrote a Latin epitaph for his tomb. Henry is said to have been educated in London, but after a promising start, 'some immoral conduct occasioned his dismissal' from a congregation at Tintwistle, Cheshire (Nightingale, 1.228). He died at Clitheroe, Lancashire, in 1795. Peter Walkden's daughter Catherine married William Fogg, and was the mother of the Revd Peter Walkden Fogg of Ormskirk, Lancashire, and grandmother of Henry Fogg, also minister there for sixty-four years. 


@@@@@


doc= 28465


Walkelin (d. 1098), bishop of Winchester, was one of the Conqueror's chaplains but the claim that he was his kinsman is unsubstantiated. William of Malmesbury tells a story of Archbishop Maurilius of Rouen being concerned with his early career; hence Walkelin the future bishop is probably to be identified with the Walkelin, canon of Rouen, who attests a charter of Maurilius, dated to between 1055 and 1066, in favour of Chartres. Following the deposition of the pluralist Stigand by the papal legate, 'c'.11 April 1070, Walkelin was appointed by the king to the see of Winchester, to which he was consecrated on 30 May by the legate Ermenfrid. Immediately on entering office, Bishop Walkelin sought to replace the monks in his cathedral by canons. This would seem to suggest that he realized the true nature of the problem for a contemporary bishop in that most English of institutions, the monastic cathedral: that is, how to pay the household if the resources of the church were in the main directed to the support of monks. Initially he obtained the support of the king, as well as that of most of his colleagues, for this tactic. His good relations with the Conqueror are evident from the story related by the Winchester annalist, in which William, having granted to Walkelin as much timber as he could take from the wood of Hempage in three days and nights, allowed himself to be appeased after the bishop, with the help of many carpenters, had cut down the entire wood. However, Lanfranc, appointed archbishop of Canterbury later in 1070, successfully resisted this policy. A somewhat embittered narrative of Bishop Walkelin's deeds is placed in the mouth of his successor, Bishop William Giffard, and recorded in the St Swithun's Priory cartulary. Walkelin is said to have divided the goods of the see between himself and the convent and to have appropriated 300 librates of the monks' share of the land for his grandiose building plans, as well as the patronage of all the priory's churches for these same purposes. 
Walkelin's principal monument is his building work, for no written material issued in his name appears to survive. His was the decision to destroy the Old Minster church in Winchester, the principal church of Anglo-Saxon Wessex (if not of England in its entirety), and to replace it with the vast Norman cathedral, much of which survives today. The plan was huge in contemporary terms: with a length of almost 180 yards, Walkelin's Winchester was rivalled only by the Cluny III of St Hugh. The work began in 1079 or 1080; the Winchester annalist claimed that the new church was consecrated and the monks took possession of it on 8 April 1093 but the evidence of modern archaeology is that only the eastern portion of the church, and possibly the crossing, could have been completed by then, the remainder not being finished until 'c'.1122, under Walkelin's successor, William Giffard. 
Under Rufus, Walkelin remained involved in politics in the royal service -- in 1097, shortly before his death, he was appointed regent along with Ranulf Flambard (died 1128) when the king left England. He continued to attest royal charters, as would be expected while Winchester and the crown-wearing ceremony there at Christmas remained an important manifestation of royal authority. When the dispute between the archbishop of Canterbury and the king concerning papal authority first arose, Walkelin was one of the bishops who tried to persuade Anselm not to pursue his demands for leave to visit Rome. On the occasion of the consecration of Battle Abbey (11 February 1094) he obtained permission for St Giles's Fair, one of the five or six great fairs of medieval England, a major source of wealth for the see and crucial for the economic development of his cathedral city in the twelfth century. Little or no evidence survives on which to base an assessment of Walkelin's career as a diocesan. It is known that he consulted Ernulf of Rochester, an acknowledged expert on canon law, when in difficulty on a point of marriage law. The text of Ernulf's reply, in which it is made clear that Walkelin's point was originally raised in discussion at Canterbury, and not in writing, still survives. In April 1095 the monks of Bury St Edmunds, doubtless to the chagrin of his colleague Hermann, the bishop of Thetford, called in Walkelin to officiate at the translation of the bones of their patron saint. Following this event Bishop Walkelin issued an indulgence, which proved extremely popular. 
Walkelin made his brother Symeon prior of St Swithun's Cathedral Priory, and as such, the latter was doubtless a great assistance to him in his dealings with his monks. The narrative of Walkelin's deeds purporting to be issued by William Giffard stresses that it was this link which made the division of the goods of the see a practical proposition. In 1093 Symeon became abbot of Ely. Walkelin's nephew, Gerard, who also began his career in the church of Rouen, was successively bishop of Hereford and archbishop of York. Walkelin died on 3 January 1098. 


@@@@@


doc= 28466


Walker, Adam (1730/31-1821), itinerant lecturer and writer, was born at Patterdale, Westmorland, into the numerous family of a woollen manufacturer. Neither the exact date of his birth nor the identity of his parents is known. Walker left school barely able to read but persevered alone to achieve a general education. He developed a considerable mechanical skill, constructing models of the milling machinery employed locally for fulling, grinding, and papermaking. At the age of fifteen he became assistant master at Ledham School in the West Riding of Yorkshire, and at eighteen he was appointed writing master and accountant at Macclesfield Free School, where he studied mathematics and issued his first publication, 'A System of Family Bookkeeping, with a Ready Ruled Book' (1758). From 1762 to 1766 he ran a school in Manchester, teaching a range of commercial and polite subjects appropriate to the city's needs. He speculated unsuccessfully in trade, and gave lectures on astronomy. 
Walker was probably married by this time. He and his wife, Eleanor, were living at Kirkland, Westmorland, at the time of the birth of their eldest son, 
In 1766 Walker bought the apparatus of the itinerant lecturer William Griffis, gave up schoolmastering, advertised his lectures in various local papers, and took to the road. He wrote the first of several extremely successful tracts: his 'Analysis of a Course of Lectures on Natural and Experimental Philosophy' was first published at Kendal in 1766, and under the editorship of his sons reached its twentieth edition in 1827. Walker travelled through the north of England and southern Scotland, then spent four years in Ireland, before settling in York. Like most itinerant lecturers, Walker captured the attention of his audiences by his demonstrations. One of the most spectacular exhibits was his eidouranion, a transparent orrery, which stood the Walker family in good stead for fifty years. Walker's mechanical skill enabled him to invent and build a simple cometarium which demonstrated Kepler's first two laws of planetary motion. He was a friend of James Ferguson (died 1777), one of the best-known itinerant lecturers, and on Ferguson's death acquired his eclipsareon to demonstrate the nature of eclipses, and came to give lectures in London in 1778-9. This venture was successful, and in 1781 he moved his home to George Street, Hanover Square. 
Although now based in London, Walker continued to travel. In northern towns artisans flocked to his lectures on mechanics. He was friendly with most of the eminent industrialists and scientists making up the Lunar Society, and dined with Matthew Boulton. In London he filled the Theatre Royal, Haymarket, with a staged performance of his new eidouranion. His demonstration was accompanied by the heavenly music of the coelestina, a mechanical harpsichord producing continuous sound, which Walker had patented in 1772. In his 'Epitome of Astronomy' (1782), Walker announced himself lecturer to the duke of Gloucester; this tract went through thirty editions by 1824. A visit to Paris in 1785 led him to publish his views on aspects of French life; he was similarly inspired by a tour of Flanders, Germany, France and Italy, on which he commented in 1790. He lectured at the public schools of Eton, Westminster, Winchester, St Paul's, and Rugby. Between lectures Walker put his hand to improvements to various machines, a method of thermo-ventilation (patented in 1786), and plans for a rotating light which he helped to erect on St Agnes in the Isles of Scilly in 1790. He died at Richmond, Surrey, on 11 February 1821, and was buried in the family vault at Hayes, Middlesex, on 16 February, where a monument commemorated him as 'the inventor of the Eidouranion'. 
William Walker was baptized on 26 June 1766 at Kendal. Educated at Eton College as king's scholar, 1778-80, he gave his first lecture at Newbury with his father, when only sixteen. He continued this profession until his death on 14 March 1816 at the Manor House, Hayes, Middlesex; he left a widow, Elizabeth, and four young children, all of whom died shortly afterwards from consumption. He was buried on 16 March 1816 at Hayes, and commemorated alongside his father as astronomical lecturer. 
Adam John Walker was educated at the Royal Grammar School, Lancaster, then at the University of Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1791 and MA in 1794. He served as rector and vicar of parishes on the Welsh border. He was vicar of Bishopstone at the time of his death, on 1 January 1839. 
Deane Franklin Walker, born at York on 24 March 1778, continued his father's custom of lecturing at public schools and giving theatrical performances on the London stage during the winter season. He was also responsible for the later editions of his father's books. He married Ellenora, daughter of Thomas Normansell; a son and three daughters survived his death at Upper Tooting, Surrey, on 10 May 1865. 


@@@@@


doc= 28467


Walker, Alexander (1764-1831), army officer in the East India Company, born on 12 May 1764, was the eldest son of William Walker (1737-1771), minister of Collessie in Fife, and his wife, Margaret (died 1810), daughter of Patrick Manderston, an Edinburgh merchant. Appointed an East India Company cadet in 1780, he went to India in the same ship as the physician Helenus Scott, with whom he formed a lifelong friendship. On 21 November 1782 he became an ensign, and that year served in the campaign under Brigadier-General Richard Mathews directed against Haidar Ali's forts on the coast of Malabar. He was present with the 8th battalion at Mangalore during the siege by Tipu, and offered himself as a hostage on the surrender of the fortress on 30 January 1784. In recompense for the danger he incurred he received the pay and allowance of captain from the Bombay government while in the enemy's hands. 
In December 1785 Walker commanded a Bombay government expedition to establish a military and commercial port on the north-west coast of America, from where the Chinese obtained furs. After exploring in 1786 as far north as 62 degree, however, and remaining a while at Nootka Sound, the enterprise was abandoned. 
Walker rejoined the grenadier battalion in garrison at Bombay. On 9 January 1788 he received a lieutenancy, and in 1790 served under Colonel James Hartley as adjutant of the line in the expedition sent to the relief of the raja of Travancore. In 1791 he served under General Sir Robert Abercromby as adjutant of the 10th native infantry during the campaign against Tipu. After the conclusion of the war a special commission was nominated to regulate the affairs of the province of Malabar, and Walker was appointed an assistant. In this capacity he showed ability, became known to the Indian authorities, and received the thanks of Marquess Wellesley. When the commander-in-chief of the Bombay army, General James Stuart, proceeded to Malabar, Walker became his military secretary with the brevet rank of captain. On 6 September 1797 he attained the regimental rank of captain, and in the same year was appointed quartermaster-general of the Bombay army, which gave him the official rank of major. In 1798 he became deputy auditor-general. He took part in the last war against Tipu, and was present at the battle of Seedaseer in 1799 and at the siege of Seringapatam. At the request of Sir Arthur Wellesley, he was selected, on account of his knowledge of the country, to attend the commanding officer in Mysore and Malabar. 
In 1800 Walker was dispatched to Gujarat by the Bombay government with a view to tranquillizing the Maratha states in that neighbourhood. His reforms were hotly opposed at Baroda by the indigenous officials, who were interested in corruption. The discontent culminated in 1801 in the insurrection of Malhar Rao, the chief of Kurree. Walker took the field, but, being without sufficient force, could do little until reinforced by Colonel Sir William Clarke, who on 30 April 1802 defeated Malhar Rao under the walls of Kurree. In June, Walker was appointed political resident at Baroda at the court of the guikwar, and in this capacity succeeded in establishing an orderly administration. On 18 December 1803 he attained the regimental rank of major, and in 1805 gained the approbation of the East India Company by negotiating a defensive alliance with the guikwar. In 1807 he restored order in the district of Kathiawar, and with the support of Jonathan Duncan (1756-1811), governor of Bombay, suppressed infanticide. On 3 September 1808 he attained the rank of lieutenant-colonel, and in 1809, after he had embarked for England, he was recalled to Gujarat to repel an invasion by Futtee Singh, the ruler of Cutch. Order was restored by his exertions, and in 1810 he proceeded to England. 
On 12 July 1811 Walker married Barbara (died 1831), daughter of Sir James Montgomery, baronet, of Stanhope, Peeblesshire. They had two sons: Sir William Stuart Walker KCB, who succeeded to the estate of Bowland in Edinburgh and Selkirk, which his father had purchased in 1809; and James Scott Walker, captain in the 88th regiment. 
In 1812 Walker retired from the service. In 1822 he was appointed, with the rank of brigadier-general, governor of St Helena, then under the East India Company. An active administrator, he improved agriculture and horticulture by establishing farming and gardening societies, founded schools and libraries, and introduced the culture of silkworms. Soon after retiring he died at Edinburgh on 5 March 1831. While in India, Alexander Walker formed a valuable collection of Arabic, Persian, and Sanskrit manuscripts, which was presented by his son Sir William in 1845 to the Bodleian Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 28468


Walker, Sir Andrew Barclay, first baronet (1824-1893), brewer and benefactor, was born at Auchinflower, Ayrshire, on 15 December 1824, the second son of Peter Walker (1795-1879) of the Fort brewery, Ayr, and his wife, Mary (died 1846), eldest daughter of Arthur Carlaw of Ayr. He was educated at Ayr Academy and at the Liverpool Institute. On completion of his education Walker was taken into partnership in the brewing business by his father, who had established a small brewery in Ray Street, near St Paul's Square in Liverpool. The business expanded rapidly and in 1846 a new brewery was opened in Warrington, where the family already had two breweries. In 1877 another brewery was opened in Burton upon Trent to specialize in the brewing of high-quality bitter ales under the title of A. B. Walker & Sons. On the death of his father in 1879 Walker became sole proprietor of the Warrington breweries and in 1890 the firm converted to a limited liability company, 'Peter Walker & Son Warrington & Burton Ltd', with Walker as the first chairman. Walker also acquired a number of colliery properties in Ayrshire and south Wales from which he derived a large income. 
Walker entered the Liverpool city council in 1867. He was elected alderman in 1871, served the office of mayor in 1873-4 and 1876-7, and was high sheriff of Lancashire in 1886. At a cost in excess of $50,000 he built the Walker Art Gallery which was opened and presented to the town in September 1877. In 1886 he provided $20,000 for the building of engineering laboratories in connection with the Liverpool University College which was opened in 1889. He also contributed other large sums to charity and art and literature in Liverpool throughout his life. To the village of Gateacre, near Liverpool, he gave a village green and an institute, library, and reading-room. In recognition of his public services he was knighted on 12 December 1877, and created baronet on 12 February 1886. In 1884, for approximately $250,000, he purchased Osmaston Manor in Derbyshire, with furniture, model village, and estate. As a mariner he owned a famous steam yacht called the 'Cuhona' on which he entertained several members of the royal family, including the prince of Wales. 
In November 1889 Walker resigned from his position as alderman on the city council because of ill health. In recognition of his service to the city, Liverpool made him its first honorary freeman in January 1890, and in December the same year he was presented with his portrait by W. Q. Orchardson RA. 
Walker was twice married. His first wife, whom he married in 1853, was Eliza, daughter of John Reid of Limekilns, Fife; they had six sons and two daughters. She died on 20 March 1882, and on 11 October 1887 he married the Hon. Maude ('b'. 1861/2), second daughter of Haughton Charles Okeover of Okeover Hall, Staffordshire, whose title derived from her having been a maid of honour to Queen Victoria. Walker died at his residence, Gateacre Grange, Little Woolton, Lancashire, on 27 February 1893, leaving personalty valued at $2,876,781 18's'. 10died, besides much freehold property. He was survived by his second wife and was succeeded in the baronetcy by his eldest son, Peter Carlaw Walker (1854-1915), who also took over control of the family firm and lived at Osmaston. 


@@@@@


doc= 28469


Walker, Anthony (1726-1765), etcher and engraver, was born at Thirsk, Yorkshire, and baptized there on 19 March 1726, the son of John Walker (died 1763), an exciseman; he was apparently the sixth son in a family of ten children. Having been apprenticed in the Goldsmiths' Company to the London engraver and printseller John Tinney on 2 May 1740, he became free of the company on 5 April 1753. During this period he also studied at the St Martin's Lane Academy. 
Walker was one of the most gifted engravers of the period, known for topographical views, religious and genre subjects, portraits, and book illustrations. Individual plates were exhibited at the Society of Artists from 1760 onwards, and he produced a number of fine large-scale prints for the publisher John Boydell, sometimes in collaboration with William Woollett. Walker's technique was heavily reliant on etching rather than pure engraving, a means that gave his work its characteristic fluidity of line. It was not a technique, however, which produced plates capable of prolonged use, and his work is best judged from the earliest impressions that may be found. Walker also has claims as an original artist, and he designed original frontispieces and illustrations of great verve and style. His illustrations for Tobias Smollett's 'The Life and Adventures of Sir Launcelot Greaves', serialized in the 'British Magazine' (1760-61), are believed to be the earliest magazine illustrations for any serialized novel. 
Working from premises originally in Great Kirby Street and by 1763 at the corner of Nevils Court, Fetter Lane, Walker numbered among his apprentices Joseph Ryland, Thomas Cook, and Joseph Collyer. Little record survives of his personal life and character. Horace Walpole, who admired his work, expressed exasperation at Walker's reluctance to tackle more ambitious subjects. Walker's reported response, that 'he had got fame enough' ('Letters', 6.19), although considered 'shameful' by Walpole, may equally have been expressive of any emotion from an innate modesty to an irritation at being told his business by a man of leisure. Walker died at Kensington, London, on 9 May 1765 and was buried in the parish churchyard. Administration of his estate was granted to his widow, Mary Walker, of whom nothing further is known. 






@@@@@


doc= 28470


Walker, Sir Baldwin Wake, first baronet (1802-1876), naval officer, was born on 6 January 1802. He was the only surviving son of John Walker of Whitehaven (died 1822) and Frances (died 1812), daughter of Captain Drury Wake of the 17th dragoons (second son of Sir William Wake, seventh baronet; 1742-1846). He entered the navy in July 1812, was made a lieutenant on 6 April 1820, and served for two years on the Jamaica station, then for three years on the coast of South America and the west coast of Africa. In 1827 he went to the Mediterranean in the 'Rattlesnake', and in 1828 was first lieutenant of the bomb-vessel 'Etna' at the capture of Kastro Morea. For this service he received the cross of the Legion d'honneur and that of the Redeemer of Greece. He continued in the Mediterranean, serving in the 'Asia', 'Britannia', and 'Barham', and was made commander on 15 July 1834. He served in the 'Vanguard', in the Mediterranean, from September 1836 until his promotion to post rank on 24 November 1838. With Admiralty permission he then accepted a command in the Turkish navy, in which he was known at first as Walker Bey, and afterwards as Yavir Pasha. 
In July 1839, on hearing of the death of Sultan Mahmud II, and anticipating Russian dominance at Constantinople, instead of sailing to attack the Egyptian fleet the Capitan Pasha took his ships to Alexandria and delivered them to Mehmet Ali, who then refused to let them go. Walker was taken with them. He summoned the Turkish captains to a council of war and proposed to them to land in the night, surround the palace, carry off Mehmet Ali, and send him to Constantinople. But the plan was not attempted and Walker went back to Constantinople alone on a steamer sent by Sir Robert Stopford, the British naval commander-in-chief. In the capital Walker in effect acted as commander-in-chief of the Turkish navy. In the summer of 1840 he prepared and took command of a combined expedition to Syria, slipping at night past a reputedly hostile French squadron watching off the Dardanelles. In September and November he co-operated with Turkey's allies in the reduction of Beirut, Sidon, and Acre, showing great gallantry, both in organizing naval operations and in landing and leading detachments of Turkish troops to seize the towns in the name of the sultan. In January 1841 he had the pleasure of arriving at Alexandria to reconduct the Turkish fleet to Constantinople. He was nominated a KCB on 12 January 1841; he received from the allied sovereigns the second class of the Iron Crown of Austria, of St Anne of Russia, of the Red Eagle of Prussia, and was made a hereditary pasha of the Turkish empire. 
Walker was responsible for important reforms in the Turkish navy, but intrigue ensured his dismissal in January 1844. He returned to England, and in 1845 he commanded the 'Queen', designed by the surveyor Sir William Symonds, which, in sailing trials, beat all rivals. In 1846-7 he commanded the frigate 'Constance' in the Pacific, being recalled to succeed Symonds. His first duty as surveyor was to bring calm to an office disturbed by controversy, but soon he became engaged with planning the change to a steam line of battle. With the Crimean War, Walker became the main naval adviser to the first lord, and on occasions the only one. His advice was important in prompting the expedition to Sevastopol. He was created a baronet on 19 July 1856, and on 5 January 1858 he became a rear-admiral. By 1858 the question of the introduction of the seagoing ironclad was coming to the fore, and Walker was responsible for proposing the 'Warrior', whose size and speed owed much to his advice. In 1860 Walker was given greater powers of control and independent judgement over the dockyards, his title changing to controller. 
Walker did not avoid controversy during his time in office. In 1851-2 he defeated an attempt to introduce political criteria into dockyard officer appointments. Late in the decade there were accusations of gross waste in warship construction and conversion; these were very trying to Walker, involving disputes within the Admiralty as well as without, and heavy demands from parliament for returns and for Walker himself to give evidence before investigating committees. By the end of 1860, after years of long office hours and strain, Walker was exhausted, scarcely able to write a letter. The board accepted his resignation in January 1861, appointing him to the Cape command (1861-4) in the hope that the climate would re-establish his health. He left just in time to avoid another parliamentary inquiry, his flagship outpacing the steamer sent to recall him; this led to some comment, including satirical verses in 'Punch' (on 23 March 1861). 
Walker's quick recovery at the Cape was especially fortunate since he had to prepare for hostilities with the USA after the 'Trent' incident, and did so with enthusiasm, primarily through a wish to teach 'Brother Jonathan' a lesson but also hoping for prize money and to improve his fortune, over which he had several times been disappointed. The dispute was settled, but Walker still had to deal with complications with the Americans, largely because of the visit of the Confederate commerce raider 'Alabama' to the Cape. Other responsibilities included slave trade patrols, David Livingstone's expedition, the extension of the dockyard at Simonstown, a quiet conflict over precedence with the Cape chief justice, and the protection of his three unmarried daughters from importunate naval officers. 
Walker became a vice-admiral on 10 February 1865. His next employment was his last, as commander-in-chief at Sheerness (1866-9). He became a full admiral on 27 February 1870, shortly afterwards going on to the retired list. He had married, on 9 September 1834, Mary Catherine Sinclair (died 1889), only daughter of Captain John Worth RN of Oakley House, Suffolk; they had five sons and four daughters. He lost both a son, Charles, and a son-in-law, Captain Hugh Talbot Burgoyne, when the 'Captain' went down on 7 September 1870. Walker died at his home, The Depperhaugh, Hoxne, Suffolk, on 12 February 1876. He was succeeded in the baronetcy by his eldest son, Sir Baldwin Wake Walker (1846-1905), a naval officer and at one time assistant director of torpedoes. A grandson, Sir William Frederic Wake-Walker, was controller of the navy from 1942 to 1945. 
Walker was highly regarded as a seaman. He was also hard-working and generally popular with colleagues and subordinates. In matters of personal honour he was punctilious, this circumscribing a sense of humour that was perhaps never highly developed. One of his great strengths was what Sir William Symonds described as his 'own quiet mild and discreet persuasive manner' (W. Symonds to Walker, 7 Jan 1848). His tenure as surveyor-controller was historically significant, marking the change from that officer being a naval architect to a policy maker, and an important stage on his development into becoming the acknowledged head of naval 'materiel' and a lord of the Admiralty. Walker was a good and careful administrator, but did not possess much imagination or prescience, above all concerning the supersession of the screw liner by the ironclad battleship, where, despite the 'Warrior', his influence was often retrograde. Surviving photographs principally suggest the administrator, but a painting of Walker in Turkish service, in the possession of the family, is in a heroic tradition suitable to the subject's undeniable gallantry. 


@@@@@


doc= 28471


Walker, Sir Charles Pyndar Beauchamp (1817-1894), army officer, was born on 7 October 1817, the eldest son of Charles Ludlow Walker of Redland, JP and deputy lieutenant of Gloucestershire, and Mary Anne, daughter of Revd Reginald Pyndar of Hadsor, Worcestershire, and Kempley, Gloucestershire, cousin of the first Earl Beauchamp. He was a commoner at Winchester College from 1831 to 1833. He was commissioned ensign in the 33rd foot on 27 February 1836, and became lieutenant on 21 June 1839 and captain on 22 December 1846. He served with the regiment at Gibraltar, in the West Indies, and in North America. On 16 November 1849 he exchanged into the 7th dragoon guards. He married in 1845 Georgiana, daughter of Captain Richard Armstrong of the 100th foot. She survived him. 
On 25 March 1854 Walker was appointed aide-de-camp to Lord Lucan, who commanded the cavalry division in the Crimea. He was present at Alma, Balaklava, and Inkerman, and was mentioned in dispatches. He was also present at the naval attack on Sevastopol on 17 October, where he acted as aide-de-camp to Lord George Paulet on board the 'Bellerophon', and was awarded the Mejidiye (fifth class). 
On 8 December 1854 Walker was promoted major in his regiment, and in anticipation of this he left the Crimea at the beginning of that month. He was appointed assistant quartermaster-general in Ireland on 9 July 1855, and on 9 November he was given an unattached lieutenant-colonelcy. On 7 December 1858 he became lieutenant-colonel of the 2nd dragoon guards (the Queen's Bays). He joined them in India, and took part in the later operations against the rebels. He commanded a field force in Oudh, with which he defeated the rebels at Bungdon on 27 April 1859, and a month afterwards served in the action of the Jirwah Pass under Sir Hope Grant. He was mentioned in dispatches. 
From India Walker went on to China, being appointed on 14 May 1860 assistant quartermaster-general of cavalry in Sir Hope Grant's expedition. He was present at the actions of Sinho, Changkiawan (Zhangjiawan), and Palichiao (Baliqiao). In the advance on Peking (Beijing) he went ahead to select the camping-grounds, and on 16 September, when Sir Harry Smith Parkes and others were treacherously seized during the truce, he narrowly escaped. His sword was found when Changkiawan was stormed and sacked later in the day, 18 September 1860. He was mentioned in dispatches, and was made CB on 28 February 1861. He had become colonel in the army on 14 December 1860. 
Back in England, Walker went on half pay on 11 June 1861, and on 1 July was appointed assistant quartermaster-general at Shorncliffe. He remained there until 31 March 1865. On 26 April he was made military attache at Berlin, and he held that post for nearly twelve years. In the Austro-Prussian War of 1866 he was attached to the headquarters of the crown prince's army as British military commissioner, and was present at the battles of Nachod and Koniggratz. He was again attached to the crown prince's army in the Franco-Prussian War, and was present at Weissenburg, Worth, Sedan, and throughout the siege of Paris. He was given the medal and the Iron Cross. The irritation of the Germans against England and the number of roving Englishmen made his task difficult, but he was tactful and genial and his action had the approval of the government. 
Walker was promoted major-general on 29 December 1873 (afterwards antedated to 6 March 1868). He resigned his post at Berlin on 31 March 1877, and became lieutenant-general on 1 October. He was inspector-general of military education from January 1878 until 7 October 1884, when he was retired with the honorary rank of general. He had been made KCB on 24 May 1881, and colonel of the 2nd dragoon guards on 22 December 1881. He died at his London residence, 97 Onslow Square, South Kensington, on 19 January 1894, and was buried in Brompton cemetery. Extracts from his letters and journals during active service were published after his death as 'Days of a Soldier's Life' (1894). 


@@@@@


doc= 28472


Walker, Charles Vincent (1812-1882), technical editor and electrical engineer, was born on 20 March 1812 in Marylebone, Middlesex, the son of Vincent Walker and his wife Ann, 'nee' Blake. Details of his education are unknown, although he was said to have been trained as an engineer. By 1838 he was drawn to the study of electricity, and was a founder and active member of the London Electrical Society, serving as its secretary and treasurer and editing its 'Proceedings' from 1841-3. On its winding-up, he started the 'Electrical Magazine', of which only two volumes appeared, in 1841-3. He acquired a wider reputation in 1841 by completing the second volume and editing the entire manuscript of Dionysius Lardner's 'Manual of Electricity, Magnetism and Meteorology', which formed part of Lardner's 'Cabinet Cyclopedia'. Walker's own book on 'Electrotype Manipulation' was published in 1841, and ran through many editions, and, like his telegraph manual, 'Electric Telegraph Manipulation' (1850), was translated into French and German. He also edited and translated into English sundry other scientific works. 
In 1845 Walker was appointed electrician to the South-Eastern Railway Company. During his lifelong tenure of this post, he was responsible for many improvements: when telegraph wires had to be laid underground, he was the first to make use of gutta-percha as an insulant; he devised an instrument to protect telegraph apparatus from damage by atmospheric electric discharge; and he improved graphite batteries. In 1866 he patented apparatus to enable train passengers to communicate with the guard, and in 1876 he patented a 'train describer' for indicating trains on a distant dial. 
Walker also interested himself in submarine telegraphy and on 13 October 1848 he sent the first submarine message, through a 2 mile loop of cable laid from Folkestone to a ship anchored offshore and back, the shore end being connected with the railway company's telegraph to London Bridge Station. In 1849 he collaborated with George Biddell Airy, astronomer royal, in the introduction of time signals, which were telegraphed from Greenwich observatory to stations on the South-Eastern Railway. 
Walker was elected to the Meteorological Society in 1850, where he held various offices and served as president in 1869-70. He encouraged the society to publish its 'Proceedings', of which he was editor from 1861 to 1864. On 7 June 1855 he was elected to the Royal Society; on 8 January 1858 to the Royal Astronomical Society; and in 1876 he was president of the Society of Telegraph Engineers and Electricians. Walker died of heart failure at his residence, 26 Upper Grosvenor Road, Tunbridge Wells, Kent, on 24 December 1882. The probate record described him as a widower, but nothing is known of his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 28473


Walker, Clement (d. 1651), political pamphleteer, was born at Cliffe, in the parish of Tincleton, Dorset. His father was Thomas Walker of Westminster. Clement may have attended Christ Church, Oxford, though there is no record of his matriculation. In 1611 he was admitted to Middle Temple. Soon afterwards he inherited the office of usher of receipt in the exchequer, but he always employed a deputy to do the work. In the 1630s he was also marshal of common pleas. 
Some time before 1626 Walker married Frances (died 1631), daughter of Sir William Pitt, a teller of the exchequer. They had three children, born between 1626 and 1631, but it was not a happy marriage. There were rumours that Frances had been unfaithful, and in June 1629 Walker stabbed and seriously wounded her; the whalebones of her stomacher saved her life. Her father wanted to hush it up, but his son told him that this was impossible, because 'the whole Sheir of Dorsett doth ring with the Infamous fame therof' (BL, Add MS 29974, fol. 118). Frances eventually recovered, and the couple were at least partly reconciled before her death in 1631, although her husband still remained on bad terms with her family. In 1634 Walker was married a second time, to Mary, daughter of Sir William Button. She claimed to have brought him a large marriage portion; in return he settled his office on her as jointure. A son, John, was born to this marriage. The attempt on Frances's life blotted Walker's reputation: Anthony Wood later said that his hands were 'stained with his own wife's blood' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.293). 
By 1640 Walker had acquired an estate at Charterhouse-on-Mendip, Somerset. He supported parliament in the civil war and early in 1643 was appointed to the Somerset assessment and sequestration committees. Soon afterwards he served as advocate in the trial of Robert Yeomans and George Bourchier for attempting to betray Bristol to Prince Rupert. Walker remained in Bristol, and was there when the city fell to Rupert at the end of July 1643. The governor, Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes, defended himself from charges that he had not put up a resolute defence, provoking Walker to accuse him of cowardice. On 25 September 1643 Walker was sent for by the House of Lords, charged with having scandalized Fiennes's father, Lord Saye and Sele. When taken into custody Walker said that Saye was 'a base beggarly Lord, and that his Sons were Cowards' ('JHL', 6.240-41). The Lords fined him $100, awarded Saye $500 damages, and required Walker to make submission at the bar of the house. He refused to submit, claiming that the Lords' judgment 'was against the Liberty of the Subject', and that they had no right to try 'a Commoner of England' ('JHL', 6.247). He was sent to the Tower, but released on bail on 17 October so that he and William Prynne could prosecute the charges against Fiennes. The colonel was court-martialled and sentenced to death, though subsequently pardoned by his commander, the earl of Essex. 
After his release Walker may have spent several years in London; there is no sign that he ever attended meetings of the Somerset committee. He claimed to have lost his whole estate during the war ($10,000 according to his later estimate), to have spent another $3000 in the parliament's service, and to be liable for $5000 borrowed for the defence of Bristol. These sums are almost certainly exaggerations. In 1646 he was elected to the House of Commons for Wells; according to Wood, he curried favour with the local puritans in order to win the seat. He took the covenant on 24 June. In the same year he was named an elder of the Somerset presbyterian classis, though he was critical of clergy who wished to impose an oppressive discipline on the Scottish model. He was one of those accused of instigating the 'presbyterian' London riots of 26 July 1647. He stayed at Westminster when the speakers fled to the army at the end of that month, and on 1 August he was named as chairman of a committee charged with drawing up a protest against the army's actions; his notes for this declaration were soon confiscated. 
By this time Walker was writing the first of his numerous pamphlets against the parliamentary radicals. 'The Mystery of the Two Juntoes' was written in 1647 under the pseudonym Theodorus Verax; in 1648 it was incorporated, along with the first volume of Walker's 'History of Independency', in his 'Relations and Observations, Historical and Politick, upon the Parliament Begun anno Dom. 1640'. Walker argued that the increasing polarization of parliament between 'Presbyterians' and 'Independents' was a sham to enable the leaders of the factions to divide offices and patronage between them. He claimed to express the views of the non-partisan back-benchers, 'the honest middle men of the House' (C. Walker, 'Mystery', 1647, 6). Their desire for a moderate settlement, he said, had been betrayed by their leaders: 'the controversie between the 2 'Juntoes' being no more than whose slaves we shall be' (ibid., 17). Despite his later reputation as a presbyterian, Walker was even-handed in his criticisms of the two factions, blaming the presbyterians for needlessly antagonizing Fairfax's army, and for trying to constitute a countervailing force against the New Model out of disbanded supernumerary forces. 
However, by May 1648 Walker was convinced that it was the radical Independents who were responsible for the illegalities being perpetrated by parliament. In part one of 'The History of Independency' he argued that the army and its allies in the Commons were obstructing a settlement with the king, aiming at achieving power for themselves. His case against the Independents was further developed in 'Anarchie Anglicana, or, The History of Independency, the Second Part' (1649), which focused largely on the events of the previous year. A third part of the series, entitled 'The High Court of Justice, or, Cromwells New Slaughter House in England', appeared in 1651. 
There are few signs of Walker's parliamentary activities in 1648. On 17 June he joined the presbyterians in demanding an investigation of an alleged plot to poison Charles I, and he was sometimes involved in Somerset affairs, joining with other MPs in October to ask for the disbandment of military forces in the county. On 2 December he was named to the presbyterian militia commission for Somerset. In the great all-night debate in the Commons on 4-5 December, Walker spoke in favour of accepting the king's recent answers in the treaty of Newport. He also supported the subsequent motion that the king's answers were a satisfactory basis for continuing negotiations. He was imprisoned in Pride's Purge on 6 December, and remained in custody until some time in January 1649. During that month he joined William Prynne in publishing 'A Declaration and Protestation' against the army's recent actions. 
Walker was again arrested soon after the publication of the second part of 'The History of Independency'. On 24 October 1649 his papers were seized by order of the House of Commons; soon afterwards he was committed to the Tower on a charge of treason, though he was never brought to trial. During his imprisonment the committee of revenue took away his exchequer office and conferred it upon another MP, Humphrey Edwards, whom Walker publicly denounced in a broadside entitled 'The Case between Clement Walker Esq. and Humphrey Edwards, Truely Stated' (1650); his wife wrote a similar attack. Walker died in the Tower in October 1651, and was buried at the nearby church of All Hallows Barking. No known portrait has survived, but a 1647 deposition described Walker as being of short stature, and in 1650 George Wither spoke sneeringly of his red nose and wrinkled face. 
Anthony Wood said that Walker was 'notably vers'd in the liberties and privileges of parliament, and in the statute law of the kingdom' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.293), but he is chiefly important as a political pamphleteer. 'The History of Independency' was a highly effective piece of propaganda against the radicals in parliament, the army, and the counties, especially Somerset. It was still in demand after the Restoration, and was reprinted in 1661. Walker may have begun a continuation, but the one that appeared in 1661 was written by a certain 'T. M'. 


@@@@@


doc= 28474


Deane Franklin Walker (1778-1865), in York. There was also a daughter, Eliza, who married Benjamin Gibson of Gosport. 


@@@@@


doc= 28475


Walker, Sir Edward (1612-1677), herald, was born on 24 January 1612 at Roobers, Nether Stowey, Somerset, the second son of Edward Walker (died 1635/6) of Roobers and Barbara, daughter of Edward Salkeld of Corby Castle, Cumberland. 
In 1633 Walker entered the service of Thomas Howard, earl of Arundel, earl marshal, who was attending Charles I's unpopular coronation as king of Scotland on 18 June 1633 in Edinburgh. On 24 May 1635 he was appointed Blanch Lyon pursuivant-extraordinary, thanks to his patron, by whose warrant of 27 August to the master of the wardrobe he acquired 'a coat of arms [tabard] embroidered with satin upon damask enriched with gold thread' ('CSP dom.', '1635', 355). In 1636 Walker attended Arundel on his lengthy but abortive mission to the ailing Holy Roman emperor, Ferdinand II, in Regensburg. In 1637 he was appointed Rouge Dragon pursuivant and in 1638 Chester herald. In 1639 he was secretary at war in Arundel's bloodless expedition against the Scots leading to the treaty of Berwick, for which he wrote the minutes. He also wrote a short life of his patron, which became the fourth book of Walker's 'Historical Discourses'. On 23 April 1640 he was made paymaster to the garrison at Carlisle and the following year he was paid to disband it. 
On 24 April 1642, shortly before the start of the civil war, Charles I sent Walker and another herald to demand the surrender of Kingston upon Hull and to proclaim Sir John Hotham a traitor in case of refusal. By autumn that year the king had constituted Walker his secretary at war. Following the battle of Edgehill in 1642 Walker remained with the king at Oxford (where he was created MA in 1642) until its siege and surrender in 1646. He was made secretary extraordinary of the privy council on 13 April 1644 and Norroy king of arms in the same year. He was sent to offer a pardon to Waller's army after the battle of Cropredy Bridge of 29 June 1644 and played a similar role on 12 August 1644 prior to the defeat of Essex at Lostwithiel. His account of the 1644 campaigns was an important source for the relevant section of Edward Hyde, earl of Clarendon's 'History of the Rebellion'. 
Walker became Garter king of arms in 1645, having been knighted on 2 February of that year in Oxford. One of his first tasks as Garter was to call on Prince Rupert in Oxford, with the chancellor and register of the order, with messages from the king about the prince's future installation as a knight of the Garter. Following the royalist defeat at Naseby (1645), the capture of the king by the Scots at Newark (1646), and the surrender of Oxford on 24 June 1646, Walker went briefly to France, where he saw at Le Mans the famous enamel memorial plate of Geoffrey Plantagenet, count of Anjou, said to be the earliest surviving example of a true coat of arms. Charles I having escaped in 1647 from Hampton Court to the Isle of Wight, Walker was permitted by parliament to act as his chief secretary at the abortive treaty of Newport. The documentary records of this treaty were published as a supplement to Walker's 'Historical Discourses' but a fuller account by his secretary, Nicholas Oudart, is printed in Peck's 'Desiderata curiosa'. 
The execution of Charles I on 30 January 1649 did not end Walker's career in the royal service. That same year he was in The Hague with Charles II who appointed him clerk of the council in ordinary and receiver of the king's moneys. On 6 June the king sent him a list of debts to be settled immediately and Walker complied. Anxious to preserve his rights in troubled times he petitioned the king to confirm his right as Garter to carry the warrants and insignia to foreign princes and others who were elected to the Order of the Garter. The king, having referred the matter to three companions of the order, confirmed Garter's rights in his declaration at Breda on 28 May 1650. In the following month Walker accompanied Charles to Scotland and his name was included in a list (10 July 1650) of those ordered by the Scots parliament to be banished from the court and/or the country. He was still in Scotland during the battle of Dunbar on 3 September 1650 but on 4 October he was ordered to leave the court within twenty-four hours and he finally embarked for the Netherlands via Aberdeen in late October. From 30 October to 9 November 1650 he reported to Cottington from The Hague on the king's movements following Dunbar. 
Walker had already invested Edward count palatine of the Rhine, first cousin of the king, as a knight of the Garter on 19 September 1649 at St Germain-en-Laye. He later invested three more companions at The Hague in 1653: Henry, duke of Gloucester, brother of Charles II; the prince of Taranto; and William Henry, prince of Orange (later William III). In 1654 he undertook a mission to Berlin to invest (on 3 April) Frederick William, elector of Brandenburg. Nevertheless, Walker was seldom satisfied and his endless complaints irritated his superiors. Secretary Nicholas in 1653 called him importunate, ambitious, and foolish, and in the same year Hyde described him as a correspondent not to be endured, and continued 'he has written impertinent letters either of expostulation or request, every week; he was troubled about Lane's appointment to be Clerk of the Council; next he asked for a letter to the Prince Elector, asking for Lord Stafford's liberty; and now he expostulates severely upon Sir W Ballentyne's being charged with the Garter for the Swedish Prince. (Ogle and others, 2.175)' In the following year Hyde wrote to Nicholas 'Why should [you] wonder that a herald who is naturally made up of embroidery, should adorn his own services?' (ibid., 2.346). However both men sometimes found him useful, as on 5 May 1656 when Hyde recorded that he had heard from Walker in Amsterdam who suggested a scheme for getting money from Dutch Catholics by means of some priests. On 23 March 1657 Hyde wrote to Ormond that Walker, like Hyde himself, desired plenty and to live according to his quality as herald, but that it was no more in Hyde's power to help him than to restore him to his lodging in Windsor Castle. This refers to Garter's Tower in the lower ward which successive garters petitioned unsuccessfully to have repaired. 
Walker was on good terms with Elias Ashmole but apparently disliked Sir William Dugdale, though after borrowing the latter's splendid 'Monasticon Anglicanum' for three days in Amsterdam he wrote to him enthusiastically on 6 August 1655 saying 'I have almost made myself blind perusing it' and offered to supply a plate by W. Hollar (Hamper, 293). He was also a friend of the astrologer William Lilly and took an interest in horoscopes himself. The Ashmolean manuscripts contain much of this material including Walker's nativity 'Calculated and interpreted by Capt. G Wharton at Oxford 1645' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 179, 2.1-9). However, he took exception to a book about Charles I published by Lilly in July 1651, 'Monarchy and No Monarchy', and admonished him in a letter from The Hague dated 24 May 1652 which became the fifth book of his 'Historical Discourses'. In November 1655 Walker joined Charles II at Cologne and became once more secretary of the council and the following year secretary at war. 
At the Restoration, Walker returned to his post as Garter displacing the intruded Edward Bysshe who, with parliamentary sanction, had been Garter from 1646 to 1660 and Clarenceux from 1650 to 1658. Sir William Le Neve, who had been appointed Clarenceux in 1635, was found insane in March 1661, and although Walker tried to get the post for himself Bysshe was appointed on 10 March 1661. He was frequently attacked by Walker, notably for having allegedly forged his own pedigree, but Walker's motives were partly selfish, namely to hinder the grant to Bysshe of a commission to carry out a heraldic visitation, or else to get himself included in it. In fact on 7 July 1663 Clarenceux (Bysshe) and Norroy (John Dugdale) received commissions in their own right to visit their respective provinces, thus resuming a practice which had been halted by the civil war. Walker's self interest had already led him, while still in exile in 1657, to draft a proposal for uniting the offices of Clarenceux and Norroy with that of Garter. He further angered his colleagues by making grants of arms without reference to the provincial kings (Clarenceux and Norroy) or to the earl marshal. On 6 May 1645 he had received a warrant from Charles I at Oxford authorizing him to grant augmentations (special marks of honour) to the arms of the king's faithful adherents, or to grant them new arms as he saw fit. On 3 September 1660 he obtained a further warrant confirming and amplifying that of 1645. 
Meanwhile, away from the College of Arms, on 27 May 1660 Walker had invested with the Garter, on board ship, Sir Edward Montagu, who had just escorted Charles II back to England and in July of that year Walker, John Nicholas, and Sir George Lane were made clerks of the privy council in ordinary. Walker and Nicholas received a substantial pay rise on 18 April 1665. Walker also played an important part in the coronation of Charles II, which took place in Westminster Abbey during a thunderstorm on 23 April 1661. He wrote a detailed account of the event in fifty-two manuscript folios dated 25 May 1661, subsequently published in 1820 as 'A Circumstantial Account of the Preparations for the Coronation'. Ashmole also wrote a brief narrative of the coronation and banquet as part of a book by John Ogilby but withdrew his name from the second and subsequent editions, possibly for fear of upsetting Walker. 
In 1668 the College of Arms submitted to the commissioners draft orders for the regulation of the college based on those of 1568 but dealing in more detail with the control of unauthorized herald painters, certain duties of the kings of arms such as the recording of their grants of arms at the college, and the conduct of visitations and funerals. These were largely accepted by the commissioners but Walker and Bysshe both seemed to ignore the requirement to register their grants. Meanwhile in 1672 Charles II revived the office of hereditary earl marshal, which had been in commission since 1662, conferring it on Henry (Howard) earl of Norwich, later duke of Norfolk. The latter decided that the kings of arms needed stricter control and on 21 May 1673 he made an order requiring every grant to be made by all three kings jointly, following a warrant from the earl marshal, and recorded before it went to the grantee. He also laid down minimum fees, both Bysshe and Walker having been accused of making cheap grants surreptitiously. Next day the earl marshal directed a warrant to all three kings to make a grant to one Nevinson Fox. Walker considered the earl marshal had exceeded his powers and, perhaps unwisely, petitioned the privy council. The king referred the petition to the lord privy seal, whose lengthy opinion strongly supported the earl marshal, whereupon the king, on 16 June 1673, issued a declaration of the earl marshal's authority over the officers of arms. The loyal Ashmole tried to assist Walker by drafting a statement claiming that while Garter was subject to the earl marshal's authority as a member of the college he was not so as an officer of the Order of the Garter. The exercise was in vain, for on 22 January 1675 an order in council confirmed the validity of the king's declaration of 1673. 
Fuller details of Walker's grievances against his colleagues and the earl marshal during the period 1673-6 may be found in Ashmole manuscript 1133. He singled out for particular blame Andrew Hay, the earl marshal's secretary, and Thomas Lee, Chester herald. Lee was one of a triumvirate (with Francis Sandford and Henry St George) who disagreed with Walker over details of the plans to rebuild the College of Arms on the site of Derby House, destroyed in the great fire of 1666. Many similar disputes were chronicled in letters sent to Sir Joseph Williamson in Cologne by his clerk Henry Ball. Letters of June 1673 indicate that Bysshe was in disgrace over the inadequacy of his grant and visitation records and that Walker proposed to sell his place and retire. He did not in fact do so and he even obeyed the earl marshal's warrant for the grant of arms to Nevinson Fox. However, further disagreements followed and it is regrettable that these disputes clouded the final years of his distinguished career, to the prejudice of the office of Garter and of the College of Arms itself. 
On 18 May 1675 Walker bought for $1060 from the surviving trustee of Elizabeth, Lady Barnard, William Shakespeare's grandchild and heir, a house called New Place in Stratford upon Avon, which had been the poet's last home. However, he does not seem to have lived there but at Clopton in Warwickshire. He married at an unknown date Agnes (died in or before 1676), daughter of John Reeve of Bookham, Surrey, and had an only child, Barbara, who married, in 1662, Sir John Clopton of Clopton; their eldest son, Edward, was baptized at the College of Arms in 1663. Walker died at Whitehall on 20 February 1677 and was buried in the Lady (or Clopton) Chapel in Stratford upon Avon church. His epitaph was composed by his successor William Dugdale. In his will he left the college the library of Sir William Le Neve, which he had purchased in 1663, having already presented it with a collection of original grants of arms in 1673. He also bequeathed to his successors as Garter two volumes of the arms of the nobility and two relating to the Order of the Garter. He was probably the first Garter to keep a continuous record of the order, and Dugdale was to continue the second of Walker's volumes. 


@@@@@


doc= 28476


Elizabeth Walker (1800-1876), miniature painter, wife of William Walker, was born in London, the second daughter of the engraver Samuel William Reynolds (1773-1835) and his wife, Jane Cowen. Her father taught her to paint and to engrave in mezzotint at an early age; she later studied engraving with Thomas Lupton and miniature painting with George Clint and William Northcote, and herself became a popular miniaturist. She was a frequent exhibitor at the Royal Academy and the Society of British Artists between 1818 and 1850, and in 1830 she was appointed miniature painter to William IV. Among her many eminent sitters were five prime ministers. She also painted in oils, and after her marriage she assisted her husband with his engravings. She died at 64 Margaret Street on 9 November 1876 and was buried with her husband. Her miniature of her father is in the National Portrait Gallery, London, and her full-size portrait of the earl of Devon is at Christ Church, Oxford. 


