@@@@@


doc= 28477


Walker, Frederick (1840-1875), painter and illustrator, was born at 90 Great Titchfield Street, London, on 26 May 1840, the son of William Henry Walker (died 'c'.1847), a jeweller, and his wife, Ann Powell (died 1874). W. H. Walker died while Frederick was still a child, from which time he and his seven siblings were supported by their mother, who was a skilled embroiderer. Frederick's paternal grandfather, William Walker, had been a painter of portraits and nature subjects who exhibited at the Royal Academy between 1782 and 1808. 
Walker attended the North London Collegiate School in Camden Town until the age of fifteen, when he was placed as an apprentice and draughtsman in the office of Messrs Baker and Harris, architects in Gower Street. In 1857 he enrolled at Leigh's academy, and in March the following year he entered the Royal Academy Schools. During this time he regularly drew from antique sculpture in the British Museum. Walker was notoriously inattentive as a student, both at Leigh's and at the Royal Academy. Towards the end of 1858 he was employed by Josiah Wood Whymper in Lambeth as an apprentice designer of woodblock illustrations, where he was to work three days a week for two years. There he met Charles Green and John William North, both fellow apprentices; the latter became Walker's closest friend. In 1859 he enrolled at the Langham Artists' Society, a club where young painters worked together on specified subjects and then compared the resulting sketches. 
By 1860 Walker's reputation as a designer of black and white illustrations was sufficiently well established for him to embark on a freelance career. His output as an illustrator during the first half of the 1860s was considerable, contributing as he did to periodicals such as 'Good Words', 'Once a Week', and the 'Cornhill Magazine'. His series of illustrations for Thackeray's novel 'The Adventures of Philip', which was serialized in the 'Cornhill Magazine' in 1861-2, were admired by a wide public and by the author himself. Walker had been asked in the first instance to adapt Thackeray's own sketches, but after the first two and following his plea that he should be allowed to contribute designs of his own invention he was given virtually a free hand. The illustration entitled 'Thanksgiving', later worked up as the watercolour drawing known as 'Philip in Church' (Tate collection), ended the series and was published in August 1862. In addition, Walker made drawings for the Dalziel brothers, for publications including both 'Hard Times' and 'Reprinted Pieces' by Charles Dickens. Dalziel commissioned a series of thirty illustrations of countryside subjects from Walker, but found that increasing pressure of work meant that only about a third of the project was fulfilled. Other artists, among them George John Pinwell and J. W. North, were brought in, and the resulting volume was entitled 'A Round of Days' (1866). This was followed by 'Wayside Posies' (1867), also produced by Dalziel and published by Routledge. The engraver Joseph Swain, who cut many of the woodblocks that Walker designed, wrote of Walker's method: 'In working out the minutest detail Walker was painfully conscientious. This was even shown in the backgrounds of his illustrations, most of which were drawn on the blocks from nature' (Goldman, 'Victorian Illustration', 125). 
In the early 1860s Walker was turning increasingly to painting, treating domestic and genre subjects, some of which were derived from his work as an illustrator, and working both in oil and watercolour. His first exhibited work at the Royal Academy -- 'The Lost Path' (priv. coll.), shown in 1863 -- was badly hung, but none the less attracted admiring attention. In February the following year he was elected as an associate member of the Old Watercolour Society and exhibited the watercolour version of 'Philip in Church', previously treated as an illustration, as a trial piece. At the society's summer exhibition of 1864 he showed the elaborate watercolour 'Spring', while the following year he sent its pendant, 'Autumn' (both V&A). He was also regularly represented in the society's winter exhibitions of drawings and sketches. 
Walker's use of bodycolour was elaborate and very personal, and as a technique identified him as one of the younger generation who believed that the method of blending pigment with commercially manufactured Chinese white paint to give opaque areas of colour was a legitimate way of gaining depth of tone and richness of compositional effect. This was a technique still regarded with disfavour by the older members of the Watercolour Society, and about 1865 Walker caricatured himself squeezing paint out of an enormous tube, with the caption 'What 'would' 'The Society' say if it could only see me?' In 1876, on the occasion of the memorial exhibition of Walker's paintings and drawings, John Ruskin commented unkindly on the artist's 'semi-miniature, quarter fresco, quarter wash manner of his own -- exquisitely clever, and reaching, under such clever management, delightfullest results here and there, but which betrays his genius into perpetual experiment instead of achievement' ('Works of John Ruskin', 14.340). 
In his watercolour compositions of the 1860s and early 1870s Walker devised his most characteristic subject type, in which figures go about their daily routines in either rustic or urban settings. A subject such as 'My Front Garden' (Harris Museum and Art Gallery, Preston), exhibited at the Watercolour Society in the winter of 1864-5, shows the immediate precinct of the house in St Petersburgh Place, Bayswater, which he shared with his mother and siblings from 1863, and a postman handing letters to a housekeeper. Of his careful attention to the forms of nature, but avoidance of mechanical realism, J. W. North wrote of his friend's method: 'Walker painted direct from nature, not from sketches. His ideal appeared to be to have suggestiveness in his work; not by leaving out, but by painting in, detail, and then partly erasing it. [His work] frequently passed through a stage of extreme elaboration of drawing, to be afterwards carefully worn away, so that a suggestiveness and softness resulted -- not emptiness, but veiled detail. His knowledge of nature was sufficient to disgust him with the ordinary conventions which do duty for grass, leaves, and boughs; and there is scarcely an inch of his work that has not been at one time a careful, loving study of fact. (Marks, 168)' 

Walker had ambitions to be known for large-scale oils as well as for watercolours. In 1867 he returned as an exhibitor at the Royal Academy, with the remarkable canvas 'The Bathers' (Lady Lever Art Gallery, Port Sunlight), showing boys swimming and playing together beside the River Thames. From the early 1860s Walker had been connected with the group of St John's Wood artists who called themselves The Clique, and among which his fellows were P. H. Calderon, G. D. Leslie, J. E. Hodgson, W. F. Yeames, G. A. Storey, and H. Stacy Marks. It was perhaps contact with artists in this circle that caused Walker to introduce symbolical elements and a more generalized evocation of the landscape in his academy exhibits. Walker was much praised for his oil 'The Old Gate' (Tate collection) when it was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1869, and in fact received a personal commendation from Frederic Leighton, who served on the hanging committee that year. The following year he showed another Somerset subject, 'The Plough' (Tate collection), a work that secured his election as an associate of the Royal Academy in January 1871. 
Although Walker was based in London, most of his work was done in different parts of the countryside -- his most favoured haunts being the Thames valley around the village of Cookham, where his mother had a cottage; the Quantock Hills in north Somerset, where he stayed with J. W. North at Halsway Manor, and later at Woolstone Moor; and the Scottish highlands, to which he went on fishing expeditions to Corrichoillie with Richard Ansdell and often stayed with his friend and patron William Graham MP, at Stobhall on the River Tay. Occasionally he ventured overseas -- to Paris in 1863 and 1866; and to Venice in 1868 and 1870. A breakdown in his health in 1873 -- presumably the first symptom of the consumption that was to cause his death two years later -- led to his visiting Algiers, in company with North, in the winter of 1873-4. Whenever he was abroad he found himself desperately homesick; in Algiers he cried piteously: 'I shall never see a hansom cab again' (Marks, 291). 
Walker remained busy through the year 1874, taking up various unfinished canvases, such as 'Mushroom Gatherers', and completing 'The Right of Way' (National Gallery of Victoria, Melbourne). In May 1875 he travelled to Scotland, and this was despite worries about his deteriorating state of health. At St Fillans on Loch Earn in Perthshire he collapsed; his twin sister Mary Marks was sent for, and she was with him when he died on 4 June, at the Drummond Arms Hotel. His body was taken south, and was buried on 8 June 1875 in Cookham churchyard, beside that of his mother, Ann, who had died in the previous November. He was unmarried. Henry Armstead's sculpted profile portrait of Walker remains in Cookham church, and conveys the same distinctive appearance that the artist himself had often shown in his delightful self-portrait caricatures, a number of which are reproduced in J. G. Marks's biography of his late brother-in-law, 'The Life and Letters of Frederick Walker' (1896). 
A memorial exhibition of Walker's works was held at Deschamps Gallery in New Bond Street in the spring of 1876. A notice of the exhibition in the 'Art Journal' made the observation that, 'like Millet, and Mason, and Pinwell, [Walker's] sympathies went forth to what was lowly and familiar, and his genius sublimed common things into the region of poetry and Art' ('Art Journal', 38, 1876, 85). 


@@@@@


doc= 28478


Walker, George (bap. 1582?, d. 1651), Church of England clergyman, was born at Hawkshead in Furness, Lancashire, and was probably the son of Edward Walker baptized in Hawkshead on 7 October 1582. Educated first at Hawkshead grammar school, founded by his kinsman Archbishop Edwin Sandys, he then went to St John's College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA early in 1609 and proceeded MA in 1611, and where his teachers included Christopher Foster and Alexander Richardson. Ordained deacon in London on 22 September 1611, 'aged twenty-eight', he may have been curate of Ware, Hertfordshire, before being ordained priest on 7 June 1612. 
In 1611 Walker attracted attention by attacking the celebrated London puritan divine Anthony Wotton for perversion of the orthodox doctrine of justification. Their dispute, which was initially conducted in private conference and from various city pulpits, centred on whether or not Christ's righteousness was imputed to the believer, Wotton having claimed in defiance of Calvinist orthodoxy that this was not the case. Walker believed he detected in Wotton's position a thinly veiled Socinianism, and he noisily accused the older preacher of heresy and blasphemy. The dispute ultimately led in 1614 to an informal (but semi-sanctioned) conclave of some of London's most distinguished godly divines -- including Lewis Bayly, Richard Westfield, William Gouge, Richard Stock, and Thomas Gataker -- which gathered to adjudicate the quarrel. The result was a qualified victory for Wotton. This neither hindered Walker's career nor ended his campaign, however. On the presentation of the dean and chapter of Canterbury Cathedral he was inducted on 29 April 1614 to the living of St John the Evangelist, Watling Street, London, resigned in his favour by his former tutor Foster. Later in the decade he wrote a long manuscript polemical attack on the renowned nonconformist divine William Bradshaw, whose 'A Treatise of Justification' (1615) had attempted to clarify the dispute. Walker's appointment on 2 March 1619 as chaplain to the widely respected bishop of Ely, Nicholas Felton, suggests that despite his godly connections and tendencies he also had friends in the ecclesiastical establishment and was regarded as a conformist. That year he proceeded BD, being incorporated of Oxford in 1621. 
While in the early 1620s Walker apparently accused the London minister William Chibald of errors similar to Wotton's, he also took aim at a very different polemical target, Roman Catholicism. In May 1623 Walker agreed to an informal conference with a priest named Sylvester Norris; a month later, accompanied by his fellow London minister Henry Burton, Walker engaged in a disputation with the notorious Jesuit John Fisher (real name Percy). Walker's accounts of these encounters were published respectively as 'The Sum of a Disputation' (1624) and 'Fishers Folly Unfolded' (1624). 
Only with the accession of William Laud to the bishopric of London in 1628 did Walker begin to experience difficulties with the ecclesiastical authorities. In November 1631 he found himself summoned before the high commission. Although no articles or accusations survive, the fact that the court ordered him at one point to 'give in a Coppy of the sermon' suggests that he was in trouble for some matter uttered by him from the pulpit (CUL, MS Dd. ii. 21, fol. 85'r'). His case dragged on for two years, although in the end Walker appears to have escaped serious censure. Yet this was only the beginning of his troubles with Laud. As the latter, now archbishop, observed to King Charles in his annual report for 1635, Walker 'had all his time been but a disorderly and peevish man, and now of late hath very forwardly preached against the Lord Bishop of Ely [Francis White] his book concerning the Lord's Day, set out by authority; but upon a canonical admonition given him to desist he hath recollected himself, and I hope will be advised. ('Works', 5.332)' Perhaps unsurprisingly given his temperament, this warning served only to provoke Walker, who in 1638 brazenly published a work of sabbatarian extremism, 'The Doctrine of the Sabbath', printed illicitly at Amsterdam. In 1638-9 he came under official scrutiny again for his theological disputes with John Goodwin, an affray that drew the intervention of Bishop William Juxon of London. 
Walker's final confrontation with the Caroline authorities came on 14 November 1638, when he was called before the king and privy council and 'Charged to have uttered and delivered in a Sermon... the fourth of October Last, divers thinges tending to publique faction, and disobedience to Authority' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Bankes 23, fol. 27'r'). On Walker's account, Laud (perhaps not without some warrant) 'accused to the king' that Walker had been 'a seditious fellow ever since he the said Archbishop knew London, and a preacher of factious and mutinous doctrine and the greatest troubler of London who had raysed upp more troubles and stirres then any other in the City' (TNA: PRO, SP 16/500/6, fols. 35-8). Among other things, it was alleged that Walker had preached that 'wee must not too much fear great men kings and potentates', that '[h]e teaches inferiors to examine and dispute the commands of their superiors', that '[h]e blames officers and ministers who execute the warrants of judges and magistrates by taking away mens goods and Haling them to prison calling them executions of unjust decrees', a claim that the councillors saw as a reference to ship money (Bodl. Oxf., MS Bankes 44, fol. 13'r'). For his pains Walker found himself suspended and committed to the Gatehouse, where he languished for ten weeks until he grew perilously ill and was transferred to his brother's house in the country. Walker remained under house arrest for the next year and a half. 
On 20 May 1641 Walker was freed by order of parliament, and his imprisonment declared illegal. Restored to his parsonage, he published that year a number of theological works which acknowledged his debt to Londoners and others who had supported him in his afflictions, including 'The Key of Saving Knowledge' (dedicated to his parishioners), 'The History of the Creation' (dedicated to the earl of Bedford), and 'God Made Visible in his Works' (dedicated to Sir Thomas Barrington, Sir Gilbert Gerard, Sir William Masson, and Sir Martin Lumley). Twenty-five years after the Wotton affair, he also continued to spar in print over its exact details. His 'Socinianism in the Fundamental Point of Justification' (1641) and 'A True Relation' (1642) were countered by Thomas Gataker's 'Mr Anthony Wotton's Defence' (1641). He went on to become an active member of the Westminster assembly of divines in 1643, to preach a fast sermon before parliament on 29 January 1645, and (as a zealous presbyterian) to become a leader of the first London classis upon its foundation in 1645, serving alongside William Gouge as a trier. His anonymous advocacy of the new discipline appeared as 'A Modell of the Government of the Church under the Gospell' (1646). 
During this period Walker likewise devoted considerable effort to raising funds for the establishment of lectureships in parts of England that, in the words of his will, had hitherto been 'most barren and destitute of meanes to maintayne the preaching of the Gospell', especially his native Lancashire. Indeed, when he died late in 1651 he bequeathed land in his birthplace of Hawkshead for the establishment of a perpetual lectureship there. Walker was survived by his wife, Katherine, who proved his will on 22 January 1652, a married daughter, and his apparently estranged son, George (who against Walker's wishes had abandoned study for the ministry and secretly married a poor, undowried woman). 


@@@@@


doc= 28479


Walker, George (1645/6-1690), Church of Ireland clergyman, was the son of the Revd George Walker ('c'.1600-1677) and Ursula (died 1654), the daughter of Sir John Stanhope of Melwood, Yorkshire. His parents settled in Ireland but fled following the 1641 rising. Although Walker is generally supposed to have been born and brought up in Yorkshire, he claimed to have an 'affection to the Scottish nation where he had his education' (Walker, 'Vindication', preface, 3). The family returned to Ireland after the Restoration and Walker matriculated at Dublin University in 1662 and took holy orders. He married, about 1668, Isabella Barclay ('b'. 'c'.1650), with whom he had five sons and three daughters. In 1674 he was appointed rector of Donoghmore, co. Tyrone, which had been devastated during the civil war. He built a rectory there in 1683 and a mill in the village in 1684. 
In early 1689, when Ireland was again on the brink of war, Walker rallied the protestants in the area and raised men to garrison Dungannon. Orders to abandon the town were received on 14 March from Colonel Robert Lundy, who planned to consolidate the forces under his command. When King James's army marched on Londonderry, Walker commanded five companies in St Johnstown. On 13 April he rode to Lundy to alert him to the danger, and was present that night at Clady when the Irish advance was temporarily checked. On the following morning he was posted with his troops to Long Causey, north of Lifford, but once the Irish army crossed the Finn he was forced to abandon his position and fall back on Londonderry. Walker arrived at night to find the gates shut, and he and his men were obliged to sleep outside the walls. He gained entry the next day only after the sentry had been threatened. 
Lundy's decision to treat with the enemy once King James arrived outside the city provoked a mutiny. Lundy refused to continue as governor and on 19 April, after a hurried election, Henry Baker succeeded him and nominated Walker as a joint governor, a choice that was ratified by the electorate. Both Walker and Baker begged Lundy to remain, but without success, and Walker arranged Lundy's escape from the city the following evening. The division of responsibilities between the new governors was such that Walker took charge of the civil administration of the city and all the provisioning, while Baker looked after military affairs. Walker was also elected colonel of one of the regiments in the city and took an active part in its defence throughout the ensuing three months. He proved to be an inspirational leader. John Michelburne, never quick to praise others, wrote of Walker that: 'Truly much Praise was due to him for having been so great an Animator of the Protestant Cause in those worst of Times' (Michelburne, 'An Account', x). When Baker died on 30 June, Michelburne succeeded him to become joint governor with Walker. 
After the Irish failed to storm the defences on 4 June, the siege developed into a blockade. Provisions in the city ran low and the garrison was reduced to eating horseflesh, cats, mice, seaweed, and dogs 'fattened by eating the bodies of the slain Irish' (Walker, 'True Account', 39). The desperate circumstances of the city prompted occasional outbreaks of rioting fuelled by wild rumours that Walker was either embezzling the stores or treating with the enemy. A later cause of discontent in some quarters was the suggestion that Walker's intransigence was preventing an honourable capitulation. In early June, he was forced to take refuge in Baker's house while a violent mob searched for him outside, and later that month a group of officers signed a petition to have him removed. Nevertheless, the complaints against Walker were rejected by the overwhelming majority of the garrison as, after the city was finally relieved on 28th July, he and Michelburne welcomed General Percy Kirke into the city on behalf of the inhabitants and led the celebrations. 
After handing over the command of his regiment, Walker was entrusted with a loyal address to King William signed by 145 officers, clergymen, 'and other gentlemen' of Londonderry. On 9 August he set sail for Scotland and began a triumphant progress to London. He was made a burgess and guild-brother of the city of Glasgow on 13 August. He received the same honours in Edinburgh on the next day, and on his journey south he was mobbed and dined in Chester on 22 August. 
Walker's reputation in London had been made not only by the newsletters but by the publication of a speech and two sermons supposedly given by him during the siege. He was met at Barnet by a coach belonging to Sir Robert Cotton, the MP for Chester, and was brought discreetly into the city. Nevertheless, 'The prime citizens treated him with all the demonstrations of joy and gratitude; and the vulgar even stifled him with gazing, crowding and acclamations' (Macrory, 325). A week after his arrival, he was taken to Hampton Court to be presented to the king. William drank to his health, gave him $5000, commissioned Kneller to paint his portrait, and promised him the bishopric of Derry when it fell vacant. Walker was banqueted by the Irish Society, the sheriffs of London, and the lord mayor, and was made a doctor of divinity by the universities of Oxford and Cambridge. 
In November 1689 Walker presented a petition to the House of Commons on behalf of the 2000 widows and orphans in Londonderry, and was invited to the bar of the house to be told by the speaker that $10,000 had been voted for the relief of the sufferers and that note had been taken of the 'extraordinary service you have done to their Majesties and to England and Ireland'. 
Walker's self-effacing manner was much admired. He told the House of Commons: 'As for the service I have done, it is very little, and does not deserve this favour you have done me' (Hempton, 403). The 'London Gazette' noted that 'The applauses of the People as he passes are very troublesome to him, for his modesty is as great, and as deservedly admired, as his courage and Conduct' ('London Gazette', no. 2484). Narcissus Luttrell described Walker as 'a very modest person' (Luttrell, 555), and John Tillotson, yet to become archbishop of Canterbury, wrote approvingly of 'Walker, whose modesty is equal to his merit' (Milligan, 360). 
Bishop Burnet saw Walker as being 'but a man of ordinary parts, but they were well suited to this work, for he did wonders in this siege' (BL, Add. MS 63057B, fol. 278). The caricature of Walker in King James's 'Memoirs' (p. 334) as a 'fierce Minister of the gospel, being of the true Cromwelian or Cameronian stamp' is quite false, especially as Walker described himself as 'a true son of the Church of England' (Walker, 'Vindication', 13). 
Walker took lodgings in Fetter Lane, London, where he hurriedly wrote his 'True Account of the Siege of London-Derry'. Although this proved a popular and vivid description of the siege, it drew immediate criticism, especially from Presbyterians, and sparked off a pamphlet war. In an attempt to placate his critics, Walker published later in the year 'A Vindication of the Account of the Siege of Derry'. Sensitive to the suggestion that as a clergyman he should not have taken up arms, he pleaded that 'his Case has all the authority that the greatest necessity in the World can give to any Action -- the lives of thousands, besides his own, were at stake; his Religion, that is dearer than all, and the 'English' and 'Scotch' equally dear to him, next door to an utter Extirpation out of Ireland. (Walker, 'Vindication', 23)' Walker's 'True Account' was in early 1690 attacked in print by the Irish Presbyterian minister John Mackenzie, who had been his regimental chaplain during the siege. 'Walker', wrote Mackenzie, 'was a man of peace all the time and was guilty of shedding no other blood to stain his coat but the blood of the grape' (Mackenzie, 'Invisible Champion', 8). The 'True Account' was criticized for falsely playing up Walker's own part in the siege at the expense of others: 'Gov. Baker has been thus injuriously pilfered of several of his deserved plumes, and Dr Walker adorned with them' (Mackenzie, 'Narrative', preface, iii). 
Mackenzie took particular exception to Walker's describing himself throughout the 'True Account' as 'The Governor', thereby giving the impression that he stood above Baker and Michelburne. Whenever Baker or Michelburne signed a document first, Mackenzie asserted, Walker 'seldom failed to crowd in his name before them' (Mackenzie, 'Narrative', 62). Whatever the truth of that, Mackenzie's claim that Walker was not a governor at all, but merely the commissary of stores, is certainly false. This is clear from Michelburne's barbed remark of 1692 that he 'was in joynt Command with the Doctor, whose conduct appear'd more conspicuous in the Eating part than the Fighting, and reason good, the Charge of the Stores, and Provision being committed to him alone' (Michelburne, 'An Account', x). 
In recounting a surprise attack by the defenders in the early hours of 6 May, Walker described himself as leading 'at the head of them with all imaginable silence' (Walker, 'True Account', 26). Mackenzie retorted: 'if he did so, it was not only with all imaginable silence, but with so wonderful secrecy too, as to be neither seen nor heard by any of those that are said to follow him' (Mackenzie, 'Invisible Champion', 8). 
Walker was also criticized for belittling the part in the defence played by the Presbyterians in the city. In the 'True Account', he listed the names of seventeen other clergymen who were in the city during the siege. There were also seven nonconforming ministers, he wrote, 'whose names I could not learn' (Hempton, 146), but noted that they 'were equally careful of their people and kept them obedient and quiet' (ibid., 113). This statement, with its suggestion that the Presbyterians were naturally disobedient and noisy, still caused anger two centuries after his death. 'Perhaps no other passage could be produced from the whole range of English literature in which an equal amount of deliberate and stinging malice is conveyed under the garb of innocence and praise' (Witherow, 300). 
To the Presbyterians, Walker's crime was aggravated by his printing a misspelt list of those nonconforming ministers at the end of his 'Vindication'. William Gilchrist of Kilrea was spelt as 'Mr W. KilChrist'. 'The mischievious intent cannot be mistaken', wrote Doctor Killen (Killen, xvi). It was 'a puerile attempt to annoy the Presbyterians' (ibid.). 
Walker travelled back to Ireland in February 1690 and was in Carrickfergus to greet King William on his arrival on 14 June. The see of Derry became vacant on the death of Ezekiel Hopkins on 19 June, but Walker was never consecrated bishop, as he accompanied the army on its march south. While encouraging the troops forward, he was shot dead at the battle of the Boyne on 1 July 1690. The account published by Sir John Dalrymple in 1771 that, on being told of Walker's death by the river, King William enquired sarcastically 'Fool that he was, what had he to do there?' (Dalrymple, 1.40) is apocryphal. Walker's corpse was stripped by camp followers and was buried on the field of battle on the same day. 
Thirteen years later Walker's widow paid for his remains to be disinterred and reburied in the church at Castlecaulfield, co. Tyrone. The Latin inscription on his monument there reads: 'His fame shall be more durable than rock.' When the bones were inspected in 1838 it was found that they belonged to more than one man. 'A cast was taken of the skull, which was perfectly sound, and in which the organs of intelligence and firmness were remarkably developed' ('Newry Telegraph', 30 Oct 1838). In 1826 a statue of Walker on an 81 foot stone column was erected on the walls of Londonderry. It was destroyed by a bomb in 1973. 


@@@@@


doc= 28480


Walker, George (d. 1777), privateer, is of unknown origins. As a boy and a young man he served in the Dutch navy and was employed in the Levant, apparently for the protection of trade against Turkish or Greek pirates. Later he became the owner of a merchant ship and commanded her for some years. In 1739 he was principal owner and commander of the 'William' (20 guns and only 32 men), trading from London to South Carolina. The Carolina coast was heavily populated by Spanish privateers, and in the absence of a British man-of-war Walker put the 'William' at the service of the colonial government. His offer was accepted, whereupon he increased the crew to 130 and presently succeeded in driving the Spaniards off the coast. In late 1742 he sailed for England with three merchantmen in convoy, but his ship foundered in a December gale. On his eventual arrival in London he learned that his agents had allowed the insurance to lapse and that he was a ruined man. 
The following year Walker was master of the 'Russia Merchant', trading to the Baltic. With the outbreak of war with France in 1744 he was offered the command of the 'Mars', a private ship of war of 26 guns, to cruise in company with another, the 'Boscawen', somewhat larger and belonging to the same owner. They sailed from Dartmouth in November, and in early January 1745 encountered two homeward-bound French ships of the line, which captured the 'Mars' after the 'Boscawen' had hurriedly deserted her. Walker was sent as prisoner in the 'Fleuron'. On 6 January the two ships and their prize were sighted by a British squadron of four ships of the line, including the 'Sunderland' (Captain John Brett), the 'Captain' (Thomas Griffin), and the 'Hampton Court' (Savage Mostyn). The four British ships now divided, with two giving chase but failing to engage the Frenchmen, who escaped to safety at Brest. The crews of the 'Fleuron' and 'Neptune', though sickly and depleted, were jubilant and boastful at their escape from the controversial British action. At Brest, Walker was landed as a prisoner at large and was exchanged within a month. On his return to England he was put in command of the 'Boscawen' and sent out in company with the 'Mars', which had been recaptured and bought by her former owners. In this cruise Walker met another privateer, the 'Sheerness', and agreed to sail in company. Next day, north-west of Cape Finisterre, they sighted eight homeward-bound West Indiamen under the French flag. Walker boldly attacked them, sank one, and with the aid of the 'Sheerness' captured five, which were safely brought to Bristol. On a second cruise, coming into the channel in December the weakly built 'Boscawen' almost fell to pieces, and was preserved to be run ashore near St Ives, on the Cornish coast, only through Walker's exertions. His conduct was widely reported in London, with the result that he was almost immediately offered a much more important command. 
Walker now left the employ of his Dartmouth owners, following an offer from a London syndicate who had formed a squadron to attack the powerful ships increasingly employed by France and Spain to bring their cargoes across the Atlantic. This force, known collectively as the Royal Family, had already achieved one notable success; Walker was to have the command of what proved to be the culminating effort of British privateering. The squadron, comprising four ships -- the 'King George', 'Prince Frederick', 'Duke', and 'Princess Amelia' -- carried an aggregate of 121 guns and 970 men. Its prestige was very high, for in the summer of 1745, off Louisbourg, it had made an enormously rich prize that, after the owners' share of $700,000 had been deducted, yielded $850 to each seaman, and to the officers in proportion. After cruising for nearly a year and having made prizes well in excess of $200,000 the Royal Family put into Lisbon; they sailed again in July 1747, and had watered in Lagos Bay, when on 6 October the Spanish ship 'Glorioso' (70 guns) was sighted standing in towards Cape St Vincent. Walker rightly assumed that she had treasure and boldly attacked her in the 'King George', a 32-gun frigate. In an action of several hours' duration, in smooth water and fine weather, the 'King George' was nearly beaten; but on the 'Prince Frederick''s coming up, the 'Glorioso' fled to the westward, where she was met and engaged by the 'Dartmouth', a king's ship of 50 guns that accidentally blew up, with the loss of all but one of her crew. Some hours later the 80-gun 'Russell' brought the 'Glorioso' to action and succeeded in taking her. Only half-manned, the 'Russell' was largely dependent on the privateers to take the prize into the Tagus. The Royal Family then continued cruising, but with moderate success owing to the absence of enemy shipping, until the end of the war; none the less the total prizes taken by the four ships under Walker's command were valued at about $400,000. 
Walker is generally regarded as the most successful British privateer. He was evidently a good and resourceful seaman, who rose to the occasion and won his crews' regard by taking care of them, although he maintained strict discipline, and exercised his men both physically and in evolutions and in gunnery. Further, he always carried a number of musicians on board. It is unfortunate that so little is known of him. After the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle he involved himself in the venture of the Society of the Free British Fishery and carried out surveys of the Orkneys and of the Hebrides in its interest. But the syndicate that owned the Royal Family proved none too scrupulous and refused to admit his expenses and delayed settling his claims, and indeed those of his crews. Eventually he was imprisoned for debt and then declared bankrupt, and was released only after four years. Little is known of his subsequent life; he died on 20 September 1777 at Seething Lane, in the City of London, and was buried at All Hallows Barking, Great Tower Street, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 28481


Walker, George (1734?-1807), Presbyterian minister and mathematician, was born at Newcastle upon Tyne. At the age of ten he was placed in the care of his uncle at Durham, Thomas Walker (died 1763), who was successively minister at Cockermouth (1732), Durham (1736), and Leeds (1748). He attended the Durham grammar school under Richard Dongworth. In autumn 1749 he was admitted to the dissenting academy at Kendal under Caleb Rotherham; here, among the lay students, he met his lifelong friend John Manning (1730-1806). On Rotherham's retirement in 1751 he was for a short time a pupil of Hugh Moises at Newcastle upon Tyne. In November 1751 he entered at Edinburgh University with Manning, where he studied mathematics under Matthew Stewart, who interested him in that subject. He moved to Glasgow University in 1752 to attend divinity lectures of William Leechman; he continued his mathematical studies under Robert Simson and heard the lectures of Adam Smith, but learned more from all three in their private conversation than their public performances. Among his contemporaries at Glasgow were Newcome Cappe, Nicholas Clayton, and John Millar (1735-1801), members with him of a college debating society. After leaving Glasgow in 1754 without graduating, he did occasional preaching at Newcastle and Leeds, and injured his health by excessive study; at Glasgow he had allowed himself only three hours' sleep. He apparently recovered through a course of sea bathing. In 1756, while seeking to become what he himself termed the 'spiritual consul' to 'any presbyterian tribe' (Walker, xxxi), he declined an invitation to succeed Robert Andrews as minister of Platt Lane Chapel, Manchester, partly on financial grounds: the salary was only $40 p.a. But later in that year he accepted a call (in succession to Joseph Wilkinson) to serve his uncle's former congregation, at Durham, and was ordained there in 1757. 
At Durham, Walker finished, but did not immediately publish, his 'Doctrine of the Sphere', begun in Edinburgh. With the signature P. M. D. (presbyterian minister, Durham) he contributed to the 'Ladies' Diary' a collection of mathematical papers, published in serial form and edited by Thomas Simpson (1710-1761). He left Durham at the beginning of 1762 to become minister at Filby, Norfolk, and assistant to John Whiteside (died 1784) at Great Yarmouth. Here he resumed his friendship with Manning, who was by then practising as a physician at Norwich. He began a treatise on conic sections, inspired by Isaac Newton's 'Arithmetica universalis' of 1707. He took pupils in mathematics and navigation. Through Richard Price he was elected fellow of the Royal Society, and in 1772 was recommended to William Petty, second earl of Shelburne (afterwards first marquess of Lansdowne), for the post of his librarian, subsequently filled by Joseph Priestley. He declined it owing to his approaching marriage in that year, when he also became mathematical tutor at Warrington Academy in succession to John Holt (died 1772). Here Walker prepared his treatise on the sphere for publication, himself cutting out all the illustrative figures, of which there were 20,000, for an edition of 500 copies. It appeared in quarto in 1775, and was reissued in 1777. Joseph Johnson gave him for the copyright $40, remitted by Walker on finding the publisher had lost money. 
The emoluments at Warrington did not answer Walker's expectations, and he resigned in two years, becoming colleague to John Simpson (1746-1812) at High Pavement Chapel, Nottingham, in autumn 1774. Here he remained for twenty-four years and devoted himself to congregational and political work. He made his mark as a pulpit orator, reconciled a division in his congregation, founded a charity school in 1788, and published a hymnbook. In conjunction with Gilbert Wakefield, the controversialist and classical scholar, he formed a literary club, meeting weekly at the members' houses. Wakefield described him as possessing 'the greatest variety of knowledge, with the most masculine understanding' of any man he ever knew ('Memoirs of the Life of Gilbert Wakefield', ed. J. T. Rutt and A. Wainewright, 2 vols., 1804, 1.227). Nottingham was a focus of political opinion, which Walker led both by special sermons and by drafting petitions and addresses sent forward by the town in 1775 in favour of the independence of the United States and the advocacy of parliamentary reform (1782) and religious liberalization (1789-90). His ability and his whiggish constitutional opinions won the high commendation of Edmund Burke. His reform speech at the county meeting at Mansfield on 28 October 1782 led William Henry Cavendish Cavendish-Bentinck, third duke of Portland, to compare him with Cicero, to the disadvantage of the latter. From 1787 Walker was chairman of the associated dissenters of Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire, and part of Yorkshire, an organization aiming to achieve the repeal of the 'Test Acts' and secure religious liberty for Unitarians. His 'Dissenters' Plea' (n.d. [1790]) was praised by Charles James Fox as the best publication on the subject. He was an early advocate of the abolition of the slave trade. The variety of his interests is shown by his publication in 1794 of his treatise on conic sections, while he was agitating against government measures for the suppression of public opinion which culminated in the ''Gagging Act'' of 1795. 
Towards the end of 1797 Walker was invited to succeed Thomas Barnes as professor of theology in Manchester College. Feeling it a duty to comply, he resigned his Nottingham charge on 5 May 1798. There was one other tutor, but the funds were low, and Walker's appeal in April 1799 for increased subscriptions met with little response. From 1800 the entire burden of teaching, including classics and mathematics, fell on him, with no increase of salary. In addition he served the congregation at Dob Lane Chapel, Failsworth, from 1801 to 1803. Samuel Pipe-Wolferstan, whose son Stanley studied under Walker at Manchester, recorded in his diary that Walker was overworked and embroiled in financial disputes with the college trustees. He resigned in 1803, and the college was moved to York. 
Walker remained for two years in the neighbourhood of Manchester, and continued to take an active part in its Literary and Philosophical Society, of which he was elected president on the death of Thomas Percival (1740-1804). In 1805 he moved to Wavertree, near Liverpool, still keeping up a connection with Manchester. In the spring of 1807 he went to London on a publishing errand. His health declined suddenly, and he died at Draper Hall, London, on 21 April 1807. He was buried in Bunhill Fields. His only son, George Walker, his biographer and author of 'Letters to a Friend' (1843) on his reasons for nonconformity, became a resident in France. His only daughter, Sarah (died 1854), married on 9 July 1795 Sir George Cayley, bt, of Brompton, near Scarborough. 
Walker's theology, which he described as a 'tempered Arianism', plays a considerable part in his own compositions, and also shows itself in omissions and alterations in his 'Collection of Psalms and Hymns' (1788). James Tayler, in a funeral sermon, described him as 'averse to... contradiction' and prone in controversy to 'an unbecoming warmth of expression'. As J. E. Bradley has shown, Walker was an important figure in late eighteenth-century English radicalism and his controversial writing endured for longer than that of most of his contemporaries. 


@@@@@


doc= 28482


Walker, George (1772-1847), writer and publisher, was born in Falcon Square, Cripplegate, London, on 24 December 1772. At fifteen he was apprenticed to a bookseller named Cuthell in Middle Row, Holborn, and two years later opened his own business with a capital of a few shillings. He married the daughter of a local tradesman with some property and prospered. He transferred to Great Portland Street, adding a musical publishing department, and finally, as a music publisher solely, moved to Soho Square, and took his son George Walker (1803-1879) into partnership. 
Walker wrote numerous Gothic novels in the manner of Ann Radcliffe, including 'The Romance of the Cavern' (1792), 'Cinthelia' (1797), and 'The Three Spaniards' (1800). The latter two works were translated into French for sale in Paris. He also published a volume of poetry in 1801, and 'The Battle of Waterloo: a Poem' in 1815. His 'Adventures of Timothy Thoughtless' (1813) is a children's book. More notable was a satirical novel, 'The Vagabond' (1799). A. D. Harvey regards this 'picaresque masterpiece', with Godwin as its target, as the best of the anti-reform novels, exhibiting 'the anxious repudiation of the new ideals about woman's role' (Harvey, 292). George Walker died on 8 February 1847 and was buried in Highgate cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 28483


Walker, George (1803-1879), writer on chess, was born in Great Portland Street, London, on 20 March 1803 and baptized at St Marylebone on 17 April. He was the son of the novelist and publisher George Walker (1772-1847). Working in his father's music publishing business at 17 Soho Square, he was a partner by 1836. On 1 November 1827 he married Maria Margaret, 'nee' Oxley (1801/2-1864). After his father's death George Walker went on to the stock exchange, where he practised until 1873 in partnership with William Bull. 
As a chess player Walker was bright without being extremely brilliant. His recorded games with masters show that he was an adept in developing his pieces and making exchanges, but he admits that players of the strength of Morphy or Macdonnell could always give him the odds of the pawn and move. His particular hero was Labourdonnais, whom he tended in his last illness, and buried at his own expense in Kensal Green cemetery (December 1840). Walker wrote a memoir of the 'roi d'echecs' for 'Bell's Life', which was translated for the Parisian 'Palamede' (15 Dec 1841) as 'Derniers moments de Labourdonnais'. From 1840 to 1847, when he ceased playing first-rate chess, Walker was inferior only to Buckle and Staunton among English players. 
More significant, however, were Walker's administrative and literary activities. As a young man he founded the Percy chess club in Rathbone Place in 1823; impressed by defeats at the hands of William Lewis, he defected to the latter's chess school. He was a prime mover in the Westminster chess club (1831-43; secretary to 1838) -- host to the Macdonnell-Labourdonnais match at Bedford Street, Covent Garden, and later based in the Strand -- and helped resurrect it in the form of the St George's club, before the enmity of Howard Staunton caused him to migrate to the London chess club. Walker's long-running chess column in 'Bell's Life in London' (1835-73) has been described as his 'real service to chess' (Harding, 364), particularly in the column's early years, when he was almost alone as an advocate of the game. In 1838 he sought to start a specialist magazine ('The Philidorian'). 
As a writer on the game, George Walker's reputation was European, although the 'Oxford Companion to Chess' now considers his work 'more enthusiastic than accurate' (Hooper and Whyld, 444-5). His production of cheap books had a significant publicizing role. 'No writer has produced so many books upon the subject of chess as Mr. Walker' ('ILN', 427). His first publication, a pamphlet of twenty-four pages, 'New Variations in the Muzio Gambit' (1831), was followed in less than a year by his 'New Treatise' (reprinted thrice to 1846), which gradually supplanted the chess 'Studies' of Peter Pratt (1803) and the far from thorough 'Treatise' by J. H. Sarratt (1808), as amended by Lewis in 1821; a German translation of the 'New Treatise' went through several editions. Walker's 'Chess Studies, Comprising one Thousand Games actually Played during the Last Half-Century' (1844), also an improvement on Lewis's previous work, was re-edited by E. Freeborough in 1893; it finally established the principle that games of major masters (even quite casual ones) should be recorded. The year 1847 largely saw the end of Walker's writing. He is to be distinguished from William Greenwood Walker, who published 'A Selection of Games at Chess' in 1836. 
Walker died at his home, 40 Albion Road, Stoke Newington, London, on 23 April 1879, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. He was survived by his second wife, Matilda ('b'. 1840/1). 


@@@@@


doc= 28484


Walker, George Alfred (1807-1884), sanitary reformer, was born on 27 February 1807 at Nottingham, the second son of William Walker, a plumber, and his wife, Elizabeth Williamson, of Barton under Needwood, Staffordshire; he also had at least one sister. His earliest teacher was Henry Wild, a Quaker of 'Notten'. Later Walker moved to London and studied at Aldersgate Street School. In 1829 he became a licentiate of the Society of Apothecaries, and, in 1831, a member of the Royal College of Surgeons. In 1835 he studied at St Bartholomew's Hospital, and the following year at the Hotel Dieu in Paris. While there, he visited the great cemeteries which had been recently established outside the city boundaries, his interest in interment having first been awakened when, as a boy in Nottingham, he had witnessed shocking mutilations and upturning of human remains in the overcrowded graveyards of the town. 
In 1837 Walker returned to London and set up in medical practice at 101 Drury Lane. Within a short distance of his surgery were seven of the most overcrowded and pestilential graveyards in London. These included the Green Ground in Portugal Street and the notorious Enon Chapel in St Clement's Lane, where between 10,000 and 12,000 people were buried under the floorboards in a cellar measuring only 59 by 29 feet. A believer in the miasmic theory of disease, Walker was convinced that the smell emanating from these overcrowded graveyards was poisonous and could ruin the health of those who lived nearby. 
In 'Gatherings from Graveyards' (1839) he exposed the appalling state of urban graveyards and, drawing on his extensive knowledge of health, sanitation, and mortality, sought to prove the connection between disease and burial. His solution was to propose the prohibition of intramural interment and the establishment of new cemeteries outside the towns. This was the first of a series of publications on the subject which was instrumental in securing the appointment in 1842 of the parliamentary select committee on intramural interments. It was chaired by W. A. Mackinnon (Conservative MP for Lymington, the most active campaigner in the Commons on the issue) and included Anthony Ashley Cooper, earl of Shaftesbury, who, in the following years, continued to support burial reform. Its report (1842) recommended the ending of burials in large towns, enabling parishes to establish suburban cemeteries, and the establishment of a central authority. Following this report, Sir James Graham (home secretary, 1841-6), apparently as a delaying ploy, asked Edwin Chadwick (secretary of the poor-law commission, 1834-46) to report on intramural interments. His report (1843) further publicized insanitary and disgusting burial areas (also exploitation, fraud, and infanticide) and recommended ending most intramural burial, and establishing a comprehensive nationalized system of interment. However, Graham's refusal to act, and the complacency of many of the medical and ecclesiastical authorities, who profited much from burial fees, prevented much immediate progress towards closing the metropolitan graveyards. Walker continued his campaign, establishing the National Society for the Abolition of Burials in Towns in 1845. He also continued to lecture and write on the subject, publishing 'Interment and Disinterment' (1843), 'Burial Ground Incendiarism' (1846), and 'A Series of Lectures on the Actual Conditions of Metropolitan Graveyards' (1847). Some time in 1846-7, Walker purchased or leased Enon Chapel, with the intention of removing the remains. At his own expense, he arranged for these to be reburied at Norwood cemetery, and 6000 people witnessed their removal in four van loads. 
Walker's campaign was given a significant boost by the cholera epidemic of 1848, which convinced most people of a connection between disease and the state of public hygiene and sanitation. The Society for the Abolition of Burials in Towns campaigned vigorously in 1849. Among the legislation that followed were measures forbidding any further burials in London's inner-city graveyards and prohibiting interment anywhere in the metropolis if such action were necessary for the protection of public health; the bodies were subsequently removed from most of these graveyards to the large new out-of-town cemeteries, as Walker had proposed. Also, burial inspectors were appointed. 
Walker's other principal interest was the use of warm vapour baths to treat diseases such as rheumatism, gout, and indigestion. He established the first warm vapour baths in London at 11 St James's Place in 1844, and published 'The Warm Vapour Cure' (1847) to publicize his methods of treatment. However, the baths were destroyed by fire in 1854. 
Walker retired to Ynysfaig House, Arthog, Dolgellau, Merioneth, in 1855. He spent his last years writing his memoirs, called 'Grave reminiscences: some experiences of a sanitary reformer', but these were never completed. Following a sudden paralytic seizure about a week before, he died, unmarried, at his home on 6 July 1884 and was buried at the Quaker burial-ground near Tywyn, Merioneth. 


@@@@@


doc= 28485


Walker, Sir George Townshend, first baronet (1764-1842), army officer, was born on 25 May 1764, the eldest son of Major Nathaniel Walker (1740-1780), who served in the Royal American rangers during the Anglo-American War, and Henrietta (died 1829), only daughter and heir of Captain John Bagster RN, of West Cowes, Isle of Wight. His great-great-grandfather Sir Walter Walker, of Bushey Hall, Hertfordshire, was advocate to Catherine of Braganza, the wife of King Charles II. 
By Queen Charlotte's wish Walker was commissioned ensign in the 95th foot on 4 March 1782; he became lieutenant on 13 March 1783, and on 22 June was transferred to the 71st, the 95th being disbanded. The 71st was also disbanded soon afterwards, and on 15 March 1784 he was transferred to the 36th. He joined it in India, and served with General (afterwards Sir Henry) Cosby's force against the Poligars in the neighbourhood of Tinnevelly in February 1786, in charge of the quartermaster-general's department. He was invalided home in 1787, and exchanged on 25 July to the 35th foot. In 1788 he was employed on the staff in Ireland as aide-de-camp to General Bruce. On 13 March 1789 he was made captain-lieutenant in the 14th foot, but, instead of making plans to join it in Jamaica, he obtained leave to go to Germany to study tactics and the German language. 
On 4 May 1791 Walker obtained a company in the 60th, all the battalions of which were in America; but he seems to have remained at the depot. In 1793 he went to Flanders with a body of recruits who had volunteered for active service. He was present at the action of 10 May 1794 near Tournai, and was employed on various missions while serving in the quartermaster-general's department during the retreat of the duke of York's army. When the army embarked for England he was made an inspector of foreign corps, and was sent to the Black Forest and Switzerland to superintend the raising of Baron de Roll's regiment. After making arrangements for its passage through Italy and embarkation at Civitavecchia, he returned to England in August 1796. 
Walker was promoted major in the 60th on 27 August. In March 1797 he went to Portugal and was aide-de-camp first to General Simon Fraser (died 1777), and afterwards to the prince of Waldeck, who commanded the Anglo-Portuguese army; but ill health obliged him to go home in June. He was inspecting field officer of recruiting at Manchester from February 1798 until March 1799. He then joined the 50th in Portugal, having become lieutenant-colonel in that regiment on 6 September 1798; but in October he was summoned to the Netherlands to act as British commissioner with the Russian troops under the duke of York. He afterwards accompanied them to the Channel Islands, and so missed the campaign in Egypt, in which his regiment served. He took over the command of the 50th at Malta in October 1801, returned with it to Ireland in 1802, and served with it in the expedition to Copenhagen in 1807, being in Spencer's brigade of Baird's division. 
In January 1808 he went with the 50th to the Peninsula, as part of Spencer's force. It was one of the regiments particularly mentioned by Sir Arthur Wellesley (later Viscount Wellington) in his report of the battle of Vimeiro. It formed part of Fane's brigade, which, with Anstruther's brigade and Robe's guns, occupied a hill in front of Vimeiro, and was attacked by a strong column under Laborde. The French had nearly reached the guns when Walker wheeled his right wing round to the left by companies, poured a volley into the flank of the column, charged it both in front and flank, and drove it in confusion down the hillside. 
In the autumn Walker went to England. He returned with dispatches for Moore, but reached Corunna two days after the battle. He was made colonel in the army on 25 September 1808. In 1809 he served in the Walcheren expedition, at first in command of his regiment, and afterwards as brigadier. 
In August 1810 Walker went back to the Peninsula with the rank of brigadier-general. He was employed for a year in the north of Spain, aiding and stimulating the authorities of Galicia and the Asturias to raise troops and take a more active part in the war. He had persuaded Lord Liverpool to let him take 3000 British troops to Santona, but the men were sent to Wellington after the latter had intervened. Finding that he could do no good with the Spaniards, and having become major-general on 4 June 1811, Walker applied to join the army in Portugal, and in October he was given command of a brigade in the 5th (Leith's) division. 
At the storming of Badajoz, on the night of 6 April 1812, Walker's brigade was ordered to make a false attack on the San Vincente bastion, to be turned into a real attack if circumstances were favourable. After a confused action Walker forced his way along the ramparts, and captured three bastions. Then a sudden scare (fear of a mine, according to Napier) made the men turn, and they were chased back to the San Vincente bastion, where they rallied on a battalion in reserve. Walker was shot while trying to overcome this panic. The ball, fired by a man not two yards distant, struck the edge of a watch which he was wearing in his breast, turned downwards and passed out between his ribs, splintering one of them. He also received four bayonet wounds. He was taken care of for a time by a French soldier, whom he was afterwards able to repay. He was so weakened by loss of blood that his life was for some time in danger, and he had to remain three months at Badajoz before he could be sent home. His brigade had lost about half its effective strength, but its success had decided the fall of Badajoz. Wellington in his dispatch wrote of his conspicuous gallantry. On 24 October he was given the colonelcy of De Meuron's regiment, one of the 'foreign' corps raised for garrison duties. 
Walker was still suffering from his wounds when he returned to the Peninsula in June 1813. The army was in the Pyrenees, covering the blockade of Pamplona, when he joined it on 4 August at Ariscun, and was placed in command of the 1st brigade (50th, 71st, and 92nd regiments) of the 2nd (Stewart's) division. Stewart had been wounded in the action of Maya ten days before, and in his absence the division was commanded by Walker for a month. He was present at the battle of the Nivelle on 10 November, but his brigade, which had suffered very severely at Maya, was not actively engaged. Shortly afterwards he was given temporary command of the 7th (Lord Dalhousie's) division, which formed part of Beresford's corps. At the passage of the Nive and the actions near Bayonne (10-13 December) this division was in second line. It helped to drive the French out of their works at Hastingues and Oeyergave on 23 February 1814. At Orthez, four days later, it was at first behind the 4th division, but it had a prominent share in the latter part of the battle, and in the pursuit. Walker was wounded while leading one of his brigades. He was mentioned in Wellington's dispatch, and was included in the thanks of parliament. 
In March he reverted to his former brigade, but in the middle of that month his own wound and the recent death of his wife caused him to leave the army and return to England. He received the gold medal with two clasps for his services in the Peninsula, was made KCB in January 1815, and knight commander of the Portuguese order of the Tower and Sword in May. 
Walker was governor of Grenada from 7 April 1815 to 17 February 1816. On 21 April 1817 he received the GCB. He was made a member of the consolidated board of general officers, and groom of the chamber to the duke of Sussex. On 19 July 1821 he was promoted lieutenant-general, and on 11 May 1825 he was appointed commander-in-chief at Madras. He took over that command on 3 March 1826, and held it until May 1831. On 28 March 1835 he was made a baronet, and received a grant of arms commemorating Vimeiro, Badajoz, and Orthez. 
On 24 May 1837 Walker was appointed lieutenant-governor of Chelsea Hospital, and on 28 June 1838 he was promoted general. He had been made a colonel-commandant of the rifle brigade on 21 May 1816, De Meuron's regiment being disbanded in that year. He was transferred to the 84th regiment on 13 May 1820, to the 52nd on 19 September 1822, and, finally, to the 50th on 23 December 1839. He had married in July 1789, Anna (died 15 Feb 1814), only daughter of Richard Allen of Bury, Lancashire; they had two daughters. On 15 August 1820 he married Helen (died 23 Aug 1859), youngest daughter of Alexander Caldcleugh of Croydon, Surrey; they had four sons and two daughters. A handsome soldierly man, Walker died at Chelsea Hospital on 14 November 1842. 


@@@@@


doc= 28486


Walker, George Washington (1800-1859), missionary, was born in London on 19 March 1800, the twenty-first child of John Walker (1726-1821) and his second wife, Elizabeth, 'nee' Ridley. His mother died early and his father moved to Paris, and he was brought up by a grandmother at Newcastle upon Tyne as a Unitarian. He was confirmed by a bishop, and sent to a Wesleyan school at Barnard Castle. Apprenticed to a Quaker linen draper in Newcastle in 1814, he attended meetings of the Society of Friends; in 1827, influenced in part by James Backhouse, the York Quaker, he joined the society. An attachment to his master's daughter, who soon after became blind and died on 3 November 1828, much influenced his character at this time. 
In 1831, in obedience to a 'call', Walker accompanied Backhouse on what turned out to be a twenty-seven-year mission to the southern hemisphere. They landed at Hobart Town on 8 February 1832, after a five months' voyage. Encouraged by the governor of Van Diemen's Land, Sir George Arthur, they visited convicts, and reported on the living conditions of convicts and Aborigines (there and on Flinders Island). In Launceston they gathered a body of Quakers, who held their first yearly meeting in 1834. By that meeting Walker was acknowledged a minister. After three years in Van Diemen's Land, Walker and Backhouse went to Sydney and made the acquaintance of Samuel Marsden, the senior chaplain there. When they returned to Hobart, at the request of the new governor, Sir John Franklin, they assisted Alexander Maconochie in the writing of his controversial report on penal conditions. In 1838 they travelled to Cape Town, visiting Mauritius on the way. They toured all the mission stations in South Africa, regardless of denomination, in a journey of 6000 miles. 
When they parted on leaving South Africa in September 1840, Walker returned to Hobart Town and on 15 December 1840 married Sarah Benson Mather, a member of a Wesleyan family which had joined the Friends; they had ten children and were prominent members of the Quaker community, with both parents becoming noted philanthropists. Walker set up as a linen draper but devoted himself chiefly to moral causes, attaching a savings bank and a 'Bible' distribution centre to his business. Regardless of considerable opposition -- on one occasion threatened with being tarred and feathered -- he preached the virtues of temperance and was active in convict and Aborigine welfare programmes. He and his wife (also a Quaker minister) became active in finding employment for destitute women. Walker possessed 'the gentle methodological persuasion of a Quaker resolved to effect a change in a vicious brutal world' ('AusDB'). He died in Hobart Town on 2 February 1859 and was buried on 4 February in the Friends' burial-ground, Providence Valley, West Hobart, Tasmania. His house, Narryna, later became the Van Diemen's Land Folk Museum. 


@@@@@


doc= 28487


Walker, Sir Hovenden (1666?-1725), naval officer, was the second son of Colonel William Walker of Tankardstown, Queen's county, Ireland, and Elizabeth, daughter of the physician Peter Chamberlen (1601-1683). There is some doubt over his date of birth, some sources giving 1656 and others 1666: the latter is more likely, as in June 1678 he was admitted to Trinity College, Dublin, though he never completed his degree. In April 1686 he was at Nevis, where he volunteered to join the 'Dartmouth' for the pursuit of a Spanish pirate. His account of the voyage found its way into Samuel Pepys's papers, and he subsequently visited Boston in the 'Dartmouth', where he entertained the crew with an anti-Spanish poem of his own composition. He was appointed second lieutenant of the 'Saint David' on 30 October 1688, and obtained post rank as captain of the fireship 'Vulture' on 17 February 1692. 
In the 'Vulture' Walker was present at the battle of Barfleur, but had no actual share in it, nor in the destruction of the French ships at La Hogue. He was shortly afterwards appointed to the 'Sapphire' on the Irish station, and in 1694 to the armed ship 'Friends' Adventure'. In 1695 he commanded the 'Foresight' (50 guns), in which, when off the Lizard, in charge of a convoy, and with the 'Sheerness' in company, he fought a gallant action with two French ships of 60 and 70 guns, on 29 April 1696, and beat them off. In January 1697 he was appointed to the 'Kent', in June to the 'Content Prize', in September to the 'Royal Oak', and in February 1698 to the 'Boyne' as flag-captain to Vice-Admiral Matthew Aylmer, going to the Mediterranean as commander-in-chief. On the return of the 'Boyne' to England in November 1699 the ship was ordered to pay off, and Walker asked for leave of absence to go to Ireland, where, he explained, he had a case pending in the court of chancery, in which his interests were involved to the extent of $1000. As the Admiralty refused him leave until the ship was safe in Hamoaze and her powder discharged, he begged to 'lay down' the command. 
In December 1701 Walker was appointed to the 'Burford', one of the fleet off Cadiz under Sir George Rooke in 1702; and afterwards of a squadron detached to the West Indies with Walker as commodore. After calling at the Cape Verde Islands and at Barbados he arrived at Antigua in the middle of February, and was desired by Colonel Christopher Codrington to co-operate in an attack on Guadeloupe. The first part of the co-operation was to provide the land forces with ammunition, which was done by making up cartridges with large-grained cannon powder and bullets taken from the case-shot. There were no flints, mortars, bombs, pickaxes, spades, and such like, necessary for a siege. The ships took the men over to Guadeloupe, put them safely on shore, cleared the enemy out of such batteries as were within reach of the sea, and kept open the communications. When the French, driven out of the towns and forts, were permitted to retire to the mountains, the English were incapable of pursuing them, and finally withdrew after destroying the town, forts, and plantations. At the end of May the squadron returned to Nevis, where, a few weeks later, it was joined by Vice-Admiral John Graydon, with whom it went to Jamaica, and later on to Newfoundland and England. 
From 1705 to 1707 Walker commanded the 'Cumberland', in which, in the summer of 1706, he took out a reinforcement to Sir John Leake in the Mediterranean, and took part in the relief of Barcelona. In December 1707 he was appointed to the 'Royal Oak', in January 1708 to the 'Ramillies', and in June, under a recent order in council (18 January), to be captain resident at Plymouth, to superintend and hasten the work of the port, and to be commander-in-chief in the absence of a flag-officer. On 15 March 1711 he was promoted rear-admiral of the white. About the same time he was knighted, and on 3 April he was appointed commander-in-chief 'of a secret expedition', with an order to wear the union flag at the main when clear of the channel. The 'expedition' intended against Quebec -- consisting of ten ships of the line, with several smaller vessels and some thirty transports, carrying upwards of 5000 soldiers, commanded by Brigadier-General John Hill -- sailed from Plymouth in the beginning of May, and arrived in New England on 24 June. The supplies and reinforcements which were expected to be waiting for it were not ready, and the fleet did not sail for the St Lawrence until 30 July. As they entered the river it began to blow hard, and on 21 August a dense fog and an easterly gale compelled them, on the advice of the pilots, to lie to for the night. By the next morning they had drifted on to the north shore, among rocks and islands, where eight transports were cast away with the loss of nearly 900 men, and the rest of the fleet was saved with the greatest difficulty. 
The storms continued, and the locally recruited pilots were unanimous in stating the fleet could not reach Quebec. In any case the ships were short of provisions, a consequence of the earl of Oxford's policy of keeping the expedition's purpose as secret as possible even from the Admiralty -- and, indeed, from Walker himself. A council of war was of the opinion that, with only ten weeks' provisions on short allowance, nothing could be done but to return to England as soon as possible. They arrived at St Helen's on 9 October, and not long afterwards, Walker's flagship, the 'Edgar' (70 guns), blew up while at anchor at Spithead. When the 'Edgar' blew up Walker was on shore; but -- among other things -- all his papers were still on the ship and were lost, a circumstance which afterwards caused him much trouble. On 14 March 1712 he was appointed commander-in-chief at Jamaica, where he quarrelled with the governor, and sailed finally from Plymouth on 30 April with the small squadron and a convoy of 100 merchant ships. The command was uneventful, and is important mainly in showing that nothing in the conduct of the expedition to the St Lawrence was considered by the Admiralty prejudicial to Walker's character as an officer. On the peace he was ordered to England, and arrived off Dover on 26 May 1713. 
Walker retired to Somersham, his country estate near St Ives in Huntingdonshire, where he was a JP. In March 1715 he was ordered to send a justification of his conduct at Quebec to the Admiralty, but the loss of his papers in the 'Edgar' delayed him. He had not responded when he learned in April that his half pay had been stopped and he had been removed from the flag-officers' list, almost certainly more because of his closeness to the tories, and especially to Viscount Bolingbroke, than because of genuine misconduct in Canada. Thereafter Walker left England for a plantation in South Carolina: in 1719 he attempted to justify his departure to the Admiralty, arguing that 'being struck out of half pay... I looked upon myself at liberty, in order to provide for myself... [being] a drowning man, catching in haste at any twig to save himself'. In the same letter he referred to himself living in Carolina on 'Indian corn, and potatoes (because I could not afford to buy plumb cake in London)', and to his part of Carolina as 'the most poor and beggarly settlement in that new discovered world' (TNA: PRO, ADM 1/577, Walker to Admiralty, 11 Sept 1719). Shortly afterwards he published 'A Journal, or Full Account of the Late Expedition to Canada' (1720), an attempt at self-justification which actually betrayed the writer's 'naivete' and mediocrity as a commander. Walker was back in England by 1722, soliciting for his half pay and even for the post of controller of the navy, and two months before his death he even applied audaciously for back pay from his 1702 command. 
By the mid-1720s Walker had moved to Germany where he was well acquainted with Thomas Lediard in Hamburg and Hanover. 'I found him', wrote Lediard, 'a gentleman of letters, good understanding, ready wit, and agreeable conversation; and withal the most abstemious man living; for I never saw or heard that he drank anything but water, or eat anything but vegetables' (Lediard, 855). He was twice married: first to Jane Pudsey and second to Margaret Jefferson, who survived him and with whom he had one daughter, Margaret (died 'c'.1777). Walker died in Dublin, of apoplexy, on 24 December 1725. 


@@@@@


doc= 28488


Walker, James (1758x60-1822x5?), engraver in mezzotint and stipple, son (according to Redgrave) of a captain in the merchant service, was apprenticed to the London engraver Valentine Green on 28 January 1773. He left Green in 1780, the year of his earliest published plate, dated 2 July, which depicted Sir Hyde Parker, after Romney; this was followed by other portraits, notably after Romney, as well as the subject pieces for which Green's studio was renowned. He engraved a portrait of Empress Catherine II from a painting belonging to the Russian ambassador, Ivan Simolin, and it was probably Simolin who recruited him to go to Russia in 1784, where he was appointed engraver to Catherine. Walker was accompanied by his wife, Mary, and possibly a daughter. Two more children were born while they were in Russia: Catherine (born and died in 1791) and a son, Charles James (1786-1788). Walker was also accompanied by John Augustus Atkinson (1774x6-1830), probably his stepson, who later trained under Walker and developed into a competent painter in Russia. 
Walker's principal task was to engrave important pictures by old and contemporary masters in the imperial collection, but he also produced some forty-three portraits of the imperial family and the Russian aristocracy. On 30 December 1786 he was made an associate of the Academy of Arts at St Petersburg, and in September 1794 a full academician. His appointment as imperial engraver was renewed by Emperor Alexander I. Walker returned to England from time to time to arrange publication of his engravings. During one such visit, in 1792, when he also took out the freedom of the Russia Company, he published two parts of 'A collection of prints, from the most celebrated pictures in the gallery of her imperial majesty Catherine II, empress and autocratix of all the Russias'. These were retailed for him by the landscape painter William Hodges and the bookseller R. Blamire. Back in Russia, Walker's other duties included showing distinguished British and other foreign visitors round the Hermitage, and the training of pupils. He returned to England with a pension in 1802, but twenty-four of his plates were lost in a shipwreck off Yarmouth. 
In London, Walker continued to publish mezzotints and also to collaborate with Atkinson. He engraved several of Atkinson's pictures but he also wrote the text for 'A Picturesque Representation of the Manners, Customs and Amusements of the Russians' (1803-4), in three volumes, illustrated with 100 aquatints by Atkinson, and dedicated to Alexander I. In 1807 they launched a similar collaboration on 'A picturesque representation of the naval, military and miscellaneous costumes of Great Britain', although only the first volume appeared. Walker wrote a light-hearted account of his experiences in 'Paramythia, or, Mental pastimes: being original anecdotes, historical, descriptive, humourous, and witty, collected chiefly during a long residence at the court of Russia, by the author'; probably written by 1816, it was published anonymously in 1821. A sale of his surviving prints took place on 29 November 1822; Walker may have died shortly before that date, although the existence in the British Museum of a plate by him published in 1825 suggests, if it was not a reprint, that he died a few years later. 


@@@@@


doc= 28489


Walker, James (1764-1831), naval officer, was son of James Walker of Innerdovat in Fife and his wife, Mary, daughter of Alexander Melville, fifth earl of Leven and fourth earl of Melville. He entered the navy in 1776 on the frigate 'Southampton', in which he served for five years, in the West Indies, then in the channel. He was appointed to the 'Princess Royal', the flagship of Sir Peter Parker (1721-1811), who, on 18 June 1781, promoted him lieutenant of the 'Torbay', one of the squadron that accompanied Sir Samuel Hood to North America. The 'Torbay' took part in the action off Chesapeake on 5 September, in the operations at St Kitts in January 1782, and in the battle of Dominica on 12 April. Walker, whose father was an intimate friend of George Brydges Rodney, was on the point of being promoted when Rodney was superseded by Admiral Pigot, and the chance was gone; he was still in the 'Torbay' when, on 17 October 1782, in company with the 'London', she destroyed the French 'Scipion' in Samana Bay, Haiti. 
After the peace, Walker spent some years in France, Italy, and Germany. While in Vienna in 1787 he heard of the Dutch armament and immediately started for England. Near Aschaffenburg, the diligence in which he was travelling, and which was carrying a considerable sum of money, was attacked by robbers. Walker put up resistance but was knocked on the head, stripped, and thrown into the ditch. He was carried into Aschaffenburg, where his wounds were dressed. Although the Frankfurt lodge of freemasons offered financial assistance, the delay prevented his reaching England until the crisis with the Dutch was over, so he returned to Germany. In 1788 he was offered command of a Russian ship, but the Admiralty refused him permission to accept it. In 1789 he was appointed to the 'Champion' on the coast of Scotland. After postings to the 'Winchelsea' and, in 1793, the 'Boyne', he was moved as first lieutenant into the frigate 'Niger', which was attached to the Channel Fleet under Lord Howe and was one of the repeating ships in the battle of 1 June 1794 in the north Atlantic. 
On 6 July Walker was rewarded with the rank of commander. Short commissions as acting captain of the 'Gibraltar' and commander of the bomb-vessel 'Terror' led to his appointment in June 1795 as acting captain of the 'Trusty', in which, having escorted five East Indiamen to a latitude of safety, he learned that some forty English merchant ships were at Cadiz waiting for convoy. Disregarding orders to return to Spithead, he went to Cadiz and brought the ships home, with property, as represented by the merchants in London, of the value of upwards of $1 million, 'which but for his active exertions would have been left in great danger at a most critical time, when the Spaniards were negotiating a peace with France' (Ralfe, 159). It was probably this very circumstance that made the government attentive to the Spanish complaint that money had been smuggled on board the 'Trusty' on account of the merchants. Walker was accordingly tried by court martial for disobeying orders and dismissed the service. In March 1797, after war had broken out with Spain, he was reinstated, and soon appointed to a gunboat intended to act against the Nore mutineers; afterwards, as acting captain of the 'Garland', he convoyed the Baltic trade as far as Elsinore. On his return he was appointed, still as acting captain, to the 'Monmouth', which he commanded in the battle of Camperdown on 11 October. As they were bearing down on the enemy, Walker addressed the hands: 'My lads, you see your enemy; I shall lay you close aboard and give you an opportunity of washing the stain off your characters [alluding to the recent mutiny] in the blood of your foes. Now, go to your quarters and do your duty. (Ralfe, 160)' In the battle two of the Dutch ships surrendered to the 'Monmouth'. On 17 October Walker's promotion as captain was confirmed. Temporary command of various ships in the North Sea followed, and in 1801 he commanded the 'Isis' (50 guns) in the fleet sent to the Baltic, and was in Nelson's squadron at the battle of Copenhagen. In addition to a 14 gun battery, Walker engaged both his own intended target and that of Nelson, whose flagship, the 'Elephant', had run aground. When the 'Elephant' was refloated and sailed past, Nelson took off his hat, waved it, and cried, 'Well done, brave Walker! Go on as you have begun; nothing can be better' (Marshall, 'Royal Naval Biography', 1/2, 1823, 161). After four and a half hours' fighting the two Danish blockships were reduced to silence, but at the heavy cost of 33 killed and 88 wounded out of the 'Isis''s complement of 350. 
Walker shortly afterwards took a convoy to the West Indies in the frigate 'Tartar'. There he was appointed to the 'Vanguard', and on the renewal of the war took an active part in the blockade of San Domingo, in the capture of the French 'Duquesne' on 25 July 1803, and in the capture of St Marc, taking off its garrison of 1100 men, who were on the verge of starvation, to save them from the vengeance of the local people. Walker returned to England in the 'Duquesne' and was then appointed to the frigate 'Thalia', in which, after taking convoys to the East Indies and to Quebec, he commanded a squadron of three frigates on the Guernsey station. 
In October 1807 he was appointed to the 'Bedford', one of the ships that went to Lisbon and to Rio de Janeiro with Sir William Sidney Smith. When the fleet dispersed in a gale, Walker's ship alone escorted the two Portuguese men-of-war carrying the Portuguese royal family for the thirteen-week voyage to Rio. For the next two years Walker remained at Rio, where he was admitted to the friendship of the prince regent of Portugal, who on 30 April 1816 conferred on him the order of the Tower and Sword, and, when Walker was recalled to England, presented him with his portrait set with diamonds and a valuable diamond ring. The 'Bedford' was afterwards employed in the North Sea and in the channel, and in September 1814 went out to the Gulf of Mexico, where, during the absence of the flag officers at New Orleans, Walker was left as senior officer in command of the large ships. He was reportedly an officer of pleasing and cheerful disposition who won the respect of his crew by lenity and goodness, and was complimented by his admiral, Sir William Young, for once going five months and three weeks on the 'Bedford' without a flogging while the ship remained in the highest state of discipline. 
In the summer of 1814 Walker was selected to accompany the duke of Clarence to Boulogne to bring over the emperor of Russia and king of Prussia. On 4 June 1815 he was nominated a CB. After the peace he commanded the 'Albion', 'Queen', and 'Northumberland', which last was paid off on 10 September 1818, ending his long service afloat. He was promoted rear-admiral on 19 July 1821. 
He was twice married: his first wife was a daughter of General Sir John Irvine; his second was the third daughter of Arnoldus Jones Skelton MP (first cousin of the Marquess Cornwallis); they had three sons. Walker died after a few days' illness, on 13 July 1831, at Blatchington, near Seaford; he was survived by his second wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 28490


Walker, James (bap. 1770, d. 1841), Scottish Episcopal bishop of Edinburgh, the son of Alexander Walker, was baptized in Fraserburgh, Aberdeenshire, on 24 January 1770. He was tutored by Alexander Jolly (1756-1838), bishop of Moray, and later attended Marischal College, Aberdeen, and afterwards St John's College, Cambridge, graduating BA in 1793, MA in 1796, and DD in 1826. He returned to Scotland in 1793, where he was ordained deacon in the Scottish Episcopal church. Later he became a sub-editor of the third edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', edited by George Gleig (1753-1840), bishop of Brechin. About 1800 he became tutor to Sir John Hope bt, of Craighall, and for two or three years he travelled with him in Europe. While in Germany he sought the acquaintance of the foremost philosophers and men of letters, devoting particular attention to metaphysics. The article on Kant's system in the supplement to the 'Encyclopaedia' was the result of his researches at Weimar. 
In 1805 Walker was ordained priest by the bishop of Kildare, possibly to overcome the legal disqualification preventing those in Scottish orders holding a living in the Church of England. But in the same year he received the charge of St Peter's Chapel, Edinburgh, although he was always a scholar rather than a pastor; in 1808 he became dean of Edinburgh. On 30 November 1819, during a visit to Rome, he conducted the first regular Anglican service held in the city, for British residents. Eschewing proselytism, the service, using the English rather than the Scottish liturgy, was unofficially tolerated by Pope Pius VII. 
In 1829 Walker resigned his charge of St Peter's to his colleague Charles Hughes Terrot (1790-1872): chronic rheumatism made his health uncertain and he wished to conserve his energies for his recent appointment as the first Pantonian professor at the Episcopal Theological College, an office which he retained until his death. In 1829 Walker published 'Sermons on Various Occasions'; he was also the author of several single sermons, and translated Jean Joseph Mounier's treatise under the title 'On the influence attributed to philosophers, freemasons, and to the illuminati on the revolution of France' (1810). 
Walker was the most distinguished scholar of his day in the Episcopal church, and his wide theological knowledge gave him great influence across the Episcopal church and with the bishops. As a result he was elected bishop of Edinburgh by the clergy of Edinburgh, Glasgow, and Fife, and consecrated bishop at Stirling on 7 March 1830. As a native of the north of Scotland, with Scottish and English education, the appointment further consolidated the unity between northern and southern Episcopalians assisted by the appointment of his predecessor, Daniel Sandford, an Englishman. At the Episcopal synod in Aberdeen on 24 May 1837, on the resignation of George Gleig, Walker was elected primus of the Scottish Episcopal church, though his health made some of the burdens of office difficult. He died at his home at 22 Stafford Street, Edinburgh, on 5 March 1841, and was buried in the cemetery of St John's Episcopal Church, Princes Street, Edinburgh. He was married, and was survived by two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 28491


Walker, Sir James (1809-1885), colonial governor, the son of Andrew Walker of Edinburgh, was born at Edinburgh on 9 April 1809, and educated at the high school and the university there. After entering the Colonial Office as a junior clerk in 1826 he served under several secretaries of state, and on 11 February 1837 he became registrar of British Honduras, from where he was transferred on 18 February 1839 to be treasurer of Trinidad; here he acted as colonial secretary from June 1839 to September 1840. On 15 October 1839 Walker married Anne, the daughter of George Bland of Trinidad. They had a son and three daughters. 
In January 1841 Walker became secretary to Sir Henry Macleod, special commissioner to British Guiana, for the purpose of settling the difficulties with the legislature over the civil list. In 1842 he was appointed colonial secretary of Barbados. This colony was at that time the seat of the government for the Windward Islands, and during his service there Walker was sent in September 1856 to act as lieutenant-governor of Grenada and in 1857 to fill a similar position at St Vincent. He acted as governor of Barbados and the Windward Islands from 13 March to 25 December 1859, and as lieutenant-governor of Trinidad from 20 April 1860 to 25 March 1862, when he was appointed governor-in-chief of Barbados and the Windward Islands. A careful official rather than an able administrator, he became a CB in 1860 and KCMG in 1869. On 4 January 1869 he was transferred to the Bahamas, which were then going through a time of severe financial depression. He retired on a pension of $400 on 3 May 1871, and lived a quiet country life, first at Uplands, near Taunton, and later at Southerton, Ottery St Mary, Devon, where he died on 28 August 1885. Walker's son, Sir Edward Noel-Walker, was lieutenant-governor and colonial secretary of Ceylon. 


@@@@@


doc= 28492


Walker, James Robertson- (1783-1858), naval officer, was born on 22 June 1783, the eldest son of James Robertson, deputy lieutenant of Ross-shire, and for many years collector of the customs at the port of Stornoway. His mother was Annabella, daughter of John Mackenzie of Ross. He probably served a few years in merchant ships; he entered the navy in April 1801 as able seaman on board the sloop 'Inspector' at Leith, but was moved into the frigate 'Princess Charlotte', in which, as midshipman and master's mate, he served for two years on the Irish station. In May 1803 he joined the 'Canopus', flagship of Rear-Admiral George Campbell off Toulon in 1804. From her in March 1805 he was moved to the 'Victory', in which he was present at Trafalgar. When she was paid off in January 1806, Robertson was sent, at the request of Captain Hardy, to the frigate 'Thames', in which he went to the West Indies; there in April 1807 he was moved to the 'Northumberland', flagship of Sir Alexander Inglis Cochrane, with whom in December he went to the 'Belle Isle'. In April 1808 he was appointed acting lieutenant of the 'Fawn', in which, and afterwards in the sloop 'Hazard', he was repeatedly engaged in boat actions with the batteries round the coast of Guadeloupe. On 21 July 1809 his rank of lieutenant was confirmed. He continued in the 'Hazard' until October 1812, and was repeatedly engaged with the enemy's batteries, either in the boats or in the ship herself. Several times he won the approval of the admiral, but it did not take the form of promotion; and in October 1812 he was appointed to the 'Antelope', flagship of Sir John Thomas Duckworth. In her in 1813 he was in the Baltic, and in November was moved to the 'Vigo', the flagship of Rear-Admiral Graham Moore. A few weeks later the 'Vigo' was ordered to be paid off, and in February 1814 Robertson was sent out to North America for service on the lakes. 
In September Robertson joined the 'Confiance' (37 guns), a ship newly launched on Lake Champlain, and being fitted out by Captain George Downie. The British army of 11,000 men, under the command of Sir George Prevost (1767-1816), had advanced against Plattsburg on the Saranac, then held by an American force estimated at 2000 men, but supported by a strong and heavily armed flotilla. Prevost sent repeated messages urging Downie to co-operate with him in the capture of this place, and in language which, coming from an officer of Prevost's rank, admitted of no delay. The 'Confiance' was not ready for service, her guns not fitted, her men made up of drafts of bad characters from the fleet, and only just got together when she weighed anchor on 11 September and, in company with three smaller vessels and ten gunboats, crossed over to Plattsburg Bay. The American squadron was of nearly double the force; but Downie, relying on the promised co-operation of Prevost, closed with the enemy and engaged. But Prevost did not move; the gunboats shamefully ran away; one of the small vessels struck on a reef; Downie was killed; and Robertson, left in command, was obliged to surrender after the 'Confiance' had lost 41 killed and 83 wounded, out of 270, and was sinking. Sir James Lucas Yeo, the naval commander-in-chief, preferred charges of gross misconduct against Prevost, who, however, died before he could be brought to trial. At the peace Robertson returned to England, was tried for the loss of the 'Confiance', and honourably acquitted. The next day, 29 August 1815, he was promoted commander. He had no further service; on 28 July 1851 he was promoted captain on the retired list. 
On 24 June 1824 he married Ann, only daughter and heir of William Walker of Gilgarran, near Whitehaven, Cumberland, and thereupon assumed the additional surname of Walker. He married, secondly, Catherine (died 1892), daughter of John Mackenzie of Ross. He died at Gilgarran on 26 October 1858, leaving a widow but no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 28493


Walker, James Thomas (1826-1896), army officer and surveyor, eldest son of John Walker of the Madras civil service, sometime judge at Cannanore, and his wife, Margaret Allan (died 1830) of Edinburgh, was born at Cannanore, India, on 1 December 1826. He was educated by a private tutor in Wales, and at Addiscombe in 1843-4, before being commissioned second lieutenant in the Bombay Engineers on 9 December 1844. After training at Chatham, he went to India, arriving at Bombay on 10 May 1846. The following year he went to Sind as executive engineer at Sukkur. 
From 1848 to 1853 Walker served in a succession of frontier campaigns. He was several times mentioned in dispatches, but his active service was incidental to his surveying, which he vigorously prosecuted. It was dangerous work, and in the country between the Khyber and Kohat passes he was fired at on several occasions. He reconnoitred the approaches to the Ambela Pass, which ten years later was the scene of protracted fighting between British and local forces. On the completion of the military survey of the Peshawar frontier, he received the thanks of the government of India. He was promoted lieutenant on 2 July 1853, and, in recognition of his survey services on the frontier, was appointed on 1 December second assistant on the great trigonometrical survey of India under Sir Andrew Scott Waugh. He was promoted first assistant on 24 March 1854, and on 27 April married (in India) Alicia Mary (died in or after 1896), daughter of General Sir John Scott KCB, and Alicia, granddaughter of Dr William Markham, archbishop of York. He worked first on the measurement of the Chach base, near Attock, and then had charge of the northern section of the Indus series of triangulation connecting the Chach and the Karachi bases. From 1852 to 1856 he taught at the newly opened Thomason Engineering College at Roorkee. 
On the outbreak of the Indian mutiny in 1857, Walker was once more involved in fighting. Acting with conspicuous courage at Delhi, he was severely wounded by a bullet in the left thigh, and shortly afterwards narrowly escaped death from cholera. He was promoted captain on 4 December 1857, and for his services in the mutiny received the medal, with clasp for Delhi, and the brevet rank of major on 19 January 1858. He returned to his survey duties and resumed work on the Indus series, which was completed in 1860; and he was afterwards employed in the Jogi Tila meridional series. In 1860 he served under Sir Neville Chamberlain in the expedition against the Mahsud Wazirs, for which he received the medal and clasp. Here again he made every effort to extend the survey, and sent a map which he had made of the country to the surveyor-general. 
In September 1860 Walker was appointed astronomical assistant, and on 12 March 1861 superintendent, of the great trigonometrical survey of India. In the next two years the three last meridional series in the north of India were completed, and Walker's first independent work was the measurement of the Vizagapatam baseline, which was completed in 1862. The accuracy achieved was such that the difference between the measured length and the length computed from triangles, starting 480 miles away at the Calcutta baseline and passing through dense jungles, was only half an inch. By 1863 the main triangulation of India was brought back to its starting point at Madras, and Walker thus oversaw the completion of the work of Lambton, Everest, and Waugh. He next undertook a revision of Lambton's triangulation in the south of India, with remeasurements of the baselines. 
On 27 February 1864 Walker was promoted lieutenant-colonel, and went home on furlough by way of Russia, establishing friendly relations with the geodesists of the Russian survey, which led to the exchange of geodetic and geographical information with St Petersburg. In 1864 he proposed a series of gravity pendulum observations, which were intended to contribute to the survey's aim of furnishing data for determining the figure of the earth. From 1865 to 1871 observations were made, but the method was subsequently proved unreliable. 
On 27 February 1869 Walker was promoted brevet colonel, and about this time it was decided to publish an 'Account of the Operations of the Great Trigonometrical Survey of India', in twenty volumes. The first nine were published under Walker's supervision, beginning in 1871. The volumes describe the course and technical character of the survey and remain the standard authority on one of the most remarkable and extensive surveys ever undertaken. In 1871-2, when in England on leave from India, Walker (with Sir Oliver Beauchamp Coventry St John) fixed the difference of longitude between Tehran and London. He remained in England to investigate the condition of the plates of the Indian atlas, and to write a memorandum on the projection and scale of the atlas. In 1873 he turned his attention to the dispersion of unavoidable minute errors in the triangulation, to ensure high standards of accuracy in the trigonometrical survey. 
Walker's work as superintendent of the great trigonometrical survey was as much that of a geographer as of a geodesist. At his office at Dehra Dun explorers were trained, survey parties for military expeditions organized, and Indian surveyors dispatched to make discoveries, while their observations were reduced and combined. Many valuable maps were published, and Walker's map of Turkestan, compiled using information from his Russian colleagues, went through many editions. He also initiated a scheme of tidal observations at different ports on the Indian coast and devised the method of analysing the observations. Beginning in 1858 he arranged an extensive scheme of spirit-levelling, connecting the tidal observation stations by lines of levels (sometimes extending across the continent), in order to fix the exact heights above sea level of the survey baselines. The network proved of great value to canal and railway engineers who used it to provide datum points for their surveys. 
On 2 June 1877 Walker was made a companion of the Bath, military division. He was appointed surveyor-general of India on 1 January 1878, retaining the office of superintendent of the trigonometrical survey. On 31 December of the same year he was promoted major-general, and on 10 May 1881 lieutenant-general. He retired on 12 February 1883, and received the honorary rank of general on 12 January 1884, but his services in India received no official recognition. 
Walker, like his cousin Clements Markham (with whom he had corresponded professionally while the latter was geographer at the India Office), was keenly interested in geography. He was elected fellow of the Royal Geographical Society in 1859, and from 1885 to 1896 served on its council. In 1885 he was president of the geographical section of the British Association at Aberdeen. He was elected fellow of the Royal Society in 1865, was made a member of the Russian geographical society in 1868, and of the French in 1887. In June 1883 he was made an honorary LLD of Cambridge University. In 1895 he took charge of the geodetic work of the international geographical congress at the Imperial Institute in London. He contributed to the ninth edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica', and to the 'Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal', the 'Transactions of the Royal Society', and the Royal Geographical Society's 'Journal'. Walker died at his home, 13 Cromwell Road, London, on 16 February 1896, and was buried on 20 February in Brompton cemetery. His wife, a son, Herbert John (lieutenant in the Royal Engineers), and three daughters survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 28494


Walker, John (d. 1588), Church of England clergyman, is of obscure origins. Having graduated BA at Peterhouse, Cambridge, early in 1548 and proceeded MA in 1551, he was a fellow of Peterhouse from 1550 to 1555. His activities during the Marian years are unknown. Following Elizabeth's accession he became a preacher in Ipswich, his sermons winning a reputation for him throughout Suffolk. He was appointed one of the twelve university preachers in 1562, served as proctor for the Suffolk clergy in the convocation of 1563, and in 1564 was made a parish chaplain of St Peter's, Norwich. He was granted the degree of BTh in 1562 and became DTh in 1568. He voted with the reformers in convocation in February 1563 in favour of altering or abolishing some of the rites and ceremonies of the church, notably making the sign of the cross in baptism and kneeling at communion. 
Walker's abilities and reputation brought him preferment. He became rector of Little Wilbraham, Cambridgeshire, in 1567 but was deprived, probably for non-residency, on 15 August 1570. He was also rector of Alderton, Suffolk, from 1568 to 1571; but appears to have been most active in Norwich where his sermons continued to be much admired. Presented by the lord keeper, Sir Nicholas Bacon, to the third prebend in Norwich Cathedral on 25 January 1570, his appointment, together with that of Edmund Chapman, Robert Johnson, and Jeffrey Johnson, helped to bring the reformers within the cathedral chapter into a majority. This position of strength, combined with a distaste for the unreformed nature of the cathedral services, appears to have goaded Walker and others into action. Precisely what happened is unclear, but a hostile report sent to the queen complained of innovations attempted and specifically that four of the prebendaries (Walker, George Gardiner, Thomas Fowle, and Chapman) with others had broken up the organs and committed 'other outrages'. Elizabeth sent a stinging letter on 25 September 1570 to the bishop of Norwich, John Parkhurst, insisting that the offenders be discovered and sent to Archbishop Parker for punishment. It seems doubtful that any disciplinary action was actually taken, for on 10 October 1570 the queen conveyed her continuing anger, through a letter from Leicester to Parker, that the matter had been 'so far excused' by him. It was grudgingly accepted that the prebendaries were seeking to rid the cathedral of 'popish ceremonies', but their claim that they acted with the dean's consent was disputed ('Pepys MSS', 174-6). 
The Norwich affair brought no loss for Walker: he was collated to the archdeaconry of Essex on 10 July 1571 by Edwin Sandys, bishop of London. He did not hasten to take up his new appointment as he was still in Norwich in August, giving advice on the dispute between the city's governors and the ministers of the Dutch church, and in 1572 his name was included in a proposed ecclesiastical commission for the diocese which never seems to have materialized. He seldom adjudicated on cases in court, remaining active instead as an itinerant preacher. His preface to Robert Norton's translation of Rodolph Gualter's sermons entitled 'Certaine godlie homelies or sermons upon the prophets Abdias and Jonas: conteyning a most fruitefull exposition of the same' (1573) was dedicated to William Blennerhasset of Norfolk and sheds light on the godly circles with which Walker associated in Norfolk and Suffolk. Further preferment followed his appointment as archdeacon. He became rector of the parish of Laindon, Essex, on 12 November 1573, and of St Botolph, Billingsgate, in 1574. He resigned his prebend in Norwich when collated prebendary of Mora in St Paul's Cathedral on 14 August 1575, and the archdeaconry about August 1585; but he held his other livings until his death in 1588. 
Although Walker's life is ill-documented, his career mirrors that of other protestants of his generation -- those early evangelicals who urged further reform in Elizabeth's early years but were prepared as time passed to live with the anomalies of the Elizabethan settlement. Once ensconced within the London diocesan hierarchy Walker made himself useful both to Sandys and to his successor John Aylmer. In October 1573 it was reported (possibly wrongly) that Edward Dering's lecture in St Paul's Cathedral 'is bestowed uppon Mr Dr Walker' (Smith, 1.90). In 1578 with the plague spreading, he was named with others to appoint from the London clergy sixty visitors of the sick. He was actively involved in the disciplinary proceedings against Robert, third Lord Rich, and his puritan chaplains in 1581, and on 27 September that year assisted William Charke in a fourth day of conference with Edmund Campion in the Tower. Aylmer employed him on a team to collect material to answer Campion's 'Decem rationes' and he was appointed in 1582 to confer with captured Catholic priests. He appears to have been most active in the chapter of St Paul's, whether estimating the costs of Sir Nicholas Bacon's funeral or preaching at Aylmer's visitation of the cathedral in 1583, and he worked closely with Dean Alexander Nowell and fellow prebendaries like John Mullins, archdeacon of London. On 8 May 1583 he witnessed Archbishop Grindal's will. 
Walker drew up his own will on 14 September 1588, as 'residentiary' of St Paul's. He requested burial among other Christians 'in simple manner without any pompe or vanitie' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/72, fol. 429'v'). His 'faithfull and lovinge' wife, Anne (probably 'nee' Thackham), pregnant at the time, was made his sole executor. She became his widow within the week as the will was granted probate on 21 September 1588. 


@@@@@


doc= 28495


Walker, John (1692/3-1741), classical and biblical scholar, was, according to the admission registers of Trinity College, Cambridge, the son of Thomas Walker of Huddersfield. The entry for his admission to Trinity College as a pensioner on 24 May 1710 also records that he had been educated at Wakefield School under Mr Clark (Edward Clarke) and that he was aged seventeen. A search in the parish registers in the West Riding of Yorkshire provides only one baptismal entry that could be his. A John, son of a Thomas Walker, was baptized in Hartshead parish church on 14 October 1694. If this is the same person who was admitted to Trinity aged seventeen, he was born in 1692 or 1693. In 1731 Slaithwaite Free School received an endowment by the terms of the will of a Thomas Walker of Huddersfield, salter, dated 9 May 1719. The surname is a common one in the area, and that this is the subject's father can hardly be expressed as more than a possibility. 
Walker's Cambridge career was a successful one. He graduated BA in 1713, and was elected a minor fellow of his college in 1716. He took his MA in 1717. He should not be confused with his two contemporaries at Trinity, Richard Walker, the vice-master, and Samuel Walker. Walker's preference was for collaborative research, to which he brought considerable learning as well as a pleasant personality. The only evidence of an independent publication is his projected edition of the Christian apologist Arnobius. Both the first and the last of his works to be published were contributions to the work of others. The first was a set of emendations to Cicero's 'De natura deorum', printed at the end of the edition by Dr John Davies of 1718. The last consisted of some notes which he had prepared on Cicero's 'De officiis' which were incorporated by Zachary Pearce into his edition of 1745. The emendations, which show a wide range of reading, are mostly bold or ingenious conjectures after the manner of Richard Bentley. Bentley also had been a pupil at Wakefield, and their education and scholarly interests were to continue to coincide. Walker was to provide Bentley with variant readings in manuscripts both of Suetonius and of Cicero's 'Tusculan Disputations'. But the greatest part of his assistance to Bentley was in 'New Testament' work. In fact, assistance is rather too weak a word, as the end of Bentley's 'Proposals for Printing' (a new edition of the Greek and 'Vulgate' 'New' testaments published in 1720), makes clear: 'The Overseer and Corrector of the Press will be the Learned Mr. John Walker of Trinity-College in 'Cambridge'; who with great accurateness has collated many MSS. at 'Paris' for the present Edition. And the Issue of it, whether Gain or Loss, is equally to fall on Him and the Author.' In the summer or autumn of 1719 Walker went to Paris on Bentley's behalf, in order to collate Latin and Greek manuscripts of the 'New Testament'. Walker was received kindly at Paris, especially by the Benedictines. He seems to have remained in Paris for almost a year. Collations of fourteen Latin manuscripts at Paris are extant, the whole 'New Testament' in five, and part of it in nine others. He also noted the readings of four Tours manuscripts collated by Leon Chevallier, which were given him by Sabatier. These collections are contained in Trinity College, Cambridge Library, B.17.5. 
The following year (1721) Walker returned to Paris, to concentrate on Greek manuscripts. The readings of manuscripts from various collections now to be found in the Bibliotheque Nationale that are contained in the Trinity College volume B.17.42, 43 probably belong to this period. Plague in Paris in the winter of 1721-2 drove Walker to Brussels. A letter describing this removal suggests that he may have been travelling with Lord Preston, either as his chaplain or in his entourage. During this stay he collated further manuscripts, including a Greek 'New Testament' then in the library of a convent at Corsendonck near Turnhout, now at Vienna (Osterreichische Nationalbibliothek, MS suppl. Gr. 52; Gregory-Aland 3), and succeeded in identifying many of the manuscripts used by Lucas Brugensis. When the epidemic had abated, Walker returned to Paris, and seems to have remained there until 1723. 
Walker's work on Arnobius must have taken shape in these years. Of this, as he wrote in the letter already quoted, there is 'only one MS. in the world, which is lodged in the library of the King of France [now Bibl. Nat. Lat. 1661], and which I have often seen and examin'd there'. During his visit to Brussels, he discovered and collated a second manuscript (now Brussels, Bibl. Royale 10846-7), which is now generally regarded as a copy of the Paris manuscript. Two quarto volumes containing these collations, as well as notes and conjectures, along with other notes, were left in his will to Dr Richard Meade. One of these volumes subsequently came into the hands of J. E. B. Mayor. 
At about this time Walker became friends with William Wake, archbishop of Canterbury, and after his return to England, he received a series of ecclesiastical preferments. He became dean and rector of Bocking, Essex, in the archbishop's patronage, on 15 November 1725. At Lady day 1726 he received his last dividend as fellow of Trinity. He became chancellor of St David's on 17 July 1727. He was made DD under royal commission (together with Richard Walker the vice-master) on 25 April 1728. A year later Wake appointed him archdeacon of Hereford (on 3 February 1729). In 1730 he was instituted rector of the adjacent parishes in the city of London of St Mary Aldermary and St Thomas the Apostle, both in the archbishop's patronage. He was also chaplain to George II. 
Walker married Charlotte Sheffield (died in or after 1762) on 26 January 1728, and they had six sons and four daughters. Charlotte was a natural daughter of John Sheffield, duke of Normanby and Buckinghamshire (1647-1721), and Frances Stewart (died 1751), who afterwards married the Hon. Oliver Lambart. Her father's will provided Mrs Walker with a fortune of $6000. One of their sons went into the East India trade, another (Henry) became a fellow of King's College, Cambridge, whence he graduated BA (1757), and a third an officer in Germany, who married and had children. A fourth studied in the Temple, and then took orders. 
Walker continued to collate manuscripts, including those acquired by Wake, now in the library of Christ Church, Oxford. Some of these collations are in Trinity College, Cambridge (B.17.42, 43 and others in B.17.34) and those of eight of the manuscripts are in a Greek 'Testament' in Christ Church Library (MS Wake Gr. 35). A note by Walker at the end of the volume states that this work was carried out in 1732. He certainly went on collating Greek manuscripts until after 1735, as he entered some collations in a Greek 'Testament' printed in that year (Trinity College, B.17.44, 45). Altogether, ninety-six of Walker's collations of Greek manuscripts are known, containing the whole or parts of the 'New Testament'. It was John Wordsworth's informed opinion that his 'collations of Latin manuscripts are decidedly better than Bentley's, although they are not as perfect as his reputation for scholarship and his neat writing would lead one to hope' ('DNB'). In the volume Wake Gr. 35, Walker wrote accurate descriptions and datings of the manuscripts, which were used by Kitchin in his catalogue of Christ Church manuscripts. 
Walker's health was increasingly delicate, and he signed his will on 29 May 1741. He died on 9 November 1741. Mrs Walker caused to be erected a monument to him in the chancel of Bocking church where he was buried. Its laudatory character is confirmed by all the evidence. It asserts that his 'uncommon learning and sweetness of temper, joined to all other Christian perfections, and accompanied with a pleasing form of body, justly rendered him the delight and ornament of mankind'. Mrs Walker afterwards married a Welshman named Griffiths, from whom she soon separated, resuming the name of Walker, and lived first in Bedford and then in Yarmouth. She was still living in 1762. 
Wordsworth believed that the collapse of the projected Greek 'Testament' was due to Walker's death much more than to Bentley's, since Walker continued collating at least until 1737, while Bentley seems to have turned his attention to other tasks long before. If this was indeed the case, then his early death may have deprived Walker of a place beside Mill, Tregelles, and Hort, as well as of the opportunity of anticipating Lachmann with the first acceptable replacement to the received text. As it is, Walker's place in history is as the successor of Mill in the collation of manuscripts, and as a pioneer among British scholars in studying manuscripts abroad. The degree to which he contributed to the text selected in Bentley's notes and drafts is a matter for speculation. 


@@@@@


doc= 28496


Walker, John (bap. 1674, d. 1747), Church of England clergyman and historian, son of Endymion Walker, was baptized at St Kerrian's, Exeter, on 21 January 1674. His father was mayor of Exeter from 1682 to 1683. On 19 November 1691 he matriculated at Exeter College, Oxford, was admitted fellow on 3 July 1695, and became full fellow on 4 July 1696 (vacated 1700). On 16 January 1698 he was ordained deacon by Sir Jonathan Trelawny, then bishop of Exeter; he graduated BA on 4 July 1698 and was instituted to the rectory of St Mary Major, Exeter, on 22 August after the death of the previous incumbent, Richard Carpenter. On 13 October 1699 he graduated MA (apparently incorporated at Cambridge, 1702). 
The publication of Edmund Calamy's 'Account' (1702-13) of nonconformist ministers silenced and ejected after the Restoration in 1660 suggested simultaneously to Charles Goodall and to Walker the idea of rendering a similar service to the memory of the conforming clergy who were deprived and sequestered by the puritans in the period before the Restoration. Goodall advertised for information in the 'London Gazette'; finding that Walker was engaged on a similar task, he gave him the materials he had collected. Walker collected particulars by help of query sheets, circulated in various dioceses. (Those for Exeter -- very minute -- and Canterbury are printed by Calamy in his 'Church and Dissenters Compar'd as to Persecution', 1719.) Walker's helpers in this task included Mary Astell. His diligence in amassing materials may be estimated from the detailed account given in the preface to his 'Attempt towards recovering an account of the numbers and sufferings of the clergy of the Church of England, heads of colleges, fellows, scholars, &c., who were sequester'd, harrass'd, &c. in the late times of the grand rebellion' (1714). A remarkable subscription list contains over thirteen hundred names. The work consists of two parts: first, a history of ecclesiastical affairs from 1640 to 1660, the object being to show that the ejection of the puritans by the 'Act of Uniformity' (1662) was a just reprisal for their actions when in power; second, a catalogue, well arranged and fairly well indexed, of the deprived clergy with particulars of their sufferings. The plan falls short of Calamy's, as it does not give biographies. A third part, announced in the title-page as an examination of Calamy's work, was deferred and never appeared, though Calamy is plentifully attacked in the preface. 
The work was hailed by Thomas Bisse in a sermon before the sons of the clergy (6 December 1716) as a 'book of martyrology' and 'a record which ought to be kept in every sanctuary'. However, John Lewis, whom Calamy calls a 'chumm' of Walker's, and who had formed high expectations of the book, disparages it, in 'Remarks' on Bisse, as 'a farrago of false and senseless legends'. It was criticized, from the nonconformist side, by John Withers of Exeter, in an appendix to his 'Reply' (1714) to two pamphlets by John Agate, an Exeter clergyman; and by Calamy in 'The Church and the Dissenters Compar'd'. Walker's work, though strongly polemical and full of anti-puritan sentiments, shows evidence of careful historical consideration of his materials, and he does not try to ignore the charges made against some of his 'sufferers' which led to their ejection. 
Walker married Martha Brooking (1679/80-1747), in Exeter Cathedral on 17 November 1704. On 7 December 1714 he was made DD by diploma at Oxford in recognition of his literary work on the sufferings of the clergy. On 20 December of the same year he became a prebendary of Exeter Cathedral. On 17 October 1720 he was instituted to the rectory of Upton Pyne in Devon, after the death of the previous rector, James Gray. He was presented to the living by Hugh Stafford of Pyne. He seems to have spent the rest of his life there. 
Walker died in 1747, probably at Upton Pyne. He was buried on the north side of the chancel at Upton Pyne church on 20 June 1747. Before his death Walker had expressed an intention to deposit the material he had collected for his work in a library. In 1754 his son William, a druggist in Exeter, presented these papers to the Bodleian Library, where they remain. They were bound up in the nineteenth century, making twelve folio and eleven quarto volumes. Walker also left a large collection of pamphlets, and several letters, which have proved awkward to decipher because of his eccentric handwriting. He was survived by his wife who, according to her tombstone, was buried on 12 September 1747, aged sixty-seven. 


@@@@@


doc= 28497


John Walker (fl. 1784-1802), engraver, the only son of William Walker, was responsible for 'The Copper-Plate Magazine, or, Monthly Cabinet of Picturesque Prints' (1792-1802), a much esteemed compilation which he engraved and published and which gave employment to the young J. M. W. Turner. Walker had learned his craft under his father, with whom he frequently worked in collaboration. 


@@@@@


doc= 28498


Walker, John (1731-1803), natural historian and Church of Scotland minister, was born on 2 March 1731 in the Canongate, Edinburgh, son to John Walker, rector of Canongate School, and Euphame Morison, lady-in-waiting to Lady Dirleton. He was baptized at the Canongate on 9 March 1731. From his father's grammar school he went to the University of Edinburgh (1746-9) in preparation for the ministry. He records that he was an avid collector of natural specimens from at least 1746, and from 1750 his interest in natural history was further heightened by the remains of the museum left by Sir Robert Sibbald and Sir Andrew Balfour. He was licensed to preach on 3 April 1754, and on 13 September 1758 was ordained minister of Glencorse, 7 miles south of Edinburgh, where in 1750 he had made the acquaintance of Henry Home, Lord Kames, a member of the board of annexed estates. 
On 8 June 1762 Walker was transferred to Moffat, from which parish he undertook extensive fieldwork. In 1764 he was appointed, through Kames's patronage, to survey the Hebrides, and to make a report to the Society in Scotland for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge. Walker travelled 3000 miles in seven months. His report, together with his 1771 tour and four other trips between 1766 and 1786, formed the basis of his manuscripts on the natural history of the Hebrides, partly published posthumously as 'An Economical History of the Hebrides' (2 vols., 1808; reissued in 1812), and printed by Charles Stewart, the university printer, Walker's friend, executor, and former student. His other main work was also published posthumously: 'Essays on Natural History and Rural Economy' (1812). 
Walker was appointed regius professor of natural history and keeper of the university's museum at Edinburgh on 3 November 1779, while retaining his clerical post at Moffat. His lectures were considered clear but dry and formal. His teaching emphasized a utilitarian natural history. His students came mainly from Scotland but some were from Europe and from North and South America. They included James Edward Smith, Tobias Smollett, and Robert Jameson, his successor as natural history professor. Many former students provided him with natural specimens for his museum. Works printed by Walker during his lifetime comprised mainly syllabuses for his students: 'Schediasma fossilium' (1781); 'Delineatio fossilium' (1782); 'Classes fossilium' (1787); and 'Institutes of Natural History' (1792). His guide to collecting, 'Preservatio naturalium', came out in 1796 followed in 1800 by a work on the discovery of coal for Colonel Dirom, quartermaster-general of Scotland. Walker produced a large body of important but unpublished work including geological observations, a flora of Edinburgh, anticipations of Linnaean classification within the genus 'Alga', and an account of species of the genus 'Salix'. He corresponded with Linnaeus and Thomas Pennant among others, was a close friend to William Cullen and Joseph Black, and greatly developed the natural history museum at Edinburgh. His breadth of expertise was remarkable but his posthumous reputation suffered from his not having published much during his lifetime. 
On 24 November 1789 Walker married Jane Wallace (Jean) Wauchope of Niddrie, who died on 4 May 1827. On 7 June 1764 he was elected a freeman and burgess of Campbeltown in Argyll. On 28 February 1765 he received the honorary degree of MD from Glasgow University, and on 22 March 1765 that of DD from Edinburgh University. 
On 7 January 1783 Walker was transferred from his parish at Moffat to Colinton, near Edinburgh. On 2 March 1782, he was the leading figure in plans for 'a Society for the Advancement of Learning and Usefull Knowledge', a body established in 1783 as the Royal Society of Edinburgh. Walker was secretary to the physical class, 1784-1803. He contributed seven papers to that society's 'Transactions' on subjects ranging from the motion of sap in trees to whales, and five to the 'Transactions' of the Highland Society of Scotland on peat and the salmon among other subjects. He was elected an honorary member of the Highland Society in 1789, and a member of the Edinburgh Natural History Society, founded by James Edward Smith, on 5 April 1782. Walker's lectures on agriculture prompted Sir William Pulteney to found the chair of agriculture in Edinburgh in 1790. On 20 May 1790 Walker was elected moderator of the general assembly of the Scottish church. He was made a fellow of the Royal Society in 1794. He wrote parochial accounts of Glencorse (1795) and Colinton (1797) for Sir John Sinclair's 'Statistical Account of Scotland' (20 vols., 1791-9). During his last years he was blind. He died at Somerville Wynd, Canongate, on 31 December 1803 and was buried in Canongate churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 28499


Walker, John (1732-1807), elocutionist, orthoepist, and lexicographer, was born on 18 March 1732 at Colney Heath, a hamlet in the parish of Friern Barnet, Middlesex, on the eastern side of Finchley Common. Nothing is known about his father, except that he died when John was a child. His mother came from Nottingham and was the sister of the Revd James Morley, a dissenting minister in Painswick, Gloucestershire. Walker attended grammar school, but left early to learn a trade, of which he tried several, but none suited him. On his mother's death, when he was about seventeen, he decided to pursue a career on the stage and joined a succession of provincial theatre companies, the last of which was in Gloucester. In 1757 he joined Garrick's company at Drury Lane, where he at first played minor characters, such as Angus in 'Macbeth', but was soon promoted to play the second parts in tragedy, and those of a grave and sententious nature in comedy. 
In May 1758 Walker married Miss Sybilla Minors 
(Myners; 1723-1802)
, a well-known comic actress at Drury Lane. Shortly after their marriage they were both engaged by Spranger Barry and Henry Woodward to join the Crow Street Theatre in Dublin, where Walker took on many of Henry Mossop's characters after Mossop joined the Smock Alley Theatre. While he was engaged in Dublin he also played summer seasons in Bristol. In June 1762 he returned to London, where he and his wife joined Beard's company at Covent Garden. His first appearance on this stage was on 25 October 1762 as Downright in 'Every Man in his Humour', which was considered to be his best performance, though his Cato and Brutus were also commended. Walker left Covent Garden in 1767 and, after a year's stay in Dublin and a final summer season in Bristol, quit the stage in 1768. Although he achieved a certain level of fame as an actor, it was acknowledged that 'though a judicious and correct, he was far from a perfect actor. His gesture was ungraceful and... his enunciation monotonous' ('The Athenaeum', 78). 
In January 1769 Walker started a school at Kensington gravel pits with the Revd James Usher. Under Usher's influence he had converted to Roman Catholicism shortly after his marriage, and he continued to adhere to this faith for the rest of his life. Although the school was a success, Walker left after two years, following a disagreement with Usher, to become a teacher of elocution. He was very successful in this, attracting more pupils than he could accommodate, mainly young men aiming to qualify for the senate or the bar. By 1775 Walker's reputation was such that he was invited to give a series of lectures in Edinburgh. These were so popular that he was invited back, and he also gave the lectures in Dublin and in Oxford, where he was subsequently invited by the heads of several colleges to give private lectures in the university. Walker's pupils included the emperor of Russia's prime minister, the sons of Lord Erskine, and several members of parliament. As well as Garrick, his friends and patrons included Samuel Johnson, John Milner, the Roman Catholic bishop of Castabala, and Edmund Burke, who introduced him to an acquaintance as 'Mr Walker, whom not to know, by name at least, would argue want of knowledge of the harmonies, cadences, and proprieties of our language' (Emerson, 115). 
Walker was the leader of the 'mechanical' school of elocution, in which detailed rules concerning voice production, posture, and gesture were laid down, as opposed to the 'natural' school led by Thomas Sheridan. Although Walker's first publication was 'A General Idea of a Pronouncing Dictionary' (1774), and he also published 'Exercises for Improvement in Elocution' (1777) and 'Hints for Improvement in the Art of Reading' (1783), it was his 'Elements of Elocution' (1781), 'Rhetorical Grammar' (1785), and 'The Melody of Speaking' (1787) which sealed his reputation as an elocutionist. His major contribution was his theory of inflections, whereby the pitch of the voice moves up or down, or both up and down, within a single syllable. These ideas were not original, having been put forward by Joshua Steele in 'Prosodia rationalis' (1775), but Steele's work, with its elaborate musical notation, was much more difficult for the public to understand. It is unlikely that Walker actually plagiarized Steele because, by his own admission, he had a 'total want of knowledge in music' and found himself incapable of understanding Steele's notation ('Elements of Elocution', 1781, xi-xii). 
Walker's ideas on elocution continued to be influential throughout the nineteenth century, but it is as an orthoepist and lexicographer that he is best known. His most important and frequently reprinted works are his 'Rhyming Dictionary', first published in 1775 but still in press throughout the twentieth century, and, above all, his 'Critical Pronouncing Dictionary' (1791). This was the most successful and authoritative pronouncing dictionary of the late eighteenth and the nineteenth century. It was reprinted over 100 times up to 1904 and was the basis of over 20 other dictionaries published in the nineteenth century, including B. H. Smart's 'Walker Remodelled' (1836). The 'Critical Pronouncing Dictionary' was successful and influential in the United States as well as Britain, the first American edition appearing in 1803. The success of this work was due to its detailed and authoritative pronouncements on correct pronunciation, set out in 545 'rules' prefaced to the dictionary proper as well as in notes to any word whose pronunciation was controversial. Walker used the same system of notation as Sheridan, marking the different pronunciations of vowels with superscripted numbers, but criticized him for 'numerous instances... of impropriety, inconsistency, and want of acquaintance with the analogies of the Language' ('Critical Pronouncing Dictionary', 1791, 1). Walker was acknowledged to have 'settled all doubts on the subject' of English pronunciation, and his 'Critical Pronouncing Dictionary' came to be regarded as the 'statute book of English orthoepy' ('The Athenaeum', 81). By the end of the nineteenth century Walker had become a byword for linguistic correctness, so that those who used an affected pronunciation were accused of trying to 'out-Walker Walker' (Mugglestone, 'Talking Proper', 41). In the twentieth century his authority came to be superseded by that of Daniel Jones, and he has come to be regarded as an arch-prescriptivist. This criticism was first levelled at him by Alexander Ellis, who, while acknowledging his 'good and hard work', accused Walker of being one of 'these word-peddlars, those letter-drivers, those stiff-necked pedantic philosophical, miserably informed, and therefore supremely certain, self-confident and self-conceited orthographers' ('On Early English Pronunciation', 1869, 2.629, 1.155). 
After the 'Critical Pronouncing Dictionary' Walker published 'A Key to the Classical Pronunciation of Greek and Latin Proper Names' (1798), which, as 'Walker's key', was appended to several dictionaries in the nineteenth century, including an edition of Webster's American dictionary in 1829, Joseph Worcester's 'Universal and Critical Dictionary of the English Language' (1846), and several later editions of the 'Critical Pronouncing Dictionary'. His last works were 'The Academic Speaker' (1801), 'The Teacher's Assistant in English Composition' (1801), and 'Outlines of English Grammar' (1805). 
Walker died at Tottenham Court Road, London, on 1 August 1807, his wife having died in April 1802. He was buried at St Pancras on 7 August, and left about $7000, most of which was bequeathed to distant relatives and the rest to friends. Although, as his authoritative pronouncements suggest, he was dogmatic and opinionated, and at times irritable and impatient, he was scrupulously honest, generous, and charitable, and a loyal friend even to those who disagreed with him. 


@@@@@


doc= 28500


Walker, John (1759-1830), vaccinator and writer, was born on 31 July 1759 at Cockermouth, Cumberland, one of the several children of a blacksmith and ironmonger. He was educated at the free grammar school in the town and was intended for an artistic career. However, plans for an apprenticeship were abandoned and he spent five years in his father's business, engraving ornamental metalwork. During this time he received some training in drawing. In 1779 Walker travelled to Dublin with the romantic ambition of joining a privateer. The ship had already been taken by the French, so he resumed his artistic studies and within a year was publishing engravings in magazines. In 1784 he took up teaching, gradually building up a large and successful school on Usher's Island, Dublin. However, he continued to produce engravings and began to write to supplement his income, publishing an 'Elements of Geography and of Natural and Civil History' in 1788 and a 'Universal Gazetteer' in 1795. 
By this time Walker had settled in London and had again changed his career, this time for medicine. He undertook a conventional course of study, spending three years at Guy's Hospital, with a brief visit to Paris in 1797. He reportedly spent time in Edinburgh in 1799-1800, although he did not matriculate at the university. Walker graduated MD from Leiden University in 1799, and later published his thesis on the function of the heart and blood vessels. He became a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians, London, in 1812, and was for a long time member of the Physical Society of Guy's Hospital. According to his first biographer, Walker was able to pursue these studies through the generosity of Anne Bowman, a native of Cockermouth, whom he married in a civil ceremony in Glasgow on 23 October 1799. The couple had no children. 
If Walker's medical education was conventional, his career was not. He never set up in practice, but always worked in vaccine institutions, then a new arena of practice. This unusual career path was dictated largely by Walker's confrontational character, his scepticism of the merits of orthodox medical treatment, and his unconventional views in religion and politics. Walker was brought up a Baptist but in the 1780s he attempted to join the Society of Friends. He was never formally accepted in the Quaker faith, because of his doubts about the divinity of Christ and his critical views of contemporary Quaker principles. However, he rigidly adhered to the outward conventions of Quaker life, attending meetings and adopting their distinctive style of address and garb. The latter caused difficulty on numerous occasions, when Walker refused to remove his hat at table as etiquette demanded. In Paris this behaviour provoked a minor scandal at the Conseil des Anciens. Walker's politics were radical. In Paris he was acquainted with Thomas Paine, Thomas Muir, and James Napper Tandy, and translated the manifesto of the Theophilanthropists, an atheistic society. He embraced a number of radical causes that included opposition to slavery, to the employment of children as chimney sweeps, and to cruelty to animals. 
Walker first became involved in vaccination against smallpox in 1800, when he was asked by Dr Marshall to join an expedition to the Mediterranean. The two practitioners carried out successful vaccinations in Gibraltar, Minorca, Malta, and Naples, and Walker went on to join Sir Ralph Abercromby's expedition to Egypt, vaccinating the troops and working as a surgeon. He also undertook various journeys in Egypt, which provided the material for his travel book 'Fragments of Letters and Other Papers' (1802). In Egypt he caused much confusion by persistently sporting a large beard, by which he was mistaken for a Jew and assaulted. 
On his return in 1802 Walker immediately began to practise vaccination in London, and in 1803 he was appointed resident vaccinator to the Royal Jennerian Society, a charity which provided free vaccination to the poor. The post offered a small salary and a house at the main vaccine station in Salisbury Court, Fleet Street. Walker's singular temperament did not, however, allow a quiet life. In 1806 he became embroiled in a dispute with Jenner, ostensibly over vaccination technique, although the true causes are now obscure. The society split into factions: Jenner and the society's medical board demanded Walker's dismissal, while the lay board of directors, which included a number of Quakers, consistently supported him. Walker was forced to resign, but did not go gracefully. He published a scurrilous 'Jenneric opera' in the anti-vaccination 'Medical Observer', which drew a similarly bad-tempered response from Jenner's camp. The society alleged that Walker refused to hand over vaccination registers and had taken a shop at the entrance to Salisbury Court from which he waylaid patients before they could reach the vaccination station. Walker and his supporters set up a rival charity, the London Vaccine Institution, which flourished as the Jennerian Society declined. In 1813 Walker added insult to injury by reviving the moribund Royal Jennerian Society, which was eventually amalgamated with the London Vaccine Institution. Despite its controversial beginnings, and Walker's rough and ready style of dealing with patients, the London Vaccine Institution proved the most successful vaccine charity of its day, providing free vaccination to thousands of Londoners. It also sought to encourage free vaccination in the provinces by recruiting local practitioners as associate vaccinators. Walker himself worked hard in the cause until a few days of his death. He continued to publish on a wide range of topics, such as vaccination and popular science; he even made Latin translations. He died in London on 23 June 1830 from a lung disease, probably tuberculosis. 


@@@@@


doc= 28501


Walker, John (bap. 1770, d. 1831), antiquary, son of John and Mary Walker of London, was baptized at the church of St Katharine Cree, London, on 18 February 1770, and was elected scholar at Winchester College in 1783. He matriculated from Brasenose College, Oxford, in 1788, and graduated BCL in 1797. In the same year he was elected fellow of New College; he retained his fellowship until 1820. He also filled the posts of bursar, librarian, and dean of canon law. In 1809 he published 'A Selection of Curious Articles from the 'Gentleman's Magazine'' in four volumes. This undertaking had been suggested by Edward Gibbon to the magazine's editor, John Nichols, in 1792, but, as he recorded in 'Literary Anecdotes of the Eighteenth Century' (8.557), Nichols never found time to pursue the idea. Inspired by Gibbon's suggestion, Walker began work on a selection and in April 1805 wrote to Nichols asking if he would publish it (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng. lett. c. 367, fol. 206). The popularity of the work, published by Longman, led to a second edition in 1811 and a third in 1814. 
Walker's other literary and antiquarian pursuits were centred on Oxford. In 1809 he brought out 'Oxoniana', four volumes of selections from books and manuscripts in the Bodleian Library relating to university matters, 'to exhibit a view of the customs and manners which have prevailed at different periods' ('Oxoniana', 1809, advertisement, vol. 1, p. i). This was followed in 1813 by a similar work, 'Letters Written by Eminent Persons... from the Originals in the Bodleian Library and Ashmolean Museum' (2 vols.). Both proved valuable sources of quotation for succeeding writers. Walker was also the author of 'Curia Oxoniensis, or, Observations on the Statutes which Relate to the University Court' (2nd edn, 1822). He was one of the original proprietors of the 'Oxford University and City Herald and Midland County Chronicle', first published on 31 May 1806, and for several years assisted in the editorial work. He was also, from 1810, the first editor of the 'Oxford University Calendar'. 
In 1819 Walker was presented by the warden and fellows of New College to the vicarage of Hornchurch in Essex, and resided there, apparently unmarried, during the rest of his life. He died of a violent cold and inflammation of the chest, at the vicarage on 5 April 1831. His library was sold by Sothebys in 739 lots on 2 June the same year. 


@@@@@


doc= 28502


Walker, John (1769-1833), founder of the Church of God and classical scholar, was born in co. Roscommon, the son of Matthew Walker, a Church of Ireland clergyman. He entered Trinity College, Dublin, on 18 January 1786, was chosen a scholar in 1788, graduated BA in 1790, was elected a fellow in 1791, and proceeded MA in 1796, and BD in 1800. 
Walker was ordained a Church of Ireland priest and served as a chaplain in Bethesda Chapel, Dublin, from 1793; he composed a moderately well-known hymn, 'Thou God of power and God of love', in honour of the chapel's move to Dorset Street, Dublin, on 22 June 1794. From about 1803 he began to study the principles of Christian fellowship prevailing among the earliest Christians. Convinced that later departures were erroneous, he joined with a small band of followers who attempted to live what they believed to be the practice of the apostles, rejecting all church authority and discipline and calling themselves members of the Church of God. His views from this period can be found in his 'Expostulatory Address to Members of the Methodist Society in Ireland' (1804) and his 'Letters to Alexander Knox' (1803). 
On 8 October 1804 Walker became convinced that he could no longer honestly hold the position of a clergyman of the Church of Ireland. Informing the provost of Trinity College of his theological position, he offered to resign his fellowship, but was formally expelled on the following day. He joined a congregation of fellow believers at their meeting-place for worship in Stafford Street, Dublin, and supported himself by lecturing on subjects of university study, completing his edition of Livy's 'Historiarum libri qui supersunt' (1797-1813) and publishing 'The First, Second and Sixth Books of Euclid's Elements' (1808) and 'Selections from Lucian' (1816). After paying several visits to Scotland, he moved to London in 1819, where he wrote 'A Full and Plain Account of the Horatian Metres' (1822). It was probably while in London that he married and that his daughter Mary was born. 
In 1833, after Trinity College, Dublin, had granted Walker a pension of $600 in amends for their earlier treatment of him, he returned to Dublin where he died on 25 October. His theological work, 'The Sabbath: a Type of the Lord Jesus Christ' (1866), was published posthumously, and his 'Essays and Correspondence' (1838), edited by W. Burton, went to press five years after his death. His followers were known by the pejorative terms Separatists or Walkerites. 


@@@@@


doc= 28503


Walker, John (1781-1859), chemist and inventor of a friction match, was born at 104 High Street, Stockton-on-Tees, on 29 May 1781, the third son of John Walker (1748-1812), a grocer, and wine and spirits merchant, and his wife, Mary Peacock (1752-1840). He was educated in the town and afterwards apprenticed to Watson Alcock, Stockton's principal surgeon. He then moved to London -- probably to complete his medical training -- before returning to Stockton as assistant surgeon to Alcock. However, he came to dislike this work, and, as he was interested in botany and chemistry, he moved first to Durham and then to York, where he was employed by wholesale druggists. He then returned to Stockton and in June 1819 opened a chemist and druggist's shop at 59 High Street, where he made up prescriptions and supplied medicines for animals. 
Walker also enjoyed experimenting with chemicals. One day, at home, he prepared a mixture in which a dipped splint, probably used as a stirrer, became coated and dried. When the splint was scraped on the hearth, either accidentally or in an effort to remove the coating, it suddenly sparked and caught fire. Realizing that he had found a simple method of making an instant sustainable flame or light, he decided to prepare further splints that he could sell or give away. His only surviving daybook contains the earliest recorded sale of these friction matches (first entered as 'Sulphurata Hyperoxygenata Frict.') to a local solicitor on 7 April 1827. As it appears that this was the thirtieth batch to have been produced, it seems likely that he made his important discovery some time in 1826. 
In September 1827 Walker started calling the new matches 'friction lights', which became his usual name for them. The cost of 100 of these was 1's'., with a round tin case for 2died, though the matches were often sold loose. A piece of folded glasspaper was supplied with each box, and the matches, at first made of pasteboard (later wood), were flat and about 3 inches long. A match was lit by pinching the head between the folds of glasspaper and then quickly withdrawing it -- the friction igniting the chemical tip. The composition of this tip was antimony sulphide and potassium chlorate mixed with gum arabic, starch, and water. 
Walker did not think his invention was worth patenting, considering it trivial and preferring to leave its full commercial potential to others. As a result, Samuel Jones of London introduced an imitation of the friction light in 1829, which he called the Lucifer, a name that Walker disliked. Lucifers quickly became established and Walker ceased making his own matches, probably about 1830 or 1831, though he continued with his original trade until he retired. However, his invention should not be underestimated, as it was the first really practical match and an improvement on earlier methods of making fire, which could sometimes be dangerous. Friction matches gradually replaced the cumbersome tinderbox, and although expensive at the time, they eventually developed into the modern, mass-produced safety match, which could be bought very cheaply. 
Walker was small and thin in appearance, and had a courteous but cheerful nature. Clever and knowledgeable, he was always willing to give advice. His dress was neat, usually consisting of a brown coat with tails, drab knee-breeches, and grey stockings. He never married. In retirement he lived at 1b The Square in Stockton, where, suffering from heart disease and dropsy, he died on 1 May 1859. He was buried in St Mary's churchyard, Norton, Stockton-on-Tees, on 5 May 1859. 


@@@@@


doc= 28504


Walker, Joseph Cooper (1761-1810), antiquary, was probably born in Dublin, the son of Cooper Walker (1725-1799) of Dublin, and his wife and second cousin, Mary, daughter of William Gordon. He was educated in Dublin by the Revd Thomas Ball. He began work as a clerk in the Irish treasury, but suffered all his life from acute asthma, and travelled abroad frequently in the hope of improving his health. For many years he lived in Italy, where he became acquainted with Sir William and Lady Hamilton. He studied Italian literature and Irish antiquities, and published several works on both subjects, including 'A Historical Memoir on Italian Tragedy' (1799) and 'A Historical Essay on the Dress of the Ancient and Modern Irish' (1788). But his most significant work was his earliest, the 'Historical Memoirs of the Irish Bards' (1786), which -- like Charlotte Brooke's 'Reliques of Irish Poetry' (1789) -- was remarkable as a pioneering study of contemporary literature and vernacular poetry, intended to illustrate the Irish past. 
After his return to Ireland Walker settled in his house, St Valeri, Bray, co. Wicklow, where he kept his various art treasures and his large library. He was one of the original members of the Royal Irish Academy, elected in 1785, and contributed various papers to its 'Transactions'. Walker died on 12 April 1810 at St Valeri, and was buried on 14 April in St Mary's churchyard, Dublin. He left several works in manuscript, including a journal of his travels; his 'Memoirs of Alessandro Tassoni' were published posthumously in 1815. Francis Hardy, the biographer of the earl of Charlemont, completed an inadequate memoir of Walker in 1812, which his family decided to withhold. After Hardy's death the materials were handed to Edward Berwick, who failed to complete it. 


@@@@@


doc= 28505


Walker, Obadiah (1616-1699), college head and author, was born at Darfield, near Barnsley, the son of William Walker of Worsbrough Dale in the West Riding of Yorkshire. He was baptized at his father's parish on 17 September 1616. Nothing is known of his schooling. He matriculated at Oxford on 5 April 1633, having previously entered University College. The learned Abraham Woodhead, a Yorkshire compatriot, was assigned his tutor. The appointment marked the beginning of a lifelong intimacy between them. A ready scholar with an aptitude for languages Walker displayed an appetite for learning well beyond the bounds of the arts curriculum. He was elected Freiston exhibitioner on 1 October 1633 and a perpetual fellow on 10 August 1635. He graduated BA on 4 July 1635, and MA on 23 April 1638. Shortly afterwards he received ordination in the Church of England. A born teacher he inspired intellectual endeavour and personal affection in his tutorial pupils. 
In the great rebellion Walker took the king's side. On 1 September 1642 he and Woodhead were nominated delegates for the defence of the university, a tribute to his standing in Oxford. Membership of the delegacy brought him into contact with the leaders of Anglican royalism, especially Gilbert Sheldon. Unlike Woodhead, Walker remained at his post throughout the war, and discharged the office of college bursar. He preached before Charles I: a privilege which earned him his grace for the degree of BD in June 1646. Modestly, he waived the degree. 
With the surrender of Oxford, Walker was exposed to the wrath of the victorious rebel parliament. Arraigned before the parliamentary visitors he deferred submission on 19 May 1648, 'as beinge yet unsatisfied' of the lawfulness of the visitation. Three days later he was ordered to be expelled, and was finally ejected from his fellowship on 7 July for 'high contempt of the authoritie of Parliament' (Burrows, 103, 143). 
Walker made a virtue of necessity by electing to travel. Intent on improving himself 'in all kinds of polite literature' ('DNB'), he visited Paris and Rome. His time abroad stimulated his interest in different societies. Already a classicist he developed a passion for numismatics and antiquities that stayed with him for life. For the first time he encountered the splendours and challenges of Counter-Reformation Catholicism. He undertook, about 1650, on the recommendation of John Evelyn, to act as tutor to Henry and Charles, the sons of Henry Hildyard, of Horsley, Surrey. In October 1655 he and his pupils were at Basel. The conversion to Rome of his elder pupil, Henry Hildyard, suggested that Walker was, to say no more, complacent in his attitude to Catholicism. 
After wandering 'a long time up and down' ('DNB') Walker returned to England. In 1659 he published at London his first book, 'Some Instruction Concerning the Art of Oratory', the fruit of his years of study and teaching. At his return it is likely that he renewed his acquaintance with Sheldon through his friend Abraham Woodhead, whose poverty Sheldon is known to have relieved. Following the Restoration both Walker and Woodhead, as well as Sheldon, were reinstated in their Oxford preferment. On 15 August 1660 Charles II's commissioners for visiting the university ordered the removal of the intruded fellows and the restoration of Walker and Woodhead, the 'lawfull and undoubted Fellowes of the said Colledg[e]' (Beddard, 'Restoration Oxford', 1.164). 
Walker found it difficult to settle down. He soon set off on his travels. Again, he made for Rome as a private tutor. The college gave him repeated leave of absence, granting him four terms away in August 1661, on 31 January 1663, and 23 March 1664, and a further two terms on 14 January 1665, after the expiry of which he kept residence. On the death of the royalist master, Dr Thomas Walker, he voted for his successor, Richard Clayton, on 6 December 1665. Abroad he observed the 'divers communities' through which he passed and conversed with 'their most eminent directors and professors', experiences which distinguished him from most stay-at-home Oxford dons. At his homecoming he was, according to the Benedictine monk Richard Reeve, in every way 'best qualified for the advancement and direction of collegiate and academicall studies' (Beddard, 'James II', 922-3). 
Walker was soon drawn back into the intellectual and administrative life of the university. He found a powerful patron in Dean John Fell of Christ Church. As a royalist cleric who reverenced the early fathers and a seasoned tutor who loved history and the classics, he fitted easily into Restoration Oxford. Fell did more than befriend him, he employed him in some of his enterprises. In 1667 Walker became a delegate of the newly founded university press. It was his influence that brought Anthony Wood the offer to publish his pioneering 'History and Antiquities of Oxford'. A connoisseur of Roman antiquity he joined Evelyn to secure the Arundel marbles for the university in 1667. 
Walker's knowledge of European scholarship and continental contacts enabled him to swell the foreign holdings of the public library. In the early 1670s he obtained Ciacconius's 'Columna Trajani', Peruta's 'Book of Medals', and 'other bookes from Rome'. An informed bibliophile he helped to price duplicates in Bodley's library, the sale of which added to the book purchasing fund. In 1673 he published two works: 'Of Education. Especially of Young Gentlemen', a distillation of his teaching experience, which in 1699 reached its sixth edition; and 'Artis rationis ad mentem nominalium libri tres', an introduction to logic that made use of the medieval nominalists. He was behind the Oxford publication of Ockham's 'Summa totius logicae' of 1675. 
At the death of Richard Clayton on 14 June 1676 Walker, already the senior fellow, was an obvious choice for the mastership. He was unanimously elected on 22 June. He proved an active and popular head of house. An epistolary campaign, addressed to grandees and old members, raised money to complete the main quadrangle by erecting the eastern range. Following Fell's example he aspired to give an intellectual lead to his college. Calling on the assistance of his fellows he undertook an edition in Latin of Sir John Spelman's unpublished 'Life of Alfred', the reputed founder of University College. The work was chiefly intended to let the world know that its benefactions were, as he put it, 'not bestowed on mere drones' (Beddard, 'Tory Oxford', 864). 
Paradoxically, the publication in 1678 of the 'Vita Aelfredi' turned out to be a mixed blessing. While the elegantly printed folio, augmented by Walker's Old English erudition and illustrated by engravings of contemporary coinage, achieved its primary aim of justifying continuing financial support for his college, it also attracted condemnation in 1679 in -- of all places -- parliament. In the Commons that veteran sniffer out of popery, Sir Harbottle Grimston, detected a whiff of Romanism about the book. Walker's dedication to Charles II, who was fulsomely compared to the Catholic King Alfred, and seeming reconciliation of the royal supremacy with papal obedience, offended protestant prejudices. Grimston's anti-Catholicism, stirred up by Gilbert Burnet, had been directed against the master by two parliamentarian quondams of the college: Israel Tonge (Tongue) and William Shippen, who spied a chance to supplant him. 
Matters were compounded by Walker's known friendship with the Catholic convert Abraham Woodhead. At his demise in May 1678 Woodhead had left Walker a property at Hoxton that was believed to be a popish school, and, though a Catholic and non-resident, Woodhead had been permitted to draw his fellowship stipend from the college since 1660. Notwithstanding the master's negative return when called on by the vice-chancellor to identify suspected Catholics in his society in February 1679, suspicions lingered on the score of his religion. This was not helped by the preaching in June 1680 of a 'popishly affected' university sermon by one of his erstwhile pupils, Francis Nicholson, and by his publication of Woodhead's 'Of the Benefits of Our Saviour Jesus Christ to Mankind', also in 1680 (Beddard, 'James II', 918). Against the background of whig exertions to exclude a Catholic successor from the throne, the suggestion that any tory don sympathized with popery provoked widespread public concern. 
Less controversially Walker published 'Propositions Concerning Optic Glasses' (1679), proof of his interest in the experimental sciences, and 'A description of Greenland', which he contributed to volume one of 'The English Atlas' (1680). In 1682 he submitted proposals to Elias Ashmole regarding his donation of the Tradescant 'Rarities' to the university and the foundation of his museum. 
Whatever the inner state of his convictions Walker did not avow himself a Catholic until 1686, the second year of James II's reign. In 1685 he published an anonymous life of Christ, which was instantly ascribed to him, albeit it was probably of Woodhead's composing. The honour which the volume accorded to Our Lady and the Petrine claims of Rome caused the vice-chancellor, Timothy Halton, to ban the sale of the master's books in Oxford, following a failed attempt to remove the unacceptable passages before it was printed. Fell, hitherto a friend, deleted Walker from his will as a lessee of the university's privilege of printing. 
Unintimidated Walker stood his ground. He was joined by further converts: Nathaniel Boyse and Thomas Deane, fellows of University College, and John Barnard, fellow of Brasenose. Known as the master's 'three disciples' they were in October 1686 joined by John Massey of Merton, Walker's former servitor. All four academics had long ago fallen under the spell of his cosmopolitan learning and attractive personality. In January 1686 the master was summoned to court. There he consulted John Leyburn, bishop of Adrumetum, the recently arrived vicar apostolic sent from Rome, and was persuaded to declare his conversion. Together they laid plans for protecting him and his companions. On returning to college he abstained from chapel prayers. 
On 3 May James issued his dispensation, allowing the converts to retain their posts, and permitted free access to the royal court, which was to be their lifeline against Oxonian opposition. The accompanying licence authorized Walker to print, reprint, publish, and sell some thirty-six Catholic works, with an annual limit prescribed of 20,000 copies for any one title. James's optimism expected Walker, with his knowledge of the press, to make a massive contribution to the missionizing effort which, under royal auspices, began to forge ahead. Aided by Francis Nicholson, Walker began to publish apologetical pieces taken from Woodhead's manuscript writings. 
Eager to gain converts Walker boldly erected a Catholic altar in the spring of 1686, using a garret in his lodgings. Growing attendances quickly overwhelmed the capacity of this and its downstairs successor. Armed with James's mandate in August, he annexed two ground floor rooms and made them into an oratory. Mass began to be celebrated publicly on the feast of the assumption. Walker invited the Jesuit priests Edward Humberston and Joseph Wakeman to act as chaplains. In January 1687 James commanded the appropriation of the sequestrated revenue of a fellowship to be applied to their upkeep. The king attended vespers in Walker's oratory during his state visit to Oxford in September 1687. Meanwhile, assured of James's countenance, Walker embarked on a policy of Catholic imperialism. He succeeded in advancing Massey to the deanery of Christ Church, and Barnard to the moral philosophy lectureship. He even admitted Catholic undergraduates to his college. 
Denied access to the university press by his protestant adversaries Walker established his own in University College in 1687, from which he issued his first overtly Catholic work, Woodhead's 'Two Discourses Concerning the Adoration of our Blessed Saviour in the Holy Eucharist': a tract which elicited protestant replies, and, in turn, begot Walker's 'Animadversions' (1688) on Henry Aldrich's strictures. His maintenance of the crown's traditional powers to make and unmake corporations, academical, ecclesiastical, and municipal, added political resentment to mounting confessional hatred. Unable to touch him the wits of Christ Church were reduced to bribing 'a poor natural' to sing rhymed doggerel at his door: '
Oh, old Obadiah, 

Sing 'Ave Maria', 

But so will not I-a, 

For why-a? 

I had rather be a fool than a knave-a. 
('Le Fleming MSS', 25, 200)' His gratitude to the king was shown by his erection of James's statue over the inner gatehouse of the college in 1688. University College was one of the few societies in Oxford to celebrate the birth of the Catholic prince of Wales in June. 
The protestant reckoning, when it came, was swift. On 9 November 1688, four days after William of Orange's invasion, Walker packed up his books, barred his door, and left his lodgings for London to be near a monarch who could no longer protect him. Seeing flight as his only option he made for the coast. On 11 December he was arrested at Sittingbourne in the company of Bishop Giffard of Madura, former president of Magdalen, and Father Poulton, schoolmaster of the Savoy. Committed to Maidstone gaol they were subsequently removed to the Tower. Meantime, acting on a complaint from the fellows, the vice-chancellor, Ironside, and the visitors of University College proceeded on 4 February 1689 to declare the mastership vacant and to confirm the election of a new master. 
On 23 October, the first day of term, a writ of habeas corpus was moved for Walker, whereupon the House of Commons ordered him to be brought to the bar. He was charged with being reconciled to the Church of Rome and other 'high crimes and misdemeanours', and remanded back to the Tower as a traitor. He remained a prisoner until 30 January 1690 when, after an appearance in king's bench, he was reluctantly freed 'on great security' ('Life and Times of Anthony Wood', 3.324). His bail was discharged on 2 June. He was excepted from the 'Act of Indemnity'. Thereafter he lived privately in London, regained his customary equipoise, and reapplied his mind to scholarship, publishing 'Some Instruction in the Art of Grammar' (1691) for would-be Latinists, and a 'Greek and Roman History Illustrated by Coins and Medals' (1692). He never married. 
Walker's former scholar, the eminent physician Dr John Radcliffe, whom he had tried unsuccessfully to convert to Rome, 'sent him once a year a new suit of clothes, with ten broad pieces and twelve bottles of richest canary to support his drooping spirits' ('DNB'). Increasingly infirm with age he was offered a home by Radcliffe. He died in London on 21 January 1699, and was interred in St Pancras's churchyard, where Radcliffe erected a tombstone with the memorial inscription: 'O. W. per bonam famam et infamiam' ('Obadiah Walker through good fame and ill'). The extent of his infamy was that, like James II, to whom he remained loyal to the end, he had preferred the Catholic religion to the Church of England. Stripped of confessional obloquy his reputation as one of the most productive scholars of Restoration Oxford still stands. His ghost is reputed to haunt staircase 8 of University College. 


@@@@@


doc= 28506


Walker, Richard (1679-1764), horticulturist and college administrator, was the son of Robert Walker, of Tanfield, near Ripon, Yorkshire. After school in Tanfield, he was admitted as sizar in Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1703, matriculated in 1704, and graduated BA in 1707. He obtained a fellowship in 1709, proceeded MA in 1710, and was vice-master in 1734-64. From 1744 to 1764 he was Knightbridge professor of moral philosophy. Walker, a friend and protege of the master of Trinity, Richard Bentley, played an important part in the long-running battle between Bentley and the fellows of Trinity, in particular, by refusing as vice-master to act on the sentence passed by the college visitor, the bishop of Ely, to deprive Bentley of his post. 
Walker was an enthusiastic gardener, and especially interested in growing exotics in his small garden in Trinity, where his hothouse displayed banana, coffee, pineapple, and many other fashionable foreign plants. He clearly felt that the university lacked a garden and associated regular botanical instruction, and on 16 July 1760 purchased a 5 acre plot of land, including the 'Mansion House' to provide lecture rooms, on a central site on which an Augustinian friary had once stood; he conveyed this land to the university on 25 August 1762 in trust 'for the purpose of a public Botanic Garden'. In a pamphlet by him published anonymously in 1763 and entitled 'A Short Account of a Late Donation of a Botanic Garden to the University of Cambridge', Walker made clear his design, referring to the fact that 'we have generally had titular Professors of Botany, but nothing worth mentioning left behind them', and the first 'Statute or order' of his new garden states that 'by making use of the plants grown there, trials and experiments shall be regularly made and repeated, in order to discover their virtues, for the benefit of mankind'. In contrast, he states: 'Flowers and Fruits must be looked upon as amusements only; though, as these do not want their excellences and uses, they need not be totally neglected'. 
Unfortunately, Walker's death in 1764 cut short his enthusiastic promotion of the new garden, but his bequest provided for two salaried posts, a reader on plants and a curator; to the first of these posts he appointed Thomas Martyn, who had just succeeded his father John Martyn as professor of botany; the curator's post was filled by Charles Miller, brother of Philip Miller, curator of the Chelsea Physic Garden. Walker died on 15 December 1764, unmarried, in Cambridge. The 'Walkerian garden', inside which the university built its first scientific laboratory in 1787, laid the foundation for the great development of science on the 'New Museums site' between Bene't Street and Downing Street. His name is perpetuated in the Walkerian Society run by the horticultural students in the botanic garden on its present site. 


@@@@@


doc= 28507


Walker, Robert (1595x1610-1658), portrait painter, was by 1637 an independent master, and in 1650 he became a member of the Painter-Stainers' Company. 'He lived in Oliver Cromwell's days, and drew the portraits of that Usurper, and all his Officers' (Vertue, 'Note books', 2.142). There is no firm evidence that he either trained in Italy, as has been suggested, or that he worked as an assistant in the studio of Van Dyck, but his portraiture is much influenced by that master. Walker's poses are often stiff and his colour schemes limited compared to Van Dyck's. A prolific artist, his style is much more obviously derivative than that of his royalist counterpart William Dobson. This is evident in, for example, his portrait of Cromwell in the Cromwell Museum, Huntingdon, in which the pose is closely based on that used by Van Dyck in his portrait of Sir Kenelm Digby in armour (NPG). Though his work lacks any of the painterly qualities of Dobson, Walker occasionally demonstrated wit and originality, and his portraits possess a distinctive soft quality that is his own. His portraits were much popularized by the engravings of William Faithorne, and many images (including those of the parliamentarians John Lambert and Thomas Fairfax) are known only through engravings after lost originals. Walker also had a reputation for copying works by Italian masters. Signed and dated portraits by Walker are few. His best-known paintings are his striking 'Self-Portrait' in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, which is signed and datable to 'c'.1640-45; 'John Evelyn', a portrait of the diarist contemplating a skull, a 'memento mori' (1648; on loan to the NPG); 'Oliver Cromwell with his Page' (versions at Althorp, Northamptonshire; NPG; Justitsministieriet, Copenhagen, in 1935; and, best known, signed version at Leeds City Art Gallery); and 'Colonel John Hutchinson and his Son' (priv. coll.). 
Walker's 'Self-Portrait' in the Ashmolean Museum is closely related to Van Dyck's famous 'Self-Portrait with a Sunflower' (priv. coll.). The pose is similar but Walker alters the format to give a more vertical emphasis to the composition and points not to a sunflower, which symbolizes loyalty to the crown, but to a statue of Mercury, god of eloquence and feats of skill and patron of vagabonds. While Van Dyck shows himself as confident, at the height of his powers (and wealth), a sophisticated figure drawing attention to his gold chain, Walker reveals his own youth and naivety, his serious expression hiding the sardonic wit of his tribute to Van Dyck. A later, more conventional self-portrait is in the National Portrait Gallery, London. 'John Evelyn' is one of his most accomplished and Italianate portraits. Evelyn is shown in a half-length view wearing a white shirt and blue gown, at a table and leaning on a skull. 
Having recently become engaged to be married, Evelyn had sat to Walker on 1 July 1648, an event he recorded in his diary, and the painting was intended to accompany a treatise he had written for his young wife as a guide to married life: 'Instruction oeconomique'. Originally the portrait showed Evelyn holding a miniature or medal of his wife; the skull was added later. It is the image of 'Oliver Cromwell with his Page' with which Walker is most associated. The finest version of this work, dated 1649, at Leeds, shows the protector in a three-quarter length view, standing, wearing armour and holding a baton, with a page. The pose is related to Van Dyck's 'The First Earl of Strafford' (studio versions at NPG and Petworth House, Sussex). The several versions of this portrait which Walker continued to produce until 1656 are based on a number of sittings by Cromwell in 1649. Other accomplished portraits such as his 'A Portrait of a Tutor and his Pupil' (London art market, 1994) (formerly incorrectly called 'Lord Fairfax and his Daughter'), with its Greek inscription on the bookshelf which translates as 'Ever growing older and learning less', again reveal Walker's wit. His portrait of a man of the Shirley family, signed and dated 1656, shows signs of a fading talent. 
Walker, who chiefly painted the portraits of the great parliamentarians of the period, died between July and December 1658, two years before the restoration of the monarchy in 1660. His estate passed to his daughter, Jane Walker; his sister, Katherine, and a servant, Mary Nicholson, also received bequests. 


@@@@@


doc= 28508


Walker, Robert (1710-1802), Church of England clergyman, was born on 21 February 1710 at Undercrag in Seathwaite near Broughton in Furness in the Duddon valley, Lancashire, the last of twelve children of Nicholas Walker (died 1728), yeoman, and his wife, Elizabeth. As they thought him too delicate to earn his living by fell farming or slate quarrying, his parents resolved to 'breed him a scholar'. To complete his education and qualify for ordination, Walker left Seathwaite for Eskdale and then the Vale of Lorton, enduring for the best part of a decade the itinerant and impoverished life of schoolmaster, deacon, and curate, and acquiring in the process habits of application and frugality that he never subsequently forsook. During this period his efforts were supported by James Stephenson, curate of Seathwaite, Thomas Parker, curate of Eskdale, and Christopher Denton, rector of Gosforth. Finally in 1736 he was nominated to the curacy of his native Seathwaite. On 5 January 1736 he married Ann Tyson (1707/8-1800), a domestic servant from Brackenthwaite whom he had met in Buttermere, and they set up house in the cottage adjoining the chapel where he was to officiate for over sixty-six years. Ann had a portion of $40, Robert a stipend of $5 per annum to begin with. They were to have ten children, eight of whom survived to adulthood. 
Yet in spite of his straitened circumstances Walker became a prosperous man by local standards, and left about $1500 at his death. Remarkably, he had become wealthy without seriously jeopardizing the dignity of his office or forfeiting the affections of his parishioners. His successor wrote in the parish register that he was a man 'Singular for his Temperance, Industry and Integrity'. In 'The Excursion' Wordsworth reported that the local shepherds called him 'Wonderful', and the poet later celebrated him in Sonnet 17 of 'The River Duddon' as '
A Pastor such as Chaucer's verse portrays; 

Such as the heaven-taught skill of Herbert drew. 
(Wordsworth)' On weekdays Walker taught the local children in the chapel, plying his spinning wheel as he listened to them recite their lessons. He then carried the wool in 16 or 32 lb bales over the high cross 7 miles to Broughton market. He farmed his small glebe and hired himself out to local farmers. When he called on him in 1755, the Broughton curate found Walker at 'one of the most servile of the country's employments, which out of regard to persons of our profession, I shall forbear to mention' ('GM', 30, 1760, 318). He was equally industrious with the pen, writing deeds and wills and keeping accounts. About 1754 he became steward of the manor of Dunnerdale with Seathwaite, and subsequently served his patron in that capacity for forty years, presiding over the annual court baron and recording its proceedings in his beautiful hand. The position not only brought him the customary fees but enabled him to purchase parcels of land around the manor, and he eventually became owner of a nearby farm at Longhouse. Later he invested in industry both locally and further afield as his eldest son (1736-1808) and then grandson (1768-1822), both named Zaccheus, rose to partnership status in Boulton and Watt. Walker died at the Chapelhouse, Seathwaite, on 25 June 1802, and was buried in the churchyard there three days later. 
Robert Walker had supplemented his stipend by selling ale. Though not uncommon among poverty-ridden curates, the practice was frowned upon and the fact was suppressed by some early eulogists. It explains why his successor put 'Temperance' at the head of his virtues. Indeed, all reports agree on the austere simplicity of the Walkers' way of life; their diet was devoid of luxuries such as tea and coffee. But their hospitality to parishioners and passing travellers was famed. Their eldest daughter, Elizabeth (1738-1820), carried on the tradition as proprietor of the Black Bull in Coniston and her daughter, as Mrs Casson, kept the Newfield inn in Seathwaite just 200 yards down the valley from her grandfather's church. To that inn in 1804 came William and Dorothy Wordsworth, enquiring about the late curate. The result of those enquiries appeared in the passage in 'The Excursion' (Book 7, lines 351ff.), published in 1814. Then in October 1819 a descendant, Robert Walker Bamford (1796-1838), published a prose tribute to his great-grandfather in the 'Christian Remembrancer', probably too late to influence the treatment of Walker by Wordsworth in the eighteenth sonnet of 'The River Duddon', published in the spring of the following year, but in time to be quoted in the prose memoir of him that Wordsworth included in the notes to that volume. 
Walker's posthumous reputation owes much to Wordsworth's praise. Indubitably, Wordsworth, Bamford, and later Canon Richard Parkinson (1797-1858) -- in his novel 'The Old Church Clock' (1843) -- idealized the mountain curate. For example, Wordsworth not only suppressed the matter of ale-selling but also misrepresented Walker's failed attempt to add the neighbouring curacy of Ulpha to that of Seathwaite as a modest refusal of an unsolicited offer made by the bishop. However, Walker's local reputation and the testimony inscribed in the register preceded their public tributes; and not only his descendants, but his parishioners and their descendants assisted in the preservation of the memory of 'a varra good man'. Visitors to the Seathwaite chapel graveyard afford ample evidence that his modest fame has outlasted the mere century predicted for it in 'The Excursion': '
A simple stone 

May cover him; and by its help, perchance, 

A century shall hear his name pronounced, 

With images attendant on the sound; 

Then shall the slowly gathering twilight close 

In utter night; and of his course remain 

No cognizable vestiges, no more 

Than of this breath, which shapes itself in words 

To speak of him, and instantly dissolves. 
(W. Wordsworth, 'Poetical Works', ed. E. de Selincourt and H. Darbishire, 1946, 5.242)' 



@@@@@


doc= 28509


Walker, Robert Francis (1789-1854), Church of England clergyman and translator, was born in Oxford on 15 January 1789, the son of Robert Walker. At the age of eleven he was sent to Magdalen College School, where as a chapel chorister his voice was said to have so impressed Lord Nelson that he gave the boy half a guinea. He matriculated at New College, Oxford, in 1806, and graduated BA in 1811, proceeding to an MA in 1813. In 1812 he was appointed chaplain of New College, and from 1813 to 1815 he was curate at St Ebbe's, the evangelical centre in Oxford, becoming curate at Taplow, Buckinghamshire, in 1815, and at the end of 1816 or the beginning of 1817 moving to Henley-on-Thames. In 1819 he went to Purleigh, Essex, where he was curate-in-charge to an absentee rector, the provost of Oriel College, Oxford. 
Walker was twice married: first, in 1814, to Frances, 'nee' Langton (died 1824), at Cookham, Berkshire, with whom he had four sons and one daughter; second, on 30 September 1830, to Elizabeth, 'nee' Palmer (died 1876), at Olney, with whom he had five sons. 
Walker was a talented poet and an accomplished musician, but he particularly excelled as a linguist. His interest in missions and his contact with German missionary students ultimately led him to translate a substantial number of works by German evangelical theologians, notably the writings of F. W. Krummacher and C. G. Barth. 
In 1848, stricken with paralysis, Walker was compelled to resign his living and retired to Great Baddow in Essex, where he died on 31 January 1854. He was buried at Purleigh. 


@@@@@


doc= 28510


Walker, Samuel (bap. 1713, d. 1761), Church of England clergyman, was baptized on 30 December 1713 at St Paul's, Exeter. He was the fourth son, and the seventh and youngest child, of Robert Walker (1665?-1749?) of Withycombe Raleigh, Devon, and his wife, Margaret ('b'. 1669?), daughter of Richard Hall, rector of St Edmund's and All Hallows, Exeter; Sir Thomas Walker, merchant and MP for Exeter, was his grandfather. Members of his family, including a cousin, Dr John Walker (bap. 1674, d. 1747), had been prominent as clergymen in Exeter. His three brothers also became clergymen. 
Walker attended Exeter grammar school (founded by an ancestor) from 1722 to 1731, during the headmastership of the Revd Dr John Reynolds, who was from another local family and great-uncle of Sir Joshua Reynolds. On 4 November 1732 he matriculated from Exeter College, Oxford, becoming BA on 25 June 1736. Disappointed in his hope of a fellowship, he was made deacon by Dr Stephen Weston, bishop of Exeter, on 25 September 1737, to serve as curate at Doddiscombsleigh, near Exeter, and was ordained priest on 28 May 1738 on the same title. In August of the same year he resigned this curacy to accompany, as tutor and companion, young Mr Rolle -- whose relatives were prominent at Withycombe Raleigh and elsewhere in Devon -- on a visit to France. Returning early in 1740 Walker became curate to his friend Nicholas Kendall at Lanlivery in Cornwall. Kendall was archdeacon of Totnes, and on his death Walker succeeded as vicar of Lanlivery (3 March 1740), holding the benefice under bond and resigning it in favour of a nephew of Walter Kendall, the patron, in 1746. 
In the same year Walker accepted the curacy of Truro parish church (St Mary's, later incorporated in Truro Cathedral), where the Revd St John Elliot (also of Exeter College, but after Walker's time) was instituted as rector on 3 June 1746. By 5 May 1749 Elliot had become non-resident at Truro, having been instituted also to the rectory of Ladock, 10 miles north-east of Truro, where he chose to live. In recognition of the inadequate stipendiary arrangements at Truro, Bishop Clagett instituted Walker as vicar of Talland, a village some 25 miles north-east of Truro, on 13 July 1747, but Walker came to believe that this arrangement was morally wrong and resigned Talland in 1752. 
Until this time Walker, tall and handsome with a notable presence, had been a cleric of nominal religious conviction, who particularly enjoyed dancing. Contact with the able headmaster of Truro grammar school, George Conon, a Scottish layman and graduate of the University of Aberdeen, attracted him towards a more biblical faith, and evangelical conversion followed. Walker soon preached in a different strain; large numbers of parishioners came under spiritual instruction and conviction. Soon half the population of Truro, some 800, attended Sunday services, and were organized during the week into religious societies; their children were catechized publicly. Opposition arose and the non-resident rector tried to dismiss Walker, finding however that he was unable to bring himself to do it. 
In spite of hostility to evangelicals shown by contemporary bishops of Exeter (Clagett and Lavington, 1742-62), Walker remained a fully convinced churchman (accepting now the moderate Calvinism of article 17) and in 1750 formed a club for like-minded clergymen, of whom a sprinkling had appeared in Cornwall. Unlike Berridge and others, Walker believed that evangelical clergy should minister strictly within their parish boundaries. Nevertheless, the Wesley brothers were in touch with him, and in 1756 Walker was instrumental in preventing, for the time being, the Methodists' leaving the Church of England. Walker was also in contact with evangelical clergy elsewhere in England, notably Thomas Adam, vicar of Wintringham in Lincolnshire. In spite of a favourable opportunity to wed a lady of similar Christian outlook, he refrained from marriage. 
Three young men from Truro, in Walker's time, became well-known as evangelical leaders: Thomas Haweis, Thomas Wills, and George Burnett, subsequently vicar of Elland in Yorkshire, and founder of the Elland Society for educating young men for the ministry, which still operates. John Martyn, father of Henry Martyn, pioneer missionary in India, was an active member of Walker's congregation. Haweis, Wills, and Burnett went up to Oxford, where Haweis was subsequently ordained as curate to the Revd Joseph Jane, senior student of Christ Church, at St Mary Magdalen, Jane's father having been Elliot's predecessor as rector of Truro. Walker's occasional visits to Oxford made him better known to the small band of evangelicals in the university, of which the leader was the Revd James Stillingfleet, fellow of Merton College (1752-68), who subsequently published, as a preface to Walker's 'Sermons' (1763), what was for many years the only account of Walker's life. 
The strain of his parochial and other activities, amid frequent opposition, proved too much for Walker's health. He recovered from serious illness in 1744 but ten years later his physical health had seriously deteriorated. In 1758 his rector insisted on receiving a larger proportion of the meagre financial returns (collected annually, and in person from parishioners) of the benefice. Walker was obliged to move back into lodgings and was no longer able to provide a home for the elderly sister who had kept house for him. (Nevertheless he survived Elliot, who died in June 1761.) On 27 April 1760 Walker preached for the last time at Truro. He travelled to Bath and elsewhere, seeking to restore his health; Truro friends helped to meet his financial and other needs. But he was dying, apparently from consumption, and the second earl of Dartmouth, a leading benefactor of evangelicals, who had helped Walker financially on at least one occasion, took him into his house at Blackheath. For his last few weeks Walker was transferred to lodgings, where Haweis and Burnett attended him. He died at Lewisham, Kent, on 19 July 1761, aged forty-seven, and was buried on 23 July in Lewisham churchyard, where a memorial remained in 1889. In his lifetime, though his writing was cogent and succinct, Walker published little apart from eleven sermons, printed as 'The Christian' (1755), which reached a twelfth edition in 1879. His sermons were considered by Charles Simeon of Cambridge, a leading figure in the later evangelical revival, to be 'the best in the English language' (Brown, 320). 


@@@@@


doc= 28511


Walker, Sayer (1748-1826), physician, whose family came from Bocking, Essex, was born in London. About 1763 he attended the Mile End dissenting academy and in 1770 became assistant minister in Bocking under the Revd T. Davidson. While at Bocking he became friendly with his future father-in-law, Joseph Savill, a wealthy cloth maker who arranged for the collection of rents for property in Essex that belonged to Guy's Hospital. Walker then became acquainted with William Saunders of Guy's Hospital. On 5 November 1772 Walker married Mary (died 1822), daughter of Joseph Savill; they had at least one child. From this year until 1777 Walker was assistant minister in charge at Castle Green church, Bristol. After his wife inherited money from an aunt and received a cash gift from her father, Walker was able to spend two years studying medicine. In 1779 he attended lectures on materia medica given by William Saunders at Guy's before studying possibly at Montpellier, and certainly at Edinburgh. Later that year he became Presbyterian minister at the Baker Street mission in Enfield, where he treated his poor parishioners. He held this post until 1792. On new year's day 1790 Walker preached a sermon in London in which he praised scientific education, spoke of the progress being made in the treatment of the insane, and supported the French revolutionaries' attack on tyranny and stagnation. 
Walker received his MD from Aberdeen on 31 December 1791 and on 25 June 1792 became a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians. He resigned from the ministry in this year, possibly as a result of his asthma. He was elected physician to the London Lying-in Hospital in June 1794, where J. C. Lettsom was a colleague. Walker later became treasurer and orator of the Medical Society of London. He published 'The Importance of Religious Instruction' (1790), 'A Treatise on Nervous Diseases' (1796), and 'Observations on the Constitution of Women' (1803). In 1826 Walker's asthma forced him to move to Clifton, Bristol, where he died on 9 November 1826. 
About a year later Walker's body was exhumed and buried in Bunhill Fields, London, in the tomb of the Revd John Owen (1616-1683), dean of Christ Church, vice-chancellor of Oxford University, and friend of John Sayer (1633-1686), after whom Walker had been named. 


@@@@@


doc= 28512


Walker, Thomas (bap. 1698, d. 1744), actor and playwright, was baptized on 5 June 1698 at St Anne's, Soho, London, the son of Francis Walker and his wife, Elizabeth. He was educated locally at Mr Midon's school. In 1714 he joined Shepherd's company to play Paris in the droll 'The Siege of Troy'. Barton Booth then recruited him for the Drury Lane company, where he first appeared on 2 June 1715 as the third whore in Elkanah Settle's 'The City Ramble'. During his first season he was given more sizeable roles, as Young Fashion in Sir John Vanbrugh's 'The Relapse', Captain Jolly in Johnson's 'The Cobbler of Preston', and King in Dryden and Nathaniel Lee's 'The Duke of Guise', as well as a solo benefit. Walker stayed with the company, playing Granius in Thomas Otway's 'Caius Marius', Hilliard in Richard Brome's 'A Jovial Crew', Pisander in Philip Massinger's 'The Bondman', Cornwall and Edmund in 'King Lear', and Sir Charles in Thomas Shadwell's 'The Fair Quaker of Deal', and originating Cardono in Susannah Centlivre's 'The Cruel Gift' and Charles in Colley Cibber's 'The Non-Juror'. His engagement appears to have been uninterrupted by his indictment, according to the 'Evening Post' of 4-7 May 1717, for the murder of an abbot and a bailiff near the playhouse. Davies reports he was acquitted, and nothing further seems to have transpired. 
Like many Drury Lane comedians, Walker did not abandon the summer fairs. He excelled in drolls, those short, comic sketches that were often cobbled-together excerpts from popular plays. In September 1720 he collaborated with a booth owner called Lee on 'The Siege of Bethulia', a Southwark fair droll, and the following year he worked Lee's booth at both Bartholomew fair and Southwark fair, appearing in the droll 'The Noble Englishman'. By 1722 Walker was running his own great booth in Bird Cage Alley at Southwark fair, where he produced two drolls, 'The Royal Revenge' and 'Valentine and Orson', with actors from Drury Lane. This popular entertainment required a performer with a strong voice, able to establish an easy rapport with an audience. Walker offered these qualities in abundance; indeed, Hill, in 'The Actor', thought that on occasion 'the vehemence of his feeling took away his utterance' (Hill, 82). 
In 1721 Walker was poached by John Rich for the company at Lincoln's Inn Fields where, during the 1720s, he earned $1 6's'. 8died daily, with modest annual benefits, which may have netted him $20. Davies thought Walker an inheritor of Barton Booth's roles and his easy, natural manner, and particularly praised his Faulconbridge in 'King John' for his 'manly deportment, vigorous action, and a humour which descended to an easy familiarity in conveying a jest or sarcasm with uncommon poignancy' (Davies, 1.15). Walker's expanded range of roles with Rich included noble, if compromised, heroes, such as the eponymous roles in Dryden's 'Don Sebastian' and Thomas Southerne's 'Oroonoko', Alexander in Lee's 'The Rival Queens' and Massinissa in his 'Sophonisba', Ulysses in 'Troilus and Cressida', and Juba in Joseph Addison's 'Cato'. He had the comic timing for such roles as Young Valere in Centlivre's 'The Gamester', Harcourt in William Wycherley's 'The Country Wife', Lovemore in Thomas Betterton's 'The Amorous Widow', and Dick in Vanbrugh's 'The Confederacy', as well as the stage presence to carry such sexually threatening parts as Lorenzo in Dryden's 'The Spanish Fryar' and Polydore in Otway's 'The Orphan'. Although not originally designed for him, but rather for James Quin, who refused the role, Macheath in John Gay's 'The Beggar's Opera' was the kind of role Walker excelled in, and it was the part that made him, despite his limited singing experience. The play had an extended run, and Walker is captured in the role of Macheath in Hogarth's painting of the prison scene. 
Walker's extracurricular activities during this period stretched to playwriting. On 31 July 1724 his compression of Thomas D'Urfey's 'Massaniello' was printed, and he took the title role at Lincoln's Inn Fields that season. In the September after his success in 'The Beggar's Opera' he produced an imitation called 'The Quaker's Opera' at Southwark fair, which made it indoors to the Haymarket in October 1728. Two years later he tried out 'The Fate of Villainy' at Goodman's Fields Theatre, but it quickly disappeared; however, when rewritten as 'Love and Loyalty', it was well received at its one and only performance in Dublin in 1744. Walker also returned to his source of summer income when in September 1732 he and Rayner produced Centlivre's afterpiece 'A Wife Well Managed' and 'The Humours of Harlequin' at a Tottenham Court booth. This seems to have been his last sortie into the London fairs. He stayed with Rich's company when it moved to the new Covent Garden Theatre in 1732, accepting a reduced daily rate of 16's'. 8died During the next few years he added more demanding roles to his repertory, such as Bajazet in Nicholas Rowe's 'Tamerlane', Angelo in 'Measure for Measure', Sempronius in 'Cato', Kite in George Farquhar's 'The Recruiting Officer', Faulconbridge in 'King John', and Fainall in William Congreve's 'The Way of the World'. 
Walker's life appears to have been beset by debt, and by the late 1730s his problems were compounded by the death of his wife, Mary, on 20 March 1737. She was buried at St Paul's, Covent Garden, three days later. By 1739 Walker's employment was patchy, and he made only two benefit appearances at Drury Lane that year. The following season, 1741-2, he moved to the company at Goodman's Fields Theatre, which had staged his 'Fate of Villainy', and he was made much use of by Henry Giffard, but managed only one benefit performance in 1742. During the summer of 1742 he went to the Smock Alley Theatre, Dublin, and had occasional roles at Aungier Street, where he managed to persuade the management to mount his redrafted play 'Love and Loyalty'. However, despite receiving critical applause, Walker could not cover the house charges for a second night, and the play closed. Chetwood thought 'this Disappointment hasten'd his Death' (Chetwood, 248), for Walker died a few days later, on 5 June 1744. 


@@@@@


doc= 28513


Walker, Thomas (1784-1836), police magistrate and author, the son of Thomas Walker (1749-1817) and Hannah Shore, was born at Barlow Hall, Chorlton-cum-Hardy, near Manchester, on 10 October 1784. His father, a Manchester cotton merchant, was the head of the town's whig or reform party and in 1785 led the successful opposition to Pitt's fustian tax. 
The younger Thomas Walker attended a school at Manchester before going up to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1808 and MA in 1811. He was called to the bar at the Inner Temple on 8 May 1812, and, after the death of his father, lived for some years at Longford Hall, Stretford, engaging in township affairs and dealing successfully with the problem of pauperism, which became his special study. A Malthusian, in 1826 he published 'Observations on the Nature, Extent, and Effects of Pauperism, and on the Means of Reducing it' (2nd edn, 1831), and in 1834 'Suggestions for a Constitutional and Efficient Reform in Parochial Government'. In 1829 he was appointed a police magistrate at the Lambeth Street court. 
On 20 May 1835 Walker began the publication of a weekly periodical entitled 'The Original', which he continued until the following December. It was a collection of his thoughts on many subjects, intended to raise 'the national tone in whatever concerns us socially or individually'; his papers on health and gastronomy, however, were the chief attraction of the work. Many editions of 'The Original' were published: one, with memoirs of the two Walkers by William Blanchard Jerrold, came out in 1874; another, edited by William Augustus Guy, in 1875; and one, with an introduction by Henry Morley, in 1887. A selection, entitled 'The Art of Dining and of Attaining High Health', was printed at Philadelphia in 1837, and another selection, by Felix Summerley (Sir Henry Cole), was published in 1881 under the title 'Aristology, or, The Art of Dining'. 
Walker died unmarried at Brussels on 20 January 1836, and was buried in the cemetery there. A tablet to his memory was placed in London at St Mary's, Whitechapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 28514


Walker, Thomas (1822-1898), journalist, was born on 5 February 1822, at Marefair, Northampton. His parents sent him to a local school at the age of six where he remained until he was ten. His father had died when he was young, and his mother accepted the offer of relatives at Oxford to take charge of him. He was apprenticed to a carpenter and, when his apprenticeship was completed, began in business. However, he found carpentry uncongenial and abandoned his trade at twenty-four, determined instead to become a journalist. Walker had already begun his lifelong pursuit of learning by an exhaustive programme of reading. He followed his self-imposed task with much earnestness, teaching himself German so that he could read Kant in the original. To be better equipped for a career in journalism he also taught himself shorthand. 
Walker moved to London and in September 1846 advertised for a position in 'The Times', but without success. He was in danger of starving to death in the street when he chanced upon the surgery of Frederick Knight Hunt, who offered Walker casual employment. Hunt was impressed by the younger man's willingness to undertake with enthusiasm the humblest task. By a combination of good fortune and diligence, Walker eventually realized his ambition and established himself as a journalist. T. P. Healey, proprietor of the 'Medical Times', engaged him as a reporter; he also contributed to 'Eliza Cook's Journal'. But the most important factor was Hunt's becoming assistant editor of the 'Daily News'. At first Walker made occasional contributions to the paper and then he obtained a junior post on the editorial staff. He served as the foreign sub-editor's general factotum, providing him with translations and precis of articles in European and South American journals. In 1851 Walker was promoted to foreign and general sub-editor. The 'Daily News' now entered into a period of increasing success, first under the editorship of Walker's mentor, Hunt, and, after his death in 1854, under William Weir. When Weir died in 1858, Walker was appointed the 'Daily News''s political editor, with John Robinson as managing editor. This proved to be a most successful partnership. 
This rapid change in Walker's fortunes did not change his demeanour. He remained austere and was never known to make a joke. In domestic affairs, he declared his intention that the 'Daily News' would pursue a 'perfectly independent course'. Lord John Russell's new administration was afforded 'a fair trial', and its performance judged with generosity. In foreign politics he was a steadfast friend to the cause of Italian liberty, while in the American Civil War, much influenced by Harriet Martineau, he sturdily supported the northern states. However, what above all else set the tone of Walker's editorship was his unflagging devotion to Gladstone. When, in 1869, failing health obliged Walker to resign the editorship of the 'Daily News', Gladstone rewarded his loyalty by giving him charge of the 'London Gazette'. This much less onerous position Walker held for twenty years until July 1889. Despite his uncertain health and other duties, Walker's respect and admiration for Gladstone determined that he should return temporarily to the 'Daily News' at the time of the Turkish Bulgarian outrages, to guide the news reporting and editorial comment. 
An enthusiastic churchman, Walker served as president of the London branch of the Congregational church. He devoted his retirement years to philanthropic works for his church. He married twice and was survived by one daughter. He died on 16 February 1898 at his house, 53 Addison Road, Kensington, and was buried in Brompton cemetery. Political candour distinguished Walker as an editor. T. P. O'Connor described him as 'very brilliant' but discerned a marked cynicism (Koss, 1.96). T. H. S. Escott thought him 'blameless and rather colourless' (p. 214). All were agreed on Walker's devotion to Gladstone. Frederick Greenwood generously acknowledged in his 'Pall Mall Gazette' that Walker 'always held aloof from partisan excess [and was] at all times anxious to do justice to opponents -- not common merits'. All men were equally in awe of Walker's vast store of knowledge to which, over the years, he added judgement that grew ever more formidable and statesmanlike. 


@@@@@


doc= 28515


Walker, Thomas Larkins (bap. 1811, d. 1860), architect, was baptized on 20 May 1811 in Dysart, Fife, the son of Adam Walker and Elizabeth Larkins. He studied architectural draughtsmanship with Augustus Charles Pugin in London from about 1827 until Pugin's death in 1832. He was later a co-executor of Pugin's will and completed Pugin's last work, 'Examples of Gothic Architecture' (3 vols., 1836-8), to which he added his own studies of 'The History and Antiquities of the Manor House and Church at Great Chalfield, Wilts' (1837) and 'The History and Antiquities of the Manor House of South Wraxhall, and the Church of St. Peter at Biddlestone, Wiltshire' (1838). Walker's unpublished 'Essay on the study of architecture' of 1833 (MS in RIBA BAL) shows how his theory and practice were influenced by Pugin and his son A. W. N. Pugin. 
Walker was in practice with Benjamin Ferrey, another alumnus of the Pugin school, from 1833 to 1838, in which year he became a fellow of the Royal Institute of British Architects. Walker designed All Saints' Church, Spicer Street, Mile End (1838-9); Camphill House, Warwickshire, for J. Craddock (1839); a church at Attleborough, Nuneaton, Warwickshire, for Lord Harrowby (1839-40); and St Philip's Church, Mount Street, Bethnal Green (1840-42). In 1840 he designed the Chamberlaine almshouses at Bedworth, Warwickshire. They are in a red brick Tudor style and looked, to Nikolaus Pevsner, precocious for their date. They are described by Walker as a hospital in 'Architectural Precedents' (ed. C. Davy, 1841). Walker lived for a time in Nuneaton and was later in partnership with Robert Johnson Goodacure in Leicester from 1851 to 1856. After this he went to Hong Kong, possibly to recover from a failed business venture, and died there, apparently unmarried, on 10 October 1860. 


@@@@@


doc= 28516


Walker, William (1623-1684), schoolmaster and author, was born in Lincoln to unknown parents. Educated at Lincoln School under John Clarke, in 1640 he matriculated from Trinity College, Cambridge, graduating BA early in 1644. He was an usher at Louth grammar school, Lincolnshire, by the year 1645-6 and headmaster of that school from 1651 to 1657. His first wife, Elizabeth, was buried at Louth on 16 January 1650 and by 1661 he had remarried; Walker's second wife, whose name is unknown, died in 1677. In 1666 he was awarded the degree of BD 'per literas regias'. From 1657 to 1663 he was rector of Welton-le-Wold, and from 1661 until his death rector of Colsterworth (and an acquaintance of Sir Isaac Newton). From 1671 to his death he was master of Grantham grammar school. 
Noted as an author of textbooks dealing with grammar, his best-known work, 'A Treatise of English Particles' (1655), was the first systematic treatment of English particles for students of Latin. 'Some Improvements to the Art of Teaching' (1669) and his revision of Lily's 'authorized' grammar, 'The Royal Grammar' (1670), also stress the use of English in teaching Latin grammar. His final work, 'English Examples of the Latine Syntaxis' (1683), includes a portrait of the author on the frontispiece. Walker was a diffident man and a poor public speaker. His defence of the Church of England, made in 'A Modest Plea for Infants Baptism' (1677) and 'The Doctrine of Baptisms' (1678), aimed to pacify rather than provoke. 
By the time of his second wife's death, Walker was himself suffering from gout, stone, and other illnesses. When he made his will on 31 July 1684 he had two sons, William ('b'. 1661/2) and Thomas, two married daughters, and another daughter, Margaret. He died, probably at Colsterworth, on 1 August 1684 aged sixty-one, and was buried in the parish church. His epitaph in the church, 'Heic jacent Gulielmi Walkeri Particulae' ('Here lie William Walker's particles'), was subsequently repeated in collections of curious epitaphs. Walker's will was proved on 15 September by his executor, son-in-law, and successor as rector of Colsterworth, George Parish. 


@@@@@


doc= 28517


William Walker (bap. 1729, d. 1793), engraver, the younger brother of Anthony Walker and the seventh son in the family, was baptized at Thirsk on 4 December 1729. After serving an apprenticeship with a dyer he went to London and was trained by his brother. He was a gifted artist responsible for a wide variety of engraved portraits, historical scenes, and views, including landscapes after Paul Sandby, and his neat work graced many of the most handsome illustrated books of the period. Like his brother, he engraved larger plates for Boydell, but this connection was discontinued when Walker returned a painting which he considered obscene. He was the inventor of the 'rebiting' technique much employed by Woollett, who claimed never to complete a plate without a renewal of gratitude. Walker was noted for his serene temperament and the domestic felicity of his marriage of thirty-four years. His final years were spent in seclusion and he died at his house in Rosoman Street, Clerkenwell, on 18 February 1793. 


@@@@@


doc= 28518


William Walker (bap. 1766, d. 1816). A second son, Adam John Walker (1769/70-1839), was born in Newry, co. Armagh, and the youngest, 


@@@@@


doc= 28519


Walker, William (1791-1867), engraver, was born on 1 August 1791 at Markton, Musselburgh, Midlothian, the son of Alexander Walker and his wife, Margaret Somerville, of Lauder. His father manufactured salt from sea water until this business became unprofitable; the family then moved to Edinburgh, where Walker was apprenticed to the engraver E. Mitchell. In 1815 Walker moved to London and studied line engraving with James Stewart, stipple engraving with Thomas Woolnoth, and mezzotinting with Thomas Lupton. In 1819 he returned to Scotland and was employed to make the engraving of Sir Henry Raeburn's equestrian portrait of the fourth earl of Hopetoun (1821), which established his reputation; he also engraved a number of portraits after Raeburn, notably those of Sir Walter Scott and Raeburn himself (both 1826), which are often cited as among the finest examples of stipple work ever produced. In 1828 he published an engraving of Lord Brougham, after a painting by Sir Thomas Lawrence, which he himself had commissioned. 
In 1829 Walker married Elizabeth Reynolds ['see below'], the daughter of the engraver Samuel William Reynolds, and settled in London at 64 Margaret Street, where he lived for the rest of his life. They had six children: William, Samuel Alexander, Elizabeth, Marion, Kate, and Jane. Walker's total 'oeuvre' included 107 plates (twenty-three stipple, eighty-one mezzotint, and three in mixed method), of which 100 are portraits of contemporary figures which he published himself. He also produced historical group pictures. He collaborated with other engravers, among them his brother-in-law, Samuel William Reynolds the younger, and a pupil of his father-in-law, the mezzotinter Samuel Cousins. It was Cousins who did the mezzotinting on Walker's portrait 'Robert Burns', after Alexander Nasmyth (1830), which Nasmyth is said to have considered a better likeness than his own picture. Walker's most important historical pictures are 'The Reform Bill Receiving the Royal Assent in 1832', after S. W. Reynolds, engraved with Reynolds (1836); 'The Reformers Presenting their Protest at the Diet of Spires', after G. Cattermole (1844, larger version 1845); 'The Aberdeen Cabinet Deciding upon the Expedition to the Crimea', after John Gilbert (1857); and 'The Distinguished Men of Science', engraved with assistance from G. Zobel, after a drawing by John Gilbert, J. L. Skill, and Walker himself (1862). This last work includes fifty-one portraits and occupied Walker for six years. Late in life Walker set up a commercial portrait photography business. He died at his house in Margaret Street on 7 September 1867 and was buried in Brompton cemetery. Examples of his prints are in the British Museum, the Victoria and Albert Museum, and the National Portrait Gallery, London. 




@@@@@


doc= 28520


Walker, (William) Sidney (1795-1846), literary scholar, was born at Pembroke on 4 December 1795, the eldest of the six children of John Walker, a naval officer who died at Twickenham in 1811 from the effects of war wounds, and his wife, Harriet, 'nee' Falconar ('b'. 1773/4). Harriet and her sister Maria had published 'Poems on Slavery' in 1788. Sidney Walker was named after his godfather, Admiral Sir Sidney Smith, under whom his father had served. Sidney Walker, who was always called by his second forename, was a precocious child of weak physique. After spending some years first at a school at Doncaster, run by his mother's brother, and then with a private tutor at Forest Hill in Kent, he entered Eton College in 1811. He had already shown a remarkable literary ability which, however, was never fully realized. At ten he translated many of Anacreon's odes. At eleven he planned an epic in heroic verse on the career of Gustavus Vasa, and in 1813 he published by subscription the first four books of this epic in a volume entitled 'Gustavus Vasa, and other Poems', an immature work, showing little promise of 'any high and distinctive poetic power' (Moultrie, xv). At Eton he learned the whole of Homer's 'Iliad' and 'Odyssey' by heart, and wrote Greek verse with unusual correctness and ease. There, too, he began lifelong friendships with Winthrop Mackworth Praed and John Moultrie. Walker was of diminutive stature and uncouth appearance and manner, and abnormally absent-minded, and suffered much bullying at school, although he retaliated with 'relentless sarcasm' (Moultrie, xi). After winning many distinctions at Eton, he was entered as a sizar at Trinity College, Cambridge, on 16 February 1814, and began his university career in October 1814. There he maintained the promise of his schooldays. In the next few years he published verse and translations, which included 'The Heroes of Waterloo: an Ode' and a translation, 'Poems from the Danish, Selected by Andreas Andersen Feldborg', both in 1815. Walker won the Craven scholarship in 1817 and the Porson prize for Greek verse in 1818, and was admitted scholar of Trinity on 3 April of that year. Although his ignorance of mathematics made it extremely difficult for him to pass the examination for his BA in 1819, he was elected on the strength of his classical attainments to a fellowship at his college in 1820. His awkward manners and slovenly bearing did not improve, but he retained his close friendship with Praed and Moultrie, and formed a new and lasting friendship with Derwent Coleridge, who later attended him in the last days of his life. In 1824 Walker applied unsuccessfully for the Greek professorship at the university and thereafter made no further effort to obtain any similar work. While a fellow of Trinity he lived in seclusion, although his wish 'for the married life... was intense and soul-consuming' (Moultrie, lxxiv). He contributed philological essays to the 'Classical Journal', and both verse and prose to Charles Knight's 'Quarterly Magazine'. In 1824 he prepared for publication a two-volume edition of Milton's newly discovered treatise 'De doctrina Christiana'. Charles Richard Sumner, then librarian at Windsor, was ostensibly the editor and translator, but Walker took it on himself to revise 'not only the printer's, but the translator's labour' (Moultrie, lxxviii). In 1828 he edited for Knight a useful 'Corpus poetarum Latinorum', which was reprinted in 1848 and 1854. 
As an undergraduate Walker had been troubled by religious doubts, and had asked William Wilberforce for guidance. During 1817-18 Wilberforce wrote him letters attempting to strengthen his beliefs. Charles Simeon, an important influence at Cambridge during these years, allayed his concerns for a time, but Walker felt that his sceptical views regarding eternal punishment disqualified him from taking holy orders. Therefore, because of the university regulations of the time, he was forced to resign his fellowship in 1829. The loss of his fellowship meant the loss of his income and, owing to his unbusinesslike habits and trusting nature, he found himself with debts totalling $300. In 1830 his old friend Praed paid his debts and settled on him an income of $52 a year for life, to which Trinity College added $20 p.a., and on this income Walker supported himself for the rest of his life. In 1831 he moved to London and was lodging at 26 Melton Crescent, Euston Square, in 1836, and in the neighbourhood of St James's Street from 1838 until his death. His reason became disturbed, so that he thought himself possessed by a demon, and social intercourse with him became impossible. However, he remained capable of occasional literary work, which bore few signs of his mental state, and at times he was able to describe the symptoms of his illness calmly and rationally. After a life which was 'almost as uneventful as it was unhappy' (Moultrie, i), Walker died of 'the stone' (Moultrie, cxxxiv), probably kidney failure, at his lodgings, a single room on the top floor of 41 St James's Place, on 15 October 1846. He was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. On the tomb were engraved some lines from Moultrie's poem called 'The Dream of Life', in which the writer mourned the 'shapeless wreck' to which Walker's fine mind had been reduced. Moultrie published in 1852 a collection of Walker's letters and poems, the former being entertaining to read, under the title, 'The poetical remains of William Sidney Walker, formerly fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, with a memoir of the author'. 
Walker left a voluminous collection of manuscripts, including critical essays and numerous notes on the text and versification of Shakespeare. William Nanson Lettsom, one of Walker's school and college friends, tried without much success to bring some order into Walker's Shakespearian papers, and in 1854 published 'Shakespeare's versification, and its apparent irregularities explained by examples from early and late English writers'. Lettsom also edited 'A critical examination of the text of Shakespeare, with remarks on his language and that of his contemporaries, together with notes on his plays and poems', which appeared in three volumes in 1860. The cost of printing both works was borne by George Crawshay, a wealthy Cambridge undergraduate. These two works, which mainly deal with minute points of Shakespearian prosody and syntax, embody the results of Walker's vast and close reading and have proved of some value to succeeding students of Elizabethan and Shakespearian literature. Their defects are the want of logical arrangement of the material and the lack of an index, although the British Library copy of the 'Critical examination' has a partial handwritten index (1869), bound in at the end of volume 2. 


@@@@@


doc= 28521


Walkingame, Francis (bap. 1723, d. 1783), schoolmaster and writer on arithmetic, was baptized on 25 July 1723 at St Giles-in-the-Fields, London, the only surviving son of John Walkingame (died 1752), agent to the Marchant Water Works, and Elizabeth (died in or before 1752), probably daughter of Hugh Marchant, founder of the works. His education is unknown. On 18 May 1746 he married Mary Hider (died 1763/4) of Kensington; their first child was baptized there in 1747, and another in 1750. 
In the following year, 1751, appeared the first edition of Walkingame's outstandingly successful school arithmetic book, 'The Tutor's Assistant: being a Compendium of Arithmetic; and a Complete Question Book'. The title-page describes the author as 'writing-master and accomptant and master of the boarding-school in Kensington', while the preface says that it was compiled 'for the use of my own school'. Walkingame returned his thanks to all 'whose kind approbation and encouragement have now established the use of this book in almost every school of eminence throughout the kingdom'. He was referring to the schoolmasters and accountants among his 238 subscribers, who included also carpenters and plumbers. The fourth edition came out in 1760, and the twentieth in 1784, shortly after the author's death. Afterwards there were in many years two or three editions, variously edited, the main series from London and others in the provinces, notably from Gainsborough, York, and Derby. Further editions later appeared in Canada. An incomplete listing comprises 276 editions, the last in 1885; often an edition numbered 5000 or 10,000 copies. There were also close imitations, not always acknowledging the original. The York editions, starting in 1797, were corrected by Thomas Crosby of that city. To provide teachers and autodidacts with the working to the questions, in the same year Crosby published a 'Key', more substantial than the original work. It achieved at least sixty editions, with diverse authors and editors. 
From 1751 to 1800 'The Tutor's Assistant' was one of the two most popular arithmetics (the other being by Thomas Dilworth), and thereafter reigned supreme for another half-century, its perpetuation assisted by the advent of stereotyping. Walkingame disclaimed originality. He aimed to equip his pupils to solve problems by using formulae, without necessarily understanding their validity. His success was based on inclusion of contemporary commercial topics, worked examples, and many practice questions with answers. 
The second edition of the 'Assistant' in 1752 no longer referred to 'the boarding-school in Kensington'. It seems likely that about then Walkingame moved his family into his parental home at the Water Office in St Martin's Lane. By 1764 his wife must have died, possibly as a result of giving birth to a son the previous year, and on 22 December 1764 he married Elizabeth Maria Steere. Their youngest child, Jane, was born in 1781. From 1771 for about ten years he lived in Great Russell Street, before returning to Kensington, where he died in February or early March 1783, probably predeceased by his wife. 
Walkingame's fame rests on his single publication. Augustus De Morgan commented: 'this book is by far the most used of all school-books, and deserves to stand high among them' ('Arithmetical Books', 1847, 80). It must have suited the educational requirements of the century during which it flourished. 


@@@@@


doc= 28522


Walkington, Thomas (c.1575-1621), Church of England clergyman and author, was born in Lincoln, possibly the son of Thomas Walkington ('c'.1548-1620?), a Lincolnshire clergyman. He matriculated as a pensioner from St John's College, Cambridge, graduating BA in 1597 and MA in 1600. On 26 March 1602 he was elected fellow of the college, and in 1607 he published the work for which he is primarily remembered, 'The Optick Glasse of Humors, or, The Touchstone of a Golden Temperature'. Dedicated to Sir Justinian Lewin from Walkington's college study on 10 March, this engaging account of Galen's four temperamental types went beyond the usual expository tradition of such treatises, and has been regarded as something of a curiosity. Lively, witty, and concerned at least as much to entertain as instruct, it foreshadowed the literary culmination of the tradition in Burton's 'Anatomy of Melancholy'. 
Although Walkington henceforth turned his attention to a clerical career, his few surviving sermons show a continuing fascination with the effects of language and style. In 1608 he completed his BD and published a sermon on 'Ecclesiastes' 12: 10, preached at Thetford 'before his Majestie, by Thomas Walkington Batchelour in Divinitie, and fellow of S. Johns Colledge in Cambridge'. 'Salomon's Sweete Harpe; Consisting of Five Words, Like so many Golden Strings' is a paean to the 'heavenly art' of speaking (p. 9), and was dedicated to a fellow Johnsman, Thomas Howard, earl of Suffolk and lord chamberlain, on 28 June. In it Walkington also advocated strong measures against Brownism and other divisive movements within the church, and it is perhaps not coincidental that he was presented the same year to the vicarage of Raunds, Northamptonshire, an area closely associated with Brownist activity. In 1610 Walkington became rector of Waddingham St Mary, Lincolnshire; he was incorporated BD at Oxford on 14 July 1612, proceeded DD at Cambridge in 1613, and finally on 25 May 1615 was appointed vicar of Fulham, Middlesex. 
In 1620 Walkington published his last known work, 'Rabboni', an elegiac sermon on 'John' 20: 16 'preached at S. Paulls Crosse... By Thomas Walkington, Doctor in Divinity and Minister of the Word at Fulham'. For its dedication, 'To Rabboni' or Christ, Walkington now turned inwards to a spiritual rather than worldly patron; and in another virtuoso display of passion and rhetoric, he invoked the glory of the life to come -- 'the day of our life is far spent' (sig. A7). Walkington died at Fulham the following year; the administration of his goods was granted on 29 October 1621. 
After his death 'The Optick Glasse' went into several further editions. An undated edition, which cannot be dated earlier than 1627, was printed by William Turner at Oxford. This issue retains the 1607 dedication but substitutes a title-page elaborately engraved on steel, showing an optic glass held aloft by two graduates in cap and gown, who represent respectively the universities of Oxford and Cambridge. The universities are further depicted in a facing engraving, above a diagram of the humours abstracted from page 39 of the 1607 text. An identical London edition appeared in 1639; and in 1664 an edition appeared with both a printed title-page (dated 1664) and the later engraved version (dated 1663). W. C. Hazlitt describes an Oxford edition containing an extra leaf of dedication to the author's 'worshippefull, good friend M. Carye' (Hazlitt, 'Bibliographical Collections', 624), but, although the engravings may suggest Walkington's personal involvement with an edition published some time after 1612, there are no copies extant of such an edition. 


@@@@@


doc= 28523


Walkinshaw, Clementine, styled countess of Albestroff (c.1720-1802), mistress of Prince Charles Edward Stuart, was the youngest of ten children, all daughters, of John Walkinshaw (1671-1731) of Barrowfield and his wife, Katharine (1683-1780), daughter of Sir Hugh Paterson of Bannockburn. Clementine was a staunch Roman Catholic and supporter of the exiled Stuarts. 
Detail of her early life hangs on tradition and conjecture: she was almost certainly named after Clementina Sobieska, wife of James Francis Edward Stuart, the Old Pretender, but no firm evidence supports claims that she was born in Rome and Clementina was her godmother, or that as a child she was the 'little playmate' of Charles Edward Louis Philip Stuart (1720-1788), Stuart claimant to the throne. It is not certain that she was with Charles while he was in Glasgow in December 1745, but they met a month later at Bannockburn House, home of Clementine's uncle, when the prince fell ill, and according to Lord Elcho she became his mistress. Tradition in the Lake District of England claims they had a daughter, Clementina Johannes Sobieski Douglas (a surname used by Charles), known as the Finsthwaite princess. She lived near Newby Bridge, but died young, and her grave can be seen in Finsthwaite churchyard. 
Following the prince's return to France, Clementine Walkinshaw's relations with her family turned cold, and for no apparent reason she was ostracized for thirty-two years. The suggestion that she met the prince again in London when he came to England in 1750, a story that features in Sir Walter Scott's 'Redgauntlet', has been dismissed by Leo Berry. 
According to a memoir laid before the French king, Louis XV, in 1774, the prince made Clementine promise at Bannockburn to join him if he sent for her. He did so in 1752 as she was about to enter a religious order in the Low Countries. Since her sister was a member of the household of the princess dowager of Wales, English Jacobites suspected Clementine of being a British spy, and violently opposed her joining Charles: he insisted, however, and they were reunited in Paris in June or July 1752. When the Elibank plot to capture the Hanoverian royal family was betrayed later that year, Clementine was blamed, although the real 'mole' was Alexander Macdonnell of Glengarry, also known as Pickle the Spy, who was not exposed until 150 years later by Andrew Lang in his book 'Pickle the Spy'. Many bitter and disillusioned supporters now abandoned the Jacobite cause. 
Charles and Clementine settled in 'a preti house' in the rue des Vernopeles in Ghent, and later in Liege as Count and Countess de Johnson. At first they were happy together, and even Alexander Macdonnell admitted that 'the Pretender keeps her well and seems very fond of her' (Lang, 213). A daughter, Charlotte, born in October 1753, was baptized in the church of Ste Marie-des-Fonts in Liege on the 29th of that month. Sir Compton Mackenzie asserts that the couple's first serious quarrel was over Charlotte's baptism into the Catholic faith because Charles had converted to protestantism in London. 
Jacobites continued to blame Clementine for every folly the prince committed and for every secret leaked to London; at the same time spies hunted the pair down relentlessly, until they were forced to abandon Liege for secret hiding places, and eventually the relative safety of Basel in Switzerland. There they lived, modestly but comfortably, as an English doctor named Thomson and his wife, but when their presence in Basel became widely known they returned to Liege in 1756. Later they moved to the Chateau de Carlsbourg, near Sedan, which belonged to the prince's uncle, the duke of Bouillon. James Francis Edward Stuart, the Old Pretender, tried to persuade his son to abandon Clementine and marry, but to his credit Charles refused, bringing about the final rift between father and son. 
Charles subjected Clementine to outbursts of temper and beatings, and eventually, on the night of 22 July 1760, while he was absent, she took her child and fled. The prince was beside himself with anger, not because his mistress had left him but at the loss of his child, his beloved Pouponne, as he called her. With the connivance of Louis XV and the prince's father Clementine had taken refuge in the convent of the Visitation de Ste Marie, in the rue du Bac in Paris, and had no intention of returning. Anger, humiliation, and grief at losing his child led to physical and mental collapse, and for almost five years Charles scarcely left Carlsbourg. He paid Clementine nothing and, taking the style countess of Albestroff, she lived for twenty-four years with her daughter in near penury at convents around Paris. The Pretender in Rome gave her a pension of 10,000 livres, and after his death in 1766 she received half that amount from Charles's brother Henry, Cardinal York. But the price was high: Henry forced her to sign an affidavit on 9 March 1767 swearing she was never married to Charles, a declaration which she withdrew almost immediately. In 1772 the prince married Louisa, countess of Albany. Charlotte worked ceaselessly to have the world accept that her parents were husband and wife under the law of Scotland. Only ill health put an end to her pursuit of the claim. In 1784 the prince sent for his daughter, declared her legitimate, and gave her the title duchess of Albany. Within a month of joining him in Florence Charlotte persuaded her father to provide for Clementine. 
Charlotte kept in close touch with her mother, writing as many as 100 letters to her in a single year, and after Charles's death in 1788 did all she could to help her. At the French Revolution in 1789 the French cut off Charlotte's financial help, and Clementine had to flee to Switzerland for safety. Then in November that same year Charlotte died, leaving Clementine to live out a lonely life of genteel poverty at Fribourg, in Switzerland. She died there in November 1802, and was buried at the town's St Nicholas's Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 28524


Wall, John (1588-1666), Church of England clergyman, was born into a gentry family in Holborn, Middlesex, and educated at Westminster School. Having matriculated at Oxford from Christ Church in 1604, he graduated BA in 1608 and proceeded MA in 1611. Appointed rector of St Aldates, Oxford, in 1617, he gained his BD and licence to preach in 1618 and his DD in 1623. 
Wall gained wide recognition as a preacher. In the 1620s he published several sermons dedicated to members of the Berkeley and Stanhope families and to Bishop Williams of Lincoln, the 'lord and patron of my studies and fortunes' (Wall, 'Apollos'), who in turn described Wall as 'the best read in the fathers of any he ever knew' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.734). Exhibiting a combination of learning, sycophancy, and high-flown language, Wall's sermons are characterized by Christocentricity and by a scorn of separatists and of Roman Catholics, the 'bloudie instruments of voluntarie penance' (J. Wall, 'Alae seraphicae: the Seraphins Wings to Raise Us to Heaven', 1627). About this time he was chaplain to Philip Stanhope, first earl of Chesterfield, at whose Shelford seat he preached 'Christ in Progresse' (1627) and 'The Lion in the Lambe, or, Strength in Weaknes' (1628). 
Preferment followed as Wall was made a canon of Christ Church, Oxford, in 1632, vicar of Chalgrove, Oxfordshire, in 1637, and a canon of Salisbury in 1644. Deprived of his canonry at Christ Church by the parliamentary visitors in March 1648, in September he was the sole member of the chapter to be restored following a submission apparently given with 'reluctance' (Wood, 'History', 4.811-12). Remaining at Christ Church through the 1640s and 1650s, he became subdean and moderator, and in 'Ramus olivae', preached in the university church in 1653, hailed Oliver Cromwell, the dedicatee, as 'most invincible leader of the troops of... Britain and Ireland... most honorable chancellor of the academy of Oxford... [and] most extraordinary propagator of arts and sciences'; just as Alexander the Great had civilized the barbarians, so the campaigning Cromwell had brought the people to the true faith and recognition of Jesus. However, by 1658 Wall had experienced some disillusionment: 'Christian Reconcilement', while celebrating the peace Christ had obtained, regretted that 'we should live to make debate among our selves, striving and struggling, like Jacob and Esau in the wombe, and bowels of Church and Country, not as true Israelites, but as vaine Ishmaelites' ('Christian Reconcilement', 1658, 18). 
Wall publicly welcomed the Restoration with a sermon in the university church on 1 May, 'Solomon in solio' (1660), and asserted in dedicating 'A Divine Theater, or, A Stage for Christians' (1662) to Bishop George Morley, lately dean of Christ Church, that he had 'wept for joy' when he read Morley's coronation sermon, 'perform'd, to the... Gracious settlement of Church and State in their Ancient and Fundamentall Government and Splendour, the continuance whereof I do heartily pray for'. According to Anthony Wood's account, however, he was unpopular with his newly installed colleagues and with students because of insufficient loyalty to Christ Church and excessive generosity towards the town of Oxford. Although he subscribed to the college's rebuilding in 1660, it was to Pembroke College that he willed his 'Great 'Bible'... in severall languages' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/322, fol. 257), and the $100 left to the poor of Holborn on his death was apparently on top of much larger donations during the last years of his life to the poor of Oxford. Friends and executors Dr Sebastian Smith of Christ Church and Richard Croke of Marston, city recorder, did not, as Wood claimed, receive 'an incredible mass of money that he had hid' ('Life and Times of Anthony Wood', 2.91) -- they in fact received $100 each -- but Croke, a leading local parliamentarian during the civil war, was deeply distrusted by many in the university, and the association would not have helped Wall. After he died, unmarried, at Christ Church on 20 October 1666, none of his colleagues, Wood asserted, joined the funeral procession to the cathedral, where he was buried. 


@@@@@


doc= 28525


Wall, John (bap. 1708, d. 1776), physician and a founder of the Worcester Porcelain Company, was baptized on 12 October 1708 at St Peter and St Lawrence Church, Powick, Worcestershire, the second child of John Wall (1662-1734), a Worcester grocer, and his second wife, Catherine, 'nee' Cleve (1678-1722). Following his father's bankruptcy, he was educated at King's School, Worcester, until June 1726, when he gained a Cookes scholarship to Worcester College, Oxford; he obtained a BA in 1730. He moved to Merton College, where he was elected a fellow in 1734 and became MA and BM in 1736; he took his MD in 1759. By July 1736, however, he had left Oxford and begun practice in Worcester. In 1740 he married Catherine ('bap'. 1709, died 1797?), the daughter of Martin Sandys, town clerk of Worcester and cousin of Samuel Sandys, first Baron Sandys of Ombersley. They lived in Foregate Street, Worcester, where Wall had built a house, with their five children, one of whom died young; their two sons, John Wall and Martin Wall, both became physicians. 
Wall's medical practice was said to consist of three-quarters of the city and much of the surrounding countryside; his patients included Lord Dudley at Halesowen Grange, the Lytteltons at Hagley Hall, and Lady Luxborough at Barrells, Warwickshire. Wall actively supported the efforts of the bishop, Isaac Maddox, to establish an infirmary at Worcester in 1745; he served as its first treasurer and was one of the four honorary physicians there until his death; he was also on the building committee for the new hospital in 1766. A regular subscriber, he left the hospital a legacy of $20 in 1776; his widow bequeathed $100 in 1797. His influence beyond the city was felt through his work as a steward of the Three Choirs festival and in 1757 through his promotion of a scheme to build accommodation at Malvern Wells for visiting patients. Politically, he was a whig. 
Wall published quite widely, often on controversial topics. His first essay was on the local typhus epidemic of 1740-42. He wrote on the uses of musk as a medication in 1744; on the efficacy of bark in smallpox, in 1747, claiming that Richard Mead had not given him credit for his therapy; on the 'putrid' sore throat in 1751; and on the rinderpest epidemic then raging among cattle. He described treatment for worms in children, in 1758, and wrote about inoculation (1764), lead-poisoning from cider (1768), and angina pectoris (1775). His son Martin published a collection of these writings under the title 'Medical Tracts', in 1780. Wall's interest in hydrotherapy, which began in 1743, centred on the waters at nearby Malvern Wells. His monograph, 'Experiments and Observations on the Malvern Waters' (1756, with enlarged editions in 1757 and 1763), helped to make the spa fashionable. 
Apart from his medical interests, John Wall was a co-founder, with William Baylies and Edward Cave, of the Worcester Porcelain Company, in 1751. He was also one of the original fifteen shareholders. Wall was credited with inventing a new process for the manufacture of Worcester porcelain and the years 1751-76 are known as the Wall period. An amateur artist, his earliest published etching was in 1736, though most of his work cannot now be traced. He produced frontispieces to three contemporary volumes, as well as some twelve classical and religious scenes, five of which were later hung in the museum of Worcester Porcelain and one in the Worcester city museum. In 1773 and 1774 he exhibited at the Royal Academy. Wall was also interested in glass painting, and about 1750 he designed the windows for the rebuilt Hartlebury Castle chapel; these were largely removed in 1898. In 1767 he designed an east window for Oriel College chapel, Oxford, which was executed by William Peckitt of York. 
John Wall reputedly suffered from gout and in 1774 he left Worcester for Bath; he died there on 27 June 1776 and was buried in the abbey. His white marble monument, with its coat of arms and fulsome verse, illustrates the two aspects of his life, the palette of an artist and the caduceus of a practitioner. In his will, prepared a month before his death, his wife and children were the chief beneficiaries; and bequests were made to four Bath practitioners. His paintings were divided among his children. 


@@@@@


doc= 28526


Wall, Joseph (1737-1802), army officer and murderer, was born in Dublin, the eldest son of Gereld or Garrett Wall, a well-to-do tenant farmer on the estate of Sir John Denny Vesey, second baronet, near Abbeyleix in Queen's county. Details of his early life are sparse. His family were Roman Catholic but he and his brothers converted to protestantism. Most accounts state that at the age of fifteen he attended Trinity College, Dublin, where he studied and mastered classical languages, but he is not recorded in college lists, nor did he take a degree. 
It is said that about 1760 Wall volunteered for military service as a cadet, with his younger brother Augustine (died 1780), later a barrister and the first Irish law reporter to include names of speakers in his accounts. He served with distinction at the siege of Havana in 1762, returning home with the rank of captain. Lieutenant Charles Forbes of the 1st Royal Scots regiment referred to Wall's brave conduct at the siege when testifying at his trial forty years later. However, the army lists record no regimental commission, leaving the possibility of a brevet field promotion. Upon his return Wall obtained an appointment with the East India Company at Bombay, but he left this service after a few years following a duel. Although a tall man of 'genteel appearance' ('Life', 40), he 'lacked proper balance and suffered from a very short temper' (Gray, 248). He returned to Ireland to look for a rich heiress, but he courted a Miss Gregory, whom he met at an inn near his father's tenancy, 'in a style so coercive' that she prosecuted him for assault and defamation and 'succeeded in his conviction and penal chastisement' ('Life', 4). 
Wall moved to England and spent his time in gaming and amorous intrigues in London and the spa towns. To relieve his debts, in 1773 he procured a captaincy in what was to become the African corps, consisting of three independent companies of foot stationed at St Louis on the River Senegal for the defence of the recently created province of Senegambia. The governor, Charles O'Hara, placed great confidence in Wall, and he was left as senior military officer when O'Hara left Senegambia in 1776. 
Ensign Matthias Macnamara, lieutenant-governor of the Gambia, 'a man without education, extremely brutal, vulgar and avaricious' (Gray, 244), then returned to St Louis as acting governor and quickly removed his principal rival by appointing Wall lieutenant-governor of the Gambia in his stead. This was more a punishment than a promotion. The post at James Island was regarded as little more than a penal colony and its troops were of the poorest quality. Wall treated his position as an independent command, ignoring Macnamara's orders, and relations between the two quickly deteriorated. When rumours reached St Louis that Wall was acting in an arbitrary manner towards his subordinates, an investigation by the governor and council of Senegal was convened. Despite much conflicting evidence and signs of perjury and bias among the witnesses, the investigation showed the charges had substance. 
Wall, by now a sick man, continued to ignore Macnamara's orders. Matters were brought to a head when on 8 August 1776 he returned to St Louis and confronted Macnamara. He was placed under arrest for quitting his post without orders, and sent back to James Island, where he was kept in close confinement for ten months. No effort was made to bring him to trial, and Wall's health deteriorated further. In the meantime news of Macnamara's maladministration and cruel treatment of local people had reached Britain, and Captain John Clarke was appointed permanent governor; he arrived at St Louis on 8 April 1777. Wall's case was brought before the council in June, when the sickly Wall conducted his own defence. Macnamara's charges of disobedience, mistreatment of subordinates, and private trading were proved to be grossly embellished and were dismissed. Released from prison, Wall commenced several actions against Macnamara for damages over the removal of goods and false imprisonment. The council in Senegal awarded him $1527 for the former. On 28 May 1778 Wall replaced Macnamara as lieutenant-governor of Senegambia. The following year he brought a further civil action against Macnamara in London at the court of common pleas, which decided that, while his arrest might have been at first legal on the grounds that he left his post without orders, his subsequent imprisonment was malicious, and it awarded him $1000. 
Governor Clarke had died on 18 August 1778, and in Wall's absence the British administration in Senegambia surrendered to the attacking French fleet on 11 February 1779. Wall returned with a contingent of the African corps in a naval squadron under Sir Edward Hughes to occupy the island of Goree, which could be used to control the mouth of the River Gambia but which the French had left undefended. Leaving a small force to rebuild and garrison the dismantled forts, Wall, as acting governor of Goree, proceeded with four men-of-war to the Gambia. He reached James Island on 31 May, but the fort was found to be in a dilapidated state, beyond repair. Wall then sailed with the squadron to Barbados, returning to Goree in 1780. His younger brother Ensign Patrick Wall accompanied him to Goree, but died shortly after their arrival, allegedly from the shock of watching a man named Paterson flogged to death on board ship by order of his brother. Under Wall's protection, British merchants began trading on the Gambia River again, and a series of settlements were built along the river bank. However, after he had been governor and superintendent of trade for two years Wall's health gave way, and he prepared to leave the colony. 
On 10 July 1782 a deputation of the African corps, who had been on short allowance, waited on him to ask for a settlement. Wall caused their leader, Sergeant Benjamin Armstrong, and two others to be arrested on a charge of mutiny. Without holding a court martial he ordered Armstrong and the others to be flogged with a knotted rope by black slaves, which was contrary to military practice. Armstrong and the others received 800 lashes. Wall left Goree the next day. Armstrong and the other men died of their wounds several days later. In England, Wall made no mention of a mutiny in his official report, but rumours began to circulate of the tyrannical and arbitrary nature of his governorship. Charges were laid against him by Captain Roberts, one of his officers. Wall was brought before a court martial, but the charges were allowed to drop as the ship in which the witnesses were returning was believed to be lost. Wall then retired to Bath. In October 1784, following the arrival of the witnesses, he was arrested and charged with murder by two king's messengers. They began to escort him to London, but Wall escaped at Reading, walking '60 miles across country before he took a carriage, when he proceeded to Scotland, and there remained until a favourable occasion offered for his passage to the continent' ('The Times', 1 Feb 1802). There he met Frances, the sixth daughter of Kenneth Mackenzie, styled Lord Fortrose (died 1761), whom he married. 
For many years the couple lived in France and Italy, where they were admitted into society. Wall made several secret visits to Britain, and in 1797 both he and his wife returned to London, living under the assumed name of Thompson, at a house in Upper Thornhaugh Street, Bedford Square. Wall had returned to surrender himself for trial but lacked resolve, and it was not until 25 October 1801 that he wrote to Thomas Pelham, home secretary, about this intention. He was arrested soon after. 
Wall's motive was primarily financial. A large property belonging to his wife was in the hands of trustees, which he had frequently applied for, 'but they, knowing the circumstances in which he was placed, and that he could not legally sue them for it, without exposing himself to the dangers of a criminal prosecution, consistently resisted his applications for money' ('The Times', 1 Feb 1802). To free himself of this difficulty Wall had to clear his name. The death of Captain Roberts in Ireland some ten years before and the 'supposed dissolution or dispersion of the other principal witnesses taught him to rely with perfect security in his surrendering himself for trial' ('Life', 6). He was tried for the murder of Armstrong on 20 January 1802 at the Old Bailey by a special commission, presided over by Sir Archibald Macdonald, chief baron of the exchequer. The chief evidence for the prosecution was given by the surgeon, Mr Ferrit, and the orderly sergeant who were on duty during Armstrong's punishment. The evidence was not shaken on any point and the charge of mutiny was not sustained. The absence of a court martial, and of any record of a mutiny in the garrison records or in Wall's official report upon his return, proved telling. The trial lasted from 9 a.m. until 11 o'clock at night and resulted in a verdict of guilty. Efforts were made by a relative of his wife's, Charles Howard, eleventh duke of Norfolk, to obtain a pardon for Wall. The privy council held several deliberations on the case, but it had become a subject of great public interest and popular indignation, and a pardon was politically inexpedient. It would have been unwise to spare the life of an officer condemned for brutality to his soldiers when at the same time sailors were being executed at Spithead for mutiny against their officers. 
After two respites, on 28 January 1802, at 8 o'clock, Wall emerged from his cell at Newgate, to the hostile cheers of an immense crowd. 'He did not remain above two minutes on the scaffold before the platform dropped, but owing to the rope slipping a little... he was a considerable time in dying, during which time he appeared to be much convulsed' ('The Times', 29 Jan 1802). Following the execution the body was only formally dissected and not exposed to public view. Upon payment of 50 guineas to the Philanthropic Society by his family his remains were handed over and buried in St Pancras churchyard. 
The execution was at the time considered a triumph of justice -- the administration of the criminal law making no distinction between the classes -- but the poet Robert Southey pointed out: 'Nobody seems to recollect that he has been hanged, not for having flogged three men to death, but for the informality in the mode of doing it... The martial laws of England are the most barbarous which at this day exist in Europe. (Southey, 3.109)' Wall was survived by his wife and a son aged about nine at the time of his death. She was at Harrogate in September 1821 at the same time as the poet James Montgomery, who, observing her solitary walks, 'recollected how faithfully she clung to her husband through the period of his desertion, disgrace and suffering' (Holland and Everett, 3.253). Her example suggested the theme of a poem he then commenced on 'Woman', later published as 'Tale without a Name'. 


@@@@@


doc= 28527


Wall, Martin (bap. 1747, d. 1824), physician, youngest son of John Wall (bap. 1708, d. 1776), physician, and his wife, Catherine Sandys ('bap'. 1709, died 1797?), daughter of Martin Sandys, town clerk of Worcester, was baptized at Worcester on 24 June 1747. He went to Winchester College, then to New College, Oxford, in 1763. He graduated BA in 1767, MA in 1771, BM in 1773, and DM in 1777, and was a fellow of New College until 1778. He studied medicine at St Bartholomew's Hospital, and in Edinburgh. 
Wall began practice at Oxford in 1774; on 2 November 1775 he was elected physician to the Radcliffe Infirmary and in his 'Letter' of 1785 he replied to John Howard's criticisms of the infirmary. He became reader in chemistry in 1781. Having previously edited his father's essays (1780), in 1783 he published his 1781 inaugural dissertation together with two more essays, one of them on the diseases prevalent in the south sea islands. He drank tea with Dr Johnson at Oxford in June 1784 and his essay on the south sea islands was presumably the origin of their conversation on the advantage of physicians travelling among barbarous nations. 
Wall was Lichfield professor of clinical medicine from 1785 until his death. His work on the use of opium in low fevers and on the typhus epidemic at Oxford appeared in 1786. He was elected a fellow of the College of Physicians in 1787, and Harveian orator and FRS in 1788. 
Wall died in Oxford on 21 June 1824; an obituary records his capacity for exhilarating conversation and his hilarity of temper, lively anecdotes, and urbanity, as well as his free treatment of poor patients. His wife, Mary, survived him, dying in Oxford in 1841, aged ninety. They had at least two daughters and a son, Martin Sandys Wall (1786/7-1871), who was chaplain-in-ordinary to the prince regent and to the British embassy at Vienna. 


@@@@@


doc= 28528


Wall, Richard (1694-1778), politician and diplomatist for Spain, was born in 1694, probably at Coolnamuck, co. Waterford, Ireland, where a branch of that family was settled. He is first heard of in 1718, when he served as a volunteer in the Spanish fleet which was defeated off Sicily by George Byng, Viscount Torrington. In 1727, as a captain of dragoons, he went to St Petersburg as secretary with the duke of Liria, the eldest son of the duke of Berwick and grandson of James II, who had been appointed Spanish ambassador to that city. They had an interview on their way with the Old Pretender at Bologna, and halted also at Vienna, Dresden, and Berlin. Despite the trust placed in him by Liria, Wall returned to Spain prematurely, apparently suffering from depression. 
After rejoining the Spanish army, Wall served under Don Philip in Lombardy and under Montemar in Naples, and was next dispatched to the West Indies, where he conceived a plan for recovering Jamaica. In 1747 he was sent to Aix-la-Chapelle and London to negotiate peace, returned to Spain by way of France in February 1748 to report progress, and on the conclusion of the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle in October 1748 he was formally appointed to the London embassy. Wall's priorities in Britain were to obtain diplomatic concessions for Spanish commerce while simultaneously using espionage to further Spain's economic recovery. Attempts were made, with limited success, to smuggle skilled men and equipment from Britain to Spain's dockyards and woollen industry. Wall, in conjunction with the Spanish secretary of state Carvajal in Madrid, successfully ended the 'asiento', obtained by Britain for forty years in 1713 and interrupted by war, by which she had won the right to import Africans as slave labour into Spanish America. Unfortunately they had to cede Britain other trade concessions in return. 
In 1752 Wall was appointed lieutenant-general and in October of the same year was briefly recalled on account of his services being required at Madrid in settling commercial arrangements with the English ambassador, Sir Benjamin Keene. Although he had occasional differences with Keene and his successor, Lord Bristol, Wall was regarded as the head of the English party, and the French intrigued against him. He was finally recalled in April 1754, following Carvajal's death, when he succeeded the latter as foreign minister. He was reluctant to leave England, where he was very popular and had made the acquaintance of the elder Pitt and many others. That autumn, supplanting Ensenada, Wall became secretary of state. His administration was compromised by internal conflicts revolving around centralizing policies, such as the campaign against the Jesuits, and the aristocratic conservatism of his courtier colleagues. 
Wall had reached an understanding with the queen dowager, Elizabeth Farnese, and enjoyed enduring good relations with her son the king of Naples. Nevertheless, when on the death of Ferdinand VI in 1759 the king of Naples acceded to the Spanish throne as Charles III, Wall began to be eclipsed in Madrid. The king preferred a more belligerent foreign policy, leading to an alliance with France and the other Bourbon states in December 1761 and entry into the war with Britain. Wall's handling of the conflict was half-hearted and of mixed success, and after many attempts he was allowed to resign in August 1763. Some of his proteges remained in office, and Charles III continued to consult him on some matters. Among his labours in office had been the restoration of the Alhambra, which he incongruously roofed with red tiles. 
On his retirement, Wall received a pension of 100,000 crowns, the full pay of a lieutenant-general, and the possession for life of the Soto di Roma, a royal hunting seat near Granada, later presented to the duke of Wellington. This he decorated with English furniture. He also drained its 4000 acres of fields and woods, made new drives, and improved the economic condition of his tenants. He resided there from October to May, attended the court at Aranjuez for a month, and spent the summer at Mirador, a villa near Granada. Henry Swinburne (1743-1803) visited him at Soto di Roma in 1776, and was delighted with his sprightly conversation, for which he had always been noted. He died in 1778. 


@@@@@


doc= 28529


Wall, William (1647-1728), Church of England clergyman, was born at Maranto Court Farm in the parish of Chevening, Kent, on 6 January 1647, the son of William Wall, and his wife, probably Mary Rich (a couple of those names had married in Chevening on 14 January 1646). He had at least one brother, Geoffrey, and a sister, Elizabeth, who were alive when he made his will in 1725. Wall graduated BA from Queen's College, Oxford, in 1667 and proceeded MA in 1670, being incorporated in the latter degree at Cambridge in 1676. After taking holy orders he became vicar of Shoreham, Kent, in December 1674, where he continued until his death. 
Wall married Catharine (1657/8-1706), daughter of Edward Davenant, at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, London, on 1 May 1677 (parish register). Their children were as follows: Catharine, baptized on 9 April 1678, who married Richard Waring and had eight sons and eight daughters; William, baptized on 9 November 1679, who became a citizen of London and was buried on 20 June 1725 at Shoreham; Richard, baptized on 2 January 1681; Elizabeth, baptized on 18 December 1681, and buried on 12 February 1683; Edward, baptized on 17 December 1682; Rebekka, baptized on 17 December 1683, and buried on 2 March 1685; and Thomas, baptized on 20 March 1685, also a citizen of London, and buried at Shoreham on 3 February 1710. 
Wall once had the offer of a living of $300 a year at Chelsfield, 3 miles from Shoreham, which he declined because his 'conscience would not let him take [it]' ('GM', 54/1, 1784, 435). Later, about 1708, he took the living at Milton, near Gravesend, at about one-fifth of the value, and 12 miles from Shoreham. At Milton he had the assistance of a curate, Mr Thomas. 
Wall's major publication was 'A History of Infant Baptism' (1705), followed by expanded second (1707) and third editions (1720). In it he defended the validity of infant baptism by using much material from ancient church fathers, and he explored a variety of topics related to baptism. The last chapter made a plea for not dividing the Church of England over the age of baptism: a plea made to Antipaedobaptists (Baptists) who remained separate from the established church. Because of that book he was awarded the degree of DD by the University of Oxford in 1720. John Wesley (1703-1791) published some twenty pages of extracts from it under the title 'Thoughts upon Infant-Baptism' (1751; reprinted 1780 and 1791). Wall's book was reprinted several times in the nineteenth century. The circumstances of Wall's history were that David Russen had written a book against Baptists, 'Fundamentals without Foundation' (1703), to which, for Baptists, Joseph Stennett (1663-1713) published 'An Answer to Mr. David Russen's Book' (1704). Wall's book then followed; he consulted with Stennett and respected him. Wall was in turn opposed by a Baptist, John Gale, in 'Reflections on Mr. Wall's History' (London, 1711); the two men held a conference in 1719. In connection with the topic of infant baptism Wall also published 'A Conference between Two Men... about Infant-Baptism' (1706) and 'A Defence of the History of Infant Baptism' (1720). Several small works complete his publications. 
Catharine Wall died on 10 May 1706, aged forty-eight; William Wall died on 13 January 1728, probably at Shoreham, and was buried in the parish church there six days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 28530


Wallace, Eglantine, styled Lady Wallace (d. 1803), writer, was the youngest daughter of Sir William Maxwell, third baronet (died 1771), of Monreith, Wigtownshire, and his wife, Magdalene Blair. Her sister was Jane Gordon, duchess of Gordon (1748/9-1812). A boisterous hoyden in her youth, and a woman of violent temper in her maturer years, Eglantine Maxwell was married on 4 September 1770 to Thomas Dunlop, son of John Dunlop of Dunlop, and Frances Anna, daughter and heir of Sir Thomas Wallace, fourth and last baronet (1702-1770), of Craigie. On his grandfather's death Dunlop inherited Craigie, took the name of Wallace, and assumed the style of fifth baronet; but the property was deeply indebted, and in 1783 he was obliged to sell all that remained of Craigie. His wife obtained a legal separation in 1778, on the ground, it is said, of her husband's cruelty, but the quarrel may have been due to pecuniary embarrassment. 
Lady Wallace was herself a little later summoned for assaulting a woman -- apparently a humble companion -- and was directed by the magistrate to compound the matter. She left Edinburgh, and seems to have settled in London, but when her play 'The Whim: a Comedy' (1795) was banned from the stage by the licenser, she left England in disgust. In October 1789 she was arrested at Paris as a British agent, and narrowly escaped with her life. In 1792 she was in Brussels. There she contracted a friendship with General Charles Francois Dumouriez, whom in 1793 she entertained in London, where she seems to have been well received in society. 
Lady Wallace was author of 'Letter to a Friend, with a Poem called The Ghost of Werter' (1787), 'Diamond Cut Diamond: a Comedy' (from the French, 1787), and 'The Ton: a Comedy' (1788), which was produced at Covent Garden on 8 April 1788 with a good cast, but was a failure. Other works include 'The Conduct of the King of Prussia and General Dumouriez' (1793) and 'An Address to the People on Peace and Reform' (1798). 
Lady Wallace died at Munich on 28 March 1803, leaving two sons, the elder of whom was General Sir John Alexander Dunlop Agnew Wallace (1774/5-1857). 


@@@@@


doc= 28531


George Wallace (1730-1805), lawyer and writer, was admitted to the Faculty of Advocates in Edinburgh in 1754. He was a member with his father of the Rankenian Club, and a member of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. He wrote a memoir of his father that appeared in the 'Scots Magazine' for July 1771. He also published 'A System of the Principles of the Law of Scotland' (1760), which deserves recognition as the source for the article on 'Thoughts on the Origin of Feudal Tenures and the Descent of Ancient Peerages in Scotland' (1783), with a second edition; 'Nature and Descent of Ancient Peerages Connected with the State of Scotland', (8 vols., 1785); and 'Prospects from Hills in Fife' (1796), a poem modelled after James Thomson's 'Seasons'. He died in 1805. 


@@@@@


doc= 28532


Wallace, Grace Jane, Lady Wallace (1804-1878), translator, was born on 20 February 1804, the eldest daughter of John Stein of Carron Mills, Edinburgh (1769-1814), distiller and MP, and Grace Bushby, daughter of John Bushby of Tinwald Downs, Dumfries. Her father was the sixth in descent from John Stein Craig, of Alloa. He was returned to parliament on 31 May 1796 for Bletchingley as a paying guest of Sir Robert Clayton, but he did not seek re-election in 1802. There is no information about Grace Jane's early education, which might have been carried out at home. 
On 18 July 1824 Grace Jane Stein married Sir Alexander Don, sixth baronet ('c'.1779-1826), of Newton Don, Berwickshire, widower of Lucretia Montgomerie (died 1817), and MP for Roxburghshire (from 25 July 1814 to 11 March 1826). Don had been detained in Verdun after the resumption of war with France and was freed only after seventeen years. He was a good friend of Sir Walter Scott who remarked that 'he possessed strong natural parts, and in particular few men could speak better in public when he chose' ('Journal', 125). In fact Don was not a regular attender in parliament: on 5 March 1816 he gave a speech supporting his contributors' petition against the property tax and on 10 June 1819 he voted for the 'Foreign Enlistment Bill'. Grace had two children with him: Sir William Henry Don (1825-1862), the celebrated actor, and Alexina Harriet Elizabeth ('c'.1826-1919), who married in 1844 Sir Frederick Acclom Milbank esquire. Sir Walter Scott wrote about Grace Jane in a letter to his son in 1825 'Mamma and Anne are quite well. They are with me on a visit to Sir Alexr. Don and his new Lady, who is a very pleasant woman and plays on the harp delightfully' ('Letters', 9.228). Sir Alexander died in 1826. 
On 2 April 1836 Grace Jane Don married Sir James Maxwell Wallace (1783-1867), fifth son of John Wallace of Kelly. Sir James entered the army in 1805, was promoted captain in 1807, served in the campaign of 1815, and took part in the battle of Waterloo. In September 1823 he was appointed lieutenant-colonel and in 1831 he received the honour of the knighthood. He was then promoted colonel (1838), major-general (1851), general (1863), and colonel of the 17th lancers (1864). Sir James and Lady Wallace had no children. 
Grace Jane Wallace started her career as a translator in the latter years of her second marriage. She worked on German children's books and works of folkloric and historical interest. She translated some of Friedrich Wilhelm rittern von Hacklander's widely popular works, publishing 'Katherine and the Moment of Fortune' (1857), 'The Old Monastery' (1857), and 'Clara, or, Slave-Life in Europe' (1855), and also took an interest in the works of contemporary women writers, such as Marie Petersen (1816-1859), Wilhelmine von Hillern (1836-1916), Cecilia Bohl de Faber, known as Fernan Caballero (1796-1877), and Elise Polko (1823-1899). She caught the attention of the publishers Longman with her preface to the translation of Schiller's 'Life and Works' (1860) by Emil Palleske (1823-1880), one of the few critical statements left by her, and one which reveals her reading of Carlyle's 'fine tribute to Schiller' ('The Life of Schiller', xi). For Longmans she translated the lives and letters of contemporary musicians, publishing the 'Letters of Felix Mendelssohn Bartholdy from 1833 to 1847, edited by Paul Mendelssohn Bartholdy and Dr Carl Mendelssohn Bartholdy' (1863); Mendelssohn's 'Letters from Italy and Switzerland' (1862); 'Beethoven's Letters (1790-1826) from the Collection of Dr Ludwig Nohl' (1866); and 'The Letters of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart (1769-1791)', edited by Nohl (1865). These works were widely reviewed and remained the standard English translations until Emily Anderson's new editions for Macmillan. The 'Edinburgh Review', however, criticized Lady Wallace's translation of Mozart's letters for 'the perpetual repetition of the foolish expression 'our maestro'' and for 'the musical blunders' ('EdinR', 150, Oct 1879, 358) in translating German musical terminology. Her translation of Mendelssohn's letters was largely commended for its prose. Her last work was the translation of the 'Memoirs of the Empress Alexandra Feodorowna Empress of Russia' by August Theodor von Grimm (1870). Evidence to corroborate Charles Rogers's statement that Grace Jane Wallace was also a composer has not been found. Grace Jane Wallace died on 12 March 1878 at Isaberdour, Fife, Scotland. 


@@@@@


doc= 28533


Wallace, James (d. 1678), army officer, was the only son of Matthew Wallace (died 'c'.1641), laird of Dundonald in Ayrshire, and his wife, Agnes Somervell. In 1629 James Wallace married Jean Hay, daughter of the late John Hay of Renfield, minister at Renfrew; she died before 5 March 1638. In that year James Wallace's father sold the estate of Dundonald to Sir William Cochrane; even after the sale James was still sometimes called Wallace of Auchans after an important part of the Dundonald estate. 
In 1642 Wallace went to Ireland as a captain in Major-General Robert Munro's regiment. In April 1644 he was one of the petitioners of the Ulster army to the Scottish estates for arrears of pay and supplies. In 1645 he was recalled with 200 men of the regiment as part of Home's commanded foot to oppose the progress of Montrose. He joined the covenanters under General Baillie and was taken prisoner at the battle of Kilsyth. 
Wallace returned to Ireland before 1647. In November 1648 the Scottish committee of estates sent Wallace, now a major, to Ulster to recruit anti-engager troops for the Scottish army. On 30 March 1649 he was noted as being an officer in one of Monck's Ulster regiments along with the crypto-royalist Lord Montgomery of Ards. About the same time he was appointed governor of Belfast, but he was deprived of this position in June. Soon afterwards he removed to Kedhall, Ballycarry, near Carrickfergus, where he married in 1649 or 1650 a daughter of Mr Edmonstone of Ballycarry. On 10 August 1649 the estates gave him the lieutenant-colonelcy of the Irish foot, which was recruited from the anti-royalist refugees of the Ulster civil war of March-July. In May 1650 Wallace acted as warden of Montrose during the latter's imprisonment before his execution in Edinburgh. Following Charles II's return to Scotland, Wallace's regiment (commanded by Archibald, Lord Lorne), owing to its fierce loyalty to the kirk party regime, was named His Majesty's life guard of foot. Wallace served with it during Lieutenant-General David Leslie's successful defence of Edinburgh. At the battle of Dunbar, Wallace was again made prisoner. On his colonel's petition, as a reward for his services, he was referred to the committee of estates for him to be assigned part of the 'excise or maintenance' due from Ayrshire. 
After the Restoration Wallace seems initially to have lived in retirement. However, he may have been connected with the plans for a general rising in Ireland, the Dublin Plot of 1663. In September 1665 he was named as one of those leading dissidents ordered to be rounded up by the Scottish authorities, but he escaped to Ireland and took refuge with his wife's kin near Carrickfergus. By the autumn of 1666 he was back in Edinburgh, part of a committee almost certainly planning a general rising which was in contact with the dissidents of Galloway. When the Pentland rising flared up independently of such schemes Wallace was one of those resolute that it 'was our duty to own our brethren in Galloway, yea, and to go with them, and take share with them in what should be their lot' (Wallace, 389). On 18 November, a few days after the rising had sparked off, he set off to join them, and on 21 November he took command at the bridge of Doon, and led them in their march on Edinburgh. One of his earliest prisoners was Sir James Turner, who had been his companion in arms twenty-three years before. During his captivity Turner was constantly with Wallace, of whose character and rebellion he gives a detailed account in his 'Memoir' (1829). On 28 November Wallace's forces and the king's, under the command of his former comrade in Munro's foot, General Tam Dalzell of the Binns, met at Rullion Green, 7 miles from Edinburgh. Wallace and his heavily outnumbered force of 600-700 foot and 800 horse were defeated at the ensuing, hard-fought battle. With his followers, he fled. He escaped to the Netherlands where he took the name of Forbes and wrote 'A narrative of the rising at Pentland'. He was condemned and forfaulted on 15 August 1667 by the justice court at Edinburgh, and this sentence was ratified by parliament on 15 December 1669. At the time of the assassination of Archbishop Sharp in July 1668 he was thought to have been in hiding in Edinburgh and then escaped to Ireland. 
In exile Wallace was obliged to move from place to place for several years to avoid his enemies, who were on the look-out for him. He afterwards lived at Rotterdam, where he became an elder of the Scottish church; but on the complaint of Henry Wilkie, whom the king had placed at the head of the Scottish factory at Kamperveen, Wallace was ordered to return from Zeeland. Wallace, however, went back to the Netherlands some time afterwards, and died at Rotterdam at the end of 1678. He left one son, who succeeded to his father's property because the sentence of death and fugitation passed against him after the Pentland rising was rescinded at the revolution of 1688. 


@@@@@


doc= 28534


Wallace, James (1642-1688), Church of Scotland minister and writer on Orkney, was born in Banffshire of unknown parentage. He entered King's College, Aberdeen, in 1655 and graduated MA in 1659, thereafter becoming schoolmaster at Fortrose. He was appointed minister of Ladykirk in 1668, then responded to an appeal for ministers to go to Orkney, where he was admitted minister at Kirkwall in November 1672. In October 1678 he was collated to the prebend of St John in the cathedral church of St Magnus-the-Martyr at Kirkwall. His marriage to Elizabeth Cuthbert (died 1685), probably of the Inverness family of that name, brought them three sons, Andrew ('b'. 1675), Alexander (who died young), and James Wallace (b. 1684), and a daughter, Jean, who also died young. Wallace was known as 'a man of great industry and scholarship' ('Fasti Scot.', 222), with a thorough grounding in philosophy, theology, history, and mathematics. He owned a house in Albert Street, Kirkwall, distinguished with the words 'Welcome, welcome' and a double heart above the entrance. 
When Sir Robert Sibbald (1641-1722), the king's geographer for Scotland, advertised in 1682 for contributions to his projected description of the kingdom Wallace was one of those who sent him materials; he became a prolific correspondent and also provided Sibbald with information on Shetland. Wallace left in manuscript various sermons and other religious pieces, a complete history of the Orkney islands, and the work for which he is known, 'A Description of the Isles of Orkney', which his son James issued in 1693, dedicating it to Sibbald and including Sibbald's 'An Essay Concerning the Thule of the Ancients'. A second edition of 1700, purporting to be the work of the younger Wallace and dedicated to the earl of Dorset, cut some of the earlier text but added a section on the plants and shells of Orkney. The original version, edited by John Small, was reprinted in 1883. 
In the closing months of his life, and in consequence of the revolution of 1688-9, Wallace was deprived by the council of his preferments. He died of a fever on 18 September 1688, 'in the flower of his age, to the regrate of all that knew him' (Craven, preface). He gave a large number of books to the town, together with 100 merks, with which two communion cups were bought and inscribed with his name. 


@@@@@


doc= 28535


Wallace, James (b. 1684), botanist and writer, was the eldest son of the four children of James Wallace (d. 1688), minister of Kirkwall, Orkney, and his wife, Elizabeth Cuthbert (died 1685). He gained the degree of MD -- probably from Edinburgh University as his father held a great admiration for Sir Robert Sibbald, who taught medicine there. His father died in September 1688 leaving his book 'A Description of the Isles of Orkney' unpublished, and Wallace brought it out in Edinburgh in 1693, later adding to it a chapter on the shells and plants of the islands. This edition was dedicated to Sir Robert Sibbald, who is thought to have contributed an essay entitled 'The Thule of the ancients'. In 1700 Wallace brought out a new edition of the book dedicated to the ninth earl of Dorset -- a man of some learning -- but without making it clear that he was not himself the author. 
Wallace took part in the first voyage of the Darien scheme, the attempt by 'the Company of Scotland trading to Africa and the Indies', the Scottish rival to the East India Company, to found a colony in the isthmus of Panama. He sailed in the 'Endeavour', which left Leith on 19 July 1698. The diary that he kept on the journey, now in the possession of the Royal Society of London, is the only source of information for the first six weeks of the expedition, to Madeira. In Darien he was impressed by the range of animal and vegetable life, particularly by what he described as 'the legion of monstrous plants' (Wallace, 'Journal'), from which he collected some samples. He also noted species similar to those of Europe. The limited amount of shipping space meant that he could not bring back to Britain any large species, but he collected some leaves and ferns. Following the 'Endeavour''s sinking he returned to Scotland in December 1699 with the other survivors of the expedition in the company's remaining ship, the 'Caledonia'. Wallace gave some botanic specimens to James Petiver, the demonstrator at Chelsea Physic Garden, and three of these found their way into the Sloane herbarium, the great reference collection in London. Wallace was made a fellow of the Royal Society. He had connections in London, and is said to have been in the employment of the East India Company. 
In 1724 Wallace published in Dublin 'The History of the Kingdom of Scotland from Fergus the First King to the Union', taking kingship back to 330 BC. The work is mostly derivative, following a line of descent from the imaginary early kings listed by Hector Boece and accepted by George Buchanan. Wallace diverged from Buchanan's hostility to Mary, queen of Scots, because of a strong belief in monarchy: 'kings derive their power from God alone', he asserted (Wallace, 'The History of the Kingdom of Scotland', introduction). His mastery of history, even when he was not misled by Boece, was not great; there appears to be some confusion between the covenant and the solemn league and covenant. He went beyond the nominal limiting date of his work by including an 'impartial' account of the Jacobite rising of 1715, which he presented as a letter from some Scottish gentleman to a friend in New England. He was scornful of the military performance of both sides at Sheriffmuir, claiming that the encounter should not be referred to as a battle. His concern in the rising as a whole is with the various members of the aristocracy who participated in it. Nothing is known of Wallace after the publication of the 'History'. 


@@@@@


doc= 28536


Wallace, Sir James (1731-1803), naval officer, details of whose parents and upbringing are unknown, entered the navy as a scholar in the Royal Naval Academy at Portsmouth in 1746. He afterwards served in the 'Syren', 'Vigilant', and 'Intrepid' and passed his lieutenant's examination on 3 January 1753, being described on his certificate as 'appearing to be 21' (TNA: PRO, ADM 107/4). On 11 March 1755 he was promoted lieutenant in the 'Greenwich' under Captain Robert Roddam and was in her when she was captured off Cape Francois in the West Indies on 16 March 1757. In April 1758 he was appointed to the 'Ripon' (60 guns, Captain Edward Jekyl), one of the squadron under Sir John Moore at the reduction of Guadeloupe in April 1759. In January 1760 he was appointed to the 'Neptune' (90 guns) when she went to the Mediterranean as flagship of Sir Charles Saunders. On 1 November 1762 he was promoted commander and in the following April he was appointed to the sloop 'Trial' (14 guns) for the North American station. He later commanded the 'Dolphin' (24 guns) in the East Indies and the 'Bonetta' in the English Channel. On 10 January 1771 Wallace was promoted captain of the 'Unicorn', and in November 1771 he was appointed to the frigate 'Rose' (20 guns) which he took to the North American station in 1774. In the course of 1775 and the first part of 1776 the 'Rose' was actively engaged in operations designed to maintain a sense of insecurity among the rebels in the small towns and harbours along the coast. His activity attracted the attention of Rear-Admiral Shuldham who wrote to Philip Stephens at the Admiralty: 'Captain Wallace's services deserve every reward that can be conferred on him. I humbly recommend it to their Lordships' consideration sending him out a larger and better ship' (ibid., 1/484, fol. 378). Perhaps as a consequence he was given the 'Experiment' (50 guns) in July 1776. In her, he was sent to England with dispatches in January 1777, a service for which he was knighted on 13 February. 
In July Wallace returned to the North American station and to his earlier cruising activities. In July 1778 the 'Experiment' became one of the small squadron which Vice-Admiral Richard Howe assembled for the defence of the channel past Sandy Hook against the fleet under d'Estaing. The 'Experiment' continued with the squadron when Howe followed the French to Rhode Island, and took part in the manoeuvres on 10-11 August at the end of which, just as battle was to be joined, both fleets were scattered by a storm. The 'Experiment' remained in the area and on 20 August was off Newport when the French were standing in towards it. On 23 August the 'Experiment' was chased into Long Island Sound by three French line ships, thus becoming 'the first two decker that ever attempted that dangerous passage' (that is, Hell Gate, the East River connecting Long Island Sound and New York harbour) (Beatson, 4.354), and rejoined Howe at Sandy Hook on 25 August. In the following December, while cruising on the coast of Virginia, the 'Experiment' was blown off the land in a violent westerly gale. Wallace, conscious that his ship would find it hard to get to New York in her distressed condition, and knowing that the dockyard could not supply the spars and rigging he needed, bore away to the east to be refitted in an English dockyard. When ready, Wallace joined the squadron which sailed from St Helens under Admiral Marriot Arbuthnot on 1 May 1779 and with him turned aside for the relief of Jersey, then threatened by a French force of five ships of the line under the prince of Nassau. Hearing that Nassau had been repulsed and that some frigates had been sent from Portsmouth, Arbuthnot pursued his voyage, leaving the 'Experiment' to strengthen the force at Jersey. When Wallace was joined by Captain Gidoin, commanding the expected frigates, the two captains concerted an attack on the French squadron which had gone towards the mainland and was endeavouring to reach St Malo. Wallace, now benefiting from the tide, drove them into Cancale Bay, following them in, despite the refusal of the pilot to navigate the channels. He then succeeded in silencing a six-gun battery under which they had sheltered, and burnt two of the frigates and a small cutter that were fast on shore. The third frigate, the 'Danae' (34 guns), and two smaller vessels were brought off and sent to England. 
Wallace then rejoined Arbuthnot, who had been forced by foul winds to wait in Torbay, and sailed with him for New York. In September 1779 he was sent to the southward with a considerable sum of money for the payment of the troops in Georgia. On 24 September he fell in with a detachment of d'Estaing's fleet, and was captured after a spirited resistance. In the action Wallace lost his secret signal books to the enemy, making it necessary for Arbuthnot to issue a new set to the fleet. Wallace was exonerated at the court martial he faced on the loss of his ship and was given command of the 'Nonsuch' (64 guns) in March 1780, a position he fulfilled ''dress'd or rather undress'd' in a white Jacket, Night cap and Flannel Trowsers' (NMM, JOD/23). In July, cruising off the coast of France, Wallace captured the corvette 'Hussard', followed soon afterwards by the famous frigate 'Belle Poule', commanded by Raymond-Marie Kergariou de Coatles, the former captain of the 'Danae', who was killed in the engagement. In April 1781 the 'Nonsuch' was with Admiral Darby's fleet at the relief of Gibraltar. Darby praised all the captains who 'had greatly exerted themselves in their attacks on the gunboats' which had threatened the relief (ADM 1/95). On the homeward voyage the 'Nonsuch' was lookout vessel of the van squadron and chased and brought to action a French line-of-battle ship. According to Wallace the fight started at half past ten at night when he brought the 'Nonsuch' alongside the Frenchman, exchanging broadsides and for a time being caught in her rigging. Wallace considered he had the best of the action when, about midnight, his opponent seized the chance to sail away. The 'Nonsuch' continued to chase and the action was resumed at 5 a.m. and in the early light of dawn Wallace said she appeared to be an 80-gun ship and some 'who pretended to know say she is the 'Languedoc'' (ADM 1/95, fol. 210). By half past six, with much damage and many casualties, Wallace thought it prudent to disengage and rejoined the fleet, the 'Languedoc' pursuing her course to Brest. Darby ordered Wallace to make his own way back to Plymouth to send his sixty wounded men to hospital and to dock the 'Nonsuch'. 
In October Wallace was appointed to the 'Warrior' (74 guns), which sailed for the West Indies in January 1782 with Sir George Rodney and took part in the battle of the Saints on 12 April 1782, sailing in Hood's rear division. He returned to England in 1783 and for the next seven years was on half pay. In the Spanish armament of 1790 he commanded the 'Swiftsure' for a few months and, in 1793, the 'Monarch', in which he went to the West Indies, returning at the end of the year. On 12 April 1794 he was promoted rear-admiral of the white and appointed commander-in-chief at Newfoundland with his flag in the 'Romney' (50 guns). He was further promoted rear-admiral of the red on 4 July 1794. The remainder of his squadron was composed of frigates and smaller vessels intended for the protection of trade from the enemy's privateers. Wallace was therefore unable to offer any serious resistance to a French squadron of seven ships of the line and three frigates commanded by Rear-Admiral Richery which came out to North America, having been freed from Cadiz (August 1796) by the Spanish declaration of war. The French were free to inflict considerable damage on the fishermen, plundering their huts, stages, and boats. Wallace was bitterly mortified; but the colonists and traders, realizing that he had done all that was possible under the circumstances, passed a vote of thanks to him. He returned to England early the next year and had no further service. He had been made a vice-admiral of the white on 1 June 1795, vice-admiral of the red on 14 February 1799, and finally admiral of the blue on 1 January 1801. 
At the time of his death on 6 January 1803 Wallace was living at Hanworth in Middlesex (will, TNA: PRO, PROB 11/1389), but he died, according to James Ralfe, in Gloucester Place, Portman Square, London. He left to his wife, Anne, the estates which had come to her from her father, Sir James Wright, a former governor of Georgia. After some other bequests Wallace left the remainder of his property and various moneys including prize money and arrears of pay equally to his wife and their daughter, Mary. The amount of his fortune is not clear from his will but it is evident that he died a wealthy man with estates in Middlesex and Huntingdon and cash bequests in excess of $20,000. 


@@@@@


doc= 28537


Wallace, John Alexander Dunlop Agnew (1774/5-1857), army officer, was the only son of Thomas Dunlop Wallace (died 1835), of Craigie, Ayrshire, who assumed the style of fifth baronet, and his first wife, Eglantine (died 1803), known as Lady Wallace, youngest daughter of Sir William Maxwell, third baronet (died 1771), of Montreith, Wigtownshire. 
Wallace was given a commission as ensign in the 75th (Highland) regiment on 28 December 1787, his family having helped to raise it. He joined it in India in 1789, became lieutenant on 6 April 1790, and served in Cornwallis's operations against Tipu in 1791-2, including the siege of Seringapatam. He acted as aide-de-camp to Colonel Maxwell, who commanded the left wing of the army. He obtained a company in the 58th regiment on 8 June 1796, and returned to England to join it. He went with it to the Mediterranean in 1798, and was present at the capture of Minorca, and in the 1801 campaign in Egypt. It formed part of the reserve under Moore, and was hotly engaged in the battle of Alexandria. It came home in 1802. He was promoted major on 9 July 1803, and became a lieutenant-colonel in the 11th battalion of reserve on 28 August 1804. At the end of 1805 he was transferred to the 88th (Connaught Rangers) to command a newly raised 2nd battalion. 
Wallace went to the Peninsula with this battalion in 1809. With 300 men from it he joined the 1st battalion at Campo Mayor, while the rest went on to Cadiz. The 1st battalion had suffered in the Talavera campaign; he set himself vigorously to restore it, and made it one of the finest in the army. It greatly distinguished itself at Busaco. It was on the left of the 3rd division, and when the French had gained the ridge, and seemed to have cut the army in two, a charge made by the 88th, with one wing of the 45th, drove them down headlong. Wellington, riding up, said, 'Wallace, I never saw a more gallant charge than that just made by your regiment.' Picton gave Wallace the credit for 'that brilliant exploit'. 
Wallace commanded the 88th at Fuentes de Onoro, and was again particularly mentioned in Wellington's dispatch. He was also mentioned in the dispatch after Salamanca, where he was in command of the right brigade of the 3rd division (Pakenham's). During the retreat of the army from Burgos, he had a very severe attack of fever at Madrid. Conveyance in a cart to Santarem in very bad weather aggravated its effects, and he was dangerously ill for nearly eight months. He had no further service in the Peninsula; but he commanded a brigade in the army of occupation in France in the latter part of 1815. He received the gold medal with two clasps, and was made CB in 1815. 
Wallace became colonel in the army on 4 June 1813, and on 12 August 1819 major-general. He was made colonel of the 88th on 20 October 1831, and a KCB on 16 September 1833. On the death of his father in 1835, he called himself sixth baronet. He became lieutenant-general on 10 August 1837, and general on 11 November 1851. 
On 23 June 1829 Wallace married Janette (died 1862), daughter of William Rodger, and they had five sons and one daughter. He died at Lochryan House, Stranraer, Wigtownshire, on 10 February 1857, aged eighty-two. 


@@@@@


doc= 28538


Wallace, Sir Richard, baronet (1818-1890), philanthropist and art collector, was the illegitimate son of Richard Seymour-Conway, Viscount Beauchamp, later fourth marquess of Hertford (1800-1870). His mother, Mrs Agnes Jackson, 'nee' Wallace, was very probably Eliza Agnes Wallace (1789-1864), daughter of Sir Thomas Wallace of Craigie, who had married Samuel Bickley in 1808. Richard was born in London on 21 June 1818, when his father was just eighteen years old, and was given the surname Jackson. He spent his first six years in London with his mother who then took him to Paris, where she left him with his father and grandmother Maria Seymour-Conway, marchioness of Hertford (1770/71-1856) ['see under 'Conway, Francis Ingram-Seymour], and Lady Hertford's second, illegitimate, son, Lord Henry Seymour (1805-1859). Thereafter Richard led a privileged life in Paris. Since his father spent much time travelling before settling permanently in Paris, at 2 rue Laffitte, in 1835, Richard was brought up by his grandmother in the rue Taitbout with the eccentric Lord Henry as a companion. In April 1842, a month after his father's succession as fourth marquess of Hertford, Richard had himself baptized in the Anglican church, taking the surname Wallace (his mother's maiden name). He was already the father of a son, Edmond (1840-1887), with Amelie-Julie Charlotte Castelnau (1819-1897), the daughter of a French officer, Bernard Castelnau. 
Lord Hertford now embarked on making his extraordinary collection of works of art. Wallace was employed as his secretary, with an annual allowance, and from at least 1843 as his saleroom agent. In 1854 and 1856 Lord Hertford settled Wallace's debts, sustained through speculation, but in 1857 he made Wallace settle further debts by selling a small collection of works of art he had made in his own name. Following the death of the dowager marchioness in 1856, Lord Hertford, who had always been misanthropic, further withdrew from society, and Wallace, as the well-mannered agent of one of the richest, but most reclusive, collectors in Europe, became a figure of interest. In October 1859 Sir Charles Eastlake, director of the National Gallery, met 'Lord Hertford's son 'Monsieur Richard'' at a sale in Hanover and immediately recognized a rival 'against whom there is little chance of contending' ('Journals... of Lady Eastlake', 2.134-5). This acknowledgement of Wallace's parentage, recorded in Lady Eastlake's 'Journal', is of interest, since Lord Hertford never publicly declared his paternity. 
When Lord Hertford died at Bagatelle in August 1870, on the eve of the Prussian defeat of France at Sedan, Wallace unexpectedly succeeded to his father's collections and to his unentailed properties in Paris (2 rue Laffitte and the chateau of Bagatelle in the Bois-de-Boulogne), London (houses in Piccadilly, Berkeley Square, and Manchester Square), and Ireland (the Lisburn estates). Having lived in his father's shadow all his life, he was now able to express his good nature through his inherited fortune. Among the many donations he made during the Prussian siege of Paris (from September 1870 to January 1871), he gave $12,000 towards the cost of a field ambulance (attached to the army corps in which his son was serving), he chaired a British charitable fund, and he subscribed $4000 to start a subscription for victims of the shelling. The armistice was signed on 28 January 1871, and on 15 February Wallace married Amelie-Julie at the 'mairie' in the rue Drouot, both parties giving their address as 3 rue Taitbout. From March to May of the same year there ensued the uprising of the Paris commune. Throughout these months of violence Wallace kept his Paris collections boarded up in the rue Laffitte. When peace returned he was quickly rewarded for his extraordinary philanthropy: he was made a member of the Legion d'honneur and, in August 1871, received a baronetcy from Queen Victoria. One of Wallace's last public acts in Paris was to present the city with fifty cast-iron drinking fountains, known to this day as 'wallaces'. 
Wallace now resolved to remove as much of his collection as he could to Manchester House in London, although much was to remain in the rue Laffitte and at Bagatelle. While Manchester House, now renamed Hertford House, was being prepared, he exhibited his London collection from 1872 to 1875, at his own expense, in the new outstation of the South Kensington Museum at Bethnal Green. Meanwhile, in 1871-2, he had purchased collections of medieval and Renaissance armour and 'objets d'art', extending the historical scope of his father's collection which, principally, contained outstanding seventeenth-century old master paintings with a spectacular collection of French fine and applied art of the 'ancien regime'. Although never an extravagant collector like his father, Wallace continued to make occasional purchases. 
Wallace's subsequent years were spent principally either in Hertford House or at Bagatelle, but he also bought a country residence, Sudbourne Hall in Suffolk, from the fifth marquess of Hertford, and, after some litigation, established his right to the Hertford Irish estates in Lisburn. He was a conscientious Conservative MP for that constituency from 1873 to 1885; he gave the town a public park, known as Wallace Park, and built Castle House as his Lisburn residence. He remained generous with both his fortune and his time: he was a commissioner for the Paris Exhibition of 1878, and was made KCB the same year; he was a trustee of both the National Portrait Gallery (1879-90) and the National Gallery (1884-90), and a generous lender to special exhibitions. 
Wallace was a small, dapper figure, and his later portraits always give him a serious expression. He wore a French imperial moustache and his English remained tainted with a French accent. Although Wallace was highly respected as a public figure, his final years were not without their disappointments. Lady Wallace was unable to adapt satisfactorily to the life of an English aristocrat, and Wallace failed in his attempt to have his baronetcy made transferable to his illegitimate son, who then died suddenly in 1887 (leaving four illegitimate children, whose descendants survive today). Wallace afterwards spent an increasing amount of time alone at Bagatelle, where he died on 20 July 1890, in the same room and bed in which his father had died. He was buried on 23 July in the Hertford family vault in the cemetery of Pere Lachaise, beneath the body of his great friend Lord Henry Seymour. 
Although Wallace had considered leaving his London collection to the nation, he had been deterred by the government's indifference towards the question of a suitable home. Instead he left all his estate to Lady Wallace, who continued to live in Hertford House. On her death in 1897 she bequeathed the contents to the nation as the Wallace Collection and, in the event, Hertford House itself became the museum. The works of art remaining in Paris were eventually dispersed by the Paris dealer Seligmann. 


@@@@@


doc= 28539


Wallace, Robert (1697-1771), Church of Scotland minister and writer on population, was born on 7 January 1697 in Kincardine, Perthshire, the only son of Matthew Wallace (died 1727), Church of Scotland minister for the parish, and his wife, Margaret Stewart. Robert was educated at Stirling grammar school and matriculated at Edinburgh University in 1711. He studied divinity, excelled in mathematics under Professor James Gregory at Edinburgh, and taught the professor's classes in 1720. In 1722 he was licensed to preach by the presbytery of Dunblane, Perthshire, and assigned to the parish of Moffat the following year. On 14 October 1726 he married Helen Turnbull (1706-1776), daughter of George Turnbull, minister of Tyninghame. They had three children: one daughter and two sons, including George Wallace (1730-1805) ['see below']. 
In 1729 Robert Wallace was elected moderator of the provincial synod of Dumfries. His synod sermon, 'The Regard due to Divine Revelation', published in 1731 together with a prefatory response to Matthew Tindal's 'Christianity as Old as the Creation', was well received by Queen Caroline, who arranged his translation to the Edinburgh pulpit of New Greyfriars in 1733. He moved to New North Church, Edinburgh, in 1738. 
Though predisposed toward a life of reflection Wallace emerged as a leader in ecclesiastical politics. In the 1730s he became identified with the squadrone opposition interest. Aligning himself with Robert Dundas, Lord Arniston, he opposed the efforts of Archibald Campbell, third earl of Ilay, Sir Robert Walpole's Scottish manager, to implement a system of church patronage designed to pacify the kirk. His identification with opposition politics solidified during the Porteous affair of 1736. The 'Porteous Act', against harbouring 'rioters' who participated in the murder of Captain Porteous, required ministers to read the act monthly from their pulpits. Wallace, in council with Arniston, led a group of Edinburgh ministers who successfully resisted complying. In August 1739 Wallace was appointed chaplain in Scotland for Frederick, prince of Wales, then a magnate for the opposition. The following year he preached against the government from the New North pulpit when he suggested that Walpole was managing the war in accord with his own private interests rather than those of Britain. 
With the change of ministry in 1742 Wallace was chosen to manage the crown's patronage of kirk benefices by the new minister for Scottish affairs, John, fourth marquess of Tweeddale. Conciliatory in discharging these duties, Wallace attempted to balance the interests of heritors and local elders. He was elected moderator of the general assembly in the following year and was appointed a royal chaplain for Scotland and dean of the Chapel Royal in 1744. His formal leadership in the kirk ceased in 1746 with the demise of Tweeddale's ministry. 
Thereafter Wallace turned increasingly to his scholarly interests, though he was still occasionally visible in political controversies. As an Edinburgh minister he was also a trustee of George Heriot's Hospital, a responsibility he took seriously. In 1759 and 1760 he and several other ministers publicly opposed efforts by the town provost, George Drummond, to appropriate hospital land for the construction of Edinburgh's New Town. Two years later he opposed the town council's attempt to circumvent the kirk's general sessions in filling an Edinburgh pulpit with John Drysdale, an issue which focused popular sentiment against the city's managerial elite. Late in life Wallace's political sympathies were with the new spirit of radicalism associated with John Wilkes. 
While leading the kirk in the 1740s Wallace was instrumental in the establishment of the widow's fund, a project uniting his mathematical interests, political skills, and reformist inclinations. The fund was an insurance scheme to provide for the widows and orphans of kirk ministers. With assistance from Colin MacLaurin, Wallace performed the calculations on the data collected by Alexander Webster and derived a suitable formula for the plan. As moderator in 1743 he used his connections with Arniston and Tweeddale to gain support for the proposals in parliament. When the political climate appeared favourable Wallace and George Wishart were commissioned for London to request passage of the plan, which, once implemented in 1744, became one of the first truly successful insurance programmes in Britain. 
Wallace contributed to the intellectual fermentation then under way in Edinburgh. A founding member of the Rankenian Club during his university days, he was also active in the Philosophical and Select societies. He was in the vanguard of the new moderate church leadership that helped create the milieu in which Edinburgh's literati thrived after mid-century. Ecclesiastically latitudinarian, he favoured an incorporating national church without creedal ordination tests, a church capable of mitigating the effects from dangerous factional extremes like popular enthusiasm and radical freethinking. For instance, he quietly opposed the revivalism that spread through Scotland in the 1740s in the conviction that such preaching presented unscrupulous, politically ambitious men with dangerous influence over the passions of the lower orders. 
Wallace's intellectual curiosity, spirit of liberality, and commitment to the free exchange of ideas made him a role model for members of the ecclesiastical moderate party of younger men who gained control of church politics in the 1750s under William Robertson's leadership. Wallace shared with the moderates a fundamental opposition to the evangelical and Calvinistic forces in the church. Even so, his political and social outlook contained a radical, egalitarian edge that kept him from close alignment with Robertson's coterie. He could not abide their unequivocal support for the law of patronage, the tool by which they gained control of church politics, and one of the issues at stake in the Drysdale 'Bustle' of 1762, in which Wallace and the moderates took opposing sides. Nor did Wallace share in their enthusiasm for James Macpherson's controversial 'recovery' of the Ossianic poetry, which Hugh Blair promoted as a Homeric production of an ancient, virtuous, and noble race of Scots. Less sanguine about such an ancient, noble race, Wallace attributed the success of Ossian to moderate party factionalism that threatened to distort good judgement and taste. Nor was he in sympathy with the moderates' attempt to revive the Edinburgh theatre by staging John Home's 'Douglas' in 1756 over and against the popular cry that the stage was a breeding ground for sin and vice. Wallace opposed this Calvinistic attack on 'Douglas', but argued on classical republican grounds that an active theatre would tempt Edinburgh's social elite with another indulgent diversion of economic resources from useful projects of public service. Ideologically out of step as he was with both emerging church parties, Wallace's tendency from the 1750s was to dissociate himself from church politics, finding consolation in quiet walks, stoic philosophy, and scholarly pursuits. 
Wallace's publications typically sought to counter the influence of various freethinkers whose ideas threatened to erode commitment either to virtue or to liberty. Among these Bernard Mandeville, author of 'Fable of the Bees', was a favourite target. Wallace developed an innovative response to Mandeville's provocative political economy of passions and interests, private vices producing public benefits. In his 'Dissertation on the Numbers of Mankind' (1753) Wallace argued that the traditional agrarian virtues of 'frugality, temperance, simplicity, contentment with a little, and patience of labour' were more rational and more efficient at producing happiness than the commercial vices of Mandeville's imagined bees; to argue the case, he presented an elaborate history of population based on the extensive research in ancient history that he had originally presented to the Philosophical Society some time before 1745. 
Wallace opened the 'Dissertation' with a hypothetical model for the geometrical rate of world population growth, beginning from an assumed original pair. The model demonstrated that present world population was far below its potential -- a fact which, coupled with his historical argument for greater populations in the past, begged an explanation for humankind's failure to populate the earth. For this he attended to the impact of economic forces and cultural tastes on marriage patterns. Traditional agrarian societies produce an inexpensive subsistence, encouraging men and women toward early, fruitful marriages. Appetites and tastes are correspondingly simple. Economies of large, modern commercial states, by contrast, are driven by exchanges of non-essential luxuries. With a smaller percentage of the work-force in agriculture essential goods are correspondingly expensive. Tastes and appetites become attuned to luxuries, or 'overrefinement', delaying marriage and setting off a decline in both population and civic virtue. 
As Wallace was completing work on the 'Dissertation' in 1751 he showed it to fellow Philosophical Society member David Hume, who reciprocated with the essay he published in the 'Political Discourses' of 1752: 'Of the populousness of ancient nations'. Hume questioned the accuracy of population estimates in ancient sources, and argued for the superiority of modern assessments of population. Nevertheless, his essay included a graciously worded acknowledgement of debt to Wallace, that 'eminent clergyman in Edinburgh', whose work, if published, would shed additional light on this 'the most curious and important of all questions of erudition' (Heinemann, 10). Wallace published the 'Dissertation' the following year with a long appendix addressing Hume's essay. This polite exchange was widely celebrated as a model for the pursuit of truth in an enlightened age. Montesquieu supervised the translation of both works into French. In the 'Confessions' Rousseau acknowledged the spirit of the debate, praising Hume in particular for having helped edit Wallace's text. 
Underneath this population debate were fundamental assumptions about the nature of a rationally organized society, issues to which Wallace devoted considerable attention. He composed, for instance, an unorthodox essay on sexual and marital practices, 'Of venery' (published by Norah Smith in 'Texas Studies in Literature and Language', 15, 1973, 429-44), in which he lamented an onerous injustice suffered by women in the present age of over-refined tastes and indulgent appetites. Men, instead of acting on natural sexual urges and being relatively indiscriminate in the selection of partners, now sought marriage guided by artificially high standards of feminine beauty, consigning many women to remaining single and lonely. He wanted marriage redefined as a freely negotiable and dissolvable contract. Hence sexual relationships would become less exclusive, more democratic, less prone to jealousy, more widely disseminated, and more conducive to happiness and population growth. In this and other proposals his thoughts were inspired by the image of Thomas More's ideal society. 
Wallace also took an interest in agrarian reform. He decried the lack of attention to agriculture among leading families who directed their sons toward the liberal professions or the military rather than toward agricultural improvement. His unpublished essay 'Of the prices and dearth of provisions in different numbers referring to one another' (Edinburgh University Library, Laing II 620:11) proposed planned villages with more equitably divided farm land, safeguards against enclosure, and integration of agriculture with small scale manufactures, a model he felt would be morally and culturally superior to both British town and hamlet. These concerns are likewise reflected in his 'Treatise on taste' (Edinburgh University Library, DC 1 55), an unpublished response to Lord Kames's 'Elements of Criticism', in which Wallace argued that aristocratic houses should be designed without courtyards to better direct a great family's view toward its chief proper concern, the fields. 
Among Wallace's other published works, 'The Characteristics of the Present Political State of Great Britain' (1758) defended the British constitution and culture against John Brown's assault in 'An Estimate of the Manners and Principles of the Times'. While Wallace was not unsympathetic to elements of Brown's critique, the latter's accusations of national effeminacy, coming as they did in the midst of critical failures in the British war against despotic France, did not serve the cause of constitutional government. The 'Various Prospects of Mankind, Nature and Providence' (1761), a metaphysical defence of a morally ordered universe, is best remembered today as a principal source of Thomas Malthus's population calculus in the 'Essay on the Principle of Population'. The 'Various Prospects' revisited two of Wallace's favourite themes, a perfected human order modelled after More's 'Utopia', and his population calculus from the 'Dissertation'. He reasoned that a perfected constitution, once established, would be victimized by its own success in the unforgiving calculus of geometric population growth. Wallace again appealed to More's ideal republic in a sermon preached for the Scottish Society for Propagating Christian Knowledge, 'Ignorance and Superstition a Source of Violence and Cruelty' (1746), in which he preferred its design to Mandeville's social theory. A prolific author, a large collection of his unpublished works is held in the Laing collection, Edinburgh University Library. Wallace died in Edinburgh on 29 July 1771. 
His youngest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 28540


Wallace, Robert (1791-1850), Unitarian minister and biographer, second son and child (of six) born to Robert Wallace (1749/50-1830) and his wife, Phoebe (1756/7-1837), was born at Dudley, Worcestershire, on 26 February 1791. He was baptized on 19 March by the name of Robert, to which in early life he sometimes added William. His father was a pawnbroker, his grandfather a Dumfriesshire farmer. Two younger brothers also became Unitarian ministers: James Cowdan Wallace (1793?-1841), a prolific writer of hymns, served at Totnes (1824-6), York Street, London (1827-8), Brighton (1828-9), and Wareham (1831-41); and Charles Wallace (1796-1859), who studied at the University of Glasgow (MA, 1817) and Manchester College, York (1817-19), and was minister at Altrincham and Hale, Cheshire, in 1829-56. 
Wallace's father had been raised in the Church of Scotland but in Dudley attended the Presbyterian chapel in Wolverhampton Street. Until 1807 the younger Wallace was educated by John Todd (1775?-1838), curate of Frankley and St Kenelm, Worcestershire. In 1808 he came under the influence of James Hews Bransby, who had come to Wolverhampton Street in 1805. Bransby made Wallace a Unitarian and prepared him to enter Manchester College, York, in September 1810. He left York in 1815 and became in September minister at Elder Yard, Chesterfield, where he also conducted a school for sixteen years. In 1825 he married Sophia (died 1835), daughter of Michael Lakin of Birmingham; they had a daughter, who survived her father. 
Wallace distinguished himself as a theological writer and was a regular contributor to the 'Monthly Repository' and the 'Christian Reformer' on biblical and patristic topics. In 1834, in the latter journal, he reviewed J. H. Newman's 'Arians of the Fourth Century', a work, Robert Aspland said in commissioning the review, that contained 'some ingenuity and some learning, but quite enough paradox and high-church presumption, and even 'papism', to keep a reviewer alive' (Aspland to Wallace, 24 Jan 1834). His essay of 1835, again in the 'Reformer', 'On the parenthetical and digressive style of John's gospel', is a very able piece of criticism. 
In 1840 Manchester College returned to Manchester from York, and Wallace was appointed to succeed Charles Wellbeloved as professor of critical and exegetical theology; in 1842 he was made principal of the theological department. His theological position was conservative, but he was the first in his own denomination to bring to his classroom the processes and results of German critical research. He was held in great respect and affection by his students. 
The change to Manchester did not suit Wallace's health; after six years he resigned and in June 1846 became minister of Trim Street Chapel, Bath. He was made visitor of his college, became a fellow of the Geological Society, and worked hard at the completion of his 'Antitrinitarian Biography', which was published in March 1850. He preached for the last time on 10 March and died at 20 Camden Place, Walcot, Bath, on 13 May 1850. He was buried in the Trim Street Chapel graveyard at Lyncombe, near Bath. 
His three-volume 'Antitrinitarian Biography' was the result of nearly twenty-four years of labour. A few of the earlier biographies were published anonymously in the 'Monthly Repository' in 1831 and part of the introduction in the 'Christian Reformer' in 1845-6. In breadth of treatment and in depth of original research Wallace's work is inferior to that of Thomas Rees (1777-1864), but he covers more ground than any previous writer, dealing with continental and English figures from the Reformation to the opening of the eighteenth century. His introduction deals mainly with the development of opinion in England during that period. His careful array of authorities is especially useful. An extended list of his separate and periodical publications appears at the conclusion of the obituary by his brother Charles in the 'Christian Reformer' in 1850. 


@@@@@


doc= 28541


Wallace, Robert (1773-1855), politician and postal reformer, was born in Glasgow, the second son of John Wallace (1712-1805) of Cessnock and Kelly in Ayrshire, and his third wife, Janet, third daughter of Robert Colquhoun of the island of St Kitts. His father was a merchant in Glasgow, who amassed a large fortune trading in the West Indies and became proprietor of several important estates. Wallace's older brother was Sir James Maxwell Wallace ['see 'Wallace, Grace]. He married, on 3 January 1804, Margaret ('b'. 1782), daughter of Sir William Forbes of Craigievar, fifth baronet; they had no children. 
By his father's will Robert Wallace received the estate of Kelly and part of the West Indian property, and was known by the designation of Wallace of Kelly. He became a partner in the firm of Wallace Hunter, and after slave emancipation he was a claimant for a share of compensation amounting to nearly $10,000 for over 500 enslaved people in Jamaica. The treatment of apprentices on his estates at Westmoreland, Jamaica, of which he was the absentee owner, was criticized by Joseph Sturge and Thomas Harvey in their account of their visit to the West Indies in 1836-7. 
Wallace was a devoted whig, and, as a vigorous orator, his services were in demand during the reform agitation before 1832. After the passing of the 'Reform Bill' he was the first member of parliament for Greenock under the act, and held that seat continuously until 1846. In parliament his chief efforts were directed towards law reform, especially cheaper and simpler methods for the transfer of heritable property; though he did not carry through any measure specially for this purpose, he gave an impetus to reforms, and suggested plans that were subsequently adopted. In 1833 Wallace attacked the Post Office as expensive and inefficient: the pressure he exerted on the government led in 1835 to the appointment of a royal commission to which he gave evidence. After inaction from the tories in 1834-5, the whigs in 1837 made Wallace chairman of a select committee to examine Rowland Hill's plan for a penny post; Wallace's committee offered unqualified support when it reported in 1838, the penny post being enacted in 1839. 
In 1846 Wallace became embarrassed financially by the depreciation in value of some of his West Indian estates, and deemed it prudent to resign his seat in parliament. The estate of Kelly was sold, and Wallace lived in retirement at Seafield Cottage, Greenock. After his resignation a liberal public subscription was made for him, which provided an annuity of $500 p.a. Wallace died at Seafield on 1 April 1855. His sister, Anne Wallace, died unmarried in 1873 in her 102nd year. 


@@@@@


doc= 28542


Wallace, Robert (1831-1899), Church of Scotland minister and politician, second son of Jasper Wallace, master gardener, was born at Kincaple near Cupar, Fife, on 24 June 1831. His mother claimed to be the illegitimate daughter of a peer, according to Wallace's autobiography. In his home he was taught a strict Calvinism. He was educated at the Geddes Institution, Culross; the high school, Edinburgh; and at the University of St Andrews, where he won special distinction and graduated MA in 1853. After teaching for some time in private families, and attending the 1853-4 session at the Divinity Hall, Edinburgh, he was appointed on 22 April 1854 classical master at the Madras Academy in Cupar. In October 1855 he resumed his theological studies at Edinburgh University. He was licensed to preach in 1857, and shortly afterwards appointed to the charge of Newton-on-Ayr. In 1858 he married Margaret, daughter of James Robertson of Cupar; they had four sons and a daughter. In 1860 he moved to Trinity College Church, Edinburgh. In 1866 he was appointed examiner in philosophy in the University of St Andrews, and two years later the Edinburgh corporation presented him with the charge of Old Greyfriars. In 1869 the University of Glasgow conferred upon him the degree of DD. 
As a churchman Wallace was noted for the support he gave both in the Edinburgh presbytery and in the general assembly of the Church of Scotland to broad views on theology and to the reform of worship, of which Dr Robert Lee, his predecessor at Greyfriars, was the chief champion. To the latter controversy he contributed 'Reform of the Church of Scotland in Worship, Government, and Doctrine', and to the former an essay entitled 'Church tendencies in Scotland', published in 'Recess Studies' (1870), which led to much controversy and ultimately to his impeachment for heresy. In 1872 he was appointed by the crown to the chair of church history in Edinburgh University, and his ecclesiastical and political opponents protested. His inaugural lecture, published as 'The Study of Ecclesiastic History' (1873), declared not the truth of theology but 'the truth of its history' and led to his prosecution. Wallace won his case mainly owing to his own remarkable powers as a debater, but in 1876 he determined to leave the church -- resigning his chair, charge, and orders -- and became editor of 'The Scotsman' newspaper. For some years previously he had been contributing to that newspaper, but his editorship was not a success, and he resigned in 1880. 
In 1881 Wallace entered the Middle Temple, and in 1883 was called to the bar. In 1886 he was elected to parliament as a radical to represent East Edinburgh, which he held until his death. In parliament he maintained an unusual independence, and though he took only an occasional part in the debates, he kept up the reputation he had won in the ecclesiastical courts. While about to address the House of Commons on 5 June 1899 he fell down in a fit, and died in Westminster Hospital on the following day. He was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. His wife predeceased him. At the time of his death he was engaged on a biography of George Buchanan, completed by J. C. Smith and published in 1899, and on his autobiography, published in 1903 in a memorial volume prepared by J. C. Smith and W. Wallace. Wallace was in later life irascible and unsettled: his loss of vocation increased rather than diminished his intellectual difficulties. The element of bitterness was reflected by his always placing the word 'minister' in inverted commas (Drummond and Bulloch, 260). 


@@@@@


doc= 28543


Wallace, Thomas, Baron Wallace (1768-1844), politician, only son of James Wallace, barrister (afterwards solicitor- and attorney-general under Lord North to George III), and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter and heir of Thomas Simpson, Carleton Hall, Cumberland, was born at Brampton, Cumberland. He was educated at Eton College (1777-84) and Christ Church, Oxford, where he was the contemporary and associate of the earl of Liverpool and of George Canning. He graduated MA on 18 March 1790 and DCL on 5 July 1793. At the general election in 1790 Wallace was elected MP for Grampound, which he held until 1796. His subsequent constituencies were: Penrhyn (1796-1802), Hindon (1802-6), Shaftesbury (1807-12), Weymouth (1812-13), Cockermouth (1813-18), and Weymouth again (1818-28). He was from the first a Pittite, except for his strong opposition to Catholic emancipation. In July 1797 he was appointed to a seat at the Admiralty, from which he was removed in May 1800 to become one of the commissioners for the affairs of India. When Pitt retired in 1801, Wallace continued to hold office under his successor, Addington, and was made a privy councillor on 21 May 1801. When Pitt resumed office in 1804, Wallace was included in the new government, and he went with the Pittites who opposed the Grenville ministry in 1806. He resumed his commissionership in 1807, holding it until 1816 but without the promotion to the peerage for which he yearned and which his family had failed to gain owing to his father's early death. Having resigned in 1816 after not becoming president of the Board of Control, Wallace accepted in 1818 the vice-presidency of the Board of Trade. Chairing the various committees on foreign trade between 1820 and 1824 gained him a reputation, and his work for the committees and their subsequent legislative proposals marked the formal start of the movement towards 'free trade' (Hilton, 173). 
In April 1823 Wallace was succeeded by William Huskisson at the Board of Trade, but was soon appointed chairman of the committee inquiring into irregularities and abuses in the Irish revenue. The recommendations of the committee were adopted. In October 1823 he was appointed master of the Royal Mint, a post that he held until the change of administration in May 1827, and in May 1825 he successfully proposed the assimilation of the currencies of England and Ireland. Canning pressed him to join his government, but he refused. On the death of Canning he finally gained a peerage (on 2 February 1828), as Baron Wallace of Knaresdale. 
Wallace married, on 16 February 1814, Jane, sixth daughter of John Hope, second earl of Hopetoun, and second wife of Henry Dundas, first Viscount Melville. The marriage was childless; Jane died on 9 June 1829. Wallace lived at his seat, Featherstone Castle, Northumberland, and died there on 23 February 1844, the peerage becoming extinct and the estates going to the Hope family. 


@@@@@


doc= 28544


Wallace, Sir William (d. 1305), patriot and guardian of Scotland, is a man whose origins, once thought secure, have now become uncertain. 
The name Wallace originally meant a Welshman, and William's descent has been confidently traced from a Ricardus Wallensis, or Richard Wallace, who went to Scotland from the lordship of Oswestry in the mid-twelfth century in the train of Walter fitz Alan, soon to become first hereditary steward of the Scottish king. Richard's great-grandson Malcolm, who held Auchenbothie near Kilmacolm as well as the five-pound land of Elderslie near Paisley, both in Renfrewshire, and who married Margaret, daughter of Sir Reginald or Rainald Crawford of Corsbie, sheriff of Ayr, has been equally confidently identified as William's father. However, the rediscovery of a deed sealed by Wallace in 1297 casts considerable doubt on this, for in the inscription on his seal Wallace identifies himself as 'son of Alan Walais'. Much of what has in the past been accepted concerning Wallace, and especially his early life, derives from the late fifteenth-century poet Blind Hary, who here, as so often, now appears to have been a source of confusion. For in the light of the seal inscription it seems highly likely that William's father was in fact the Alan Wallace recorded as a crown tenant in Ayrshire in the late thirteenth century, and that his son's presumed links with the stewards were consequently less important than was previously supposed. In this context it may be significant that evidence for Hary's story that Sir Malcolm Wallace, his hero's father, was killed in 1291 by an English knight called Fenwick, is entirely lacking. There is no doubt, however, that Wallace had brothers named Malcolm and John. 
The year of Wallace's birth is unknown. According to Hary, Wallace was eighteen when he killed the son of Selby, the constable of Dundee (book 1), an event which has been placed in 1291 or 1292, but for which there is no recorded evidence and which probably never happened, but forty-five when he was betrayed to the English in 1305 (book 11). Certainty on this subject, as in so much concerning Wallace, is impossible; it is enough, perhaps, to see Wallace as a young man, as does the English chronicler Rishanger, when he emerged from obscurity in 1297. What Hary has to say about Wallace's education, by two uncles who were priests, and about his meeting John Blair, said to have been later his chaplain and the author of a biography to which Hary acknowledges his indebtedness, must also be regarded as fiction, arising from Hary's desire to confer respectability upon both his subject and himself. One intriguing piece of evidence does survive, however, from the period before 1297. A document of 8 August 1296 records the conviction of one Matthew of York, a cleric, of robbery at Perth on 14 June 'in the company of a thief, one William le Waleys' ('CDS', 2.191). There is no means of establishing the connection between the patriot and Matthew's confederate, but English references to Wallace as a thief and brigand, although clearly part of a propaganda campaign against him, may refer to a less than creditable period in his career. 
By the time of the Perth incident, Scotland was occupied territory. Following the defeat of the Scots and Edward I's conquest of their country in the spring and early summer of 1296, the English king had imposed English administration upon it, with John de Warenne, earl of Surrey (died 1304), as keeper or lieutenant, and Hugh of Cressingham as treasurer. Believing Scotland conquered, Edward left for England, to prepare for war against France. His confidence was misplaced. Within months unrest was widespread; disturbances occurred as far apart as the west highlands, Aberdeenshire, and Galloway in the south-west. In the north Andrew Murray of Petty led the resistance to English rule. The response by Warenne and Cressingham was ineffectual and disaffection spread. It was not, however, until May 1297, when Wallace slew William Heselrig, the English sheriff of Lanark, that unrest became full-blown rebellion. 
Hary presents the death of Heselrig as Wallace's revenge for the murder of his mistress, Marion Braidfute, who had spurned Heselrig's son. The truth is almost certainly less romantic. Heselrig represented a repressive and alien regime and at the time of his death was in Lanark to hold an assize, a symbol of English authority. An attempt on an English official on such an occasion was therefore an act of great and symbolic importance. An eyewitness account in the 'Scalacronica' reveals that the attack on Heselrig was carefully planned and ruthlessly executed. The impact of Lanark was immediate. Wallace's original band of some thirty men now grew. The Scottish chronicler Fordun saw his followers as 'those who were bitter in heart, and heavily oppressed by the intolerable servitude of English domination' (Fordun, 2.321). The English verdict, in Guisborough, is that they were 'vagrants, fugitives, and outlaws' ('Chronicle of Walter of Guisborough', 294). Recruitment was aided by a rumour that Edward meant to impress the 'middle folk of Scotland' into his army against France. For such as these, rebellion against Edward was preferable to service abroad in a war against Scotland's ally, Philippe IV. 
The killing of Heselrig was the only specific charge in the indictment against Wallace in 1305. He was now no longer unknown but notorious in English eyes if an inspiration to the Scots. Soon after Lanark he struck again. His target was a figure senior to Heselrig, William Ormsby, Edward's justiciar, then at Scone. In this endeavour Wallace was joined by Sir William Douglas 'le Hardi', a man of fearsome reputation, captured at Berwick in 1296 but released. This, Wallace's first recorded association with a nobleman, failed, but narrowly. Ormsby somehow learned of the approach of the Scots and fled, leaving much booty behind. The raid, as daring as the attack on Heselrig, gave further encouragement to the patriotic cause and added to Wallace's reputation. He and Douglas separated after Scone. Wallace overran the Lennox, while Douglas was active in Nithsdale. The English maintained that behind Wallace was to be discovered the influence of Robert Wishart, bishop of Glasgow, and James Stewart. The chronicle of Lanercost is emphatic on this point: 'They [Wishart and Stewart] caused a certain bloody man, William Wallace, who had formerly been a chief of brigands in Scotland, to revolt against the King, and assemble the people in his support' ('Chronicle of Lanercost', 163). The belief that Wallace the rebel was the creation of the two men has persisted. His devotion to the church and his maintenance, when in power, of the established order suggest an innate conservatism. In this characteristic, however, he was not unique and the events of 1297 were to show that he was very much his own man. 
In June the English at last moved against the Scots. Henry Percy and Robert Clifford had been given the task by Edward of suppressing the rebellion. From Cumberland they crossed into Annandale, where they burnt Lochmaben before proceeding to Irvine, arriving there by the end of the month. A Scottish army had assembled to meet the threat. In command were Wishart, Stewart, Douglas, and a recent convert to the patriotic cause, Robert Bruce, lord of Annandale, the future King Robert I. At the sight of the English cavalry the Scots sought terms. The negotiations leading to their submission were lengthy; Guisborough avers that the Scots were gaining time for Wallace to collect an army, an opinion which has found favour with historians. This denies Wallace the credit to which he is entitled by once more making him dependent on others. His presence at Irvine is not attested and the compromise which the negotiations represented was foreign to his nature. In a letter of 23 July to Edward, Cressingham described Wallace, then in the Forest of Selkirk, as 'like one who holds himself against your peace' (Stevenson, 'Documents', 2, no. 453). Cressingham, for once more perceptive than his colleagues, raised an army and would have acted but for Percy and Clifford who, with Irvine in mind, claimed to have subdued Scotland south of the Forth. Their confidence, like that of their king in the previous year, was misplaced, if understandable. Irvine had been deceptively easy. Wishart and Douglas were imprisoned. Stewart escaped this fate, as did Bruce, but their authority had been damaged. Wallace, however, was untainted by Irvine and, aided by a lack of response from the English, was free to assume the role in which Guisborough portrayed him: 'the common folk of the land followed him as their leader and ruler; the retainers of the great lords adhered to him; and even though the lords themselves were present with the English king in body, at heart they were on the opposite side' ('Chronicle of Walter of Guisborough', 299). 
From the Forest of Selkirk, Wallace went north. According to Hary he reached Aberdeen, where he burnt 100 English ships. If this incident occurred, it was more probably the work of Andrew Murray, soon to be Wallace's colleague. Wallace himself was busy enough, clearing Fife and Perthshire of the English. In early August he began the siege of Dundee. Warenne, loath to continue as Edward's lieutenant in Scotland but disappointed in his hopes of relief, finally acted. He left Berwick at the head of what 'Lanercost' calls 'a great army'. How many men exactly he had at his disposal is unknown. Guisborough's figures of 1000 horse and 50,000 foot in the English army, and 180 horse and 40,000 foot for the Scots, must be regarded as fanciful. Cressingham, who accompanied Warenne, informed Edward that he himself had mustered at Roxburgh 300 horse and 10,000 foot, a respectable contribution. Whatever the total number at Warenne's command, Cressingham thought it adequate for its purpose, refusing an offer of reinforcements from Percy and Clifford on the grounds of cost. 
To Warenne the strategic importance of Stirling was clear, and he had reached there by the first week of September. The Scottish army which faced him was under the joint leadership of Wallace and Murray. The two had linked up towards the end of August, possibly at Dundee. Fordun tells us that before leaving Dundee Wallace entrusted the siege of the castle to the people of the town on 'pain of loss of life and limb' (Fordun, 2.322). The Scottish army at Stirling was certainly smaller than the English and almost entirely infantry. Unlike Warenne, neither Wallace nor Murray could claim extensive military experience, least of all in command of large forces; their victories over the English had been on a limited scale. Yet at Stirling they inflicted on the English a wholly unexpected defeat, the first in a pitched battle in the war. The battle of Stirling Bridge was fought on 11 September, after abortive attempts at arbitration by Stewart and Malcolm, earl of Lennox (died 1333). Warenne was obviously reluctant to fight, despite his superiority in numbers and the contempt for the Scots which he shared with Cressingham after Dunbar and Irvine. Even after Stewart and Lennox had failed in their negotiations, Warenne was not done with talking. He sent two Dominican friars to the Scots to seek their surrender. To them Wallace made a justly celebrated response: 'Go back and tell your people that we have not come here for peace: we are ready, rather, to fight to avenge ourselves and to free our country. Let them come up to us as soon as they like, and they will find us prepared to prove the same in their beards. ('Chronicle of Walter of Guisborough', 300)' This was the response of one committed to a cause and sure of the outcome. Wallace and Murray had drawn up their army on the south-facing slope of the Abbey Crag, where the Wallace monument stands today, looking towards Stirling Castle and the narrow wooden bridge across the Forth which stood below it. The English army was stationed on the south side of the Forth, between it and the castle. To come to grips with the Scots, who made no attempt to advance, the English had to cross the bridge. On the morning of 11 September this manoeuvre began. Some 5000 men had crossed, only to be recalled because Warenne had overslept and now insisted on creating several new knights. Dissension broke out in the English camp. An intelligent suggestion from Sir Richard Lundie to outflank the Scots at a nearby ford was overruled by Warenne on the intervention of Cressingham and the crossing resumed. The bridge was so narrow that only two horsemen could cross abreast. Wallace and Murray watched the English from the Abbey Crag until they were sure that enough of the enemy had reached the far side for their purposes. They then released their infantry down from the slope along the narrow causeway to the bridge. The terrain was, if suitable for infantry, too soft to permit the effective deployment of the English cavalry. In the words of Guisborough 'there was, indeed, no better place in all the land to deliver the English into the hands of the Scots, and so many into the power of the few' ('Chronicle of Walter of Guisborough', 301). The Scots seized the northern end of the bridge so that the English vanguard was isolated and no reinforcements could reach it. The vanguard suffered appalling casualties, while the remainder of the army watched, unable to assist. Some 5000 infantry and 100 knights are said to have perished, killed by the Scots or drowned in the Forth. Sir Marmaduke Tweng, a Yorkshire knight, made a heroic escape, and some of the Welsh infantry swam to safety, but Cressingham died on the Scottish spears. Warenne had not crossed the bridge and fled to Berwick after ordering the destruction of the bridge to hinder a pursuit by the victorious Scots. With the battle won, Stewart and Lennox reappeared and with their men fell on the retreating English, killing some and capturing the baggage-train. 
The Scots flayed the body of Cressingham and cut the skin into strips to be used as trophies. Lanercost states that Wallace had a sword-belt made from one of the strips. The English showed no sympathy for the treasurer, in whose incompetence as a general and refusal to countenance the expense of additional troops they found an explanation for their defeat. Warenne, no less incompetent, continued to enjoy his king's confidence. 
The failure of the English leadership at Stirling Bridge should not be allowed to detract from the achievement of Wallace and Murray. They had deployed their army, inferior in numbers to the English but more disciplined, with intelligence, and on terrain suited to their purpose. Stirling did not end the war but its significance was not lost on contemporaries. In its aftermath Dundee Castle surrendered, as did Stirling itself. Edinburgh and Berwick also fell to the Scots, although their castles remained in English hands. Haddington and Roxburgh were burnt. The English hold on Scotland had been severely weakened. The collaboration of Wallace and Murray was not destined to last; wounded at Stirling, Murray died early in November. On Wallace alone thus fell the burden of leading the Scots in the continuing war. He soon gave evidence of his qualities. As he had in the military field, he demonstrated an unexpected talent in the diplomatic. On 11 October he and Murray wrote from Haddington to the mayors and communes of Hamburg and Lubeck. The style of the document, and that of others issued by them, indicates that they saw themselves as leaders of the army of Scotland in the name of King John (John Balliol). The letter of 11 October was doubtless one of a series intended to restore trading relations with Germany. Nor was Wallace unaware of the importance of the church in the struggle with England. On 3 November he secured the election of William Lamberton as bishop of St Andrews in succession to William Fraser. The wisdom of Wallace's action became apparent in time, with Lamberton until his death in 1328 a strong opponent of the English. 
By the time of Lamberton's election Wallace had invaded England. His army had grown in size and become a drain on the limited resources of a Scotland stricken by famine. The Scots, moreover, were intent on retribution and Wallace saw no reason to restrain them. About 18 October he marched into Northumberland, catching the inhabitants by surprise. The Scots plundered and slaughtered at will. From Northumberland the Scots crossed into the north-west, reaching as far as Cockermouth. Without siege equipment they were unable to take any town of consequence, but such was their ferocity that, Guisborough relates, 'the services of God totally ceased in all the monasteries and churches between Newcastle and Carlisle, for all the canons, monks and priests fled before the face of the Scots, as did nearly all the people' ('Chronicle of Walter of Guisborough', 304). The barbarous acts committed by the Scots under Wallace, like those ordered by Edward I at Berwick, had the purpose of breaking resistance, and were of a kind often repeated by both sides. But Wallace was on occasion capable of mercy. At Hexham, whose priory had suffered from the depredations of his soldiers, he invited the canons to celebrate mass and issued a letter of protection to them. His treatment of the canons was not enough, however, to alleviate the reputation for cruelty which the raid guaranteed him in English eyes; henceforth he was the object of an unremitting campaign of vilification. The raid into England ended in late November, with the Scots foiled in their attempt to ravage the bishopric of Durham by increasingly severe weather and, it was believed, by the intervention of St Cuthbert himself. 
Back in Scotland, Wallace began to prepare for the inevitable clash with Edward. To what extent he could rely on the support of the magnates in this is debatable; many had agreed to serve Edward I in Flanders in 1296, and Scottish tradition suggests that some at least were not reconciled to Wallace's rise to power. If Fordun is to be believed, Wallace did not hesitate to employ harsh measures against these recalcitrants, imprisoning them until they submitted to his will. To others he was no less brutal. One source relates that he hanged some citizens of Aberdeen as an example to those who refused to obey him, while the case of Michael Miggel further illustrates Wallace's methods. Summoned to Perth after Wallace's death to explain his association with him, Michael told how he had twice escaped from Wallace's army only to be recaptured and warned that a third escape would mean death. He had remained with Wallace 'through fear of death and not of his own will' ('CDS', 2, no. 1689). His story was credible enough to save him from punishment and can scarcely have been unusual. Such was Wallace's military genius that he created from a mixture of volunteers and pressed men an army capable of standing against Edward. 
The shock of Stirling had reunited the English behind their king who, in the wake of a truce with France, returned from Flanders on 14 March 1298. The nobles and clergy of England, both sources of disaffection, were won over by the need to defeat Wallace. In pursuit of this aim the king was his usual careful self, obsessed with detail and the need for legal justification for his actions. To facilitate the administration of the war the seat of government was moved north to York, and there Edward held a council in April to discuss the forthcoming campaign. The disregard by the Scottish magnates of the summons to attend the council allowed Edward to announce the forfeiture of the lands of his Scottish enemies. His army was instructed to muster at Roxburgh on 25 June. Edward, having made a pilgrimage to the shrine of St John of Beverley, was at Roxburgh in early July. Estimates of the force at his disposal vary but by the standards of the time it was formidable, composed of some 2000-3000 horse and about 14,000 infantry, of whom the greater proportion were Welsh. Edward advanced into Scotland through Lauderdale, over country devastated by Wallace and empty of inhabitants so that, as Guisborough has it, the English 'could not discover a single soul to tell them the whereabouts of the Scottish army' ('Chronicle of Walter of Guisborough', 324). 
Wallace's movements between his return from England and the start of the Falkirk campaign are uncertain. The winter of 1297-8 saw limited incursions by the English, under Clifford in Annandale and Warenne in the east, but what part Wallace played in these events is unknown. No major English activity was possible until Edward's return from Flanders, and it must be assumed that Wallace used the time to assemble and train his army and to devise the strategy which brought him so close to victory against Edward. His presence at Torphichen in Linlithgowshire on 29 March 1298 is attested by a grant of that date to Alexander Scrymgeour, the hereditary standard-bearer of the Balliols, and himself subsequently executed for treason by Edward. In the grant to Scrymgeour, Wallace styles himself both knight and guardian of the kingdom and, as before, leader of the army in the name of King John. When he was knighted and by whom is not recorded, although an English source suggests that one of the premier earls of Scotland was involved in the ceremony. His election to the guardianship as the first sole occupant of the office arose naturally from his military achievements; whether or not the magnates approved, he was the obvious choice. The English were unimpressed by his new status. One of their political songs comments that 'from a robber he becomes a knight, just as a swan is made out of a raven; an unworthy man takes the seat, when a worthy man is not by' ('Wright's Political Songs', 174). As guardian Wallace now imposed on the Scots a strategy hitherto alien, eschewing confrontation on the line of advance, and instead withdrawing to the north behind country systematically wasted. 
The wisdom of Wallace's strategy was soon apparent. Edward, frustrated by his inability to bring Wallace to battle, moved deeper into Scotland. As he did so, his problems increased. Food was short, Wallace's situation was undiscovered, it was impossible to live off the land, and Edward for once had failed to ensure the supply of provisions by sea. A detachment under Antony Bek, bishop of Durham, sent by Edward to attack the castles of Dirleton and Tantallon, had no food other than beans and peas from the fields and the rest of the army was in no better condition. By 19 July Edward was at Temple Liston, on the right bank of the Almond. The few supplies which reached him contained 200 tuns of wine. This Edward unwisely distributed. The Welsh, their morale and loyalty equally suspect, became drunk and rioted, killing a number of priests. The cavalry thereupon charged the Welsh. Eighty were killed and the rest spent the night apart from the main army, threatening to change sides. Edward stated that if necessary he would, with God's help, defeat the Welsh and Scots together. He recognized the true nature of his predicament, however, in his decision to fall back on Edinburgh, as a possible preliminary to the abandonment of the campaign. A withdrawal from Scotland by Edward at this time would not have ended the war but the blow to his prestige and the likely resumption of his struggle with his barons would have given Wallace the opportunity further to strengthen his position and thus have affected the course of the war. 
The most renowned of Plantagenet kings, outgeneralled by a man for whom he and his people had nothing but contempt, was saved from disaster by news from a scout brought to him on 21 July by two earls, Patrick of Dunbar and Gilbert Umfraville of Angus. From the scout Edward learned that the Scots were no more than 18 miles away, at Falkirk. According to Guisborough, who gives the fullest account of these events, the scout also revealed Wallace's plans. He had discovered Edward's intention to retire on Edinburgh and thought to attack the retreating English by night, when they were most vulnerable. A set-piece battle was not part of Wallace's strategy. Edward's response was both spirited and immediate; praising God who had delivered the enemy to him, he declared that he would not wait upon an attack by the Scots but would instead seek them out. He led his army in the direction of Falkirk and by this action seized the initiative from Wallace. That night, 21 July, the English camped to the east of Linlithgow. Despite his apparent confidence Edward was still conscious of the possibility of attack by the Scots; his men were to rest with their horses beside them. During the night he was injured by his horse but he quelled the panic in his camp when he proved his fitness by mounting his horse. At dawn on the next day, the feast of St Mary Magdalene, Tuesday 22 July, he led his army through Linlithgow towards Falkirk. 
Shortly afterwards the English had their first sight of the enemy. On the top of a hill a large body of Scottish spearmen was sighted. The English took this to be the main body of Wallace's army but the spearmen disappeared. What their function was is unclear. If, however, the information from Edward's scout was correct, the spearmen may have constituted the leading element in the proposed attack on the English. Events had overtaken Wallace and he was faced with a battle he had not sought. His dispositions, however, indicate that he had clearly understood that, ultimately, he would have to meet Edward in battle. The English saw a Scottish army divided into four schiltroms, composed of infantry armed with spears with 12 inch iron tips. Each schiltrom, in the words of Guisborough, 'was made up wholly of spearmen, standing shoulder to shoulder in deep ranks and facing towards the circumference of the circle, with their spears slanting outwards at an oblique angle' ('Chronicle of Walter of Guisborough', 327). A fence of stakes protected each schiltrom. The Scots could not match the English in heavy cavalry, the latter's principal weapon; if the schiltrom thwarted the expected cavalry assault, the fence could be moved aside to allow the spearmen an offensive role. The numbers in each schiltrom are unrecorded. Wallace had stationed his archers, a small force from the Forest of Selkirk under Sir John Stewart of Jedburgh, brother of James Stewart, between the schiltroms. The cavalry, probably controlled by John Comyn the younger of Badenoch, 'the Red', was to the rear. Behind the Scots lay Callander Wood, in front the Westquarter Burn and a small loch hidden from the English. Wallace had chosen neither the moment nor the location for his meeting with Edward; in the circumstances his dispositions were sound. Retreat was not an option; it would have damaged his credibility and given the English cavalry its opportunity. A remark attributed to him at Falkirk suggests that he recognized the parlous situation of his army. To his spearmen he said: 'I have brought you to the ring; now see if you can dance' (Rishanger, 'Chronicle', 187). 
Wallace's dispositions were such as to give Edward pause. He was opposed to an immediate engagement and wished to allow his army rest and refreshment. His subordinates would not listen and the earls of Norfolk, Hereford, and Lincoln led the vanguard forward. Their momentum was slowed by the loch between them and the Scots and they were forced to swing westward. Antony Bek, in charge of the English right wing, was apparently, like Edward, in favour of caution but was overruled by his commanders. The two wings then clashed with the schiltroms. At this juncture the Scottish cavalry fled, whether from treachery, as was later asserted in Scottish accounts, or from fear as at Irvine, cannot be known. The loss of the cavalry was to prove a great blow to Wallace. The schiltroms, however, trained and controlled by him, proved their worth against the repeated cavalry charges; more than 100 English horses were killed. Edward's strategy during the campaign had been flawed; his tactics now restored his reputation. He withdrew his cavalry and advanced his Welsh longbowmen and Genoese crossbowmen. At Bannockburn, sixteen years later, Robert Bruce kept in reserve a small cavalry force against such an eventuality, a lesson learned from Falkirk. Wallace was deprived of the use of the cavalry by its flight and the schiltroms, with Stewart and his archers slain in the early English charges, were unprotected. They stood, an increasingly easy target, their discipline a credit to Wallace. The slaughter of the infantry was immense, both under the hail of missiles and the subsequent renewed cavalry assaults. One English chronicler relates that the Scots fell like blossoms in an orchard when the fruit had ripened. The majority of those who perished at Falkirk were of the common people who had discerned in Wallace their best hope of salvation. Not all of their betters left them to their fate. Sir John Stewart died with his men as, according to Fordun, did Macduff, son of Earl Malcolm of Fife. Guisborough reports that while most of the knights fled, a handful remained to direct the schiltroms. 
Wallace himself left the field before the end. The inevitable English charge of cowardice can safely be discounted. There is reason to believe that Wallace supervised the escape of Scottish survivors, while the ambush of Brian le Jay, master of the English Templars, was an action of the kind in which Wallace excelled. The English, exhausted by the battle and still without adequate supplies, could not follow up their victory and Wallace had time to reach Stirling, where he burnt the town and castle. Edward restored both, then began a phased withdrawal from Scotland by way of Ayr and Lochmaben, reaching Carlisle on 9 September. Of Wallace's movements at this time we have, as so often, little evidence. At some date between Falkirk and the following December he resigned the guardianship, to be succeeded by Robert Bruce, earl of Carrick, and John Comyn the younger of Badenoch, an uneasy coalition reflecting Scottish conservatism. Historians have seen Wallace's resignation as inevitable after Falkirk. Scottish tradition is, however, less positive. Fordun, for example, places the resignation 'at the water of Forth' soon after Falkirk, and blames it on Scottish treachery, but indicates that Wallace chose to resign 'of his own accord' (Fordun, 2.324). Despite Falkirk no credible alternative to him as commander existed; had he determined to remain as guardian, he could scarcely have been forced from the position without damage to Scottish unity, a fragile thing at any time. He rejected this option, as he did, according to an allegation at his trial in 1305, an offer of clemency from Edward. A year after Falkirk he was in the field against the English. He then went abroad to argue the Scottish case. 
We know something of Wallace's intentions from a letter of 20 August 1299 from Robert Hastings, the English constable of Roxburgh, to his king. Hastings passed to Edward an account by an informant of a council of Scots magnates at Peebles: 'at the council, Sir David Graham demanded the lands and goods of Sir William Wallace because he was leaving the kingdom without the leave or approval of the Guardians. And Sir Malcolm, Sir William's brother, answered that neither his lands nor his goods should be given away, for they were protected by the peace in which Wallace had left the kingdom, since he was leaving for the good of the kingdom. (Barrow, 'Robert Bruce', 107)' A description follows of a violent altercation between Graham and Malcolm Wallace, in which Bruce and Comyn, still ostensibly colleagues in the guardianship, joined on opposing sides. It required intervention by Stewart and others to prevent bloodshed. 
The letter does not reveal what decision was taken on Wallace's lands. He had in any case reached France, where he remained for at least a year, by early November 1299. Wallace went to the court of Philippe IV to try to persuade him once more to support the Scots against Edward. Philippe, whose sister Margaret had married Edward in September, was at first hostile to Wallace. He had him arrested and offered to surrender him to Edward. In thanking Philippe, Edward asked merely that Wallace be kept in France. With time Philippe's attitude to Wallace changed. In a letter of 7 November 1300, a year after Wallace's arrival in France, Philippe wrote to 'his lieges destined for the Roman court' with the request that they obtain 'the Pope's favour for his beloved William le Walois, knight, in the matter which he wishes to forward with His Holiness' (Stevenson, 'Documents Illustrative of Sir William Wallace', 163). French records name a number of Scots associated with Wallace in France, all of them devoted to the restoration of Balliol, and Wallace's presence in France and possibly in Rome was part of a larger initiative. In May-June 1301 a powerful Scottish delegation, in which Master Baldred Bisset played a leading role, was in Rome to present a rebuttal of Edward's claim to Scotland and it was natural that Wallace should wish to support this endeavour in person. A safe-conduct from Hakon V, found on Wallace at his capture, hints at a visit to Norway but no proof exists that it occurred. 
The date of Wallace's return to Scotland is unknown. That he was once more in the field against Edward in 1303 is certain, although the assertion in an English chronicle that in that year the Scots 'began to rebel, making William Wallace their commander and captain' (Rishanger, 'Chronicle', 213) does not accurately reflect his role. In his absence, the Scots had met with varying fortune. Campaigns in Scotland by Edward in 1300 and 1301 had been inconclusive and hopes of a Balliol restoration were high in 1301. The next year, however, was not a happy one for the Scots. In January Robert Bruce submitted to Edward. At Courtrai in July the French met with a defeat so serious at the hands of the Flemings that Philippe IV, in order to retrieve the position, sought an accommodation with Edward. In August Pope Boniface VIII ('r'. 1294-1303), hitherto sympathetic to Scotland, wrote to the Scottish bishops to seek peace with Edward. A year which had begun well for the Scots with a truce of nine months with Edward had by the autumn so deteriorated that the very real danger of an Anglo-French peace which excluded Scotland was recognized. To avert the danger a Scottish delegation was sent to Paris. Among those involved were John Soules, sole guardian since early 1301, and Bishop Lamberton. John Comyn remained in Scotland to direct the war and it was he rather than Wallace therefore who was at this time the principal figure in the resistance to Edward. On 24 February 1303 Comyn inflicted a defeat on the English under Sir John Segrave at Roslin. The delegation to Paris, however, failed in its purpose and on 20 May the feared Anglo-French treaty was agreed. In the summer of 1303 Edward carried out an extensive campaign, and by September he had reached Kinloss Abbey before wintering at Dunfermline. 
Wallace is not known to have been at Roslin. Yet he was not inactive. In June 1303, with Comyn and Simon Fraser, he left the Forest of Selkirk to raid through Annandale and Liddesdale and into Cumberland. This raid and other individual acts of defiance could not turn the tide against Edward, with whom Comyn, acting for the Scots, was forced to negotiate. On 9 February 1304, at Strathord, Comyn submitted. From the relatively lenient terms imposed on the Scots Wallace was specifically excluded: 'as for Sir William Wallace, it is agreed that he may render himself up to the will and mercy of our sovereign lord the king, if it shall seem good to him' ('RotP', 1.213). An English chronicle relates that early in 1304 Wallace had sought through friends to submit to Edward. It adds that Wallace's request for an inducement to submit so angered Edward that he offered 300 marks to any man who killed Wallace. Edward continued to use every means to bring Wallace to account. A parliament at St Andrews in March outlawed Wallace, Simon Fraser, and the garrison of Stirling, which still held out against Edward. In July Fraser submitted and Stirling fell to Edward, but Wallace remained at large, the search for him growing increasingly intense. 
The pursuit of Wallace had apparently begun soon after his return to Scotland. On 15 March 1303 certain Scots had been rewarded with money by Edward for an attempted ambush of Wallace and Fraser. On 10 September reimbursement was made for the loss of two horses in a similar venture. From his winter quarters Edward in March 1304 sent against Wallace and Fraser a large force under Segrave, Sir Robert Clifford, and Sir William Latimer. With them went Robert Bruce. The raid failed in its primary purpose of capturing Wallace and Fraser, but defeated them at Happrew near Peebles. Edward rewarded Nicholas Oysel, who had brought news of Happrew, and John of Musselburgh, who had guided the English force, but was displeased at the escape of the two Scots. Wallace was not easily to be taken; nor had he lost his skill as a soldier. In September 1304, in a skirmish 'below Earnside', in Stirlingshire, he inflicted casualties on a superior force under Aymer de Valence and made his escape. Edward put considerable pressure on the Scots to ensure Wallace's capture. James Stewart, Sir John Soules, and Sir Ingram Umfraville were not to be given letters of safe-conduct until Wallace was taken. Comyn, Sir Alexander Lindsay, Sir David Graham, and Fraser would have their sentences of exile or otherwise remitted if they captured Wallace before the twentieth day after Christmas. Lest there should still be doubt in the minds of the Scots, Edward informed Alexander Abernethy that 'it is not at all our pleasure that you hold out any word of peace to him, or to any other of his company, unless they place themselves absolutely and in all things at our will without any reservation whatsoever' (Stevenson, 'Documents Illustrative of Sir William Wallace', 2, no. 471). 
In such circumstances it was only a matter of time before Wallace was captured. He survived, by means unknown, until 3 August 1305, when he was seized, in or near Glasgow, by servants of Sir John Menteith, Edward's keeper of Dumbarton. For his part in the capture Menteith was rewarded with land and other marks of Edward's favour. Sixty marks were distributed to those who had assisted in the capture, and forty marks given to 'the servant who had spied out William Wallace' (Stevenson, 'Documents Illustrative of Sir William Wallace', 169). English accounts emphasize that Wallace was betrayed by his own countrymen, but it has been argued that Menteith, at least, was merely carrying out his sworn duty. After Edward had refused to see him, Wallace was brought to London by Sir John Segrave on 22 August, amid great popular excitement, and lodged overnight in the property of William Leyre, an alderman, in Fenchurch. Early the next morning, again to great excitement, he was taken to Westminster Hall on horseback in a procession which included Segrave, his brother Geoffrey, and justices, sheriffs and aldermen. Inside the hall he was made to stand on a scaffold at the south end. A laurel crown had been placed on his head, to mock, it was said, his boast that one day he would wear a crown there. The principal figure in the commission of gaol delivery appointed to try Wallace was the justice Peter Mallore, and it was he who presented the indictment. Wallace denied the charge of treason, since he had never sworn allegiance to Edward, but admitted the other charges. There was no trial in the modern sense. The proceedings were a formality, as was the judgment, given on the same day by Segrave. Wallace, disregarding his fealty and allegiance, had risen in arms against the English king; he had exercised authority 'as if a superior' in Scotland, making an alliance with France in the process; he had waged destructive war in both Scotland and northern England; and he had continued in his resistance to Edward I even after his defeat at Falkirk. Since his legal standing was by 1305 that of an outlawed thief, the law allowed him no defence. Consequently he was to be drawn on a hurdle to the gallows at Smithfield, hanged, his heart and bowels taken out and burnt, his body quartered. His head was to be cut off and placed on London Bridge, his quarters displayed at Newcastle, Berwick, Stirling, and Perth. The sentence, the standard one for treason, was carried out immediately. To Sir John Segrave fell the task of distributing the severed limbs to their various destinations in Scotland; 'for the carriage of the body of William le Waleys' he received the sum of fifteen shillings ('CDS', 2, no. 485). 
No contemporary equalled Wallace in courage and constancy in the cause of Scottish independence. Others (some of them unjustly overlooked since) met the same end but, unlike such as Simon Fraser and John, earl of Atholl (died 1306), Wallace could not be guilty of treason since he had never taken an oath to Edward. When he might have saved his life by submission, he judged the price, the abandonment of the cause to which he had devoted himself, too great. That he could have saved his life before 1303 seems certain; Edward's offer of clemency after Falkirk and his response to Philippe IV's news of the apprehension of Wallace suggest that Edward was then less intransigent than he became in the matter of Wallace. The latter's continued defiance of Edward after his return to Scotland accelerated the search for Wallace. It is sometimes argued today that in 1303 Wallace was already something of a spent force. Yet the view of Rishanger, albeit unsubstantiated, that Wallace then again assumed the leadership of the Scots reflects the persistent English perception of Wallace as the source of Scottish resistance. His defeat at Falkirk had cost him an army but not, for the English, that pre-eminent position. At Stirling and in the Falkirk campaign Wallace demonstrated military qualities which Edward, a vastly experienced soldier, could not fail to appreciate. Where Wallace acquired those qualities, and that political and diplomatic skill of which there are few but significant indications, it is impossible to say. But the combination made him unique in a society unprepared for his emergence and, ultimately, unable to tolerate him. Of his time in his devotion to religion and his cruelty to enemies, he was in advance of it in his challenge to current doctrines in war and politics. In rebelling against Edward he threatened revolution. His isolation, pursued by the English and alienated from the ruling classes in Scotland, was inevitable. He was the victim of his own success. 
Wallace remained, chiefly through the poem by Blind Hary, a popular figure in Scottish folklore in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. The Latin poetry of Thomas Ruddiman (1674-1757) presented Wallace as a popular, radical bastion against imperial power. Robert Burns's verses 'Scots wha hae wi' Wallace bled' were for two centuries in effect the Scottish national anthem. Early in the nineteenth century consideration was given to a national memorial of 'the Scottish hero', as Victorians often referred to Wallace. 'Traditions, &c. Respecting Sir William Wallace' (1856) records much Wallace folklore. The nationalism characteristic of the 1850s reached its culmination when, on 24 June 1861, the duke of Atholl laid the foundation stone of the national Wallace monument, designed by J. T. Roach of Glasgow. The monument, 220 feet high and placed on the Abbey Crag, north of Stirling overlooking the battlefield, is rivalled as a monument to a Scot only by that to Sir Walter Scott in Edinburgh. At its foot is a 'hall of [Scottish] heroes', such as Bruce, Buchanan, Knox, Burns, Livingstone, and Gladstone. The hall also contains what is thought to be Wallace's sword. Derivative monuments to Wallace reflected reviving Scottish patriotism in many parts of the empire; that at Ballarat, Victoria, unveiled in 1889, was the best known, a focus of Scottish national sentiment in Australia. Wallace's pre-eminence in the Scottish historical tradition is also marked by the positioning of his statue, together with that of Robert Bruce, at the entrance to Edinburgh Castle. Wallace's reputation received a different but equally fervent memorial in the film 'Braveheart', which Mel Gibson directed in 1995, also playing the starring role of Wallace and achieving a great international success. This modern retelling of Wallace's story reflected the approach to the subject adopted by Hary. There is the same distortion of fact and manipulation of chronology, the same ability to arouse a range of emotions, and the same anti-English sentiment. Present, too, is the view of Wallace as the inspiration behind Bruce's conversion to the cause of Scottish independence. Despite the potency of this mixture, the Wallace who emerges in the film is as two-dimensional as Hary's creation; to that extent, epic and film alike do him a disservice. Our knowledge of Wallace is limited, but such reliable evidence as we have points to a quite exceptional figure whose reputation is secure without the need for invention. The status of Hary's work as an authority on Wallace has in any case declined with the acknowledgement of its true function. Hary was intent on countering the pro-English policies of James III, and the adventures of Wallace, inveterate foe of the English and patriotic martyr, were admirably suited to his purpose. Even so, Hary's poem established a national stereotype of such remarkable force that Wallace remains not merely the first but the most durable and heroic of Scottish patriots. 


@@@@@


doc= 28545


Wallace, William (1768-1843), mathematician, was born on 23 September 1768 at Dysart, Fife, the eldest son of Alexander Wallace, a leather manufacturer, and his wife, Janet Simson. He received an inadequate school education, but was instructed in arithmetic by his father. In 1784 his family moved to Edinburgh where he was apprenticed to a bookbinder. Here, by his own industry, he mastered geometry, fluxions, and astronomy. In 1788 he attended John Robison's lectures on natural philosophy. Robison introduced him to John Playfair, who assisted him and who remained his patron thereafter. Subsequently he exchanged his occupation for that of a warehouseman in a printing office, and also took on work as a private tutor, learning Latin and French so that he could study continental mathematics. 
In 1794, after briefly working as a bookseller's shopman, Wallace was appointed mathematical teacher in Perth Academy on Playfair's recommendation. In the same year he married. In 1796 he submitted his first paper (on geometrical porisms) to the 'Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh', and wrote the article 'Porism' for the third edition of the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (1801). His next paper, submitted to the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1802, concerned the application of an ingenious method for the rectification of the ellipse to a problem of physical astronomy. This paper established Wallace's reputation as a mathematician, although it later emerged that his method had been anticipated by A. M. Legendre (1752-1833), in a memoir of 1794. This induced Wallace to publish a translation of Legendre's memoir in Leybourn's 'Mathematical Repository' (1809 and 1814). 
In 1803, following his patron's advice, Wallace applied for the office of mathematical master in the Royal Military College at Marlow (later at Sandhurst), a post obtained after hard competition. After he moved there his family increased rapidly, and he had three daughters and a son. In 1804 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. A regular contributor of encyclopaedia articles, he submitted papers of a geometrical nature, incorporating applications to geodesy and astronomy; he also contributed several translations of French memoirs and some geometrical problems to the 'Mathematical Repository'. In 1804, writing as 'Scoticus', he proposed for proof a problem, now known as Wallace's theorem, which states 'if four lines intersect each other to form four triangles by omitting one line in turn, the circumcircles of these triangles have a point in common' ('Mathematical Repository', n.s. 1, 1804, 22). Wallace was one of those individuals who realized very early the need for a mathematical renaissance in Britain. A decade before the Cambridge reform in 1816, he and his colleague at Marlow, James Ivory, abandoned the fluxional calculus in their contributions to the 'Repository'. However, Wallace considered his most significant step towards fostering mathematics to be his article 'Fluxions' published in the 'Edinburgh Encyclopaedia' in 1815 -- the first systematic presentation of the continental calculus in Britain. 
In 1819 Wallace succeeded John Leslie as professor of mathematics in Edinburgh University. This position was the crowning object of his ambition and he cherished being held in high esteem by his students, such as D. F. Gregory and T. Galloway. Delight in practical applications induced him to invent, and give his name to, the eidograph, with which drawings could be copied to a larger or smaller scale, and the chorograph, a simple calculating device for cartographers to find the position of a station given the angles made to it from three points in the same plane. He superintended the erection of two observatories, one at Sandhurst and another on Calton Hill, Edinburgh, with the nearby monument to Napier, the inventor of logarithms. In 1838 he retired due to ill health, and was accorded a civil pension of $300 a year. He received the degree of LLD from the university on 17 November 1838. He published two books, 'Conic Sections' (1837) and 'Geometrical Theorems and Analytical Formulae' (1839). He died at Edinburgh on 28 April 1843. 


@@@@@


doc= 28546


Wallace, William (1843-1897), philosopher, was born at Railway Place, Cupar, Fife, on 11 May 1843, the son of James Cooper Wallace, builder, and his wife, Jane (Jean), 'nee' Kelloch, both persons of considerable originality and force of character. After attending Madras Academy in Cupar and spending four years at the University of St Andrews, and electing not to pursue theological studies as his parents had hoped, Wallace gained an exhibition at Balliol College, Oxford, in 1864, and in 1867 became fellow of Merton College. He graduated BA in 1868 and proceeded MA in 1871. In 1868 he was appointed a tutor of Merton, and in 1871 he became its librarian. In 1872 he married Janet Barclay, whom he had known from his childhood; a daughter and two sons were born to them. His brother Edwin Wallace, author of 'Outlines of the Philosophy of Aristotle' (1883), was vice-provost of Worcester College from 1881 to his death in 1884. In 1882 Wallace succeeded T. H. Greene as Whyte professor of moral philosophy, and he held that office, along with the Merton tutorship, until his death fifteen years later. 
As a professor, Wallace had a great influence upon many generations of students of philosophy at Oxford. In his lectures he aimed not so much at the detailed exposition of philosophical systems as at encouraging students to think critically. He lectured without notes, and seemed to develop his subject as he spoke. His humorous, elegant, and yet earnest lectures produced a unique impression of insight and sincerity. 
Wallace's writings are almost all devoted to the exposition of German philosophy, particularly the philosophy of Hegel. In 1873 he published 'The Logic of Hegel', translated from the work known as the 'Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences'. The first full English translation entitled this work Wallace's 'Logic' and was a free and creative rendition, accompanied by notes explicating difficult parts of the text. Wallace drew parallels between classical philosophy and contemporary German and British thinkers, connecting, for example, Hegel's Idea and the Idea of Plato and Aristotle; he also highlighted the links between Hegelianism and Christianity. Reissued a little more than one hundred years after its first publication, it was still deemed 'the most masterly and influential of all English translations of Hegel' (Findlay, v). Such idiosyncratic, often amusing, notes as 'the Absolute Idea may be compared to the old man who utters the same creed as a child, but for whom it is pregnant with the significance of a lifetime' (ibid., v) contributed to the distinctiveness of Wallace's translation. Well read in both classical and modern literature, Wallace was particularly successful in freeing philosophical conceptions from technical terms and reclothing them in language of much literary force and beauty. In 1892 he produced a second edition of 'The Logic of Hegel', which was reissued the following year with the addition of a long analytical introduction. His work on Hegel culminated in his translation entitled 'The Philosophy of Mind' (1894), which was also republished almost a century after its first publication. Regarding Hegel as fundamentally a German philosopher whose thought was alien to a British audience, Wallace's introduction and notes accentuated those elements of the texts which resonated with British readers, especially with fellow idealists ['see 'British idealists]. Accordingly, he treated the dialectic fleetingly but fully discussed themes of unity and community in Hegel. 
In addition to his monumental translations of Hegel, Wallace's brief biographical account of Kant (1882), which depicted Kant as engaged in a dialogue with Locke and Hume, added to the growing Kantian scholarship by J. H. Stirling, Edward Caird, John Watson, and others. In his spirited and forceful biography of Schopenhauer, published in 1890, Wallace traced the alternating depth and shallowness of the philosopher's repudiation of empiricism and materialism, complaining of his 'unconquerable vanity' ('The Life of Arthur Schopenhauer', 112) but praising his insight into the power of art and his belief that the best life is one predicated on the underlying unity of all experience. He read widely and travelled to various parts of Germany to acquaint himself with the geographical and cultural environment. Wallace's Gifford lectures on the history of natural theology, delivered at the University of Glasgow in 1892, were posthumously published in a collection of essays and lectures edited by Edward Caird. 
Wallace was a keen botanist, cyclist, and mountaineer whose rather abrupt manner concealed a generous and affectionate nature. His knowledge of Kant, Fichte, Herder, and Hegel was exceptional and his contribution towards the reception of German thought in Britain singular. Wallace died at the Rock of Gibraltar inn, Bletchington, near Oxford, on 19 February 1897, the day after a bicycling accident from which he never fully recovered consciousness. He was buried at Holywell cemetery, Oxford, on 22 February. 


@@@@@


doc= 28547


Wallace, William Vincent (1812-1865), composer, was born at Waterford, Ireland, on 11 March 1812, the first of the three children of Sergeant William Wallace, a Scot, who was bandmaster of the 29th or Worcestershire regiment. As a child, instructed in music by his father, he learned to play many instruments, including piano, violin, clarinet, and guitar. In 1825 his father was discharged from the army and the family moved to Dublin, where the elder Wallace apparently played bassoon in the orchestra of the Theatre Royal. His two sons, William and Wellington, played violin and flute respectively in the same orchestra, and William sometimes deputized for the leader, James Barton. During these years William studied piano with W. S. Conran and organ with Haydn Corri. He was appointed organist of the Roman Catholic cathedral of Thurles in 1830 and professor of music at Thurles Ursuline convent. He sought the hand of Isabella Kelly (died 1900), one of his pupils at the convent, and, to gain her father's consent, converted to Roman Catholicism in 1830, taking the additional name of Vincent, which he thereafter used as his principal Christian name. The marriage took place the following year, and in August 1831 the couple returned together to Dublin, where Wallace rejoined the theatre orchestra. Paganini's visit to Dublin stimulated him greatly. In May 1834 he made his debut as a composer and violinist, playing his own concerto at a concert of the Anacreontic Society. 
On 9 July 1835 Wallace left Liverpool on a ship bound for Van Diemen's Land with his wife, his son, William, and his sister-in-law Anna Kelly. On 31 October they arrived in Hobart, where Wallace gave a number of concerts, and in January 1836 they moved to Sydney, where he began to establish himself as a performer of note. At a concert given under the patronage of the governor of New South Wales, Sir Richard Bourke, at the Royal Hotel on 12 February he played a piano concerto by Herz and a violin concerto by Mayseder. His performances, particularly on the violin, excited the awe of the Australian press. In the wake of several successful concerts, together with his wife and his sister, Eliza (1814-1879), who was an accomplished singer, on 4 April 1836 he founded an academy of music for the instruction of young ladies in Bridge Street. He may also have been involved in sheep farming but this remains uncertain. Within two years he had run up debts of nearly $2000 and, abandoning his family, set sail from Sydney on 11 February 1838. His wife and child probably returned to Ireland shortly afterwards. An improbable tale of adventures, involving Maori cannibals and tiger hunting during a three- or four-month journey to Chile via New Zealand and India, is colourfully related by Berlioz in his 'Les soirees de l'orchestre' (1853), apparently on the basis of information supplied by Wallace. He was certainly in Valparaiso, Chile, by 3 June 1838, when he gave a concert on violin and piano. During the next five years he slowly made his way northwards, visiting Buenos Aires, Lima, Jamaica, Cuba, and Mexico. In Mexico City he conducted the opera season of 1841 and composed a mass for the cathedral. He then proceeded to New Orleans (1841), Philadelphia (1842), Boston (1843), and New York, where his debut at the Apollo Saloon on 6 June established him as a leading figure in New York's musical society; he astonished his listeners by playing his own brilliant 'Introduction and Variations on La Cracovienne' on either violin or piano. In 1844, having reputedly lost a fortune by poor investments, he left for Europe. After a period in Germany and the Low Countries he arrived in London, where he performed as a pianist at the Hanover Square Rooms on 8 May 1845. 
It was only at this point that Wallace's public career as a composer began in earnest, after the veteran librettist Edward Fitzball, to whom he had been introduced by an old Dublin friend, Heyward St Leger, invited him to set his latest text. The result of their collaboration was the opera 'Maritana', written in a very short time (probably incorporating much musical material from Wallace's earlier unpublished compositions) and produced under Alfred Bunn's direction at Drury Lane on 15 November 1845. It gained immediate and decisive success with a public and press that was already intrigued by tales of Wallace's exotic adventures, and came to rival Balfe's 'The Bohemian Girl' (1843) in popularity. A major reason for its success was its eclectic yet at the same time vigorous and inventive musical idiom, so different from that of the conventional English operas of the time; Wallace's musical styles ranged from the robust sumptuousness of Meyerbeerian grand opera, through the gentle melancholy of Chopin, to the intriguing unfamiliarity of Spanish-American popular music; this occasioned the critic of 'The Athenaeum', H. F. Chorley, to observe that Wallace was 'in search of a style, since there are half-a-dozen different manners tried in as many portions of the opera', but such sophisticated quibbles hardly troubled the average listener, who enjoyed a succession of stirring and memorable pieces. 'Maritana' also shared with 'The Bohemian Girl' the distinction of being one of the very few English operas to obtain recognition abroad; it was produced in Vienna, Hamburg, and Prague as well as in far-flung places in the English-speaking world such as Sydney and Cape Town. Though it did not gain such a decisive place in the repertory as Balfe's opera, it continued to be performed in England well into the twentieth century. It has been suggested by Nicholas Temperley in the 'New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians' that Wallace's unorthodox harmonies were directly derived from genuine Spanish-American folk music and that, in this aspect of the opera, may have had a direct influence on Bizet's 'Carmen'. 
Bunn hoped to follow up the success of 'Maritana' with Wallace's next opera, 'Matilda of Hungary', to Bunn's own libretto, which the composer had set to music in a more ambitious grand opera style. However, when produced at Drury Lane on 22 February 1847, it was coolly received, largely on account of the banal libretto. Wallace almost immediately began work on a new opera, 'Lurline', to a libretto by Fitzball, based on the Loreley legend. It was announced for performance at the Paris Opera and at Covent Garden in 1848, but did not reach the stage; it seems probable that, on account of serious eye trouble, Wallace failed to complete the score in time. Abandoning composition for a while he sailed for Brazil in 1849 and, after an eight-month stay there, made his way to New York. In 1850, having apparently obtained advice that his marriage to Isabella Kelly was invalid because he had been under age at the time and 'bred up a Protestant', he married an American pianist, Helene Stoepel (died 1885), who had made her New York debut on 16 June 1850; she appeared in concert programmes from January 1851 as Mrs Wallace. 
For much of the 1850s Wallace's activities are largely uncertain. He may have returned to England in 1853, and it has been suggested that 'Lurline' was staged in Germany as 'Loreley' in 1854, though no firm evidence has so far come to light. In the same year he experienced the first symptoms of the heart disease that was eventually to cause his death. He is known to have been in Germany between September 1858 and January 1859, whence he probably travelled to London, and here, on 18 March 1859, he assigned the copyright of 'Lurline' to the Pyne-Harrison Opera Company, which produced it at Covent Garden on 23 February 1860. Later in 1860 he revisited New York, where extracts from his latest opera were performed at a reception held in his honour. The success of 'Lurline', though not as great as that of 'Maritana', was considerable, especially with those critics who approved of Wallace's greater reliance on their favourite German models, such as Weber and Mendelssohn. The opera was extended to the end of the season and eventually earned some $50,000 for the company, though Wallace, who had sold the copyright for 10's'., did not benefit financially. Nevertheless, encouraged by the critical reception of 'Lurline', he immediately set to work on a new opera, 'The Amber Witch', to a libretto by Chorley, which was brought out in a rather inadequate production at Her Majesty's Theatre on 28 February 1861. The critics again were favourable, and a late twentieth-century commentator has described it as the work in which 'Wallace's style reached its full maturity' (Burton, 'Wallace'). Wallace himself regarded 'The Amber Witch' as his finest work, but the public was lukewarm. He continued his attempt to interest the London public in English grand opera with 'Love's Triumph', to a libretto by Planche, produced at Covent Garden on 3 November 1862; however, the production had only a short run. His last completed opera, 'The Desert Flower', received its premiere at Covent Garden on 12 October 1863, but, like the previous two operas, achieved no more than a 'succes d'estime'. Wallace was working on a new opera, 'Estrella', in 1864 when he again became seriously ill with heart trouble, in consequence of which he retired to Passy near Paris, where he was visited by Rossini and other notable musicians. His condition deteriorated, and in September 1865 he travelled to the Chateau de Haget, at Vieuzos in the Pyrenees, with his wife, Helene, who nursed him through his final illness. He died on 12 October 1865 and his body was transported back to London, where it was buried at Kensal Green cemetery on 23 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 28548


Henry John Wallack (1790-1870), the eldest son of William Wallack and Elizabeth Granger, and the elder brother of James William Wallack, born in London, was also a well-known actor. He made his first appearance on stage at the Surrey Theatre. He was more successful in America than in England, and made his American debut in Baltimore in 1819. His first appearance in New York was in May 1821 at the Anthony Street Theatre, where he continued to play in tragedy and in heroic drama. His most popular roles were those of Rob Roy, Coriolanus, Brutus in 'Julius Caesar', Captain Bertram in 'Eternal Discord', and Gambia in the opera 'The Slave'. On this trip he was accompanied by his wife, the former Fanny Jones, a beautiful dancer. After the birth of their youngest daughter, Fanny, in 1822, his wife also became a dramatic actress, and was attached to the Park Theatre, New York, for about ten years. Following an extended tour of the country, Henry John Wallack became the leading man at the Chatham Garden Theatre in 1824. He returned to England in 1828 and remained at Covent Garden until 1832. He also appeared as Julius Caesar at Drury Lane in October 1829. His wife divorced him in 1833 and about a year later he married again. His second wife was a Liverpool-born singer named Maria Turpin, who had just joined the Covent Garden company, having appeared in London for the first time at the Haymarket in 1830 as Polly in 'The Beggar's Opera'. 


@@@@@


doc= 28549


Wallack, James William (1795-1864), actor, born on 20 August 1795 at Hercules Buildings in Lambeth, London, was the second son of William Wallack (died 1805) and his wife, Elizabeth Granger, 'nee' Field, an actress who had been a member of David Garrick's company for a time, and who died on 6 March 1850 at Clarendon Square, London, at the age of ninety. Both William and Elizabeth Wallack were well-known performers at Astley's Amphitheatre. Following in their footsteps, James William made his first appearance on stage at the age of four in the pantomime 'Blue Beard' at the Royal Circus, afterwards known as the Surrey Theatre. His father originally intended him to have a naval career, but later allowed him to follow his own desires and take to the stage. At the age of twelve Wallack appeared with a troupe of the Academic Theatre in London and impressed Sheridan into obtaining him an engagement at Drury Lane. When the house burnt down in 1809 he went to the Royal Hibernian Theatre, Dublin, at the age of seventeen, to play Laertes to the Hamlet of R. W. Elliston. This was followed by roles such as Rob Roy, Rolla in 'Pizarro', Benedick in 'Much Ado about Nothing', Petruchio in 'The Taming of the Shrew', Mercutio in 'Romeo and Juliet', and Iago in 'Othello', all of which were highly successful. 
In 1817 Wallack eloped with and married Susan Johnstone (died 1851), the daughter of the celebrated popular singer and Irish comic actor John Henry Johnstone, and then departed for the USA. He made his American debut on 7 September 1818 as Macbeth, at the Park Theatre, New York, and went on to play in Boston and other American cities, mainly in a variety of Shakespearian roles. After a short season at Drury Lane in England in 1820, he continued with his theatrical career in New York. He received a compound fracture of the leg when a stagecoach in which he was travelling to Philadelphia was involved in an accident near Brunswick, and was slightly lame for the rest of his life. However, he adapted his career to his disability and appeared in New York in 'The Birthday' in the role of an old sailor on crutches. On his return to England he became stage-manager in the autumn of 1823 under Elliston at Drury Lane Theatre, where he played Doricourt, Lovemore, Faulkland in 'The Rivals', Harry Dornton in Thomas Holcroft's 'The Road to Ruin', the original Earl of Leicester in 'Kenilworth', and other leading roles in comedy. He continued to portray Shakespearian characters too, and in 1827 was Iago to the Othello of Edmund Kean, whom he also supported in the roles of Edgar, Malcolm, and Macduff. He supported both Macready and Kean in such parts as Charalois in Philip Massinger's 'The Fatal Dowry', Valentine in Congreve's 'Love for Love', and Charles Surface in Sheridan's 'The School for Scandal'. 
Between 1827 and 1837 Wallack alternated between performances in England and America, his greatest hits being, in romantic drama, Allessandro Massani in J. R. Planche's adaptation of Scribe's 'The Brigand' (1829) and, in domestic drama, Martin in Douglas Jerrold's 'The Rent Day' (1832). In September 1837 he assumed management of the National Theatre, New York, the first of the four Wallack theatres, with his brother Henry ['see below'] as stage-manager. When the house burnt down in September 1839 he took over Niblo's Garden for a time. After appearing at London and Dublin in 1840 and touring America, he was seen for the first time at the Princess's Theatre, London, in October 1844, as the leading actor in a popular version of the famous French play 'Don Caesar de Bazan', by Gilbert a Beckett and Mark Lemon. He stayed on there as stage-manager until 1846. He spent the next five years in America, touring Philadelphia, Boston, and New Orleans. In 1851 he was once again in London, this time at the Haymarket. His wife's death that year grieved him greatly and brought on an illness, on his recovery from which he made his last appearance in England as St Pierre in Sheridan Knowles's 'The Wife'. 
Back in New York in 1852, Wallack took over Brougham's Lyceum at Broadway and Broome Street. With his sons (John Johnstone) Lester ['see below'] and Charles, as stage-manager and treasurer, he opened it in September 1852 as Wallack's Theatre with Thomas Morton's 'The Way to Get Married'. For nine years this second of the Wallack theatres flourished. Wallack played many roles himself, such as Sir Edward Mortimer in Colman's 'The Iron Chest' and Shylock in 'The Merchant of Venice'. In 1861 he and his son Lester opened the new Wallack's Theatre at Broadway and 13th Street, and, most importantly, continued to provide opportunities for many new and young actors from England to make their debut on the American stage. By this time Wallack had given up acting and was spending most of his leisure at The Hut, his country seat at Long Beach. At the close of the season in 1862 he spoke a farewell address, which was his last public appearance. His health declined rapidly, and he died in New York on 25 December 1864. 
Wallack belonged to the school of Charles Kemble and appeared at his best in light comedy, his dark, handsome figure lending itself easily to romance. His performance in tragedy never achieved quite as much success but he was greatly admired in melodrama. His brother Henry John and his sisters Mary and Elizabeth also had a certain amount of success on the stage. Mary played at the Coburg Theatre, London, as Mrs Stanley, and made her American debut at the Chatham Theatre, New York, in June 1827. However, she retired into private life after a couple of seasons, and died in New Orleans in 1834. Elizabeth, the only member of the family who never visited the United States, married an actor named Pincott and became the mother of Leonora, who in turn married the actor Alfred Wigan. 


After spending the years 1834 to 1836 at Covent Garden as stage-manager and leading actor, Wallack went to New York once more in September 1837, as stage-manager of the National Theatre which his brother James William had opened there. In 1839 he gave several important performances against Edwin Forrest, notably as Iago to the latter's Othello. In the same year he and his wife began a long engagement at the New Chatham Theatre, where his two daughters Fanny and Julia also made their stage debut, with their father in Sheridan Knowles's 'The Hunchback' (23 December 1839). The following summer Wallack returned to England, where he rented Covent Garden for a short, unsuccessful season in 1843. His next appearance was in New York, as Sir Peter Teazle in 'The School for Scandal' (September 1847), when the Wallacks opened the Broadway Theatre. Throughout that season his daughter Fanny was the leading lady. He himself played a varied repertory, his parts ranging from the chief Shakespearian heroes to Fagin in 'Oliver Twist', Rolla in 'Pizarro', and Sir Anthony Absolute in 'The Rivals'. Thereafter he spent most of his time in the United States. He died in New York at the age of eighty, on 30 August 1870. Both his wives predeceased him: his first wife, Fanny, died in New Orleans in 1845, and his second wife, Maria, died of cancer in London on 18 July 1860. 




Wallack played with Burton's company at the Chambers Street Theatre for a while in such roles as Charles Surface in 'The School for Scandal', Harry Dornton in 'The Road to Ruin', and Sir Andrew Aguecheek in 'Twelfth Night'. He came into his own in September 1852 on Broadway at his father's reopening of Brougham's Lyceum as Wallack's Theatre. Here he had the opportunity to stage many of his own works, notably 'Two to One, or, The King's Visit' (1854), 'First Impressions' (1856), 'The Veteran' (1859), and 'Central Park' (1861), as well as to take the lead in many plays, such as Orlando in 'As You Like It', Bassanio in 'The Merchant of Venice', and Tom Dexter in Tom Taylor's 'The Overland Route'. Wallack became more closely involved in management when this theatre was closed down and a new Wallack's Theatre was opened by his father, at the corner of Broadway and 13th Street, with Taylor's new comedy 'The New President', in which Wallack, playing La Rampe, appeared as Lester Wallack for the first time. He was active manager of this establishment from the beginning and became sole proprietor on his father's death in 1864. For more than fifteen years he ran the theatre with great fame and success, continuing his father's policy of encouraging both known and unknown British actors to make their first appearance on the American stage at his house. Towards the end, however, he was unable to compete with Booth's and Daly's theatres, and he closed down in 1881. He made one more effort at management in January 1882, when he opened the last of the Wallack theatres on Broadway and 30th Street; he was forced to transfer the lease in 1887, though the house retained the name of Wallack until 1896. Lester Wallack died at his country home near Stamford, Connecticut, on 6 September 1888, and was buried in Woodlawn cemetery on 9 September 1888. His 'Memories of Fifty Years' was published posthumously in 1889. As actor and manager he was, for about forty years, one of the most prominent figures of the American stage, and much renowned also in England. With his death, the name of Wallack passed from the world of theatre. 


@@@@@


doc= 28550


(John Johnstone) Lester Wallack (1820-1888), actor and playwright, the son of James William Wallack (1795-1864) and Susan Wallack, 'nee' Johnstone, was ultimately perhaps the best known of the family, though mainly in the United States. He was born in New York on 1 January 1820 and made his debut as a professional actor in England as Angelo in 'Tortesa the Usurer' around 1841. Initially in the provinces he took the stage name of Allan Field and then played as John Lester. In 1844 he became stage-manager at the Theatre Royal, Southampton, but left the following year for the Queen's Theatre, Manchester, to play Benedick in 'Much Ado about Nothing' and Mercutio in 'Romeo and Juliet'. He did not get the chance to make an appearance in London until November 1846, when he played at the Haymarket Theatre. His American debut was on 27 September 1847, as Sir Charles Coldstream in the farce 'Used up' at the Broadway Theatre, New York, when he used the name John Wallack Lester. From then he built his career exclusively in the United States. Within a couple of years he had been successful in such varied roles as Captain Absolute in 'The Rivals', Sir Frederick Blount in Bulwer-Lytton's 'Money', and Edmond Dantes in 'The Count of Monte Cristo', and had appeared at the Chatham and Bowery theatres as Don Caesar de Bazan and Dick Dashall and in other highly successful roles. His own dramatizations of Alexander Dumas -- 'The Three Guardsmen' and 'The Four Musketeers, or, Ten Years after' -- were produced at the Bowery Theatre in November. He played D'Artagnan and his cousin James William Wallack (1818-1873) played Athos. In 1848 he had married Emily Millais; they had four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 28551


Galensis, John (fl. 1210), canon lawyer, was of Welsh origin but took up residence at Bologna where he studied at the university. His principal accomplishment was the compiling of the 'Compilatio secunda' (between 1210 and 1212 or 1215 at the latest). Chronologically the third of the 'Quinque compilationes antiquae' to be made, this collection contains selections from papal decretals chiefly from the pontificates of Clement III (1187-91) and Celestine III (1191-98), that is, decretals which fall between those in the 'Compilatio prima' and those in the 'Compilatio tertia' of 1210, and was thus known as the second compilation or the 'Decretales medie seu intermedie'. The selections are arranged systematically in five books. The collection drew heavily on the works of Gilbert the Englishman and Alan the Englishman. A measure of the work's significance is that of its 330 chapters nearly 75 per cent were included in the greatest of medieval canonical collections, the 'Decretals' of Gregory IX (1234). Galensis also wrote a partial summary and a gloss for his own collection, as well as glosses and an 'apparatus' for the 'compilatio tertia'. He is to be distinguished from the Franciscan theologian of the same name, who died about 1285. 


@@@@@


doc= 28552


Wales, John of (d. 1285), Franciscan friar and theologian, was born in north Wales and graduated in theology from Oxford, before joining the Franciscans in 1258. He belonged to the custody of Worcester, which included north Wales. He was sixth lector to the Oxford Franciscans, from 1259 to 1262, and it can be deduced from his works that he spent the early to mid-1260s living and writing in Oxford, before transferring to Paris in the late 1260s. He was certainly in Paris by June 1270, as a sermon of this date survives. There are no references to John's activities during the 1270s, but his abundant works show that he spent most of his time writing, while his sources indicate that he did this in Paris. During the years 1281-3, John was one of two Franciscan regent masters of theology in Paris, and three of the sermons he preached there have survived. In this period John left Paris for long enough to travel to Wales twice as Archbishop Pecham's ambassador to Llywelyn ap Gruffudd -- he made trips in October and November of 1282. From 1283 to 1285 he was still based in Paris, as part of the commission appointed to examine the works of Peter John Olivi, a Provencal friar suspected of heresy. John died in 1285, before the commission had completed its task, and was buried in Paris. 
John of Wales was a remarkably prolific writer. Some twenty surviving works are now accepted as his. They range from sermons and biblical commentaries to pastoral handbooks of various kinds. The body of work as a whole was extremely popular from the late thirteenth until the mid-sixteenth century. Over 450 manuscripts of John's works survive, and fourteen early printed editions of various texts appeared between 1472 and 1550. 
The pastoral handbooks were by far the most popular of John's works. They are remarkable particularly for the wide variety of texts that John quoted to help educate his readers. His fascination with the ancient world led him to seek out an extraordinary range of sources, some extremely rarely cited in his time. His use of more than fifty classical authors establishes him as a major classicizing writer for the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, and he seems to have been an important link between the classical interests of Robert Grosseteste (died 1253) and the wider classicizing tendencies of many fourteenth-century English friars. In particular, John was one of the first medieval writers to quote from a full text of the 'Noctes Atticae' of Aulus Gellius, doing much to spread and popularize knowledge of this author. 
The four best known of John's works were his 'Breviloquium de virtutibus antiquorum principum et philosophorum' (151 manuscripts survive, and 5 early printed editions), 'Communiloquium, sive, Summa collationum' (144 manuscripts survive, and 10 printed editions), 'Compendiloquium de vita illustrium philosophorum' (27 manuscripts survive, and 3 early printed editions), and 'Breviloquium de sapientia sanctorum' (23 manuscripts and 5 early printed editions). These four works have many stylistic similarities and seem to have been written as a group between the mid-1260s and the early 1270s, the first two predating 1270-72, and the latter two postdating this. 
The 'Breviloquium de virtutibus' relates to the group of works on virtue produced in the later thirteenth century, and to the 'Furstenspiegel' or volumes of advice to princes. John was unusual in his inclusion of philosophers, a theme popular at the time but usually treated separately. This, with the inclusion of many lively classical tales, does much to explain the work's success and popularity. Apart from the many manuscripts and early printed editions, this work spawned at least ten separate translations and abridgements in five different languages. 
John's greatest work, in size as in popularity, was his 'Communiloquium'. Written between 'c'.1265 and 1269-72, it is a vast handbook for preachers, crammed with extracts from a wide variety of sources. It deals primarily with the state and its ruler, with shorter sections on various divisions of society. John had a clear concept of the state ('respublica') as a separate entity, and reveals distinct ideas about the need of every individual to support the state and to obey its laws -- rulers included. John says that if a king does not rule properly, he is no longer a king but rather a tyrant, and that it is no crime to kill a tyrant. The dating of 'Communiloquium' to the mid- to late 1260s, a time of conflict and civil war in Italy, Germany, and England, made these comments highly topical. The later parts of 'Communiloquium' comment at length upon contemporary society: husbands and wives, children and education, masters and servants, merchants and farmers, churchmen of all kinds. The work was extraordinarily popular, and its vast compass and selection of exciting tales must partly explain this, but the evidence of textual use indicates that for the readers, as for the writer, the political content was the real meat of the volume. 
John's more conventional works were rather less popular. Even so, the 'Legiloquium', 'Moniloquium', 'Summa iustitiae', 'De poenitentia', 'Ars praedicandi', and 'Ordinarium vitae religiosae' each survives in between sixteen and forty-four manuscripts -- still substantial numbers for handbooks of this period. John's 'Postilla in Apocalypsim' was also popular (thirty-seven manuscripts), more so than his various series of sermons. John of Wales's posthumous influence was immense. His works were quoted from Oxford sermons of the 1290s to an English political tract of the 1430s, while Chaucer made considerable use of 'Communiloquium' in his 'Canterbury Tales', notably in the general prologue and in the tales of the wife of Bath, the summoner, and the pardoner. John's writings were owned and used in every country in medieval Europe, and were translated into the vernaculars of England, France, Spain, and Italy. 


@@@@@


doc= 28553


Thomas Wallensis (d. 1255), bishop of St David's, was, by his own account, of Welsh origin. He became a Franciscan friar, and was a canon of Lincoln in 1235, a regent master in theology at Paris in 1238, and one of the first four Franciscans to teach at Oxford, being expert in Greek. Before 27 May 1238 Robert Grosseteste offered him the archdeaconry of Lincoln with a prebend, writing that he preferred Thomas's claims above all others although he was still young. In 1243 Thomas took an active part in the dispute which arose between Grosseteste and the abbot of Bardney. Matthew Paris ascribes the origin of the suit against the abbot to the archdeacon. He was elected to the poor bishopric of St David's on 16 July 1247, and he accepted it at Grosseteste's urging, and out of love for his native land. He was consecrated on 26 July 1248 at Canterbury. In 1252-3 he visited the Roman curia, and on 10 October 1253 issued an important set of statutes for his cathedral and its chapter. He was present at the parliament in London at Easter 1253, and joined in excommunicating all violators of 'Magna Carta'. He died on 11 July 1255. 


@@@@@


doc= 28554


Waleys, Thomas (fl. 1318-1349), Dominican friar and theologian, joined the Dominican order in his youth and by 1318 was a bachelor of theology at Oxford. A three-year dispute between the university and the Dominicans prevented him from lecturing on the 'Sentences'. This has customarily been referred to 1311-14, but Waleys is explicit that the dispute that affected him was heard before John XXII ('r'. 1316-34), so it must have been the second one, in 1317-20. Since it was only in December 1320 that the Dominicans were ready to accept a settlement, Waleys cannot have started lecturing on the 'Sentences' until 1321, so he can hardly have incepted as DD before 1323. In 1326 he was sent as lector to San Domenico, Bologna, since the pope wanted Benedetto da Como, who had been appointed, to go instead on a mission to the Greeks. The general chapter of 1327 attests Waleys's participation, as lector of Bologna, in a consultation on a point of Dominican law. In 1331 Richard Winkley, later provincial of England, was sent to Bologna, and Waleys became chaplain to the Dominican Cardinal Matteo Rosso Orsini in Avignon. 
Waleys's surviving academic works, which include 'Moralitates' on the 'Old Testament' and commentaries on part of the psalter and on books 1-10 of 'De civitate Dei', show him to have been an observant and witty man, with a growing interest in classical antiquity, fostered particularly by the access to rare books that his time in Bologna and Avignon provided. In Beryl Smalley's judgement, his attitude to the classics was more objective and less moralizing than that of his contemporary Petrarch. Learning to approach his texts 'as a scholar, who has collated manuscripts and collected variants', Waleys 'steeped himself in primary sources and he gave exact references' (Smalley, 98, 100). As a teacher and preacher he was never afraid to speak his mind. In Italy he engaged in active polemic against the Franciscan views on poverty condemned by John XXII in 1323; he once went to Arezzo and personally broke up a gathering of allegedly heretical Franciscans. In Avignon, on 3 January 1333, he ventured to combine in one sermon a denunciation of several recognizably Franciscan 'heresies' and a long refutation of the pope's own controversial theory about the beatific vision, especially as expounded by Cardinal Annibaldo da Ceccano. Neither the pope nor the Franciscans were explicitly named, but Waleys's clerical audience would have taken the point. At the end of the sermon he was carried away by his theme, as he admitted later, and made the unpremeditated claim that it was the hope of winning prompt success for their petitions at the papal court that most moved people to support the pope's theory of the beatific vision. 
Within days Waleys was summoned before the local inquisitor, the Franciscan Guillaume de Montrond, who had him imprisoned. His position on the beatific vision was not challenged, but six propositions from his sermon were denounced as heretical. The affair became a 'cause celebre', arousing intense interest in Paris; the French king himself followed it closely. Most people saw the hand of the pope in what had happened, but Waleys was more aware of the role of his Franciscan enemies, particularly Walter Chatton (died 1343/4), and complained that he was being unfairly and dishonestly harassed. During a long lull in the proceedings against him he managed to smuggle out of his prison a further contribution to the debate sparked off by the pope's ideas on the beatific vision, a treatise 'De temporibus et momentis' in which he elaborated on his most original theory, of the simultaneity of resurrection and judgement, and incidentally denounced as heretical a view that Chatton had propounded in a sermon. Waleys had eloquent supporters, including the master of the Sacred Palace, Armand de Belvezer, who denied that he was guilty of any heresy; but his enemies were lined up against him. The non-schismatic Franciscans were naturally keen to show their loyalty to John XXII, and in any case they had theological reasons for finding the latter's views on the beatific vision more congenial than the Dominicans did; and the successive committees of masters called to discuss Waleys, while excluding those likely to be sympathetic to him, included outspoken supporters of the pope's theory, such as John Lutterell (died 1335), who had incidentally been chancellor of Oxford during the dispute of 1317-20 and represented the university against the Dominicans. 
On 12 October Waleys appealed to the pope and was soon transferred to the papal prison. In February and March 1334 he appeared before a commission headed by two cardinals. After that the case seems to have lapsed without a verdict. Waleys was freed in August, but not allowed to leave Avignon. After his release he presumably took up residence in the Dominican priory. He did not return to Matteo Rosso Orsini's household, but he evidently remained on good terms with him. In 1336 Matteo's 27-year-old nephew, Tebaldo, was made archbishop of Palermo and he seems to have asked Waleys's advice about preaching. His reply was the readable and sensible 'De modo et forma praedicandi', in which he stresses content rather than style or form. His own recent experiences appear to have left him unperturbed: he advises Tebaldo that, although a preacher should not cause unnecessary offence, if the good of church or state requires it he must be fearless in his denunciation of wrongdoing. It has been argued that 'De modo' was written after Waleys's return to England, but he cites something that happened 'in my country', which means he was writing outside England, and the dedication suggests that Tebaldo was still fairly new to his pastoral responsibilities; the second part of the treatise, a set of 'Advent' sermons, is not necessarily based on the Sarum lectionary, as has been alleged, since the Dominican lectionary contained exactly the same readings. 'De modo' was followed by another preachers' aid composed for Tebaldo, an alphabetic collection of patristic 'sententiae' culled from the corpus of canon law, entitled 'Campus florum', and that seems to be the last thing Waleys wrote. 
Probably after Clement VI became pope in 1342, Waleys was allowed to return to Oxford, where he made friends with a secular priest who was studying there, Lambert Poulshot. In 1349 he petitioned the pope to give his friend a benefice. Describing himself as 'broken by old age and struck down with paralysis' (Emden, 'Oxf.', 3. 1961), Waleys says that Lambert, from sheer kindness, is looking after him; otherwise he would be entirely destitute. Evidently the black death had left the Dominican community unable to cope. It is not known when Waleys died. 


@@@@@


doc= 28555


Waller, Augustus Volney (1816-1870), physiologist, was one of the seven children of William Waller (died 1829) and his wife, Jessie ('nee' Eagle), of Elverton Farm, near Faversham, Kent. An entry in the parish records of Preston church, near Faversham, gives the date of Waller's baptism as 11 December 1833, with a note appended stating, on the authority of the surgeon in attendance, that he was born on 9 November 1816. This date also appears on his University of Paris diploma and may be taken as correct. His baptism at the age of seventeen is consistent with the belief that soon after his birth the family emigrated to Nice, where his father died in 1829. Waller returned to England with his mother, who later remarried, and he is believed to have been brought up by a friend of his father, William Lambe, a medical practitioner in London, and later with his son Lacon Lambe (1797-1871), a medical practitioner in Herefordshire. The elder Lambe was a vegetarian who wrote on the subject, and Waller followed the same diet until he left his adopted home to study in Paris. He matriculated 'bachelier es lettres' in 1834 and went on to study medicine. In 1840 he obtained his MD with a thesis on indirect percussion, returned to England to qualify as a licentiate of the Society of Apothecaries, and established himself in practice at St Mary Abbott's Terrace, Kensington, London. Waller married on 6 January 1844 Matilda Margaret Walls (1815-1888), daughter of John Walls, solicitor, of Fulham. They had one daughter, Matilda Amelia (1845-1908), and one son, Augustus Desire Waller (1856-1922), later professor of physiology in the University of London. 
Between 1840 and 1850 Waller combined medicine with private scientific research, in which he had a deep interest. His first published work was on microscopical observations of hailstones, but he soon turned to what became his main interest, the physiology of nerves, which secured him an enduring reputation. In 1851 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society at the early age of thirty-five, having published two papers in the 'Philosophical Transactions'. The first, in 1849, was on the histology of the frog's tongue. The second, in 1850, was on the changes undergone by nerve fibres following bisection: this was his seminal contribution to physiology. 
Waller relinquished his medical practice in 1851 to move to the University of Bonn, where he worked with the ophthalmologist J. L. Budge. His papers, mainly in French, on the pathways of the cervical autonomic nerves, were well received and he and Budge were jointly awarded the Monthyon prize of the French Academie des Sciences in 1852. He left Bonn for Paris in 1856 to work in M. J. P. Flourens's laboratory at the Jardin des Plantes. In 1856 he was awarded a second Monthyon prize, this time in his sole name, but he left for England soon after, owing to ill health. Waller applied, unsuccessfully, for a teaching post at University College, London, under William Sharpey, but in 1858, with improving health, he was appointed professor of physiology at Queen's College medical school, Birmingham. 
This offered Waller a permanent academic post with time for research, which was his metier; but he also kept in touch with clinical work by taking the additional post of physician to Queen's College Hospital, and obtaining his membership of the Royal College of Physicians. Birmingham did not suit him; the two medical schools in the city were active rivals (until their merger in 1868), and after failing to obtain the newly created Linacre chair of anatomy and physiology at Oxford in 1859, he resigned to live at St Leonards, Sussex. He kept in touch with science and in 1860 he was awarded a gold medal by the Royal Society, in recognition of the importance of his physiological researches. In 1862 he went to live abroad again, first in Bruges and then in the canton of Vaud, Switzerland. He was in medical practice, but still drawn to scientific investigations, and he received some support from the Royal Society. In 1868 he moved to Geneva, where he undertook clinical investigations and also physiological experiments at the university. In May 1870 he went to London to deliver the Croonian lecture to the Royal Society, but soon after his return he fell ill again and died of 'angina pectoris' (coronary heart disease) at his home, 4 rue du Mont-Blanc, Geneva, on 18 September 1870. He was buried at the Cimetiere de Plainpalais, Geneva, on 21 September, but his grave can no longer be traced. 
Waller's principal technique was microscopy, which he learned as a medical student under Alfred Donne, the pioneer French histologist. He made no technical advances in the subject, beyond introducing the frog tongue for the examination of the capillary circulation, but he devised simple, yet crucial, experiments based on the bisection of nerves supplying the eye, tongue, and blood vessels and observing changes in the function and appearance of these organs. The pathways between brain and body organ were traced by following the degenerative changes which took place below the point of bisection distal to the nerve-cell body. Thus the nerve was effectively stained by its own chemistry in a manner analogous to the tracing of blood vessels by injected dyes. These histological changes became known as 'Wallerian degeneration'. Their importance in physiology lies in their use in mapping the course of nerve fibres within nerve trunks and in the central nervous system: this has been called the Wallerian method. By its use Waller and Budge were able to demonstrate that the sympathetic nerve to the eye has its motor roots in the cervical spinal cord, the cilio-spinal centre. From his work on degenerating nerve Waller came to understand the essential nutritive function of the cell body, at a time when the connection between nerve cell and nerve fibre was not clearly established. Cut off from the cell, the fibre withers and dies. 
The discovery of vasomotor nerves was made by the combined but independent work of Claude Bernard, C. E. Brown-Sequard, and Waller in 1852-3. Waller's contribution was an elegant experiment on the action of the sympathetic nerve on blood flow in the ear, and he appreciated, more than the others, the importance of vascular control throughout the body. 
Another discovery for which Waller can claim priority is that of diapedesis, the process by which white blood cells can move across the capillary wall into the interstitial space without the leakage of other blood components. This observation was made in 1846 in London, but he never explored it further and the subject is now usually associated with Julius Cohnheim, whose work did not appear until 1867. 
Waller was always aware of the problems of clinical medicine, and throughout his career he undertook investigations which might have had some practical application. Thus he examined cooling as a form of local anaesthesia and the use of what he termed vagal compression in the treatment of migraine and seasickness. He was always prepared to carry out these procedures on himself, but they were never widely adopted. 


@@@@@


doc= 28556


Waller, Edmund (1606-1687), poet and politician, was born on 3 March 1606 at Stocks Place, Coleshill, Hertfordshire, and baptized on 9 March 1606 at Amersham, Buckinghamshire, the eldest son of Robert Waller (1560-1616) and his wife, Anne (1581-1653), daughter of Griffith Hampden. His father, originally a barrister, retired to the care of his extensive estates in Buckinghamshire, Oxfordshire, and Bedfordshire, taking up residence in Beaconsfield, Buckinghamshire, early in the poet's life. After attending Eton, he was admitted to King's College, Cambridge, in 1621, not taking a degree, and in 1622 he was admitted to Lincoln's Inn. In 1624 the Waller family purchased Hall Barn, Beaconsfield, which remained the poet's principal residence for the rest of his life. 
At the death of his father in 1616, Waller was heir to an estate estimated at $2100-$2500 a year, and in 1631 he married a wealthy heiress, Anne Banks ('c'.1609-1634), daughter of a London mercer, John Banks (1571-1630), who brought him an additional $8000. His first wife died in childbirth in October 1634, and he married for a second time, in 1644, during his imprisonment for 'Waller's plot'. An interesting letter to his cousin Walter Waller suggests that this marriage took place while he was a prisoner in the Tower, and was for a time kept secret. His second wife, Mary Bressy (died 1677), bore him thirteen children, of whom four sons and seven daughters survived him. His son Robert ('b'. 1633), from his first marriage, who at one point was tutored by Hobbes and, like his father, was a student at Lincoln's Inn, died young, probably during the 1650s. 
At the time of his death Waller had an estate of $40,000. Besides Hall Barn in Beaconsfield, he owned a house in St James's Street, London, and extensive properties elsewhere. Even after paying a fine of $10,000 at the time of his exile, he remained a wealthy man; leaving his mother to manage his estates, he lived comfortably in Rouen and Paris, selling some of his wife's jewels to meet expenses: according to the 'Life' in 'Poems', 1711 (p. xxviii), 'there was no 'English' Table but Mr. 'Waller's'' in Paris during this period. Before his period of exile, Waller was one of the richest men in Buckinghamshire: Thorn-Drury says that with the exception of the banker Samuel Rogers 'the history of English literature can show no richer poet' ('Poems', ed. Thorn-Drury, 1.xxi). Clarendon, who had reason to dislike and distrust Waller, described him as 'born to a very fair estate' and 'resolved to improve it with his utmost care', commenting tartly on Waller's well-attested social skills: 'He was a very pleasant discourser, in earnest and in jest, and therefore very grateful to all kind of company, where he was not the less esteemed for being very rich' ('Life of... Clarendon', 1.45). 
The two main intellectual influences upon the early Waller were his friends George Morley (later bishop of Winchester) and Lucius Cary, Lord Falkland. Waller had paid Morley's debts and in return Morley had, over a period of years beginning in the late 1620s, 'assisted and instructed him in the reading many good books... especially the poets' ('Life of... Clarendon', 44). Nearly all of Waller's poetry was written after he met Morley, and most of it after Morley had introduced him to the Falkland circle in the 1630s. Falkland's ideas of moderation and tolerance, of humane learning and urbane conversation, exercised a lasting influence over Waller long after Falkland's death during the early stages of the civil war. Other close friends, from a later stage in his life, were Thomas Hobbes and John Evelyn. Many of Waller's poems, and in particular the 'Panegyrick' to Cromwell, are strongly influenced by Hobbes, whose 'De cive' Waller proposed to translate at one point. Characteristically, when asked by Aubrey to 'write some Verses in praise' of Hobbes, he declined on the grounds of being 'afrayd of the Churchmen', though he admitted to Aubrey that he greatly admired the way Hobbes in 'Leviathan' had 'dispelled the mists of Ignorance, and layd-open their Priest-craft' ('Brief Lives', 156). 
Although Waller held no court office under Charles I and, as a substantial country gentleman, cultivated a degree of independence, he was, as Aubrey says, 'very much admired at Court' during the 1630s, and his poems are very much products of a court culture. Thomas Corns has described Waller as a central figure among those poets associated with the court of Charles I whose writings 'refracted a brilliant image of Charles and his queen in poems of compliment, in song and in masque' (T. Corns, 'The Royal Image: Representations of Charles I', 1999, 17). After the Restoration, Waller remained closely associated with the court: 'no man's conversation', Aubrey writes, 'is more esteemed at Court now then his' ('Brief Lives', 309). Waller was pre-eminently an occasional poet, and a poet of compliment: Rochester, in 'An Allusion to Horace' (1675), expresses a view of him widely held at the time: '
Waller, by Nature for the Bayes design'd, 

With force, and fire, and fancy unconfin'd, 

In Panigericks does Excell Mankind: 

He best can turne, enforce, and soften things, 

To praise great Conqu'rours, or to flatter Kings. 

' Waller's skills as panegyrist, addressing poems in praise, successively, of Charles I, Cromwell, Charles II, and James II, have frequently led later writers to see him as a Vicar of Bray. Samuel Johnson, for example, writes disapprovingly: 'Neither Cromwell nor Charles could value his testimony as the effect of conviction, or receive his praises as effusions of reverence; they could consider them but as the labour of invention and the tribute of dependence... He that has flattery ready for all whom the vicissitudes of the world happen to exalt must be scorned as a prostituted mind that may retain the glitter of wit, but has lost the dignity of virtue. (Johnson, 'Poets', 1.271)' Yet the view of Waller's poems, in the 1630s and later, as merely offering servile support to the king in verse, underestimates the complexity of the political stance in a number of the poems, tuned precisely to a particular audience, context, and persuasive purpose. 
In 1645, shortly after Waller went into exile, the publisher Humphrey Moseley, a committed royalist, issued a collection of Waller's 'Poems', identifying the author as 'lately a Member of the Honourable House of Commons'. A series of poems placed at the beginning of the volume are all political statements, with overt persuasive intent. For example, 'Upon his Majesties Repairing of Pauls' (1635) seeks to counter puritan attacks on Laudian innovation (the poem tactfully omits all mention of Archbishop Laud) by presenting Charles I as moderate reformer with a '
grand design 

To frame no new Church but the old refine. 

' 'To the King on his Navy' (1636) again turns its elegant praise to a concrete political end, arguing for a maintenance of a strong navy used for pacific aims rather than being involved in the wars of continental Europe. In responding to the pressure of opposing views of royal power and its uses, these poems rely much more on 'comely grace' than on the cut and thrust of polemic, presenting 'a bloodlesse conquest' as the best of all. 
In changing circumstances, Waller's allegiances may have changed over the years, but, it can be argued, his fundamental beliefs remained consistent. The role he habitually assumed both in his poems on state affairs and in parliament was that of a peacemaker, a broker between opposing factions, and his career as a whole can be seen as illustrative of the strengths and weaknesses of the ideology of moderation and compromise. 
Waller was first elected to parliament in 1624 at the unusually young age of eighteen -- Clarendon describes him as having been 'nursed in parliaments' ('Life of... Clarendon', 1.45). Between 1624 and 1629 he represented Ilchester, Chipping Wycombe, and Amersham in the House of Commons. He was elected to the Short Parliament in 1640, again representing Amersham, and sat for St Ives, Cornwall, in the Long Parliament until his expulsion in 1643. Although after the discovery of 'Waller's plot' he was banished and excluded from ever sitting again as a member of parliament, in 1651 he was pardoned and his sentence of banishment was revoked. He was elected to parliament in 1661, representing Hastings. He continued to serve until two years before his death, and Burnet describes how in his later parliamentary career 'he was the delight of the House, and though old, said the liveliest things of any among them' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 2.83). 
When parliament was summoned in 1640 after eleven years of the personal rule of Charles I, Waller played an active role in both the Short and Long parliaments, arguing a position similar to that of Falkland and other moderates: conservative, distrustful of innovation and extreme measures, critical of those advisers to the king 'who thought to disswade his Majesty from this way of Parliaments' and of the doctrine that 'a Monarch can be absolute, and that the King may doe all things 'ad libidinem'', while avoiding any direct criticism of the king himself. The right to property, the desire of 'a true hearted 'Englishman'... to leave his... Inheritance as intire to posterity, as he received it from his Ancestors', is to Waller the keystone of all rights: 'The propriety of our goods is the mother of courage and nurse of Industry, which makes us valiant in warre and good husbands in peace' ('A Worthy Speech', 1, 2, 4). Waller's speeches, packed with Latin tags and classical allusions, were circulated widely during the 1640s, suggesting that they are as much addressed to a general public audience as to his fellow MPs. Abuses, the result of a 'misunderstanding betwixt the King and the people', can and will be corrected, and temporary disunities resolved by an appeal to reason and the public interest: 'for let the Commonwealth flourish and then, he that hath the Soveraignty can never want or doe amisse so as he governes not according to the interest of others, but goe the shortest and safest wayes to his owne and the Common good. (ibid., 3, 4)' In the Short Parliament and the early stages of the Long Parliament, Waller was sufficiently trusted by his colleagues to manage the impeachment of the ship-money judge Sir Francis Crawley, and the evil counsellors he inveighs against in speeches in 1640 and 1641 include clerical and lay exponents of absolutism. 
But where in 1640 he could attack 'the Prelates Innovations' in urging absolutist counsels, Waller's speech of July 1641, urging reform rather than abolition of episcopal church government, sees the danger of 'great Innovation' and disrespect for law and tradition as coming from below, rather than above: 'the 'Roman' Story tels us, that when the people began to flock about the Senate, and were more curious to direct and know what was done, then to obey, that Common-wealth soon came to ruine'. In this speech, unsuccessfully urging caution on his colleagues, Waller appeals to class solidarity in depicting law and property as under siege by mob pressure, in the form of petitions: 'I look upon Episcopacy, as a Counter-scar[p], or outwork, which if it be taken by this assault of the people, and withall this Mysterie once revealed, that we must deny them nothing when they aske it thus in troopes, we may in the next place, have as hard a taske to defend our propriety, as we have lately had to recover it from the prerogative. ('Speech Concerning Episcopacie', 4-5)' In the months that followed, Waller and his allies among the constitutional moderates were more and more forced to choose sides, as partisan bitterness increased in the House of Commons, and by October 1641 Waller was listed in a letter by Sir Edward Nicholas to the king as prominent among the 'Champions in maynten'nce of your Prerogative' ('Poems', ed. Thorn-Drury, 1.xxxvi). As late as July 1642, according to D'Ewes, Waller was urging 'an accommodation to be had with his majesty and that a civil war might be avoided', though the 'fiery spirits' in the house would not hear of it (V. Snow and A. Steele Young, eds., 'Private Journals of the Long Parliament', 1992, 264). 
The most discreditable episode in Waller's life, and one which has blackened his later reputation, is the fiasco of 'Waller's plot'. Here the ideology of moderation and compromise shows itself in the worst possible light. After the outbreak of the civil war Waller remained in parliament with the king's approval, speaking 'with great sharpness and freedom... as the boldest champion the Crown had in both Houses' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 3.38-9). He was thus in a position to capitalize on the strong sentiment for peace that had grown up in the City of London and in those parliamentary moderates who still hoped for a reconciliation with the king. In its original form, 'Waller's plot' seems to have entailed some form of passive resistance by citizens of London, backed by members of both houses, to urge a negotiated settlement upon parliament. One of the plotters, Richard Chaloner, a wealthy linen draper, described its inception as follows: 'It came from Mr. 'Waller' under this notion, that if we could make a moderate party here in 'London', to stand betwixt the gappe, and in the gappe, to unite the King and the Parliament, it would be a very acceptable work, for now the three Kingdomes lay a bleeding, and unlesse that were done there was no hopes to unite them. (Challenor, 4)' But the peace plan quickly turned to war: in its final form, the plot apparently called for an armed rising and seizure of the key points of the City in order to let the king's army in. When Pym, in a highly dramatic speech, revealed the alleged plot to the House of Commons, he placed particular emphasis on the contrast between the 'pretences' of peace and the actuality of 'blood and violence' -- 'such a combustion, as to have your swords imbrued in one anothers bloud' ('Discovery', sigs. A2, A3). Even if Waller cannot be held fully responsible for the plot's final form -- in his speech before the House of Commons pleading for his life, he claimed to have 'utterly rejected... the Propositions of letting in part of the Kings Army' ('Mr Waller's Speech', 3) -- the readiness with which the plot and one of its chief actors were diverted from their course is an index to their fundamental weakness. 
Pym and his allies in parliament used the plot as a pretext to annihilate the moderates, destroying any possibility of peace. Members of the House of Commons who had spoken up for a negotiated settlement in the previous months were hard pressed to clear themselves of charges of complicity in the plot. The peace party, which comprised a majority in the House of Lords and a large minority in the House of Commons, was in a moment reduced to impotence. Moreover, a covenant was imposed upon the parliament, the City, and the army, by which all signatories declared their innocence of the plot and vowed support of 'the Forces raised by the Two Houses of Parliament... for the defence of the true Protestant Religion and Libertie of the Subject, against the Forces raised by the King' ('Sacred Vow and Covenant', 1643, 2). 
When Waller was questioned in prison after his arrest on 31 May 1643, he confessed his own guilt and implicated others freely. He was, as Clarendon put it, 'so confounded with fear and apprehension that he confessed whatsoever he had said, heard, thought, or seen, all that he knew of himself, and all that he suspected of others, without concealing any person, of what degree or quality soever' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 3.44). In accusing such figures as the earls of Portland and Northumberland of complicity in the plot, Waller hoped to save his own life by shifting the blame on others whom the House of Commons and the army would be unable, because of their rank, to punish. Apparently Waller agreed to co-operate fully with his captors; in a petition to the house the following year, he speaks of 'the free and ingenuous confession and discoveries made upon promised favour' ('Sixth Report', HMC, 28). But his behaviour after his arrest caused his reputation to plummet: Clarendon accuses him of 'abjectness and want of courage' in seeking to preserve his life 'in an occasion when in which he ought to have been ambitious to have lost it' ('Life of... Clarendon', 1.45). 
Waller managed to have his trial put off until the furore had died down, and then was allowed to appear before the house. Aubrey claims that during his imprisonment the poet 'bribed the whole House, which was the first time a house of Commons was ever bribed' ('Brief Lives', 309), while Clarendon and the author of the 'Life' in 'Poems' (1711), more modestly, make the bribes selective, directed to 'some leading Members' of the house and influential puritan clergymen. When he appeared before the house in July 1643, his air of 'despairing dejectedness', 'all clothed in mourning', impressed his viewers: 'divers of the House seeing his sad and dejected condition at the barre whom they had formerly heard speake in publique with so much applause could not forbeare shedding of teares' (D'Ewes, MS diary). Clarendon, whose account of the incident is generally hostile to Waller, pays tribute to his oratorical skills as 'a man... very powerful in language, and who, by what he spoke and in the manner of speaking it, exceedingly captivated the good-will and benevolence of his hearers; which is the highest part of an orator': 'so that, in truth, he does as much owe the keeping his head to that oration as Catiline did the loss of his to those of Tully' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 3.52). After remaining a year and a half in prison without trial, Waller was fined $10,000 and permitted to go into exile in November 1644. Although he had saved his life, he had managed by his conduct to alienate all parties. 
As early as 1645, near the beginning of his period of exile, Waller was described by his friend Hobbes as 'meditating how you may to your Contentment and wthout blame passe the seas' and return to England, making peace with the new regime, and on 27 November 1651 the House of Commons revoked his sentence of banishment (Wikelund, 'Hobbes', 266). In January 1652 he returned to England, and before long was on terms of familiarity with his kinsman Cromwell (Waller was Cromwell's second cousin by marriage, John Hampden's first cousin, and brother-in-law to Adrian Scrope, the regicide, who may have been instrumental in securing his pardon). Cromwell appointed Waller a commissioner of trade in 1655. Waller's 'Panegyrick to my Lord Protector' (1655) is an argument for the legitimacy of Cromwell's protectorate, seeking to demonstrate to former royalists 'the present Greatness and joynt Interest of His Highness, and this Nation'. Using arguments closely akin to those of Hobbes's 'Leviathan' (1651), 'to set before men's eyes the mutual relation between protection and obedience' ('Leviathan', review and conclusion), the 'Panegyrick' presents Cromwell as 'de facto' monarch, a restorer of order rather than a feared agent of destruction: '
Your drooping Countrey torn with Civill Hate, 

Restor'd by you, is made a Glorious State. 

' In elegant quatrains, the poem deploys a series of classical and biblical analogies to present England as 'the seat of Empire' and Cromwell as a new Augustus: '
As the vext world to finde repose at last 

It self into 'Augustus' Arms did cast; 

So 'England' now, doth with like toyle opprest 

Her weary head upon your bosome rest. 

' The 'Panegyrick' thus concerns itself with the most important political issue of the 1650s, the settlement of the state, the transformation of the rule of the sword into the rule of law. 
The publication of the 'Panegyrick' prompted a number of satiric poems, anti-panegyrics, by royalists and republicans who sought to refute Waller's arguments for accepting the legitimacy of the Cromwellian regime (see Norbrook, 311-16). In 'Upon the Present War with 'Spain', and the First Victory Obtained at Sea' (1658-9), a much-elaborated heroic poem about a naval victory in 1656, Waller concludes by explicitly urging Cromwell to accept the title of king, arguing that the state can be 'fixt' by 'making him a Crown' and 'a Royal Scepter, made of Spanish Gold'. It has been suggested that the publication of a broadside version of Waller's poem in 1658 was part of a 'concerted propaganda campaign' to counter republican and royalist objections to a proposal to offer a crown to Cromwell (Stocker and Raylor, 134-7). These schemes came to nothing, and though Waller continues to praise Cromwell in a poem the following year as one who 'gave us peace and empire', bringing the nation glory in 'conquering abroad', the occasion of that poem was the lord protector's sudden death, and Waller makes no predictions about the future. 
In addressing lines 'To the King, upon his Majesties Happy Return' (1660), Waller faced a particularly delicate task, as one of the many Englishmen who had gone over to the support of Cromwell's regime. He solves his problem by praising the returning Charles II for possessing those virtues which serve his own purpose best, by implication urging upon the king a policy of toleration and general amnesty, forgiveness for the 'Frailty' of others. In the years after the Restoration, Waller at frequent intervals commemorated particular occasions with a panegyric addressed to one or another member of the royal family: 'On St James's Park as Lately Improved by his Majesty', 'Upon her Majesties New Buildings at Somerset-House', 'Of the Lady Mary, Princess of Orange', 'A Presage of the Ruine of the Turkish Empire, Presented to his Majestie on his Birth-Day'. In such poems, the tendency toward idealization, already marked in his poems of the 1630s, is even more pronounced. Waller provides an implicit defence of his practice in a poem of 1680 which defines 'the use of poetry' in traditional ethical terms: '
Well sounding verses are the Charm we use, 

Heroick thoughts, and vertue to infuse. 

' Yet the 'great Acts' singled out for praise, here as in Waller's poems addressed to Cromwell, are open to conflicting interpretations. The longest and most ambitious of his heroic panegyrics, 'Instructions to a painter, for the drawing of the posture and progress of his majesties forces at sea, under the command of his highness-royal; together with the battel and victory obtained over the Dutch' (1666), turns the inconclusive battle of Lowestoft into a second Actium and the duke of York into a peerless hero of romance. As earlier with the 'Panegyrick to my Lord Protector', Waller's poem gave rise to a whole series of parodies and refutations, portraying similar events in unflattering terms, as exemplifying cowardice and greed. Marvell's 'Last Instructions to a Painter', written a year later, is representative of these anti-court satires in the way it makes the events it describes indicative not of England's glory but of England's shame. 
Throughout the reign of Charles II, Waller played an active role in parliament, and the stance he habitually assumed there was more independent of the court than in such poems as 'Instructions to a painter' or 'On St James's Park'. Over 180 speeches by him are recorded in Grey's 'Debates', and he was appointed to 209 parliamentary committees between 1661 and 1681 (HoP, 'Commons, 1660-90', 3.654). Although allied to the court by his position on the council of trade and plantations, as well as by personal ties, he was found a good part of the time in the parliamentary opposition. Party organization lists drawn up in the 1670s show him now a seeming ally of one side, now of the other. His allegiance, as under Cromwell's protectorate, was not to a particular ruler or administration, but to his idea of the nation, as expressed, for example, in a speech of 1675 critical of Charles II and his ministers: 'We believed, when the King was called back, that the Law was come again... No Government can be more advantageous to him than this. 'Tis a monarchy. The King governs by Law' (Grey, 3.302). In the bitterness between the parliament and the king over such issues as the king's declarations of indulgence in 1662 and 1672, the Third Anglo-Dutch War, and the crown's management of finances, he endeavoured to reconcile the opposing parties. While he jealously guarded parliament's privileges, the poet repeatedly cautioned the House of Commons against the dangers of meddling where they had no right and of attempting to eat into the king's prerogative. 
Waller was a steadfast proponent of religious toleration in a house bent on persecution of papists and dissenters, arguing that severe laws would have an effect opposite to that intended: 'the people of 'England' are a generous people, and pity sufferers... He would not have the Church of 'England', like the elder brother of the 'Ottoman' family, strangle all the younger brothers' (Grey, 1.128). Throughout his parliamentary career, he was concerned with the growth of trade, arguing that 'the riches and strength of all nations is proportionable to their trade' ('Memoirs of Sir John Reresby', 2nd edn, 1991, 99). Again and again on the floor of parliament he urged the example of other nations and of history to argue against the narrow, tight-fisted provincialism of many of his colleagues: 'At 'Paris' there are many bridges -- at 'Venice' hundreds -- We are still obstructing public things' (Grey, 1.415). Whether defending or attacking the government, Waller emphasized the primacy of the national interest, the importance of law, and common sense. 
During the agitation over the Popish Plot, Waller characteristically sought to act as broker between opposing factions, yet found his attempts in the House of Commons to 'persuade them to Union among themselves, agreement with the Lords & a better understanding with his Majty' did not meet with success: 'I thinke both the Weather & the House at this tyme too hot for mee' (BL, Egerton MS 922). Initially sympathetic to the whigs, he later opposed their attempts to exclude the duke of York from the succession. Waller did not serve in the three Exclusion parliaments of 1679-81, and it may be that at the height of the crisis he prudently chose to withdraw from active politics. When James II ascended the throne, he greeted him with two poems, both of which are thinly disguised pleas to the new king to pursue a policy of reconciliation and national unity. According to the 'Life' in 'Poems' (1711), his private opinion was that 'the King would be left like a Whale upon the Strand' (p. xxxvi). 
Waller suffered from ill health in his last years, and his 'Divine Poems' (1685) are explicitly the product of old age and physical decline. His poem 'Of the Last Verses in the Book' includes the memorable lines, '
The Soul's dark Cottage, batter'd and decay'd 

Lets in new Light thro' chinks that time has made. 

' He died at his house in St James's Street, London, on 21 October 1687, and was buried five days later in Beaconsfield. 
Waller's oldest surviving son, also Edmund Waller (1652-1699), was an active whig, closely associated with republicans during the later years of the reign of Charles II, served as MP for Amersham after 1689, and became a Quaker towards the end of his life. The poet's favourite daughter, Margaret (1648-1690), who remained unmarried, served as her father's amanuensis, and many manuscripts survive in her hand (and possibly also in the hand of her sister Elizabeth) among the Waller family papers (Beal, 548-51). The younger Edmund Waller is not mentioned in his father's will, which names his brother Stephen (1654-1706) as executor, and leaves $1000 apiece to Stephen and to his sisters Margaret, Mary, Elizabeth, Anne, Cicely, and Octavia, with the residue of the estate to be divided equally among them, and leaves smaller sums to Benjamin (of unsound mind, and left in the care of his sister Margaret) and Dorothy, a dwarf; a codicil leaves an equal $1000 share in the estate to another son, William. Evidently there was ill feeling between the brothers Edmund and Stephen after their father's death, since in 1688 Edmund sued Stephen and his sisters to recover money allegedly owed him by his father and to gain access to the London house left to Stephen in their father's will (private information). 
In the editions of his poems published in 1645 at the time of his exile, Waller is presented as primarily a lyric poet: the title-page of 'Poems' (1645), incidentally signalling Waller's association with the court of Charles I, includes the statement that 'All the Lyrick Poems in this Booke were set by Mr. Henry Lawes, Gent. of the Kings Chappell, and one of his Majesties Private Musick.' Settings of sixteen Waller poems can be found in a manuscript by Lawes dating from the 1630s (BL, Add. MS 53723), and six of them appear in Lawes's 'Ayres and Dialogues' (1653). Waller's poems appear to have circulated widely in scribal manuscript collections, several of which are still extant ('this parcell of exquisit Poems, have pass'd up and downe through many hands amongst persons of the best quallity', according to the 'advertisement to the Reader' in 'Poems', 1645). In a dedicatory epistle he casually dismisses these poems as 'the diversions of... youth', and their characteristic titles maintain the fiction of being by-products of a courtier's life, attuned to particular occasions: 'Of the Lady who can Sleep when she Pleases', 'Of her Passing through a Crowd of People', 'On the Friendship betwixt Sacharissa and Amoret', 'To a Lady from whom he Receiv'd a Silver Pen', 'In Answer of Sir John Suckling's Verses'. Waller is a highly traditional poet, who consistently chose to work in themes and forms that other writers had cultivated before him, and adhered to the classical ideal of the poet as craftsman: '
Our lines reform'd, and not compos'd in haste, 

Polisht like Marble, would like Marble last. 
(Prologue to 'The Maid's Tragedy Altered', 1690)' Waller's love poems tend to be relatively formal, decorous, and impersonal, as compared to the colloquial tone and jaunty cynicism of his fellow Caroline poet Suckling. His advice in one poem ('To Flavia') is to 'dissemble well': unobtrusive wit, poise, and attention to nuance characterize such lyrics as 'Go Lovely Rose', 'To a Lady in Retirement', and 'On a Girdle'. His poetical courtship of Lady Dorothy Sidney, daughter of the earl of Leicester, as 'Sacharissa' is tactful rather than passionate, and the same graceful and elegant praise can be found in a congratulatory letter on her marriage in 1639 ('Poems', ed. Thorn-Drury, 1.xxviii-xxx) as in the poems for which she provided the occasion. As 'The Story of Phoebus and Daphne Apply'd' wittily suggests, even if the poet loves 'in vain', he is more than amply compensated by the applause of his coterie audience: 'He catcht at love, and fill'd his arm with bayes'. 
Although the edition of 1664 describes Waller's poems as 'Written only to please himself, and such particular persons to whom they were directed' (sig. A3), his poems were widely read during the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries. At least four separate editions were published in 1645, and during his lifetime there were further collected editions, each containing new poems, in 1664, 1668, 1682, and 1686. Two posthumous volumes of previously uncollected writings, 'The Maid's Tragedy Altered' and 'The Second Part of Mr Waller's Poems', were published in 1690. Waller's reputation as a poet was at its highest during this period, when Gerard Langbaine described his writings as 'fit to serve as a Standard, for all succeeding poems' ('An Account of the English Dramatick Poets', 1691, 507) and his editor Francis Atterbury could speak of him as 'the Parent of 'English' Verse, and the first that shew'd us our Tongue had Beauty and Numbers in it' ('Second Part', sig. A3). 
As a poet Waller is to an unusual degree poised precisely between two ages: F. W. Bateson describes him as 'a minor Renaissance poet and a major Augustan poet' ('English Poetry: a Critical Introduction', 1966, 117). During Waller's lifetime and afterwards, the terms regularly used to describe his poems were 'sweet', 'soft', and 'smooth': these characteristics helped make his poems particularly suited for musical setting, and helped ensure his continuing popularity in Restoration salons. Etherege's Dorimant and Congreve's Mirabell both quote Waller at every available opportunity. What Augustan poets and critics singled out for praise in Waller was his technical skill in 'numbers' or versification and in the control of diction. Dryden, who greatly admired Waller and consistently treated him as mentor and precursor, claimed that 'the well-placing of words, for the sweetness of pronunciation, was not known till Mr. Waller introduced it' ('Of Dramatic Poesy and other Essays', 2 vols., 1962, 1.175). In paying tribute to Waller, Dryden, like Atterbury, particularly emphasizes his role in showing later writers 'the excellence and dignity' of rhyme: 'he first made writing easily an art; first showed us to conclude the sense most commonly in distichs' (ibid., 1.7). When neo-classical canons of correctness fell out of fashion in the nineteenth century, Waller's poetic reputation plummeted, and it has never fully recovered. Where the inscription on his monument in Beaconsfield reads 'inter poetas sui temporis facile princeps' ('easily the prince of poets in his time'), Douglas Bush in 1945 could confidently proclaim that 'there is little attraction in Waller... a fluent trifler' and that 'no poetical reputation of the seventeenth century has been so completely and irreparably eclipsed' ('English Literature in the Earlier Seventeenth Century', 1945, 166-7). A renewed interest in court culture and in the intersection of literature and history toward the end of the twentieth century has led to a modest Waller revival, notably in studies by Chernaik, Norbrook, Hammond, and Corns. 
There is no twentieth-century edition of Waller (other than George Thorn-Drury's edition of 1905, long out of print), and no modern biography. In 2000 a biography by John Safford and a critical edition by Michael Parker and Timothy Raylor were in preparation. Useful biographical materials can be found in the 'Life' prefixed to the 1711 'Poems', in the 'Observations on some of Mr Waller's poems' in the fine edition prepared by Elijah Fenton in 1729 ('The Works of Edmund Waller, Esq., in Verse and Prose'), and in Thorn-Drury's introduction. An indispensable guide to the extensive Waller archives (some in the possession of Waller's descendants) can be found in Peter Beal, 'Index of English Literary Manuscripts', volume 2, '1625-1700', part 2 (1993). 


@@@@@


doc= 28557


Waller, Sir Hardress (c.1604-1666), parliamentarian army officer and regicide, was the son of George Waller of Groombridge, Kent, and Mary, daughter of Richard Hardress; both parents were dead by 1622. He was descended from the fifteenth-century soldier and administrator Richard Waller and was the first cousin of the parliamentarian general Sir William Waller. Hardress was knighted in 1629, and in the same year married Elizabeth Dowdall, the daughter of Sir John Dowdall, an Old English (but protestant) landowner from co. Limerick, and acquired a large estate centred on Castletown, on the River Shannon. In the 1630s Waller was involved in Munster society, and became a close ally of the lord president of the province, Sir William St Leger, whom he would later describe as 'so dear a friend, and may I say, a father' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 3, fol. 498). He was elected for the borough of Askeaton in co. Limerick in the Irish parliaments of 1634 and 1640. In the latter he became a prominent opponent of Thomas Wentworth, first earl of Strafford, and worked with both Old English and New English opponents of the Dublin administration, travelling to London to present the Commons' petition to the king. He was the only New Englishman to join an Old English petition offering composition payments to avert further plantation in the west of Ireland. 
Waller's sympathies with the Old English were crushed by the Irish rising of 1641. When Munster rebelled in late November St Leger appointed Waller governor of Askeaton, and in 1642 he became lieutenant-colonel of St Leger's regiment of foot. On the death of St Leger in June 1642 Waller took control of his regiment, and became an ally of Lord Inchiquin (Morrough O'Brien) in his factional rivalry with the Boyle family, led by Richard Boyle, first earl of Cork. In September 1642 Waller travelled to England to advance Inchiquin's claim to the presidency of Munster, and to lobby for Irish interests in general. His early reports were bleak. In December 1642 he told the earl of Ormond 'that they are there so involved in their own danger that a word of Ireland will not be heard' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 4, fol. 83). For the next year Waller remained in England, trying to persuade the king and parliament to settle their differences and turn their attention towards Ireland. Waller's outspoken criticism of Charles I's plan to sign a cessation of arms with the Irish rebels was badly received at court, and he left Oxford in disgrace. In January 1644, when Inchiquin went to Oxford to prevent a peace treaty with the Irish, Waller was left in charge of Munster, and his open hostility towards the cessation riled the confederates, who accused him of being 'devoted and affected to the Parliament' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Carte 10, fol. 536). On his return from court Inchiquin sent Waller back to Oxford to lobby the king once more, but he was unable to make any headway before July 1644, when Inchiquin and the other Munster protestants declared for parliament. By the end of August Waller had fled to London. 
Waller was appointed colonel of a regiment of foot in the New Model Army in April 1645, and fought at Naseby in June of that year. In October he was wounded leading his men in the assault against Basing House. During this period Waller caught the spiritual enthusiasm of the New Model officers, becoming a religious Independent. He also developed a lasting admiration for Oliver Cromwell. By December 1645 he proclaimed that 'Tis certain that our greatest hopes for Ireland is from this army, about which I have had many free and serious discourse with Lieutenant-General Cromwell, whose spirit leads much that way' ('Egmont MSS', 1.264-5). His support for Cromwell as commander-in-chief was a snub to Inchiquin, and indicates how far Waller had changed his political allegiances since the summer of 1644. Even the choice of the Independent peer Viscount Lisle as lord lieutenant of Ireland proved insufficiently radical for Waller, who complained that 'I do not hear the work is like to be carried on by such as carry a two-edged sword in their hearts as well as their hands' (ibid., 1.280). Despite his initial misgivings Waller supported Lisle, and in December 1646 joined Sir William Parsons, Sir John Temple, Arthur Annesley, and others in calling for the new lord lieutenant's immediate dispatch for Munster. Waller accompanied Lisle in his expedition in February 1647, and tried to take over Inchiquin's army when the lord lieutenant's commission expired in April. The failure of the coup left Waller vulnerable, and for a few days he tried to placate his old commander, in the hope of saving his Munster commissions. When Inchiquin rejected his advances -- saying 'I would not willingly be joined here with any Independent' -- Waller had little option but to return to England (ibid., 1.395). 
From June 1647 Waller was heavily involved in the politics of the New Model Army. His regiment had been prominent in the Saffron Walden debates in May, and he represented the army in its meetings with MPs and the City of London, and presented the army's remonstrance to parliament on 23 June. In August he joined Fairfax's committee of officers, and in October he was chosen to consider the 'Case of the army'. During the Putney debates which followed Waller was keen to prevent religion becoming a cause of division, and urged that such issues should not be discussed. This did not signal a softening of his radical political stance: when it came to negotiating with parliament or the king, Waller was forthright, telling the army 'to let them know that these are our rights, and if we have them not, we must get them the best way we can' (Firth, 1.344). Waller's readiness to use force may have quietened dissent in his own regiment, at least: through the disturbances of late 1647 his men were unanimous in their loyalty to Fairfax. Waller's radicalism continued in the winter of 1648-9. After playing an important part in suppressing the royalist rising in Devon and Cornwall during the second civil war, he returned to London in December 1648, where he seconded Pride's Purge, Thomas Pride's purge of the presbyterian members of the House of Commons, and personally prevented William Prynne from taking his seat. In January 1649 he was appointed a commissioner to the high court of justice which tried Charles I, and he was to miss only one of its meetings. On 29 January he signed the king's death warrant ['see also 'Regicides]. 
Cromwell's appointment as lord lieutenant of Ireland in March 1649 was welcomed by Waller, but his regiment was not chosen for the invasion, and he returned to his policing duties in the west country. By the end of November, however, he had been given command of a new regiment for Ireland, and by June 1650 he had been promoted major-general. Waller's Irish service confirmed his reputation as a soldier. He led the siege of Carlow, fought at Limerick, and pursued the defeated Irish into the mountains of counties Kerry and Clare. Having been appointed governor of Limerick in 1651 he used his military position to extend his influence over the whole county, and throughout the 1650s continued to control the local administration and to ensure that his own men were elected MPs for the protectorate parliaments. At first Waller was closely allied to the army interest in Ireland. In 1652-3 he was one of the army's agents in England, where (in February 1653) he presented the 'humble representation of the officers of Ireland' against John Weaver, and argued that the army should be treated generously in the Irish land settlement. It was hardly surprising that one commentator saw Waller as having 'a great interest in the soldiery' at this time ('Fifth Report', HMC, 193). The formation of the protectorate undermined Waller's position within the army. Many of the Irish officers were suspicious of Oliver Cromwell's ambition, and began to work against his regime. This grated with Waller's personal loyalty to the new protector, which had been reinforced by the marriage of his daughter to Cromwell's relative Henry Ingoldsby in August 1653. It is significant that when the protector was proclaimed in Dublin on 30 January 1654, Waller was one of only two senior officers present. In later years he worked closely with Henry Cromwell, who governed Ireland from 1655, and this alliance brought him back into contact with the Munster protestants, and especially Cromwell's closest adviser, Lord Broghill (Roger Boyle), some of whose relatives in the Clayton and Fenton families were married to Waller's children. Although Waller did not take his seat as MP for counties Kerry, Limerick, and Clare in the protectorate parliaments, his friends and clients would support the attempts by Broghill and others to establish a civilian 'settlement' in the Commonwealth, and (in 1657) they were involved in the attempt to persuade Cromwell to accept the crown. 
Waller's loyalty to the regime was based on his personal fealty to Oliver Cromwell. In the late 1650s Waller showed signs of restlessness, and Henry Cromwell warned his father that 'your old servant Sir Hardress Waller thinks himself forgotten' (Thurloe, 'State papers', 7.734). Grants of baronetcies to his sons-in-law Maurice Fenton and Henry Ingoldsby were designed to placate Waller, but with the death of Oliver Cromwell in September 1658 there was little to restrain him, and Henry Cromwell included him among the untrustworthy officers who should be recalled to England. From then on, Waller behaved erratically. With the collapse of the protectorate in May 1659, he immediately threw in his lot with the Rump Parliament, and proved his new allegiance by seizing Henry Cromwell at Phoenix Park. His new friends did not trust him, however, and the Irish commander-in-chief, Edmund Ludlow, refused to put him in charge of the army in his absence. In October and November 1659 Waller continued to support the republicans, and signed the Irish officers' letter in support of John Lambert and the English army. In December, however, he joined the Irish protestants' coup in Dublin and refused Ludlow permission to land at Ringsend. In the early months of 1660, as secluded MPs were returned to Westminster and the restoration of the monarchy was expected, Waller panicked, and again seized Dublin Castle. This second coup was short-lived, and he was imprisoned, on Sir Charles Coote's orders, at Athlone, only being released on the intervention of his cousin Sir William Waller. 
On the Restoration Waller fled to France, but he returned in the hope of benefiting from the leniency offered to repentant regicides. During his trial in October 1660 he claimed to have signed the death warrant unwillingly, 'finding that no dissent of his could have prevented it', and denied supporting the offer of the crown to Cromwell (BL, Egerton MS 2549, fol. 93). Such lies seem to justify Edmund Ludlow's attack on Waller as 'one who would say anything to save his life' (Ludlow, 209). Waller was one of only two regicides to plead guilty to the charges against him. He was attainted, but the death sentence was commuted, and he was imprisoned in Mont Orgueil Castle, Jersey, where he died in 1666. After his final arrest most of Waller's friends and family deserted him; but the marriages he had secured for his children ensured that the Wallers regained the estate at Castletown, and remained important figures in Munster into the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 28558


Waller, Horace (1833-1896), missionary and slavery abolitionist, was born in Tavistock Square, London, on 16 February 1833, the first son of six children of John Waller ('c'.1791-1865), stockbroker, and his wife, Mary Ann. He had three brothers and two sisters. From 1840 to May 1846 he attended Eagle House School, Brook Green, in Hammersmith, run by Dr Wickham, and spent his early years in Walthamstow, Essex, learning a love for country sports which continued throughout his life. He apprenticed as a stockbroker, growing up lanky and 6 feet tall with a long beard. At Whitsuntide 1859 a new sense of religious dedication led Waller, an evangelical Anglican, to join the first Universities' Mission to Central Africa (UMCA). By October 1860 he was a lay missionary bound for Nyasaland. He spent three years there supervising supplies, helping fight Yao slave raiders, and becoming friends with David Livingstone and John Kirk. He left the mission in protest when its second leader, Bishop William George Tozer, decided to keep only the boys of the mission, who had been rescued along with women and girls in 1861 by Bishop Charles Frederick Mackenzie (died 31 Jan 1862). Convinced that the women and girls would be re-enslaved if left in Nyasaland, he took them to Cape Town. In 1864 he was elected FRGS. 
In 1865, a year after Waller's return home, his father died, leaving Waller to support the family. He divided his time, applying for business ventures and government posts and aiding Livingstone, who was writing a book on his Zambezi travels. By 1867 he found his vocation in the church. False rumours of Livingstone's death in Africa that year made Waller's African experiences and his letters from Kirk, then vice-consul in Zanzibar, valuable to geographical and humanitarian circles. In August 1867 he spoke at an international anti-slavery convention in Paris; and in December, through Bishop Samuel Wilberforce, president of the UMCA (Waller's missionary experience being accepted in lieu of educational requirements), he was ordained deacon, and in 1868 priest. He was curate of St John's, Chatham (1867-70), vicar of St John's, Leytonstone, Essex (1870-74), and rector of Twywell, near Thrapston, Northamptonshire (1874-95). This career enabled him to earn a living, to focus on religion and Africa, and on 13 April 1869 to marry Alice, daughter of Thomas Brown of Kent; they had three daughters and a son, and she survived her husband. 
Correspondence with Livingstone and Kirk, augmented over time by other missionaries, officials, and businessmen going to Africa, enabled Waller to command a continuing supply of African news, making him a key person for humanitarians and businessmen who were convinced of Britain's duty to end the slave trade and develop Africa's natural resources -- in the name of 'Christianity, commerce, and civilization'. His position was recognized by his election in 1870 to the committee of the British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society and in 1882 to the home committee of the UMCA. 
When Livingstone's body and diaries were brought to England in 1874, Waller was asked to edit his 'Last Journals'. He set out to ensure that Livingstone's name would continue as synonymous with the anti-slavery cause. He omitted all Livingstone's complaints about other travellers and his African attendants, depicting him as a gentle, saintly martyr. The death scene embodied this Livingstone legend. Livingstone's attendants Susi and Chuma had found him in death on his knees on his cot, his head on his pillow. Waller transmuted it into a powerful, moving image of the missionary doctor offering up a final prayer for the end to the 'great open sore' of Africa. 
Waller received letters with African news which he regularly sent on to the 'Anti-Slavery Reporter' and, in over eighty letters to the editor, to 'The Times'. His correspondents included Colonel George Gordon and Captain Frederick Lugard, men Waller hoped would become Livingstone's successors. Waller also consulted with the Scots sent to Nyasaland -- where he owned a large estate -- to create a Livingstone memorial mission, and kept in touch with Scottish businessmen attempting to extend legitimate trade in Africa. One, Sir William Mackinnon, eventually formed the Imperial British East Africa Company. 
Convinced that British expansion would benefit Great Britain and Africa alike, Waller wrote for journals and published pamphlets, including 'The Title-Deeds to Nyassa-Land' (1887), 'Nyassaland: Great Britain's Case Against Portugal' (1890), and 'Heligoland for Zanzibar, or, One Island Full of Free Men for Two Full of Slaves' (1893). In 1895 Waller retired from Twywell to Hampshire and died unexpectedly of pneumonia at Overcombe, Hill Brow, East Liss, on 22 February 1896; he was buried at Milland church, near Liphook, Hampshire, on 26 February. 
Polemicist and advocate of British empire in Africa, Waller was a Conservative in politics and an evangelical in religion. He dedicated his life to opening up Africa to British influence. For him the British flag was the hope of Africa, and, indeed, it did bring an end to the slave trade, though the immediate benefits for Africans proved more illusory. 


@@@@@


doc= 28559


Waller, John Francis (c.1809-1894), writer, was born in Limerick, the third son of Thomas Maunsell Waller of Finnoe House, co. Tipperary, and his wife, Margaret, daughter of John Vereker. He entered Trinity College, Dublin, in 1827, and graduated BA in 1831. He was called to the Irish bar in 1833, and while studying in the chambers of Joseph Chitty he began to contribute to periodicals. 
Waller served in the court of chancery for some years, and in 1835 married Anna, the daughter of William Hopkins, with whom he had six daughters and two sons. He was one of the founders of the 'Dublin University Magazine', contributing prose and verse for more than forty years, and in 1845 succeeding Charles James Lever as its editor. He became well known under the pseudonym of Jonathan Freke Slingsby, and 'The Slingsby Papers', a collection of his comic and sentimental contributions, appeared in book form in 1852, and ran to several editions. 
The success of 'The Slingsby Papers' marked the start of a prolific literary career. In 1852 Trinity College, Dublin, conferred the honorary degree of LLD on him in recognition of his literary and legal work, and later that year Waller published two volumes of poems, one, 'Ravenscroft Hall', under his own name, and the second, 'St Patrick's Day in my Own Parlour', under the Slingsby pseudonym. Further volumes appeared as 'Poems' (1854) and 'The Dead Bridal' (1856). From 1856 until 1861 he was honorary secretary of the Royal Dublin Society. 
From 1857 until 1866 Waller edited and wrote many of the articles for the 'Imperial Dictionary of Universal Biography'. He was elected vice-president of the Royal Irish Academy in 1864. His biographical work led him to edit, with short biographies, 'The Works of Oliver Goldsmith' (1864), 'Gulliver's Travels' (1864), and 'The Illustrated Family Moore' (1866). He was appointed registrar of the rolls in 1867, and in 1870 he bought the ailing 'Dublin University Magazine' from Sheridan Le Fanu for $1700, selling it on to Kennington Cooke in its final year. 
On his retirement in 1870, Waller moved to London, where he contributed to 'Cassell's Biographical Dictionary', and continued to write. 'Festival Tales' appeared in 1873, and 'The Adventures of a Protestant in Search of a Religion' later that year, a work which was particularly popular in America, going through three editions in New York in a decade. In 1881 he published 'Boswell and Johnson: their Companions and Contemporaries'. Waller died at his home, Windhill, near Bishop's Stortford, Hertfordshire, on 19 January 1894. 
Waller was best known for his verse, in particular 'Kitty Neil', which was anthologized in many collections of Irish poetry well into the twentieth century. 'The Athenaeum' commented that 'his thought was so clear and his verse so graceful that his lyrics lent themselves readily to music' (p. 149), and many of his poems were turned into popular songs. In 1874 a long article on Waller and his works appeared in the 'Dublin University Magazine', and was later reprinted as a pamphlet. 


@@@@@


doc= 28560


Waller, Richard (c.1395-c.1462), soldier and administrator, was the son of John Waller of Groombridge, Kent, and Margaret Landsdale of Landsdale, Sussex. Groombridge had been purchased from William Clinton by Waller's grandfather Thomas, who came originally from Lamberhurst in Sussex. Richard Waller served in the French wars under Henry V, and was present at Agincourt in 1415, being said to have captured Charles, duke of Orleans. Waller was rewarded for his role in the battle with the custody of the duke, and from its profits was able to rebuild his Groombridge house. The custody also left its mark on the family's crest, through the addition of the duke's shield of arms hanging from a walnut tree. On 17 August 1424 Waller served under John, duke of Bedford, at the battle of Verneuil, but retired from military life in 1431, after holding numerous positions of command, and turned his attention to legal and political concerns. In 1433-4 he was sheriff of the joint county of Surrey and Sussex, and in 1437-8 sheriff of Kent. In 1437 Orleans's brother, the count of Angouleme, was also entrusted to Waller's keeping, after being held by the Beauforts since 1412. 
Waller became a retainer of Cardinal Beaufort; by 1434 he was receiving from Beaufort an annuity worth $20 from Farnham, Surrey, and was appointed steward of Downtown by the cardinal in 1435. By 1439 Waller had become master of Beaufort's household, and he accompanied the cardinal on his embassy to France in that year. Not long before his death Beaufort made Waller (who had also served Louis de Luxembourg as steward) steward for life of the bishopric's lands and temporalities, and in his will, dated 20 January 1446, appointed Waller one of his executors. Waller then became increasingly attached to the court. In March 1443 he served with Sir John Fastolf as treasurer of the expedition to Guyenne led by John Beaufort, duke of Somerset, and on 3 April he presented to the council a schedule of necessary purveyances for the army. He acted as receiver and treasurer of a subsidy in 1450, and was probably also joint chamberlain of the exchequer with Sir Thomas Tyrell. On 12 July of that year he was commissioned to arrest John Mortimer, alias Jack Cade, while in September he was sent on an errand to Richard of York, the purpose of which may have been to secure the duke's arrest. On 8 June 1456 he was summoned to attend an assize of oyer and terminer at Maidstone to punish rioters, and he was one of the commissioners appointed on 31 July 1458 to inquire into Warwick's attack on a fleet of Lubeck merchantmen. He must have made his peace with the Yorkists after Edward IV's accession, since on 26 February 1461 he was made receiver of the king's castles, manors, and lands in Kent, Surrey, Sussex, and Hampshire. 
Waller's eldest son, Richard (died 21 Aug 1474), who had represented Hindon in the parliament of 1453, was made a commissioner of array for Kent on 10 May 1461. Waller presumably died soon afterwards, as his name appears in no further records. With his wife, Silvia Gulby, he had two sons, Richard and John, and a daughter, Alice, who married Sir John Guildford. The second son, John (died 1517), was the ancestor both of Edmund Waller the poet, and of Sir William Waller, the parliamentary general. 


@@@@@


doc= 28561


Waller, Sir William (bap. 1598?, d. 1668), parliamentarian army officer, was born at Knole House, Kent, the son of Sir Thomas Waller (died 1613) and his wife, Margaret Lennard. The parish register of Sevenoaks records his baptism as having taken place on 3 December 1598. Given sixteenth-century practice, Waller would almost certainly have been baptized no more than a few weeks after birth, but a little doubt is cast on the accuracy of the register by Waller's recorded age at matriculation at Oxford, which suggests that he was born in 1597 or even 1596, rather than 1598. 
The Wallers, long established in Kent and of Norman descent, had been seated at Groombridge, near Tunbridge Wells, since the early fifteenth century. Sir Thomas, a younger son, had an active official career in the county and in 1604, through the patronage of the earl of Northampton, became lieutenant of Dover Castle. His wife, Margaret, was the daughter of Sampson Lennard of Chevening, Kent, and the lessee of Knole, whose wife, Margaret Fiennes, became Baroness Dacre in her own right in 1604. William Waller was thus part of a well-connected upper gentry family with aristocratic links which the Wallers were -- to judge from the name of Waller's sister, Fenes -- anxious to preserve. His cousins, close or more distant, included the parliamentarians Sir Hardress Waller and Lord Dacre, and the royalist and poet Edmund Waller. 
The 'stormy sea' ('Recollections', 103) of Waller's life was filled with escapes from danger that he saw as evidence of God's protecting providence and as signs that he had been preserved to be an active instrument of God's purpose. As a child he had narrow escapes from a casually discharged bullet, from drowning, and in a fall from his horse. Later, as he was about to leave for Oxford, he fell dangerously ill with pleurisy and 'hardly escaped the danger of itt' ('Experiences', Wadham College, Oxford, 9). He nevertheless matriculated safely at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, on 2 December 1612, when his age was recorded as fifteen, but shortly afterwards migrated to Hart Hall. He left without taking a degree, and on his return home was again providentially preserved when, after he contracted smallpox, an eminent doctor intervened to prevent the administration of potentially lethal medicine. 
Waller's education continued in Paris, where he learned fencing and the management of 'the great horse' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.814). Later he went to Italy, where his practical military formation began. He served with the English volunteers who arrived in late 1617 to aid the Venetians in their siege of Gradisca, near Trieste, in their war against piratical Christian refugees from the Turks. His fellows in the enterprise included representatives of old English military families, notably Sir John Vere, with whom he shared another providential delivery when a 'neere shotte' fell between them as they 'sate close together by the battery' ('Recollections', 108). Waller's Italian travels took him beyond battlefields to Venice, Florence, Padua, and Bologna, and it has been suggested that his later 'vanity in furniture' (ibid., 131; Adair, 7) was formed on this Italian expedition, while in 1645 the connection was recalled by an abortive proposal that he return to Venetian service. Waller's Italian venture had thus grounded his military education and introduced him to English professional soldiers, and had also widened his cultural horizons. 
In 1620 Waller left England again, one of the small band of Englishmen who actively rallied to the support of James I's daughter Elizabeth, the 'winter queen' of Bohemia. For Waller she was to remain 'that queen of women... whom I had the honour to serve at Prague in the first breaking out of the German warr' ('Vindication', 213-14). He and Ralph Hopton, the future royalist commander, were members of the troop of horse sent to Prague to act as her life guard. After the defeat of the Bohemian army at the battle of the White Mountain (8 November 1620) they escorted the pregnant queen through the snow in her flight to Frankfurt. On this expedition too Waller had providential escapes, from Cossacks of the imperial army and from shipwreck on his way home to England. The episode had furthered his military education and demonstrated his commitment to an active protestantism. 
When Waller came of age he inherited a substantial income from the prisage and butlerage on wine entering the kingdom, a grant previously held by his grandmother and his father which brought him between $1000 and $3000 a year. He was thus already comfortably established economically, and his standing was reinforced when on 20 June 1622 he was knighted by James I. He was then described as of Brenchley, Kent, where his mother held the manor of Barnes, some 10 miles from Groombridge. 
On 12 August 1622 Waller married Jane Reynell (died 1633), the only daughter and heir of Sir Richard Reynell of the Middle Temple and Forde House, Wolborough, Devon, and his godly wife, Lucy Brandon (died 1652). The Reynells were an old Devon family, and Sir Richard devoted much of the proceeds of his profitable career at the exchequer to extending his estates in the county. The young couple lived at Forde House, and in 1622 Reynell granted Waller an annuity of $133 6's'. 8died, and settled land on them after his and his wife's deaths. Jane gave birth to a son, Richard, in 1631, and a daughter, Margaret, in 1633 before dying in Bath in May 1633. Waller commissioned a splendid monument to her in Bath Abbey in which he himself was represented in armour beside her. She was, he said, 'a vertuous discreet loving and beloved wife' ('Experiences', Wadham College, Oxford, 55). Sir Richard Reynell died the next year, and was followed in 1636 by the child Richard. 
In his wife and son Waller had lost 'very deare blessings' ('Recollections', 127), but he resolved to marry again and moved to London to seek 'a religious woman, or none', a wife who would be 'an help to me in the way of [God's] service' (ibid.). God in his providence directed him to Anne Finch, a daughter of Thomas Finch, first earl of Winchilsea, an intrepid and aggressively puritan young woman. At her suggestion they 'sett a day apart to seeke God' to assure themselves of His blessing, and indeed after a somewhat troubled start arising from 'some little differences in... natures, and judgments', the marriage proved happy. She was 'a deare and sweet Comforter', said Waller: 'I may say wee were but as one soul, in two bodyes' (ibid., 128, 131). Four children were born to them, two sons who lived to unsatisfactory adulthood and two daughters. 
At first Sir William and Lady Waller lived in London, but on 23 May 1638 he acquired Winchester Castle and forest lands in Hampshire, and they thereupon set about repairing the castle; more providential deliverances ensued, in the shape of escapes from falling masonry. Waller also demonstrated a keen eye for his own property rights. In later life he admitted to 'a covetuous desire to gaine a good bargaine' ('Recollections', 130), and saw God's chastising hand in the troubles that arose from such covetously inspired ventures as his attempt to supplant, by legal but sharp practice, the previous possessor of the market of Newton Abbot, Devon, which led to 'all that trouble... in Kings Bench' (ibid.). He was soon embroiled in similar trouble in Hampshire. In 1639 he instigated twenty-eight suits against local people who had cut wood from his forest at West Bere, as they had customarily done, to fulfil their obligation to repair a nearby beacon. They petitioned the privy council for relief, and met with a sympathetic reception ('CSP dom.', '1639', 215). 
Before the civil war Waller's life seems to have been confined to personal and domestic matters, although on 21 November 1632 he had been admitted to Gray's Inn. He was not a member of parliament nor, apparently, active with the county militia; he was an inactive justice of the peace; and he played no part in the Scottish wars. When in later life he looked back on his 'retired way' in these years he observed with some complacency, 'I... desired no greater preferment than to be mine own man. GOD hath blessed me with a competent fortune, and given me a minde (it is his gift) fitted to enjoy that blessing. In that retired way, I enjoyed myself freely. ('Vindication', 107)' That this was no false boast is suggested by the depth of feeling with which he later wrote of the pleasures of country life: the goods that earth and wealth brought were to be enjoyed so long, he said, as we do not 'bottom... our selves' on them or abandon responsibilities ('Divine Meditations', 88-9). Only in November 1640 did he seek -- and at first fail to achieve -- election to parliament, and not until 3 May 1642, after a successful challenge to his opponent's election, was he finally approved as member for Andover ('JHC', 2.554). 
Once on the public stage Waller showed no uncertainty about the side he would choose in the imminent conflict. Royalists attributed his choice of parliament to his wife's influence or to resentment at a fine of $1500 imposed on him in Star Chamber following a quarrel and exchange of blows with a kinsman of his first wife who, unfortunately for Waller, was a royal servant. In fact his grounds were religious and constitutional, although his intentions were unrevolutionary. 
The religious background of the Waller family remains obscure, but Jane Reynell's mother, Lucy, was notably pious, while Anne Finch's puritan sympathies went beyond private prayer over their marriage to public support in 1640 of the reformer John Durie (whom Waller also supported). She was later to become notorious as a 'Wonderfull Lady' who accompanied Waller on his campaigns (she was 'his pretty portable Armie') and preached to sometimes ungrateful troops who accused her of usurping 'the general's baton' ('Mercurius Aulicus', 6 Sept 1644, 1147; 'CSP Venice', '1643-7', 135). Waller's providential account of his own life, in which God preserved him to 'arise, and be doing' in his cause ('Divine Meditations', 16-17), was no retrospective construct but represented the guiding principle of his conduct once open conflict broke out. Yet his puritanism also appears to have been less aggressive and unshaded than his wife's. He was suspicious of outward displays of religiosity for public effect, scenting hypocrisy; he was not always an enthusiastic sermon-goer; and he later regretted that he had allowed professional criteria to outweigh godliness in appointing officers. 
Politically, once in parliament Waller was 'an active person against the prerogative' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.814). Even in later disillusion he reaffirmed 'the constancy of [his] affection to the service of the Parliament' ('Vindication', 317). He 'abhorred' the war, but 'acted in it, as upon the defensive (which I thought justifiable),... ever with a wish... that the difference might end, rather in a peace than a conquest;... with saving of honour to King and Parliament, whereby both might have best. (ibid., 7-8)' He wanted to preserve the monarchy 'according to our laws and fundamental constitutions' (ibid., 316), and he hoped that 'GOD might have... his fear; the King his honour; the Houses of Parliament their priviledges; the people of the kingdome their liberties and proprieties' (ibid., 304). To defend this conservative equilibrium, however, it was necessary to resort to arms in 1642. 
Waller quickly emerged as an active member of the House of Commons. Within days of taking his seat he was appointed to the committee to raise money for the war against the Irish rebels, a cause which he supported generously, and in June he contributed to an appeal to raise a parliamentary army. In July he volunteered to raise his own regiment of horse, and in August he was listed as colonel of one of parliament's six cavalry regiments. Yet this willingness is not enough to explain his speedy rise to military eminence. His own limited soldiering was twenty years in the past, nor did he come from a family with a strong military tradition. Wood attributed the authority so quickly granted to him to 'his great knowledge in martial affairs' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.814). This, taken in conjunction with Waller's insistence that his serious reading was such as would 'fit [him] for 'action', which is 'the true end of all learning', and for 'the service of God', which is 'the true end of all action'' ('Divine Meditations', 31), suggests that he profited from the ample supply of books on modern military practice available in England in the decades before the war. His 'Military discourse of the ordering of soldiers' (a manuscript now lost) indicates an interest in military theory. That he chose to be represented in armour on his first wife's tomb in 1633, ten years after his palatine expedition, also suggests that he wished to retain his military persona. There is thus circumstantial evidence to explain his readiness for action in 1642. Thereafter his early successes undoubtedly contributed to his rapid rise. 
In August 1642 Waller led his fledgeling forces to besiege the important arsenal and port of Portsmouth, then in royalist hands, and on 7 September the town surrendered. It was the first of his 'prosperous successes' ('Recollections', 120), and one in which his talents for speed, night actions, and choice of ground were already manifest. Less happily, he was present at Edgehill on 23 October, where he fled with the rest of the cavalry when it broke under royalist attack. It has been suggested that this experience convinced him of the need to train a body of horse equal to that of the cavaliers, and also of the inadequacy of a passive defence against a cavalry charge, and hence to his practice of trotting forward to meet such an attack (Adair, 39). 
A string of successes now followed. On 1 December Waller took Farnham Castle, Surrey, strategically situated between Winchester and London. Then, with a substantial force of six mounted regiments, he advanced towards Winchester which he entered on 12 December after breaching the town walls; the next day the castle itself surrendered. Some 600 prisoners were taken and Waller yielded to the demands of his soldiers to sack the town. Technically he was justified, on the ground that its resistance had forced a storm, but he came to regret his decision and to see the destruction of his own house there as God's punishment for allowing the plunder of a city which, as one of its freemen, he should have protected. Winchester was soon recovered by the royalists but other successes followed. By the end of December Waller had also captured the town and castle of Arundel on his way to Chichester, which surrendered on 27 December. His reputation as 'William the Conqueror' was established (Clarendon, 2.215). 
At the beginning of 1643 royalist successes in the west threatened the Severn valley and Bristol. On 11 February 1643 the earl of Essex appointed Waller major-general of the west. He reached Bristol after rapid night marches but with only 2000 men: this lack of men was to be a continuing source of friction between him and Essex. In late March, after another night march, he had a 'great victory' when he took Malmesbury in Wiltshire, where the enemy quickly surrendered, in part persuaded by Waller's noisy pretended preparations for an assault under cover of darkness ('A Letter from Sir William Waller... to... Essex... of a Great Victory... at Malmesbury, 23 Martii', 1643). He had suffered, however, from the half-heartedness of some of his men and a shortage of ammunition, and it was a costly victory. Nevertheless his successes continued and on 24 March, after ferrying his men across the Severn, he and Lieutenant-Colonel Edward Massey demolished Lord Herbert's newly raised Welsh army at Highnam. Frustrated in his intention of moving on to Devon and Cornwall by a pacification treaty between both parties that he thought ill judged, Waller advanced into Monmouthshire, taking Monmouth and Chepstow. He then returned to Gloucester and from there supervised the taking of Tewkesbury by Massey on 12 April 1643. 
These 'Victorious... Proceedings' (W. Waller, 'The Victorious and Fortunate Proceedings of Sir William Waller', 1643) were immediately followed by a sharp setback at Ripple Field at the hands of Prince Maurice, but Waller, though outmanned and outgunned, made a skilful retreat to Gloucester. He next advanced on Hereford and the city quickly fell on 25 April. Then, contrary to Essex's instructions to prevent the junction of the two royalist western armies, he besieged Worcester in order to consolidate control of the region, but he was forced to retire again to Gloucester at the end of May. Hereford too quickly returned to royalist hands, and Waller devoted himself to building up forces to confront the now combined royalist armies. He was hampered by shortages of men and lack of pay for those he had, by mutinous troops, and by a terrain unsuitable for action by his able cavalry. On 22 June 1643 he wrote from Bath to the speaker of the House of Commons, '[I]t grieves our souls we dare not attempt what we desire. We must not hazard your trust like fools. Neither can we stay here and starve. We have long and often supplicated you for money find us but a way to live without it or else we humbly beg a present supply if not this horse will certainly disband which thought makes our hearts to bleed. (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 62/1A, fol. 128)' Exasperation at the failure to provide money to enable his army to perform the services required of it was joined to worsening relations with the lord-general; henceforth the 'jealousies and peeks' between Waller and Essex were public knowledge and a constant irritant from which, Waller observed, 'the country did suffer' (B. Whitelocke, 'Memorials of the English Affairs', 1732, 90; 'Recollections', 120-21). '[T]he General thought himself undervalued', observed Whitelocke, 'and 'Waller' was high enough. Nor did there want Pick-thanks to blow those Coals of jealousy; and this proved unhappy to the Parliament Affairs' (B. Whitelocke, 'Memorials of the English Affairs', 1732, 90). 
Waller's uncomplicated record of successes was now over. The war's operations and demands grew more complex, and in the south and west the royalists had a very capable general in his friend Hopton. On 5 July 1643 they faced each other in an inconclusive battle at Lansdown, near Bath, which left the royalists in possession of the field but badly mauled, while Waller conducted another a skilful retreat. He pursued the royalists to Devizes, Wiltshire, but his army was in a deplorable condition, prone to panic, flight, and confusion. On 13 July Waller was unequivocally beaten at nearby Roundway Down and a 'miserable rout' ensued. Losses of men, arms, and baggage were severe. It was, Waller said, 'the most heavy stroke of any that did ever befall me' (Adair, 96; 'Recollections', 131). His army was effectively destroyed. He had been sure of success, and attributed his 'dismal defeat' to Essex's 'heartburnings and jealoucies' and failure to support him. It had 'pleas'd the Lord to turn my victory into mourning, and my glory into shame' (ibid., 123, 124). 
Despite this disaster Waller made a triumphal entry into London on 25 July. His achievements were magnified, the Venetian envoy wrote sceptically, to raise civilian morale ('CSP Venice', '1643-7', 2). He had the support of the citizens and was allied with the Independents and others in the House of Commons anxious for active prosecution of the war and suspicious that Essex sought a soft peace with the king. On 27 July he was thanked by the house and recommended to Essex for command of a new army in the west, but the earl successfully dragged his feet for a month before granting the extensive authority requested by parliament on 26 August. 
Waller meanwhile had taken the solemn league and covenant on 1 August, had been appointed to the new council of war designed to exercise unified oversight over operations, and had been ordered to send a force to relieve Gloucester. On 9 August his horse -- 'Waller's dogs' (Adair, 114) -- had brutally suppressed a demonstration for peace by London women. After a summer of acerbic political manoeuvring by the two generals and their supporters Essex's reputation revived, and on 7 October he threatened to resign and leave the country, claiming that Waller's commission was inconsistent with his authority. Parliament thereupon cancelled Waller's independent command, but on 4 November 1643, threatened by a new royalist army under Hopton in the west, they named him major-general of the troops raised by the newly associated counties of Hampshire, Sussex, Surrey, and Kent. 
Waller was already prepared for action, and on 7 November he marched from Farnham to the royalist stronghold of Basing House. After several expensive assaults he was forced to abandon the siege by bad weather, the approach of royalist forces, and soldiers who, blaming him for heavy casualties, mutinied or deserted, leaving him 'enfeebled and abandoned' ('CSP Venice', '1643-7', 46). On 13 December, however, he attacked royalist forces at Alton, and in a brutal fight centred around the church the royalist commander Colonel Bolles and at least forty of his men were killed and over 700 prisoners taken. On 6 January 1644 he took Arundel Castle, and then retired to winter quarters. 
In late March 1644, now with some 8000 men, Waller advanced towards Winchester by way of Alresford. Confused though it was, the battle of Cheriton that followed on 29 March counted as a major parliamentarian victory, and although the royalists made an orderly retreat their casualties were severe. The battle demonstrated that parliament's cavalry was now the equal of the enemy's, and left parliamentarian forces in control of Hampshire and Wiltshire. Several months of marches and counter-marches by the armies of both sides followed until Essex and Waller parted angrily and Essex marched towards the west. On 29 June Waller, attempting to prevent the king from advancing into the eastern counties, faced him at Cropredy Bridge, near Banbury, and was decisively beaten. His London troops, with 'their old song of home, home' ('CSP dom.', '1644', 301), were mutinous. This hindered his pursuit of the victorious royalists, but Waller followed them on their circuitous march as best he could. 'I am of opinion', he wrote to the committee of both kingdoms, 'before this business be done, we shall be the longest winded army in England' (ibid., 303). Meanwhile he continued to beg parliament for men, money, and supplies. After the humiliating surrender of Essex's army at Lostwithiel, Cornwall, on 2 September he was too weak to prevent the king's return to Oxford. On 27 October, however, his men performed with distinction at the second battle of Newbury. After the ensuing winter lull he campaigned again in the west where he and Cromwell, who served under him, had some success, notably at Devizes in March 1645, but he was still beset by mutinous and disorderly troops and a shortage of money. 
It was Waller's last campaign. The ordinance of 17 February 1645 creating the New Model Army under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax largely abolished the old structure of divided armies under competing and quarrelling commanders, and the self-denying ordinance of 3 April required members of parliament to resign their military offices. Waller left the army disillusioned. He felt 'slighted and disesteemed' by his mutinous troops and frustrated by the 'discouragements' of parliament (Gardiner, 2.192; 'Egmont MSS', 1.237). 
Waller, now increasingly identified with the presbyterians, continued to be an active member of the committee of both kingdoms, of which he was a founding member, and of the council of state. He had not abandoned all hopes of a revived military career. Although he refused to consider command in Ireland when it was mooted in December 1645, citing his previous 'discouragements', he was at the same time, from October 1645 to March 1646, engaged in detailed negotiations with the Venetians to raise and command a substantial force for amphibious operations in the eastern Mediterranean. Nothing came of these plans, and for a time prosperity returned at home. Waller was again able to enjoy his 'estate, and the comforts of [his] family'. Winchester Castle was restored to him; in December 1645 the House of Commons voted him an annuity of $2500 and a barony was suggested; and in July 1646 parliament voted payment of $7307 due in wages. He was, he confessed, 'puffed upp' and felt unduly secure ('Recollections', 132; B. Whitelocke, 'Memorials of the English Affairs', 1732, 182; 'Calendar of the... Committee for Compounding', 1.794). As a member of parliament's committee for Irish affairs he sought to persuade disbanding soldiers to re-enlist for Irish service, and in March and April 1647 he was one of the commissioners dispatched by parliament to Saffron Walden to persuade the restive soldiers to do so. As tension between army and parliament escalated Waller was one of the eleven members of the House of Commons accused on 16 June of attacking the rights of subjects and soldiers and fomenting a new war. When the Independent members of both houses left London to take refuge with the army in July, Waller remained behind with the presbyterian majority and was appointed to its committee of safety. After the triumphant return of the Independents he fled to France. His ship was intercepted by a parliamentarian frigate but he nevertheless reached Calais safely on 17 August 1647, whence he sailed to Flushing with $46 in his pocket. He had already prudently sent household goods to Rotterdam. Later he received some of his English rents, and when his wife and family joined him they brought $500. They settled first at Leiden and then at The Hague, where he was able to wait once again on Elizabeth of Bohemia. 
'Banishment' was only the first of the 'chastisements' that God visited on Waller's 'puffed upp... presumption' of good fortune: 'imprisonment, sickness, the death of [his] wife, poverty' followed ('Recollections', 132). A vote of 27 January 1648 disabled him from sitting in parliament, but it was annulled on 3 June and he returned prematurely to England. Excluded and confined after Pride's Purge on 6 December, he was arrested on 12 December on charges of inviting the Scots into England and conspiring with Queen Henrietta Maria. 
For Waller, politics had become a 'labyrinth' ('Vindication', 224). He passed the next ten years '[i]n prisons frequent' and in trying to negotiate his way past suspicion and entrapment in 'so insnaring a time' ('Recollections', 104, 120). He spent eighteen months as a prisoner at St James's Palace before being moved to Windsor Castle and finally to Denbigh Castle in north Wales. He was not ill-treated, and he successfully evaded attempts by 'false brethren' (ibid., 116) to trap him into criminal indiscretion. Thanks to God's special mercy, he said, 'I came off with an intire innocency, not only uncondemned, but unaccused' (ibid., 105). He asserted the integrity and freedom of the captive whose soul, abandoning worldly ambition, walked with God, yet he felt the disgrace of imprisonment and the affront to status keenly: the language of ignominy, of being in 'an obscure base condition', of being the prey of malice and jealousy, is pervasive ('Divine Meditations', 66). One of the few consolations of his imprisonment was the resource and courage of Lady Anne, who found her way over the Welsh mountains to Denbigh 'disguised in mean apparell' and whose 'sweet converse and behaviour' lightened his sufferings ('Recollections', 104-5). He employed his time in writing his 'Vindication... of Sir William Waller' (1793), in which he defended himself against charges of deserting his 'first principles' and aligning himself with 'malignants', of attempting to 'break the Army' and ignite a new war, of transporting 'great summs of mony' to the Netherlands and accepting a commission from the prince of Wales, and of implication in the second civil war ('Vindication', 5-6). The catalogue reveals the distrust in which he was now held by non-presbyterians. Even after his release in early 1652 he remained at risk. 
Lady Anne died in Wales and Waller sought a third wife. He found a 'rich... blessing' in Anne, Lady Harcourt (died 1661) ['see 'Waller, Anne, Lady Waller], widow of Sir Simon Harcourt, who was killed in Ireland in 1643. They married on 13 April 1652 and were, Waller said, 'not only one flesh, but one spirit; one in our affections, judgments, wayes, ends, (as if wee had been cut out of one and the same peece)' ('Experiences', Wadham College, Oxford, 59). His material fortunes also improved, although in the 1650s he was embroiled for years in proceedings against the customs commissioners over his grant of prisage. Nevertheless he now had access both to that income and to his rents. In 1656 he sold the slighted ruins of Winchester Castle to the town corporation. In 1654 he had bought Osterley House, Middlesex, with some 758 acres. He raised $5000 by mortgages on the property, but in 1663 he sold half his acreage for $5250 with which he paid off much of the debt. He had thus not abandoned his entrepreneurial ways, although he had also made a vow in thanksgiving on his third marriage to devote a tenth of the income from his estate to 'pious uses' ('Recollections', 133). His failure to observe this vow led God, who would 'never suffer [him] to sin prosperously', justly to punish him by taking Lady Anne from him ('Experiences', Wadham College, Oxford, 62). She died in 1661; in the nine years of their marriage she bore Waller three children, cared solicitously for the children of his second marriage, and was an intelligent and godly partner to her husband, to whom she brought 'blessing and happiness' ('Recollections', 133). 
In the uncertain 1650s Waller evaded implication in Penruddock's rising in 1655, but on 22 March 1658 his house was searched and he was taken to Whitehall to be questioned by Cromwell. Nothing could be proved against him and he was promptly released, but Waller recorded that Cromwell, although courteous, examined him 'as a stranger, not as one whome he had aforetime... obeyed' ('Recollections', 116). He was suspected, probably correctly, of implication in Booth's abortive rising of 1659 and spent ten weeks as a prisoner in the Tower of London, where he and his wife found kindness and reasonable comfort until their release on 31 October 1659. On 27 December he courageously joined other old parliamentarians at the door of the House of Commons seeking admission to the reconstituted Rump, and in January and February he was active in the negotiations for the return of Charles II. On 21 February 1660 he re-entered the House of Commons, but farce mingled with triumph. In the procession of formerly secluded members William Prynne's long basket-hilt sword 'got between Sir W. Waller's short legs and threw him down, which caused laughter' ('Memoirs of Edmund Ludlow... 1625-1672', ed. C. H. Firth, 2 vols., 1894, 2.235). Two days later he was appointed a member of the new council of state. He was elected to the Convention Parliament as member for Westminster in 1660 but did not sit in the next parliament. Henceforth he retired from public life. Unlike some of his fellow presbyterians he neither sought nor received reward. 
By 1660 Waller had already fallen out with his eldest son, William Waller, and his hopes of the second, Thomas, were not high. His two older daughters married in 1648 and 1649, and Anne, the daughter of Anne Finch, married Sir Philip Harcourt, son of Waller's third wife, in 1661 and died in 1664. His three youngest children had predeceased their mother, Anne. In his retirement he wrote his 'Divine Meditations' (published posthumously in 1680). He apparently maintained old religious associations, for at his death he left $10 each to two ejected London ministers, Thomas Case and Gabriel Sangar, as well as $200 to be disbursed at their discretion for charitable uses. A close friend was Dr Thomas Coxe, who had previously served in the parliamentarian army, a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, an original member of the Royal Society, and Waller's 'faythfull and dearlie respected friend', who was one of the executors of his will and to whom, in thanks for his 'inviolable friendship both to mee and mine', Waller left $250 (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/330, sig. 78). Meanwhile relations with his heir deteriorated further, and in 1666 the younger William brought an unsuccessful suit in chancery against his in-laws and his father over his wife's portion. In his will Waller directed that Osterley House and park be sold and the proceeds used to buy lands to enable his executors to discharge William's debts and pay him an annuity. In the event of the failure of William's male line the annuity would go to Thomas and his heirs. The will is notable both for the control exerted over his sons' wayward financial propensities and for the absence of any affective language applied to them, in contrast to the warmth of his reference to Coxe. 
Waller died at Osterley House on 19 September 1668 and was buried with pomp on 9 October in the New Chapel in Tothill Street, Westminster. On 17 October, however, the heralds removed the heraldic displays, either because they were 'false and beyond his quality' or because his son, to save money, had employed counterfeit heralds (Adair, 274; Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.817). 
Waller's public reputation derives from his part as parliament's 'famous and fortunate Commander' of the first phases of the civil war (J. Vicars, 'Jehovah-Jireh', 1644, 375). Anthony Wood dismissed many of his victories as 'little, or inconsiderable' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.815) but cumulatively, transitory as the fruits of victory sometimes were, his campaigns were crucial to parliament's ultimate control of south-central England and the approaches to the Welsh border. His military talents are difficult to assess beyond his well-known tactical skills for 'nimble and successful marches', exploitation of darkness, and choice of ground (Clarendon, 2.179). His comments are always sensible, if defensively self-serving, but there is no evidence of a wider strategic grasp. In this, however, he did not differ from other commanders in a fluid, reactive, and fragmented war. His efforts were undoubtedly undercut by chronic shortages of men and money and by what an observer called Essex's 'inertia or malice' ('CSP Venice', '1643-7', 2). Although Waller marched in Essex's magnificent funeral procession in October 1646 his retrospective writings still breathed resentment. He was a victim of the splintered command structure and imperfect system of taxation and disbursement of the early war years. As he said, 'Possibly I might have made more brick, if I had had more straw' ('Vindication', 317). Yet although soldiers on both sides were notoriously volatile, the frequency of references to Waller's troops as mutinous, disorderly, and unwilling to follow him suggests that he lacked the touch that generals like Fairfax and Cromwell and other lesser commanders had in dealing with their soldiers. 
Waller was notably short -- 'little in person' but a 'brave little spark' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.814; Adair, x). Portraits show a thoughtful and determined face with a long nose and direct gaze. He was a sociable friend, an uxorious husband, a disappointed father, and a vivid and pithy writer. His writings provide invaluable evidence of gentry life in peace and war. His was, in part from the circumstances of enforced retirement, an examined life, and through his reflections it is possible to discern the views of many of the substantial conservative revolutionaries of 1642 without whom there could have been no civil war. His sociability, humour, and intense pleasure in the comfortable material world of books, gardens, and pictures (the 'long gallery' at Osterley held twenty-four at his death), notably revealed in his 'Divine Meditations' (1680), tell us much not only about Waller's mind and milieu but also about the texture of other gentry lives. The importance of a sense of personal worth and social status is illuminated by his response to the demeaning conditions of imprisonment, while the fragility of seventeenth-century health and the need for stoicism in bearing afflictions are evident in his references to attacks of the stone and other illnesses and in the vivid intensity of his account of his gout, that 'terrible disease' of seventeenth-century men (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.270). 'I am 'an infirmity of the world'', he wrote, 'a 'living Hospital'... 'the Ghost of my departed self'... 'My pain is my life'' ('Divine Meditations', 49-50). Through it all ran his conviction that all life was a manifestation of God's purpose and that the most trivial events as well as the greatest were evidence of God's oversight and intentions: God expected action from his instruments and he corrected and encouraged them on the way to his ends. Waller saw everything -- even defeat, his wives' deaths, his gout -- as sent from God for his ultimate good. The real terror, he believed, would come if it seemed that God did not care and that one was outside ''the pale of his providence''. He prayed, 'Lord, do 'any thing' to me, rather 'then nothing': Let thy pruning knife be never 'so sharp', and 'cutting', it can do me no 'hurt', so long as it 'tends to make me good'' (ibid., 119). 
In his disappointed later years Waller was to 'humbly acquiesce in the good Providence of GOD', but it was a sad acquiescence for 'GOD had determined a judgment upon the land' ('Vindication', 197, 125 ['recte' 325]). He remained a moderate parliamentarian and constitutionalist and a moderate presbyterian. He had wished to tame the king but not to destroy him:'I was borne under a monarchy; and I desire to dy under it' (ibid., 317). He had preserved the 'integrity of [his] heart according to the principles upon which [he] first engaged' (ibid., 225): his allegiance to parliament remained constant, and he rebuffed approaches from the king during the war. Parliaments, like kings, however, could decline from the ideal, and as parliament bowed before the 'incendiaries of the state' Waller became alienated and disillusioned (ibid., 11). In religion too he faced threats to the moderate reform he had hoped for. His puritanism was neither austere nor intolerant. He denied that 'Religion is a dull flat melancholy thing'; instead the 'Communion of Saints' brought 'merry hearts' together ('Divine Meditations', 32, 34). Adherence to the solemn league and covenant allowed moderate toleration given agreement on the essentials of faith, for though there could be no compromise on these there could be flexibility on its indifferent aspects. Nevertheless God required ''decency' and 'order''; 'the 'Garden of his Church'' must not be 'overgrown with 'errours' or 'prophaneness''. When that threatened, 'weeding', 'lopping, and cutting' were required (ibid., 118). As he confronted the 'labyrinth' of the interregnum Waller clung to the belief that it was the world and his former allies, not he, who had changed. 'This change is not in me, but in others', he said ('Vindication', 9-10). 
Yet Waller still believed that there were 'many saints' among his 'former brethren', and he found it 'a misery to think... that there should be saints on two sides' ('Vindication', 10). To his former enemies too he had tried to extend all the 'civilities' he could, and had endeavoured to fight the war in such a way 'that so our differences might be kept in a reconcileable condition; and we might still look upon one another... as enemies that might live to be friends' (ibid., 8). He combined principled parliamentarianism, godliness, and active and committed conduct of hostilities with hope for restoration of a socially and politically conservative, religiously reformed, but unrevolutionary society. In this Waller was typical of many who started a revolution without hesitation in 1642, were alarmed and disillusioned by its progress, and looked for the return of the monarchy in 1660 as the solution to the dangers, personal and public, that it had unleashed. 


@@@@@


doc= 28562


Waller, Sir William (c.1639-1699), politician, was the second, but first surviving, son of Sir William Waller (bap. 1598?, d. 1668), parliamentarian army officer, and his second wife, Lady Anne Finch (died 1651/2), daughter of Thomas Finch, first earl of Winchilsea. He was educated at the University of Leiden in 1647 and travelled abroad with a tutor in France in 1656, where he acquired a reputation as a vicious profligate. His father had closely supervised his strict presbyterian education, but William later went his own 'rebellious way' ('Portland MSS', 3.240-41), leaving the elder Waller fearful of William's influence upon his younger stepbrother. Under the father's will both sons were left in the hands of trustees, but William soon began to sell off his father's property. A number of customs posts that came his way, however, proved less profitable. In 1667 he married Catherine, daughter of Bussy Mansel of Briton Ferry, Glamorgan. He was at Utrecht during the Third Anglo-Dutch War and on his return to England he was targeted as a frequenter of conventicles. As a result a recommendation that Waller should be given the post of minister at Hamburg was ignored. Nevertheless, he was knighted in 1675. 
It was during the period of the Popish Plot in 1678-81 that Waller became prominent as a London JP. He was particularly noted for his anti-Catholic fervour as well as his actions to seize both Catholic priests and their goods. As one contemporary noted: '
God's Providence and Waller's studious care, 

Hath laid the Bottom of their secrets bare. 
('England's Remembrancer')' Waller swiftly established himself in the popular mind as a zealous justice, being often in the vanguard in searches for hidden priests by raiding their homes, as well as the Savoy and other regular Catholic haunts. He also made many conspicuous appearances in the satirical literature of the day, being described as one whose 'Argus Eyes, the Secret'st Corners spy' ('Sir William Waller's Kindness'). In early February 1679 he seized some 1500 popish books and other material in Holborn. Three cartloads of popish goods were subsequently burnt on 11 February under his supervision in a public ceremony lasting from eleven in the morning until one in the afternoon. His anti-Catholicism also brought him into close contact with the great informers of the day and made him a number of enemies. In 1679 he was closely involved in uncovering Thomas Dangerfield's Meal-Tub Plot. Thomas Blood, with whom Waller came into conflict in 1680, claimed to have 'broke the neck' ('CSP dom.', '1679-80', 556) of Waller when the latter was removed from the bench in April for his overzealous pursuit of Blood and Edward Christian's plot to implicate the duke of Buckingham in the crime of sodomy. Nevertheless Waller continued to be involved in various underhand activities such as suborning witnesses and was a prominent member of the Green Ribbon Club. 
Waller represented Westminster in the parliaments of 1679 and 1681. In March of the latter year he was prominent in the entrapment of the conspirator Edward Fitzharris, acting as a witness at Fitzharris's trial for high treason. In May 1681 Waller was arrested for debt and placed in the Fleet prison, but was soon released. With the reaction against plots, informers, and the whigs he fled abroad and was at Amsterdam to greet the earl of Shaftesbury on his arrival there in December 1682. He eventually settled at Bremen in Germany where he became a colonel of the city militia, although he was removed from this post in May 1684. Despite this other miscreants, including Sir Thomas Armstrong and Robert Ferguson, soon gathered around him and were given a warm welcome. English agents noted that Waller played the 'devill... and many more of that stamp... style [him] a second Cromwell' ('Seventh Report', HMC, 386). In 1685 he was made governor of Luneburg, given a regimental command, and established an English factory there. In the wake of the Williamite revolution of 1688 he returned to England, initially leading a regiment (that was soon disbanded), and continued his actions to seize Catholics, for which he had a warrant from William III in March 1689. Thereafter the new king 'did not seem inclin'd to do anything for' him, and 'would not hear of [him as governor] for the Leeward Islands' (Foxcroft, 2.215, 224). His final years are obscure and he died in poverty on 18 July 1699. 
Waller's genuinely held, although slightly unbalanced, anti-Catholicism permeated all of his actions. At the height of the Popish Plot he was never very scrupulous about his methods and was undoubtedly guilty of bullying, suborning, and intimidating many witnesses, as well as seizing their goods for his own benefit. As he plied his trade one contemporary noted that: '
You let them Plot, then shew their Priests a trick, 

You catch the plotters in the very Nick. 

Many by your Industry have been taken, 

For fear of you, some have the land forsaken. 
('Sir William Waller's Kindness')' Scorned by his enemies for his short stature Waller seems to have delighted in his duties and, for a time, successfully strove to make himself as conspicuous as possible in the affair of the Popish Plot. 


@@@@@


doc= 28564


Wallich, Nathaniel (1785-1854), botanist, was born at Copenhagen on 28 January 1785, the son of Kobmand Wulff Lazarus Wallich (1756-1843), merchant, and his wife, Hanne, 'nee' Jacobson (1757-1839). Having graduated MD in 1806 in his native city, where he studied botany under Martin Vahl, he was appointed surgeon to the Danish factory at Serampore, near Calcutta, where he arrived in 1807. When this place was captured by the East India Company in 1808, Wallich, with other officers, was allowed to enter the company's service, and in March 1809 was appointed to assist William Roxburgh at the Royal Botanic Garden, Calcutta. On 30 May 1812 Wallich married Juliane Marie Hals ('b'. 1797), who was subsequently known as Mary Ann Wallich, but she died just two months later. In 1813 he married Sophia Collings. Together they had at least seven children, two of whom died in infancy. Their son, George Charles Wallich, was a distinguished oceanographer. On 10 May 1814 Wallich was appointed assistant surgeon, and on 1 August 1817 superintendent of the garden. He at once distinguished himself by his great activity in collecting and describing new plants, causing them to be drawn, and distributing specimens to the chief European and North American gardens and herbaria. 
In 1820 Wallich, in conjunction with William Carey (1761-1834), began to publish William Roxburgh's 'Flora Indica', to which Wallich added much original matter. In the same year he was officially directed to explore Nepal; besides sending many plants home to Banks, Smith, Lambert, Rudge, and Roscoe, he subsequently issued two fascicles of his 'Tentamen florae Napalensis illustratae, consisting of botanical descriptions and lithographic figures of select Nipal plants' (1824 and 1826), printed at the newly established Asiatic Lithographic Press in Serampore. In 1825 he inspected the forests of western Hindustan, and in 1826 and 1827 those of Ava and Lower Burma. He was invalided to England in 1828, and took with him some eight thousand specimens of plants, duplicates of which were widely distributed to both public and private collections. 'A numerical list of dried specimens of plants in the East India Company's museum, collected under the superintendence of Dr. Wallich' (1828-49) contains in all 9148 species. The best set of these was presented by the company to the Linnean Society. From 1829 to 1832 he published his most important work, 'Plantae Asiaticae rariores, or, Descriptions and figures of a select number of unpublished East Indian plants' (3 vols.). He then returned to India, where, among other official duties, he made an extensive exploration of Assam with reference to the discovery of the wild tea shrub. His health, which had been weak for some years, deteriorated further despite a visit to the Cape of Good Hope in 1842-3, and he was finally forced to resign on 9 April 1846. Returning to London in that year Wallich remained active as a botanist. As vice-president of the Linnean Society, of which he was fellow from 1818, he frequently presided over its meetings. He received the degree of MD from Marischal College, Aberdeen, in 1819, was a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh and of the Danish Royal Society of Copenhagen, and was elected fellow of the Royal Society in 1829; he was also a fellow of the Royal Asiatic Society and of the Geological Society of London. In addition to the more important works already mentioned, he is credited with thirty-five papers, mostly botanical, contributed between 1816 and 1854 to various journals including the 'Asiatick Researches', 'Edinburgh Philosophical Journal', 'Transactions of the Linnean Society', 'Journal of Botany, British and Foreign', and the journals of the Asiatic Society of Bengal and the Horticultural Society. 
Wallich died at his home, 5 Upper Gower Street, London, on 28 April 1854 and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery on 3 May 1854. An obelisk was erected to his memory by the East India Company in the botanical garden at Calcutta. The genus 'Wallichia', of the Palmae, and many species commemorate his name. 


@@@@@


doc= 28565


Paris, Matthew (c.1200-1259), historian, Benedictine monk, and polymath, reveals very little about his own life and personal circumstances. This is disappointing as well as ironical, considering his compulsive concern to collect and record information relating to the events and affairs of his own time, and his acute inquisitiveness concerning times past. Even his parentage, nationality, and social origins remain uncertain. 
His surname, which Matthew Paris usually wrote as Parisiensis, occasionally as de Parisius, might suggest French origins, but Parisiensis was by no means an uncommon patronymic in thirteenth-century England, and there is nothing in his many works, or elsewhere, to indicate that he was anything other than English, especially in view of his characteristically Anglocentric attitude towards the events of his day. Nevertheless, it is quite possible that he studied in the schools of Paris early on in his career. If so, this might account for his surname, his knowledge of French sources for many of his chronicle illustrations, his keen interest in the affairs of the University of Paris and of French affairs generally, and the number of French correspondents and contacts revealed in his works. But Paris himself says only that he became a monk of St Albans, Hertfordshire, on St Agnes's day (21 January) 1217, which suggests that he was born 'c'.1200. The house remained the focus of his life and activities until his death, almost certainly in late May or June 1259. He describes very little about that life, but plainly he was soon attached to the scriptorium, where he worked in some undefined capacity with the first great historian of the abbey, Roger of Wendover, many of whose attitudes profoundly informed those of Paris himself. Upon his mentor's death in 1236 Paris took up the mantle, be it as official historiographer of the house or not, but necessarily with the abbot's licence, and devoted himself largely to his various writings until his own death. 
Despite his seclusion, Matthew Paris was by no means isolated from the world. He had access to papal bulls, imperial 'acta', royal writs and charters, news reports and correspondence from a wide range of sources, English and continental, secular and ecclesiastical; his closest informants, many of whom knew him personally, included Richard, earl of Cornwall (died 1272), a number of Henry III's councillors and 'curiales', and a variety of clerics and nobles, apart from the king himself. Some of these are known to have visited St Albans in this period, a direct and personal means for the transmission of documentary material, as well as gossip and news, which Paris then worked upon for inclusion in his various historical works. Indeed, there are a number of clear indications that it became known to many who mattered that Paris was compiling a vast, universal, contemporary history, the 'Chronica majora', and they fed his voracious appetite for information, some naturally hoping that he would repay his debt in appropriate fashion by means of his pen. This expectation certainly lies behind his presence at Westminster for the celebration of the feast of St Edward the Confessor on 13 October 1247, when Henry III presented to his beloved abbey his recent, precious, acquisition of a vase of the holy blood. According to Paris, Henry required him to write an accurate and full account of what had transpired for the enlightenment of posterity. He then invited Paris and his companions to dinner. The event was supremely worthy of record in Henry's mind, and Paris surely attended the ceremony, doubtless at royal command, precisely because the king was already well aware of his abilities as a historical writer and wished to press them into service. 
The two men certainly came to know each other well. Henry is known to have visited St Albans on at least nine occasions between 1220 and 1259, and these provided opportunities for discussion between monarch and monk in which Paris, or so he would have his readers believe, was frank in his views. In 1250, for example, he remonstrated with Henry for granting rights contrary to the privileges of St Albans, and for allowing others to do the same. During what was probably their last meeting, in March 1257, the two appear to have spent much time together, at table and in the king's private chamber, discussing current affairs, notably the election of Richard of Cornwall as king of the Romans, and Paris records that he took the opportunity to argue with the king on behalf of the masters of the University of Oxford in their dispute with the bishop of Lincoln. Paris was no sycophant. Indeed, he was highly opinionated, and Henry, in particular among his various informants, would not have been happy if he ever knew of the charges that Paris brought against him on various grounds, even though some were later tempered, toned down, or erased. 
Paris's monastic routine was interrupted on other occasions, when he travelled beyond St Albans. He records that he attended the king at Winchester in July 1251, and he was most probably present at the dedication of the abbey church of Hailes, Gloucestershire, in November; the founder, Richard of Cornwall, urged him to give a correct account of the event in his chronicle. At Christmas that year he was at York, for the marriage of Henry III's daughter Margaret to Alexander III of Scotland. But the detail and vividness of his descriptions of some other events, along with the long list of contacts and informants that he acknowledges, suggest strongly that he was more frequently absent from St Albans, meeting members of the English social elite and attending ceremonial gatherings of the court, than he himself reveals. He was undoubtedly well known to many of the great and the good and respected by them. A precious confirmation of some of his contacts, and the relationships engendered, is provided by the list of the various gifts that he had received and then left to his house, including silks and copes from Henry III, Eleanor of Provence, and Hakon IV, king of Norway. 
King Hakon had a part to play in Paris's greatest adventure when, in 1248, he was sent by Pope Innocent IV to reform the monastery of St Benet Holm, on the island of Nidarholm in western Norway. Paris had already been involved in the house's affairs in 1246-7 when, for reasons that remain unclear, he was requested by Hakon to mediate between the monks and their creditors, merchants of Cahors resident in London. He was successful, and this prior contact probably explains why it was Paris who was chosen to go to Norway himself in 1248. He describes himself as visitor to the entire Benedictine order in Norway, but the papal mandate, which he reproduces, indicates that his remit was altogether more modest, for only the abbot and monks of St Benet Holm are mentioned. His arrival in Bergen in early June 1248 occurred at a dramatic time: a great fire was raging through the city, followed by a severe thunderstorm, the lightning shattering the mast of the ship in which he had sailed. He was unharmed and visited King Hakon, who was in Bergen at the time, and delivered letters to him from Louis IX of France, requesting Hakon's participation in Louis's projected crusade and granting him victualling rights in France. Why Paris should have acted as letter-bearer and probably as a fully accredited envoy of the French king is a mystery, but if he was previously known to Louis this would strengthen any surmise that he had spent time in the schools of Paris. On completing his mission to Norway he returned home, presumably in 1249. 
The paucity of detail concerning Matthew Paris's life contrasts sharply with the astonishing volume of information and material that he provides in relation to the events and issues of his contemporary world, and which renders him such an important historian. He will always be known chiefly for his historical writings, but his cultural significance extends far beyond them. As a cartographer, his contribution was considerable. He produced one world map, four versions of an itinerary from London to central or southern Italy, four maps of the Holy Land, a diagram showing the principal Roman roads of Britain, another showing the kingdoms of the Anglo-Saxon heptarchy, and four versions of a map of Britain. The maps, in particular, are of the greatest significance, not because they were influential at the time, but because of their originality, since Paris was experimenting with cartographic concepts virtually unknown in his time and when the idea of a map was not generally understood. His interest here is closely linked to his general interest in collecting and recording information of every kind, and the same may be said of his common practice of illustrating his historical texts with paintings of the shields of individuals mentioned in them. His own observations make it plain that he had a keen interest in heraldry, leading him to reproduce nearly 300 devices, coloured and uncoloured, continental as well as English. At a critical moment in the development of heraldry these representations are precious to the historian of heraldry, and Paris was certainly one of the first to perceive the value of systematic collection of coats of arms. His interest, however, stemmed from his artist's eye and the sense of the illustrator, as well as from his awareness of the historical value of heraldry. Most of his representations occur as marginal illustrations to his historical works, the shields of the persons involved in a battle or other event described being painted in the margins of the text, or at the point when the text mentions the individual's death. 
This urge to illustrate and extend the text pictorially also underlies the inclusion of the scores of drawings that adorn Paris's works, some 130 in the 'Chronica majora' alone. Their attribution was once highly controversial, but on the basis of palaeographical, codicological, and stylistic analysis it is now generally agreed that, with a few exceptions, Paris was solely responsible for these drawings. Comparison between his first tentative efforts, and those more mature and polished drawings executed later in his life, strongly suggests that he was not trained as an artist but was self-taught, taking ideas from models available to him. These included the products of the goldsmiths, led by Walter of Colchester, who are known to have flourished at St Albans in Paris's time, and the illuminated manuscripts then extant in the abbey library. On the basis of these and other influences, some external to his house, Paris came to evolve a highly distinctive and personal style, eclectic, experimental, and innovative, which developed over about twenty-five years. The drawings that resulted are almost all of the same type, either line alone or tinted line. Whether he knew it or not, Paris was following an old Anglo-Saxon tradition which had been revived in England in the first decades of the thirteenth century. But as a result, in particular, of his distinctive use of tints, his extension of the range of colours applied, and his interesting blend of elements of late Romanesque and early Gothic styles, Paris contributed to a notable advance within the genre. 
Finally, it is probable that metalworking should be included among his accomplishments, if credence is given to the words of Thomas Walsingham when he wrote his renowned eulogy and summing-up of Paris 150 years later: 'Matthew Paris, monk of St Albans and an eloquent and famous man full of immeasurable virtues, a magnificent historian and chronicler, an excellent author... Diligently compiling his chronicle from the earliest times up to the end of his life, he fully recorded the deeds of magnates, both lay and ecclesiastical, as well as various and wonderful events; and left for the notice of posterity a marvellous record of the past. He had such skill in the working of gold and silver and other metal, and in painting pictures, that it is thought that there has been no equal to him since in the Latin world. ('Gesta abbatum', 1.395)' 

During his forty-two years at the monastery of St Albans, Matthew Paris wrote or supervised five chronicles, six hagiographies, two domestic histories, a cartulary, and a collection of fortune-telling tracts. They amount to well over a million words, most of them penned by Paris himself. Eighteen St Albans manuscripts containing his hand testify to a staggering diligence in the scriptorium. The 'Chronica majora' fuelled Paris's later historical reputation. A universal chronicle, it is the longest of his annalistic works, spanning two and a half manuscript volumes. Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MSS 26 and 16 (conventionally termed A and B), contain the annals from the creation to 1253, with the volume division occurring at the end of the annal for 1188. The remainder of the 'Chronica' (1254-9) is to be found in BL, Royal MS 14 C.vii (R). These volumes comprise the original, complete manuscript of the 'Chronica', much of which, after the annal for 1213, is autograph. The 'Chronica''s entries up until the mid-1230s are culled in the main from Roger of Wendover's 'Flores historiarum'. Yet there is some debate as to the precise point at which Wendover's 'Flores' ended and Paris's original contribution in the 'Chronica' began. The argument for July 1235 rests in part on a marginal note occurring in B after the account of Frederick II's marriage on 20 July 1235. The note, written in a hand of 'c'.1300, states that 'Master Roger of Wendover, once prior of Belvoir, arranged his chronicle up until this point. Here begins Brother Matthew Paris' (text B, fol. 95'r'). The earliest extant manuscripts of Wendover's 'Flores' (BL, Cotton MS Otho B.v, and Bodl. Oxf., MS Douce 207) close after July 1235 with a colophon indicating that Roger of Wendover was author up to this point. However, in a copy of the 'Chronica' supervised by Paris (see below, C), a note similar to that in B occurs in the hand of the original rubricator at the foot of folio 252'r', on which events of April-May 1234 are described, and a heading in the Otho manuscript of Wendover's 'Flores' suggests that the work ends in 1234. 
The authorship of the final eight folios of the annal for 1259, which are not in Paris's hand, has been disputed, yet the closing colophon is generally considered supportive of Paris's claims: 'Be it known that up to this point wrote the venerable brother Matthew Paris; and although the hand may vary in style, the manner of composition being retained however, the whole shall be ascribed to him' (text R, fol. 218'v'). Paris can therefore be credited with the 'Chronica''s annals for the period from either May 1234 or July 1235 to May 1259. His sources for the period 1235-59 included royal letters, exchequer records, and papal documents as well as a host of informative personal acquaintances, Bishop Robert Grosseteste (died 1253), Henry III, and Hakon IV of Norway among them. The 'Chronica' was produced over a period of two decades, 1240-59. It was completed as far as the annal for 1250 by February 1251, and the continuation from 1251 through to 1259 was not begun before 1252. Although continued into the fifteenth century, the 'Chronica' was not a popular work, failing to gain wide circulation. Two copies of the section up to 1188 (A), made after Paris's death, are extant as BL, Cotton MS Nero D.v, part 1 and BL, Harley MS 1620. Paris himself supervised the copying of the section from 1189 to 1250 into BL, Cotton MS Nero D.v (termed C). This was made in or shortly after 1250, before Paris decided to continue the work beyond this year. Partial expurgation of the 'Chronica' in C resulted in the omission of all matters that Paris had considered, in hindsight, to be 'offensive' to Henry III. The 'Chronica' was edited for the 'Rolls Series' by H. R. Luard between 1872 and 1883, and was translated by J. A. Giles from an inferior edition under the title 'Matthew Paris's English History' in 1852-4. 
The 'Chronica' was the prime source for Matthew Paris's 'Flores historiarum', a selective abridgement of the text, intermingled with additional material derived from the monastic annals of Reading and Southwark. The earliest extant manuscripts of the 'Flores' are Manchester, Chetham's Library, MS 6712 (Ch) (datable to the mid-thirteenth century) and Eton College, MS 123 (E) (datable to 'c'.1300). A common exemplar is believed to underlie these two manuscripts. Only the annals for 1241-9 in Ch (fols. 173'v'-202'v') are in Paris's hand, yet he is credited with authorship of book 1 (ending at 1066 and datable to 'c'.1240-45) and book 2 up until the annal for 1249 (datable to 'c'.1250-55). The 'Flores' was previously ascribed to the mythical Matthew of Westminster (supp. fl. 1300). The provenance of the Chetham manuscript is disputed. It has been argued that Ch was produced by Paris at St Albans for a Westminster audience and that it did not reach Westminster until after 1265. But a more recent view is that Ch up to folio 170'r' was compiled at Westminster from an adapted text by Paris. It was returned to St Albans, probably in 1256, so that Paris could insert his revised version of the annals for 1241-9, and then it was sent back to Westminster. The 'Flores' was edited by Luard for the 'Rolls Series' in 1890. 
There is no doubt as to the provenance of the 'Historia Anglorum'. Bound with the third part of the 'Chronica' in BL, Royal MS 14 C.vii, it is written almost exclusively in Paris's hand. Apart from abridging the autograph manuscript of 'Chronica', it draws upon Wendover's 'Flores' and the epitome of the 'Chronica' in C. It omits matter that Paris had pronounced 'impertinent' to English history in the margins of the 'Chronica', and it tones down passages critical of king and pope. On the first folio of the 'Historia' Paris declares that 1250 is his time of writing. By 1255 the work was complete as far as the annal for 1253 with which the work ends. Sir Frederick Madden edited the 'Historia' for the 'Rolls Series' in the years 1886-9. 
Two further abridgements of the 'Chronica' resulted in the 'Abbreviatio chronicorum' (included in volume 3 of Madden's edition of the 'Historia', 159-348) and the 'Chronica excerpta a magnis cronicis'. The former, covering the years 1000-1255, made additional use of the 'Historia', Wendover's 'Flores', and Henry of Huntingdon's 'Historia Anglorum'. It probably dates from 1255, and remains unfinished. The 'Chronica excerpta' is the shortest of Paris's abridged editions of the 'Chronica majora', extending from 1066 to 1246. It is difficult to prove Paris's authorship of the work, but it was certainly written under his supervision, for he wrote some of the text himself in the unique manuscript BL, Cotton MS Vitellius A.xx (fols. 77'r'-108'v'). Datable to approximately 1246-59, it draws upon the 'Abbreviatio', Wendover's 'Flores', and the 'new material' that Paris added in the margins of his 'Chronica' (from the annals of Southwark and Reading). Several charters, Henry III's forest charter of 1225 for example, are to be found in the 'Chronica excerpta', in a less corrupt and more complete form than in any other of Paris's manuscripts. 
The universal history of the 'Chronica' and its abridgements found its domestic counterpart in Matthew Paris's 'Gesta abbatum monasterii sancti Albani', a work of local history which was edited by H. T. Riley for the 'Rolls Series' in the years 1867-9. The 'Gesta' is a history of the abbey of St Albans from 793 to 1255, arranged according to the twenty-three abbacies that spanned the period, beginning with Willegod and ending with John of Hertford. The autograph manuscript is extant as BL, Cotton MS Nero D.i, folios 30'r'-62'r', and 63'v'-68'v'. How great a debt Paris owed to a twelfth-century cellarer Adam in his writing of the first eighteen lives of the 'Gesta' has yet to be determined. Opinion has commonly supposed that Paris made considerable use of a lost chronicle roll of Adam the Cellarer for the early section of the 'Gesta' ending in 1166. This belief was spawned by an ambivalent note that Paris wrote at the beginning of the autograph copy of the 'Gesta': 'According to the ancient roll of Bartholomew the Clerk, who was for a long while with Adam the Cellarer, serving him, and he retained for himself this roll from among his writings, choosing this one alone' (BL, Cotton MS Nero D.i, fol. 30'r'). Yet the grounds for considering Adam the abbey's first domestic chronicler are not altogether firm. While the 'Gesta' chronicles in some detail Adam's role in the abbey's quest for royal confirmation of its papal privileges, and his acquisition of land for the monks' kitchen, it makes no reference to his historical endeavours. It even terms him 'illiterate'. Adam is praised in later sources for his sanctity and the healing powers of dust from his tomb. Again, there is no mention of a domestic history. Walsingham praised Wendover and Paris for their historical writings but all he could say of Adam was that he was 'a Martha in worldly affairs and a Mary in contemplation' ('Annales... Amundesham', 2.304). 
It is significant, too, that Wendover betrays no sign in the 'Flores' that he had used or even knew of a history of St Albans. With the early lives of the 'Gesta' bearing Matthew Paris's stylistic imprint, it seems reasonable to conclude that Paris was responsible for their literary reconstruction of Anglo-Saxon and Anglo-Norman St Albans. The dating of the 'Gesta' is less contentious. The portion of the text that ends with the death of Abbot William of Trumpington (1214-35) was penned some time before 1250, since the 'Historia', which was begun in this year, refers to it on five occasions. Paris resumed the 'Gesta' in 1255 for, at the end of this short section, he proclaims the year in which he is writing to be the twentieth year of the abbacy of John of Hertford (1235-63). Although the 'Gesta' did not pass into general circulation, it was abridged in Paris's lifetime by John of Wallingford (d. 1258), infirmarer of St Albans some time between 'c'.1246-7 and his death in 1258. John's historical miscellany (BL, Cotton MS Julius D.vii) was culled chiefly from the works of Paris, whose friend he was; Paris himself executed the portrait of John on folio 42'v'. The 'Gesta' was continued at the end of the fourteenth century by Thomas Walsingham. 
The 'Vitae duorum Offarum' shares the 'Gesta''s interest in the early history of St Albans, although it might also be termed a work of hagiography. While ostensibly chronicling the reigns of Offa, a fourth-century king of the Angles, and Offa, king of Mercia ('r'. 757-96), the 'Vitae''s narrative pivots on Offa of Mercia's foundation of the abbey of St Albans in fulfilment of a promise made by his earlier namesake. The antiquity of the abbey is stressed and the character of its royal founder whitewashed. Authorship of the work was once accredited to John de Cella, abbot of St Albans (1195-1214), yet the discovery that it made use of Wendover's 'Flores' as copied into the 'Chronica majora' resulted in its reattribution to Paris. The work is littered with stylisms characteristic of his prose. Although it precedes the 'Gesta' in BL, Cotton MS Nero D.i, the 'Vitae''s later date of composition is betrayed by its closing words: 'The deeds of all the abbots who presided over the church of St Albans from the time of its founder, King Offa, up until the year 1250, are also described in this volume' (Paris, 'Historia duorum Offarum', 31). The 'Vitae' thus dates to 'c'.1250. It was last edited by William Wats in 1639. 
Matthew Paris's literary talents also found an outlet in hagiography. Two Latin saints' lives occupied some of his time in the 1240s and 1250s. The 'Vita Stephani archiepiscopi Cantuariensis' has survived in three fragments, all written in Paris's hand (BL, Cotton MSS Vespasian B.xiii, fol. 133'v', Nero D.i, fols. 196'r', and a leaf attached to 196'v'). They describe the journey to Rome in 1216 of Stephen Langton, archbishop of Canterbury (1207-28), whom Paris charitably declared the equal in theology of Augustine, Gregory, and Ambrose. The fragments also contain accounts of Stephen's meeting with Innocent III, his preaching on the return journey, and the translation of Thomas Becket in 1220. They were edited by F. Liebermann in 'Ungedruckte anglo-normannische Geschichtsquellen' in 1879. Paris's 'Vita beati Edmundi' documents the life and sanctity of a later archbishop of Canterbury, Edmund Rich (1234-40). It is extant only as a fourteenth-century copy, in BL, Cotton MS Julius D.vi, folios 123-156'v'. Although initially attributed to Eustace, a monk of Canterbury, the work has lain firmly at Paris's feet since the late 1890s. It was written some time after 1247, for it contains a letter of Richard of Wyche recounting the translation of St Edmund in June 1247, and it must have been completed before 1253 for it refers to the French queen Blanche of Castile as still living. A date nearer 1247 than 1253 would explain the apparent use made of this work by the 'Historia Anglorum'. The 'Vita' is based on a collection of materials made at Pontigny, but it depends also on information supplied by Richard of Wyche, Robert Bacon, and Edmund's brother, Robert of Abingdon. It was published in 1996 in an English translation by C. H. Lawrence. 
Paris translated his Latin life of Edmund into Anglo-Norman octosyllabic verse for the 'Vie de Seint Edmond', one of his four vernacular saints' lives. A late thirteenth- or early fourteenth-century copy of the work was discovered at Welbeck Abbey, Nottinghamshire, at the beginning of the twentieth century, compensating in part for the loss of another copy of the work (BL, Cotton MS Vitellius D.viii) in the Cottonian fire of 1731. Paris's claim to the authorship of 'Edmond' rests on three pieces of evidence. First, it is dedicated to Isabel de Warenne, countess of Arundel (died 1282), who had also borrowed Paris's lives of Thomas Becket and Edward the Confessor. Second, the author says that he has written the life of Edmund in two languages and the source for 'Edmond' is, as stated above, Paris's Latin life of the saint. Third, the author discloses his name -- Maheu (Matthew) (Paris, 'Vie de Seint Edmond', 1.1692). A recent suggestion that 'Edmond' is the work of an anonymous translator has yet to gain acceptance. It was written some time after 1253, for the reference to a living Queen Blanche in the Latin life is lent a posthumous feel in 'Edmond'. 'Edmond' was probably the latest of Paris's Anglo-Norman hagiographies. It was edited by A. T. Baker in 'Romania' in 1929. 
The 'Vie de Seint Thomas de Cantorbery' drew its inspiration from the twelfth-century 'Quadrilogus'. P. Meyer edited the 'Vie' for the Societe des Anciens Textes Francais in 1885. While there is general agreement that the four extant leaves (BL, Loans MS 88, not in Paris's hand) date from 'c'.1220-30 to 1240, opinion is divided as to their provenance and their author. Some consider them a close, 'first' copy of Paris's lost autograph manuscript, executed in the scriptorium of St Albans during Paris's lifetime. Others argue for their production in London by an unknown poet; it is suggested that Paris was not the creator of the first Anglo-Norman version of the 'Vie', and that the leaves have nothing to do with him. The evidence for the former position is twofold. In a note on the flyleaf of his 'Vie de Seint Auban' in TCD, MS 177, Paris mentions 'a book about St Thomas the Martyr and St Edward which I translated and illustrated ['transtuli et protraxi']'. Over a century later Thomas Walsingham stated that Paris had 'written and most elegantly illustrated' ('conscripsit et depinxit elegantissime') lives of saints Alban, Amphibalus, and the archbishops Thomas and Edmund (BL, Cotton MS Claudius E.iv, fol. 331'v'). Textual and stylistic similarities between 'Thomas' and these other lives appear to confirm common authorship. The evidence for the view that Paris did not write 'Thomas' hangs on an interpretation of the word 'transtuli'. It is suggested that Paris may have meant simply that he had 'transferred' an existing saint's life into his own manuscript. 
If, as seems probable, Matthew Paris was the author of 'Thomas', then the implication of Paris's Dublin note is that he wrote it about the same time as his 'Estoire de Seint Aedward le Rei', for they were originally in the same book. The 'Estoire''s most recent editor, K. Y. Wallace, who edited the text for the Anglo-Norman Text Society in 1983, confines it to the period 1236-45. Attempts to date it to the 1250s have failed to gain support. The 'Estoire' is a verse hagiography of King Edward the Confessor. He was staunch in his repulsion of foreigners, wise in his dependence on baronial counsel, and his reign was a paradigm of conciliatory kingship -- the Edward of the 'Estoire' was everything Paris wished for in Henry III. Paris's dedication of the work to Henry's queen, Eleanor of Provence, possibly sought to communicate these wishes. The provenance of the earliest extant manuscript of the 'Estoire', CUL, MS Ee.iii.59, is debated. It has generally been labelled a close copy and adaptation of the prototype by Paris, executed at St Albans during the 1250s. More recent assessments favour London as its place of origin. The Cambridge manuscript, it is suggested, was a metropolitan copy of between 'c'.1250-55 and 1260, produced perhaps for Eleanor of Castile, daughter-in-law of Henry III, about the time of her marriage to Prince Edward in 1254. 
Attitudes regarding the authorship of the text it contains are similarly shifting. A monk of Westminster initially received credit for the work. He was ousted by Matthew Paris in 1920. Paris's authorship of 'Edward' rests on the documentary foundations shared by 'Thomas', namely the Dublin note and the statement by Walsingham. Although the 'Estoire''s latest editor has fought Paris's corner, an attempt has also been made to credit the work to an anonymous poet. This poet, it is suggested, may be identified with the poet to whom is dubiously attributed the authorship of 'Edmond'. A recent resurrection of a theory that Henry d'Avranches (died 1262/3) was author of the 'Estoire' rests on a statement in the exchequer liberate rolls of 1244-5 that a certain Henry the Versifier was paid $10 for his writing of the lives of saints Edward and George. Yet the majority rally round Paris, while acknowledging that the extant copy hails from Westminster. For the most part the 'Estoire' constitutes a free translation of Ailred of Rievaulx's 'Vita Edwardi Confessoris', with an introductory section derived from Ailred's 'Genealogia regum Anglorum'. Yet it also made use of Paris's 'Flores', and this may explain the Westminster angle that led earlier commentators to ascribe the 'Estoire' to a Westminster monk. In addition, Paris sprinkled the text with original material; his detailed description of Edward's church at Westminster probably sprang from firsthand observation of the abbey before it began to be rebuilt in the 1240s. 
Paris's 'Vie de Seint Auban' is his only vernacular saint's life extant in the autograph. Both the text and illustrations of the 'Vie' in TCD, MS 177 (fols. 29'v'-50) were executed by Paris himself, at a date that has yet to be firmly established. Scholarship in the 1950s and 1960s settled on the decade 1230-40 for production of 'Alban' and this was a dating with which the work's only editor, A. R. Harden, concurred (Paris, 'Vie de Seint Auban', xv-xvii). It was argued that 'Alban' was probably the first of Paris's Anglo-Norman saints' lives, for its handwriting and illustrations were tidy and controlled and it was written in archaic alexandrine 'laisses' instead of the octosyllabic couplets of the other three lives. Recent studies, however, have placed the work a decade or so later, in the 1240s and early 1250s. It is suggested that Paris began 'Alban' in the 1240s, temporarily suspended work on it when he visited Norway in 1248-9, and finished it on his return. 'Alban' is a verse hagiography of England's first Christian martyr, who died in the third century. The central theme of conflict between Christian and pagan dictates its epic form. William of St Albans's twelfth-century Latin life of Alban, of which 'Alban' is a literal, vernacular translation, was written out by Paris himself in the Dublin manuscript. 'Alban' was produced for a monastic audience and the Dublin manuscript is probably that to which Thomas Walsingham refers when he tells of Paris's Lives of saints Alban and Amphibalus. 
A short genealogical chronicle, a collection of fortune-telling tracts, and a cartulary comprise the remainder of Matthew Paris's written legacy. His genealogical chronicle, 'Cronica sub conpendio abreviata a fratre M. Parisiensi', appears in three different versions on the opening and closing leaves of his manuscripts of the 'Chronica' and 'Abbreviatio' (text A, fols. iv'v' and 285, text B, fol. iii'r'- 'v', and BL, Cotton MS Claudius D.vi, fols. 6'v'-8'r'). Sketching the reigns of the kings of England from Alfred onwards, this work proved to be popular outside St Albans, for two contemporary copies are known to exist. Paris's collection of fortune-telling tracts is extant in a single autograph manuscript. Decorative portraits of Socrates, Plato, Euclid, and Pythagorus adorn the pages of Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 304, which is datable to 1240-50. Prognostic works, including the 'Experimentarius' of Bernard of Chartres, constitute the bulk of this volume. 
The 'Liber additamentorum' (BL, Cotton MS Nero D.i) was the name by which Paris himself referred to his cartulary. The documents contained therein are those mentioned by Paris in his historical chronicles, and they span the years 1242-59. A number of earlier St Albans charters and papal privileges complete the collection. The 'Liber' began as a small appendix of documents at the end of the 'Chronica''s annal for 1250; after the annal for 1247 Paris no longer wished to clutter his text with documentary transcripts. This appendix, which survives as folios 85-100, was detached 'c'.1251-3 when Paris decided to continue the 'Chronica' beyond 1250. It became part of a separate volume of miscellaneous material (BL, Cotton MS Nero D.i), which also contains the 'Gesta abbatum' and the 'Vitae Offarum'. Most of the 'Liber' was pieced together in the last ten years of Paris's life. B's documentary appendix, however, was produced before 1250, and the series of St Albans charters and privileges which occupy folios 149-61 had an even earlier genesis. Instead of compiling this series himself, as was previously thought, Paris copied it from a twelfth-century St Albans cartulary which is preserved, in a seventeenth-century hand, in the Bollandist manuscript Brussels, Bibliotheque Royale, MS 7965-7973 (3723), folios 151'r'-216'v'. The order of charters relating to the abbey's early endowment in the Brussels manuscript is the same as that found in the 'Liber'. Paris's alterations comprised the omission of vernacular boundary clauses, which suggests that he felt uncomfortable with Old English. Thus the 'Liber', which was once considered the abbey's first cartulary, reproduces and extends a cartulary compiled a century earlier. 
Beyond St Albans, where his chronicles at any rate were known to Thomas Walsingham, a great admirer, Matthew Paris's works were largely unknown in the later middle ages. Only the 'Flores historiarum', of which there were a number of continuations, enjoyed some popularity. His reputation began to revive with Polydore Vergil (died 1555), who set Paris and William of Malmesbury (died 1142) on a pedestal apart from other medieval chroniclers, but it was the Reformation that led to a notable renewal of interest in his work largely because his acid-sharp anti-papal streak inevitably appealed to protestant scholars. As John Bale (died 1563) commented to Archbishop Matthew Parker (died 1575), 'no chronycle paynteth out the byshopp of Rome in more lively colours, nor more lyvely declareth hys execrable procedynges' (Levy, 96). It was Parker himself who produced the first printed editions of 'Flores historiarum' in 1567, and of the 'Chronica majora' (from 1066 onwards), in 1571, drawing attention in the process to Paris's exposure of the pride, greed, and tyranny of the pope. A similar position was taken up by such other historians as Edward Hall (died 1547), John Stow (died 1605), and John Hayward (died 1627). The learned puritan controversialist William Prynne (died 1669), too, clearly knew Matthew Paris's chronicles well, and drew upon them for anti-Roman ammunition. Paris was also important, moreover, for the growing opposition to the Stuart monarchy, as the source for the received text of 'Magna Carta', even though he presents a conflation, inherited from Roger of Wendover, of the version of 1215 and the reissues of 1217 and 1225. Only the exceptionally learned John Selden (died 1654) appears to have noticed this. Against this background of controversy the edition of the 'Chronica majora' (also from 1066 onwards) which was published in 1640 by William Wats (died 1649), appears as the epitome of moderation, despite anti-papal invective in the introduction. 
Wats's edition was reprinted in 1644 and 1684, and no doubt this was the text used by Sir William Dugdale (died 1686) and other historians and antiquarians in late seventeenth- and early eighteenth-century England. However, Paris fell from sight in the later eighteenth century as medieval scholarship gave way to the Gothicizing antiquarianism of Horace Walpole (died 1797) and his contemporaries, although a copy of the 'Chronica majora' in the edition of 1684 was one of the very few medieval English narrative sources recorded in the library of Edward Gibbon at the time of the historian's death in 1791. Another change in literary and historical fashion, identifiable with the influence of Romanticism, seems to have been needed to bring about a renewed interest in Matthew Paris in the nineteenth century. That this was a development led by fashion rather than scholarship, at least initially, is suggested by the fact that English translations of the 'Chronica majora' and 'Flores historiarum' were published in 1852-4 and 1853 respectively, although, remarkably, they were preceded by a French translation published in 1840-41. These works were published before the scholarly editions of Paris's chief historical works appeared in the 'Rolls Series'. Sir Frederick Madden's edition of the 'Historia Anglorum' (1866-9), and H. R. Luard's editions of the 'Chronica majora' (1872-84) and 'Flores historiarum' (1890), provided texts altogether more reliable than those of Wats and Parker, and they remain the standard editions of these works. They also furthered significantly the understanding of Paris and his works through their accompanying editorial apparatuses, and thus helped to make further advances possible, notably in the work of V. H. Galbraith, who elucidated such issues as the transmission of Paris's texts and the relationship of his work to that of Roger of Wendover, and in the comprehensive monograph study of Richard Vaughan (1958), the first to consider Paris's talents, interests, and productions as a whole. 
Despite a well-provisioned library, as evidenced by the twelfth-century catalogue of Walter the Chanter, the historiographical flowering of St Albans postdated that of other monastic institutions by several decades. Its successful propagation required a well-equipped scriptorium and creative personalities. St Albans possessed wealth for the former. Roger of Wendover and Matthew Paris contributed the latter. For a man who disclosed so few autobiographical details, Paris found intrusion of private thoughts and prejudices upon his works remarkably easy. Monastic humility battled with historical subjectivity. Foreigners riled him. The Savoyards and the Poitevins, he felt, greedily fattened themselves on English revenues and deprived native Englishmen of wealth and rank. The French as a whole he denounced as proud and effeminate. Yet Paris's xenophobia did not feed upon rife patriotism. Although the persistent incursions of the devious Welsh into English territory irritated him, he could admire their bravery, which he considered infinitely preferable to the imbecility and gullibility of the English. The English displayed these characteristics, said Paris, in the face of papal avarice. 
Paris's hatred of the papacy spawned many a torrid passage in the 'Chronica'. He considered its draining of ecclesiastical revenues, and its intrusion of Italians into positions of prominence within the English church, to be evidence of loose morals. Its morals, he said, were those of a prostitute. It practised usury and simony in an endeavour to satisfy its insatiable greed. The secular arm of divine authority fared no better in Paris's hands. Henry III suffered a barrage of criticisms, ranging from poor financial management to cowardice and self-indulgence. He preferred foreign over native counsel, he obstructed abbatial and episcopal elections, and he violated his coronation oaths. He was indecisive, bending one way and another like a reed in the wind. Together, king and papacy comprised the 'two millstones' between which England was metaphorically crushed. Paris was fond of such imagery; commenting upon the detrimental effect of pope and foreigner on the material wealth of England, he likened his country to a vineyard without a wall, open to plunder by all. 
Matthew Paris's irreverent attitude to authority has been lavishly termed 'constitutionalism', and his 'Chronica majora' labelled an 'apologia pro baronibus'. That constitutional matters held some fascination for Paris is certain. Frenzied assaults on taxation, royal extortion, forest inquisitions, and itinerant justices constitute some of the most vibrant passages in the 'Chronica'. His constitutional sensitivities also operated in the domestic arena. His support for the convent in the question of an abbot's right to banish monks to distant cells is evidenced by the 'Gesta abbatum'. The latter text, in addition, maps out the procedures of abbatial elections, such as that of John of Hertford in 1235, with painstaking attention to detail. Yet Paris's constitutional interests appear amateur. They give no impression of having coagulated into coherent political theory. He no more conceived of the 'communitas regni' wielding complete power over a monarch than he conceived of monks ruling abbots. Even his thoughts on the events of 1258 and the implications of baronial reform lack complexity. As a Benedictine monk he lived within the constraints of a traditional hierarchy. This, in itself, may serve to explain why his constitutional leanings lack the definition and impetus that characterize his other attitudes and prejudices. 
Ardent though Paris's prejudices may have been, they never choked his narratives. Documentary evidence comprised the backbone of his historical methodology. 350 documents are preserved in the 'Chronica' and 'Liber additamentorum'. He knew that it was his duty to adhere to the facts. 'The lot of historians', he said, 'is hard indeed, for, if they speak the truth, they provoke man, and if they record falsehoods, they offend God' (Paris, 'Chron.', 5.469-70). Divine displeasure did not prevent him from tampering with documents. Noble intentions floundered beneath his burning desire to communicate a personal vision of the world. He lent an anti-papal slant to a letter of Patriarch Germanos of Constantinople to Pope Gregory IX written in 1232 but included in the 'Chronica''s annal for 1237. Germanos laments the tyranny of the papacy, holding it responsible for the disharmony between the Greek and Roman churches. Interpolations provided literary release for Paris's staunch convictions. In describing a dispute over three knights' fees in Horncastle between Hugh Fitzralph and Silvester of Everdon, bishop of Carlisle (died 1254), he relished attacking the royal absolutism that he felt stamped the actions of the king's agents in the affair, misrepresenting the facts in the process. Furthermore, Paris's ahistorical acquittal of King Offa of Mercia of the murder of AEthelberht of East Anglia in 794, undertaken in the 'Vitae Offarum', stemmed from little more than loyalty to the founder of St Albans. On occasion, Paris can be charged with plain carelessness rather than wilful adulteration. His pastiche of the 'Magna Carta' originated in a thoughtless conflation of the version of 1215 with the reissues of 1217 and 1225, inherited from Roger of Wendover. He had failed to question whether the charters of John and Henry were significantly different. 
The scholarly liberties Matthew Paris claimed render his works unreliable in places. Yet he was not consistently inept. Neither was he an obsessive trickster. The accurate transmission of documents was not beyond his technical mastery. His account of Henry III's speech at the exchequer in October 1256 can be checked against the exchequer memoranda rolls and it fares well. Many of the writs and charters that he copied into the 'Liber additamentorum' from the twelfth-century cartulary of the abbey remain faithful to their originals. He alternated fraudulence with precision, prejudice with impartiality. A recent description of him as 'tolerably accurate' captures the duality of his approach. He battled to control his material, shaping and tailoring hundreds of documents and endless amounts of detail into a narrative style. Success could never be unqualified. His historical works as a whole were shifting entities, undergoing endless stages of revision and censorship. They were flighty works, diverse in content. In his sprightly if crude Latin, Paris told of a thunderbolt which struck the queen's bedroom in 1251, crushing her bed to a powder, and a disease that drove cows mad in the autumn of 1252. He wondered sometimes like a child. The sparkling disintegration of a comet in 1239 seemed to him the fiery trail of a dragon. 
Paris's fascination with the world probably fed on his uneasy conviction that human history was drawing to a close. For most of his life he laboured under the notion that time would end in 1250. Apocalyptic verses conclude the 'Chronica' in this year, although Paris had later to resume the work when the last judgment failed to occur. Within Paris's closed historical chronology the wheel, or die, of fortune played havoc with men's lives and tempered human joys with human woes. In maudlin moments he lamented the deceptive and transitory nature of earthly events. Yet melancholia was not his favourite state. His works bear the hallmark of an effervescent imagination partially constrained by scholarly purpose and historical integrity. Together they comprise a spirited and evocative portrayal of political and intellectual life in England and Europe in the first half of the thirteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 28566


Wallingford, William (d. 1492), abbot of St Albans, was almost certainly born at Wallingford, Berkshire, where the Benedictine priory was a dependent cell of St Albans. It was probably under Prior John Stoke's patronage that he entered St Albans as a novice, during the 1430s. Following his profession he was sent to Oxford to study at Gloucester College. It appears he was intended to study canon law -- later he demonstrated considerable legal knowledge when defending himself against charges of embezzlement -- but he remained at the university for no more than five years and left without taking a degree: Abbot John Whethamstede later observed that all Wallingford had acquired at Oxford was 'a taste for money' (Riley, 2.130). Wallingford returned to St Albans in the early 1440s and under John Stoke, newly elected abbot, was promoted to a succession of senior obedientiary posts: by 1445 he held five offices simultaneously, including archdeacon, cellarer, bursar, forester, and sub-cellarer, and before 1451 he had also been appointed official-general. Following Stoke's death in December 1451, Wallingford was one of three candidates proposed for the abbacy. However, when it became clear that the former abbot, John Whethamstede, was prepared to resume office he withdrew his candidacy. 
During the vacancy following Stoke's death, Wallingford and his brother Thomas were investigated for their involvement in the embezzlement of 1000 marks from conventual funds, a crime to which Stoke himself had confessed shortly before his death. Stoke claimed he had entrusted the brothers with the money and that they had concealed it in a chest in the dormitory. The chest was recovered, but it was found to contain no more than 250 marks. Wallingford's suspected dishonesty was recalled in 1453, when he was required to render accounts for his various offices. These revealed significant losses, and suggested that Stoke and his officials had been guilty of widespread mismanagement. Wallingford withdrew in disgrace, and Whethamstede began an investigation into his predecessor's administration. His findings confirmed that so substantial a fall in income could have occurred only through maladministration or outright embezzlement. Wallingford responded with the scholarly but evasive argument that it was inevitable for a monk charged with such worldly responsibilities to fall in with the 'unrighteous followers of Mammon' (Riley, 2.111-12). He also secured the support of other senior monks, and the protection of some distinguished noble patrons, including Edmund Tudor, earl of Richmond, and Lord and Lady Sudeley, who prevailed upon Whethamstede to judge him leniently. Presenting new accounts to Whethamstede, Wallingford appears to have made a partial admission of guilt, but claimed that the amount lost was considerably less than had been alleged. Whethamstede again seems to have been persuaded, and even commended Wallingford for his business skills. However, in 1454, when Whethamstede requested a contribution from Wallingford towards a clerical tenth, Wallingford now denied that he had any money at all, although in his own revised accounts he had claimed to hold over $160. Whethamstede accused him of perjury, but once again Wallingford seems to have been saved from any punitive actions by the intercession of others. Whethamstede was persuaded to maintain Wallingford in his offices, provided that he raised at least $200 or $300 from them within the next two years. 
Despite these repeated allegations, Wallingford remained in office throughout the 1450s and 1460s. He was again proposed as a candidate for the abbacy following Whethamstede's death in 1465, but the prior, William Albon, was preferred. Under Albon, Wallingford himself became prior, an office he held for over eleven years. Then, following Albon's death in 1476, he again declared his candidacy and this time was elected abbot on 5 August. 
Wallingford's rule as abbot has long been seen as indicative of the corruption and decadence into which English monasteries fell in the century before the dissolution. His register reveals that he misappropriated conventual resources, maintained his own liveried retainers at the community's expense, and granted offices and rents to friends, family, and members of the local nobility. His register also suggests he frequently abused his ecclesiastical authority in the local community, making fraudulent charges against testators, granting a licence for mass to be celebrated in an alehouse, and deposing the prioress of Sopwell on false grounds of heresy. Moreover Cardinal John Morton, in a monition issued on 5 July 1490, accused Wallingford of wide-ranging financial mismanagement, simony, usury, and wasting the goods of the monastery to the value of 8000 marks. He claimed Wallingford had misgoverned St Albans and its dependent communities, attacking those monks who wished to lead a religious life, and interfering in the elections of the nunneries and priories under his jurisdiction, and he made serious allegations concerning Wallingford's sexual corruption and his tolerance of moral laxity in others, accusing the abbot of soliciting the wife of a St Albans man, and tolerating the affair between a local woman and Thomas Sudbury, formerly a monk of St Albans who was now prior of St Andrew's, Northampton. Although it is difficult to substantiate many of these claims, a number of the documents in Wallingford's register give credence to the accusations surrounding his management of the dependent cells. 
The evidence of Wallingford's misrule should not, however, be allowed to obscure his wider achievements as abbot. His relationship with his nunneries may have broken down, but he seems to have maintained a stable relationship with the other cells, and was credited with settling a long-standing dispute between the mother house and the priory at Tynemouth. He also made significant improvements to the abbey buildings, spending over $8000 in the completion of the new bakehouse, chapter house, and library which had been begun under Whethamstede; and adding costly new decorations to the interior of the abbey church. He also developed a considerable public reputation as spokesman for his order and even, surprisingly, as a reformer. A leading figure in the Benedictine general chapters, he presided at their meetings, and at least once, in 1480, served as visitor for all the Benedictine houses in the diocese of Lincoln. Wallingford also appears to have been a generous patron of education and scholarship. He increased the number of his own monks who studied at Oxford and Cambridge, and supported as many as a dozen local boys through school and university. He seems also to have encouraged the work of the so-called 'St Albans printer', who established a press -- the earliest outside Westminster -- perhaps within the abbey precincts, 'c'.1480. 
Perhaps most significant, however, were Wallingford's efforts to defend and extend St Albans' privileges and exemptions from episcopal and royal control. Although the independence of the religious orders was coming under increasing criticism, Wallingford successfully blocked all efforts to interfere in the management of his community or its endowments. Throughout the 1480s he had maintained representatives at the curia, and secured a number of significant new privileges, including the right to assume episcopal orders for himself and his successors. Between 1487 and 1492 he also successfully defended the abbey from the efforts of Henry VII and Morton to deprive it of its exempt status and subject it to archiepiscopal visitation. In 1487 the king had secured the bull 'Quantas in Dei ecclesias' from Innocent VIII empowering Morton to visit all exempt communities. Wallingford immediately dispatched a representative to the curia to secure confirmation of the abbey's exemptions and privileges -- on 6 February 1490 Morton received a bull warning him not to allow St Albans to suffer any further 'molestation'. The archbishop then sent his own delegation to Rome, which apparently presented the pope with allegations of Wallingford's corruption and misrule. Consequently on 6 March 1490 Innocent issued another bull, declaring that it had recently been brought to his attention that in 'certain houses' the monks 'are leading a wanton and most dissolute life' (Coulton, 4.515-16), and ordering that these houses be subject to immediate visitation, without recourse to earlier exemptions. Morton received this bull on 24 April and appears to have made preparations for a visitation. However, Wallingford also responded quickly, dispatching another delegation to the curia to renew his appeal for confirmation of the abbey's privileges. Innocent appears to have responded verbally to both parties between 30 June and 4 July, remarkably giving his assent to the claims of each. Despite his bull of 6 March, Innocent seems to have offered the St Albans monks full confirmation of their privileges, and at the same time offered Morton notional support for his planned visitation. Consequently on 5 July, Morton issued Wallingford with his 'Monitio', detailing the allegations of corruption made in the curia, and calling upon him to reform his own house and the nunneries within thirty days, and his other communities within sixty days, or face archiepiscopal visitation. It appears that Wallingford then made further appeals to the pope, for on 30 July, Morton received notification that the monks' claims to exemption were under consideration by a committee of papal chaplains. This seems to have been enough to halt an immediate visitation, and in spite of a further bull from Innocent issued on the same day, declaring his support for monastic reform, there is no evidence to suggest that a visitation took place. With Thomas Sudbury's death in 1490, and Wallingford's own death two years later, Morton perhaps considered the imperative for reform at St Albans had been removed. 
Wallingford died at St Albans between 23 May and 5 June 1492, and was probably buried in St Albans Abbey church. 


@@@@@


doc= 28567


Wallington, Nehemiah (1598-1658), turner and diarist, was born on 12 May 1598 in the parish of St Leonard Eastcheap, London, the tenth of twelve children and the fourth son of John Wallington, citizen and turner (1552/3-1638), and his wife, Elizabeth (1562/3-1603), the daughter of Anthony Hall, citizen and skinner, and his wife, Jane. Following the death of Elizabeth, John Wallington married Joan Hinde, a widow with two children, and following her death in 1605 he married, as his third wife, Alice Harrison (died 1634), also a widow with two children and the mother of Patience, Nehemiah's half-sister. 
Wallington was never apprenticed but set up shop as a turner after admission to the Turners' Company, by patrimony, on 18 May 1620. Within a year he had married Grace Rampaigne; she was the sister of Livewell Rampaigne, a minister of Burton and then Broxholme, whose letters of comfort Nehemiah preserved and whose widow, Sarah, and her two children lived with the Wallingtons from 1635 until her death in 1654, and of Zachariah Rampaigne, a planter in Ireland killed during the rising of 1641, whose son Charles was taken in by the Wallingtons and served as Nehemiah's apprentice until his freedom in 1655. 
Wallington's freedom as a turner and his marriage followed two years of mental breakdown, during which, doubting of his salvation, he had made a number of suicide attempts, complicated by his desire to protect his father and the puritan community from the disgrace of such an ungodly act, and had first begun to write. His work, initially a record of his sins and God's mercies, was abandoned in 1620 when he began 'A record of God's mercies, or, A thankful remembrance', part diary, part commonplace book, which he continued intermittently well into the 1630s. A combination of work and family responsibilities apparently prevented any further breakdown. Wallington was sustained by the friendship and counsel of Henry Roborough, the young curate and lecturer at St Leonard Eastcheap, by the steady common sense and strength of Grace, and perhaps by the discipline of writing. He also received a loan from the Turners' Company. However, the death of his first child, Elizabeth, in 1625 led to a fresh crisis, during which Wallington confessed that he forgot all his 'purposes, promises and covenants' with God and was inconsolable until reminded by Grace that their daughter had gone 'home to her husband Christ Jesus' ('A record of God's mercies', Guildhall Library, MS 204, p. 409). Their son John died six months after Elizabeth, their second son, Nehemiah, in 1627, and their last child, Samuel, born in 1630, died in October 1632. Only their daughter Sarah, born in 1627, survived to adulthood to marry, on 20 July 1647, a young godly turner, John Houghton. 
Unlike his father and his elder brother John, both of whom were liverymen, serving their turn as masters, Wallington never left the yeomanry of the Turners' Company. Although he apparently worked steadily at his craft he had no head for business, as he confessed on more than one occasion, and struggled all his life to find some balance between the demands of his calling as a turner and the more compelling demands of his calling as a Christian. He regularly rose in the small hours of the morning to write before private prayer in his closet and further public prayers with his household. He admitted to spending too much on books, particularly on news-sheets during the 1640s, and had a library of more than 200 works, beginning with William Gouge's 'Of Domestical Duties', which he purchased soon after his marriage. By 1654, when he compiled a catalogue of his writings, he listed fifty notebooks, ranging from his diary to memorials of God's judgements against sabbath breakers, commonplaces from scripture, and various puritan guides to the godly life, sermon notes, a volume of collected letters, a number of volumes detailing the mercies he had received, and a number of volumes of political news collected during the 1640s. Aside from a book called 'The Mighty Works of the Lord, which is a Prop to Faith', which he gave to his wife, and a book on patience, which he left to his half-sister Patience, he bequeathed all his notebooks to his son-in-law, John Houghton. He had little else to leave and apparently made no will. 
Wallington was in many respects the quintessential puritan, introspective, bookish, sermon-going, scrupulous in his business relations, and constantly struggling for even-tempered acceptance of life and of himself, which he believed should accompany assurance of election. He followed the fortunes of protestantism during the Thirty Years' War and those of parliament during the civil war. Although he served conscientiously as a lay elder in the fourth London classis from 1646 until his last years his Presbyterianism was based on his desire for parish discipline, and his only quarrel with the protectorate was that it did not bring the godly reformation that he had long prayed for. As he wrote in 1655, it was the toleration of 'many strange, false forms of worship', of 'Sabbath profanation', of 'our cruel oppression of the poor', and of 'our impudent pride' that he found profoundly disillusioning and that made him fear in his last years a dreadful punishment of his 'rebellious City' ('A memorial of God's judgments upon sabbath breakers, drunkards and other vile livers', BL, Sloane MS 1457, fols. 99'r'-101'v'). Wallington died in Eastcheap in August 1658. 


@@@@@


doc= 28568


Wallis, Tryphosa Jane (1774-1848), actress, was the daughter of the provincial performers Jane Wallis (1750-1785) and Fielding Wallis (1754-1817), whose father, Revd Thomas Wallis, was rector of Boho and Templecarn, in counties Fermanagh and Donegal, Ireland. The eldest of eight children, she was born on 11 January 1774 at Richmond, Yorkshire, where her maternal grandmother was associated with the management of the theatre. She appeared as a child in Dublin at the Smock Alley and Crow Street theatres with her parents. The family returned to England, where she continued performing, and after her mother's death in 1785 she was essentially adopted by Lord and Lady Loughborough (later earl and countess of Rosslyn). Through their influence she made her debut at Covent Garden on 10 January 1789, as Sigismunda in James Thomson's 'Tancred and Sigismunda'. The 'European Magazine' described her as exhibiting 'great marks of feeling and sensibility'. The following season she gained an engagement in Bath, and played Rosalind in 'As You Like It' for her first appearance (17 October 1790). 
Tryphosa Wallis was thereafter seen as Lucile in 'False Appearances', Indiana in Richard Steele's 'The Conscious Lovers', Calista in Nicholas Rowe's 'The Fair Penitent', Maria in 'The Citizen', and Beatrice in 'Much Ado about Nothing'. She performed in both Bath and Bristol until 1794, and became a great favourite. On 4 March 1794 she delivered an effusive speech at a farewell benefit and was presented with a medallion from the ladies and gentlemen of Bath, as a 'small tribute to her private virtue and public merit'. 
On 7 October 1794, as 'Miss Wallis' from Bath, she reappeared at Covent Garden, where she was engaged for three years at $18 a week, and played Imogen in 'Cymbeline'. She repeated many of the prominent characters in which she had been seen in Bath, including Juliet, Calista, Beatrice, and Cordelia, and played several original parts, of which the most considerable were Georgina in Hannah Cowley's 'Town Before You', Julia in Miles Peter Andrews's 'Mysteries of the Castle', Lady Danvers in Frederick Reynolds's 'Fortune's Fool', and Miss Dorillon in Elizabeth Inchbald's 'Wives as they Were and Maids as they Are'. Although the critics were relatively complimentary, there are some hints that puffs advertising her performances were exaggerated in their praise. The 'Secret History of the Green Rooms' (1795) noted that she could justly deliver 'deserted love, plaintive melancholy, and soft friendship... all beyond these nature has denied and art will scarcely supply them'. Roach's 'Authentic Memoirs of the Green Room' (1796) was harsher: 'it is not the approbation of a 'lerd' or 'lady', nor being engaged at an exorbitant salary, can make John Bull see more merit than there actually is'. 
Tryphosa Wallis's final performance at Covent Garden was on 22 May 1797. She then appeared for a short time at Newcastle and Edinburgh before marrying James Elijah Campbell of the 3rd regiment of the foot guards, at Gladsmuir, East Lothian, in June or July. On her marriage she left the stage for a time. 
On 20 February 1813, as 'Mrs Campbell late Miss Wallis', she reappeared at Covent Garden, playing the title role in Garrick's 'Isabella' but she lost her nerve and was a failure. The 'Theatrical Inquisitor' (1813) noted her 'matronly appearance and deportment', commented that her face was expressive of the amiable and domestic passions, but acknowledged she was 'unequal to the successful personation of the higher characters of drama'. Despite this faint praise, she reappeared at Bath in April and was employed there for the following season, but she never recovered her lost ground. After this final engagement she retired permanently from the stage, aged thirty. Contemporary biographers mention her as a good daughter, a good sister, and a good wife. 
Tryphosa Jane Campbell and her husband had at least seven children. One daughter, Charlotte Eliza Jane, died in 1826, and her will reveals the names of her brothers: James, John, Fielding, and Hugh. The deaths of two other daughters, Jane and Mary, aged twenty and seventeen, were reported in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' of March 1833. The same announcement mentioned that their father was, by that time, a captain in the Royal Navy. He had evidently died by the time of his wife's death, on 29 December 1848, as her tombstone at All Saints' in Edmonton, Middlesex, describes her as a widow. 


@@@@@


doc= 28569


Wallis, George (1740-1802), physician and writer, was born at York. Little is known of his early life, but he studied medicine, and, after graduating MD from Aberdeen, obtained a large practice at York. He was much attached to theatrical amusements, and, in addition to other pieces, such as the satirical 'Perjury' (1774), he composed a mock tragedy entitled 'Alexander and Statira', which was acted at York, Leeds, and Edinburgh. In 1775 a dramatic satire by him, entitled 'The Mercantile Lovers', was acted at York. Despite its intrinsic merit, the play sketched too plainly the foibles of prominent citizens of the town, and as a result of their resentment, Wallis lost his entire medical practice. He was obliged to move to Buckingham Street, London, where an expurgated edition of the play appeared in the same year. In London he commenced as a lecturer on the theory and practice of physic, and in 1778 published an 'Essay on the Evil Consequences Attending Injudicious Bleeding in Pregnancy' (1781). His other medical writings included: 'Nosologia methodica oculorum, or, A Treatise on the Diseases of the Eyes, Translated and Selected from the Latin of Francis Bossier de Sauvages' (1785); 'The Art of Preventing Diseases and Restoring Health' (1793; 2nd edn, 1796), which was translated into German in 1800; and 'An Essay on the Gout' (1798). He also edited the 'Works of Thomas Sydenham on Acute and Chronic Diseases' (2 vols., 1789) and the third edition of George Motherby's 'Medical Dictionary' (1791). Wallis died on 29 January 1802 at Red Lion Square, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 28570


Wallis, George (1811-1891), museum curator and art teacher, son of John Wallis (1783-1818) and Mary Price (1784-1864), was born at Wolverhampton on 8 June 1811 and educated at Wolverhampton grammar school from 1820 to 1827. He practised as a decorative artist at Manchester from 1832 to 1837, but he developed an interest in art education as it applied to design for manufactures, and joined the government School of Design at Somerset House, London, in 1841. He married, on 30 June 1842, Matilda (1818-1888), daughter of William Cundell of Camberwell. They had two sons and two daughters. He became headmaster of the Spitalfields School in January 1843 and was promoted to the headmastership of the Manchester School of Design on 15 January 1844, which position he resigned in 1846, as he could not agree with administrative and educational changes at Somerset House. As part of a continued advocacy of industrial exhibitions of the sort held quinquennially in Paris, he organized what was probably the first exhibition of art manufactures ever held in England, at the Manchester Royal Institution in 1845. In the same year he delivered a systematic course of lectures on the principles of decorative art which led Lord Clarendon to ask him to draw up a chart of artistic and scientific instruction in relation to industrial art. Wallis's ideas on the subject were claimed as an important influence on the system of instruction later developed by the Department of Science and Art. 
The royal commissioners for the Great Exhibition of 1851 appointed Wallis deputy commissioner for the eastern division of London, the northern counties of England, and the whole of Ireland, a position he exercised from 1850. During the Great Exhibition itself he was superintendent of the British textile division and a deputy commissioner of juries. After the close of the exhibition, he accepted the headmastership of the Birmingham School of Design. In 1853 he was again appointed as a commissioner sent by the government to the United States to report on the New York Industrial Exhibition, along with Charles Lyall, Wentworth Dilke, Joseph Whitworth, and John Wilson. Wallis's and Whitworth's reports were subsequently used to compile 'The Industry of the United States in Machinery, Manufactures, and Useful and Ornamental Arts' (1854), which helped frame British attitudes to the threat of American economic competition. During the International Exhibition of 1862 Wallis acted in the same capacity as he had done in 1851 and was again actively engaged in the British sections for the Paris exhibitions of 1855 and 1867. 
In 1858 Wallis left Birmingham and joined the South Kensington Museum, where in 1863 he was appointed senior keeper of the art collections, a post he retained until just before his death; he thus presided over a period of marked expansion in the museum's collections and installations. He was succeeded by Caspar Purdon Clarke. Wallis was an early advocate of state aid for art and had a large share in promoting the system of circulating works of art in provincial museums. He exhibited a few paintings at the Academy, Suffolk Street, and elsewhere. On 7 March 1878 he was elected FSA. He wrote in most of the leading artistic periodicals, including the 'Magazine of Art' and the 'Art Journal', to which he was one of the earliest contributors, and also delivered a vast number of lectures on design and kindred subjects. He published a number of books on decorative and industrial art, fine arts, and art education. He died at 21 St George's Road, Wimbledon, on 24 October 1891 and was buried in Highgate cemetery on 28 October. His sons, George Harry Wallis (1847-1936) and Sir Whitworth Wallis (1855-1927), became gallery curators at Nottingham and Birmingham respectively; his daughter Rosa Wallis (1857-1946) was a painter. 


@@@@@


doc= 28571


(William) Henry Wallis (1805-1890), born at Bungay, Suffolk, on 5 February 1805, practised for some years as an engraver of small topographical illustrations for books. Both Henry and Robert often signed their work simply 'Wallis', leading on occasion to problems of identification. In the 1840s Henry suffered two attacks of paralysis, which obliged him to find another occupation. He then turned to picture dealing, and in 1861 was offered the post of manager at the French Gallery at 120 Pall Mall. He bought out the owner, Ernest Gambart, in 1867 for $1000. In 1871 he retired in favour of his son Thomas. He died at home at 55 Effra Road, Brixton, on 15 October 1890. 


@@@@@


doc= 28572


Wallis, John (1616-1703), mathematician and cryptographer, was born on 3 December 1616 at Ashford in Kent. He was the third of five children of the Revd John Wallis (1567-1622), son of Robert Wallis of Finedon, Northamptonshire, Cambridge BA and MA (Trinity College), and minister at Ashford from 1602 until his death on 30 November 1622, and his second wife, Joanna (died 1643), daughter of Henry and Mary Chapman of Godmersham, Kent. She raised Wallis and his two brothers and two sisters after their father's death. 
Wallis's education was begun at Ashford. Following an outbreak of the plague in 1625 he studied Latin grammar at a private school in Tenterden in Kent. The school had been started by a Mr Finch who had enrolled a schoolmaster to instruct his children, and it closed in 1630 when the eldest child was sent to university and the other children were sent elsewhere. Although Wallis claimed to be already fit for university, in 1631 he was sent to another school, run by Martin Holbeach at Felsted in Essex, where he continued his studies of Latin and learned Greek and Hebrew, as well as some logic. Mathematics was not taught, but Wallis gained some knowledge in that field at home during the Christmas vacation of 1631, when his brother passed on to him the knowledge he had acquired 'in Order to a Trade' (Scriba, 'Autobiography of John Wallis', 26). 
At Christmas 1632 Wallis was admitted as a pensioner to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where he became noted as a dialectician. He studied natural philosophy, ethics, metaphysics, theology, anatomy, and medicine, and graduated BA in 1637 and MA in 1640. His tutors were Anthony Burgess, divine and later member of the Westminster assembly, Thomas Horton, later president of Queens' College and professor of divinity at Gresham College, and Benjamin Whichcote, later provost of King's College and vice-chancellor of the university, and to these three men Wallis addressed the dedicatory letter of his 'De angulo contactus et semicirculo disquisitio geometrica' (1656). Wallis claimed that, as a student of the anatomist and physician Francis Glisson, he was the first to defend publicly at Cambridge Harvey's doctrine of the circulation of the blood. At the end of his life he maintained to have been self-taught, after the informal instruction by his brother, with regard to the study of mathematics: 'I did thenceforth prosecute it, (at school and in the University) not as a formal Study, but as a pleasing Diversion, at spare hours; as books of 'Arithmetick', or other 'Mathematical' fell occasionally in my way. For I had none to direct me, what books to read, or what to seek, or in what method to proceed. For Mathematicks, (at that time, with us) were scarce looked upon as 'Accademical' studies, but rather 'Mechanical'; as the business of 'Traders', 'Merchants', 'Seamen', 'Carpenters', 'Surveyors of Lands', or the like; and perhaps some 'Almanak-makers in' 'London'. And amongst more than Two hundred students (at that time) in our College, I do not know of any Two (perhaps not any) who had more of 'Mathematicks' than I, (if so much) which was then but little; And but very few, in that whole University. For the Study of 'Mathematicks' was at that time more cultivated in 'London' than in the Universities. (Scriba, 'Autobiography of John Wallis', 27)' In 1640 Wallis was ordained by the bishop of Winchester and became chaplain first to Sir Richard Darley at Buttercrambe, Yorkshire, then to the widow of Horatio, Lord Vere, alternately at Castle Hedingham in Essex and in London. One evening in late 1642, sitting at supper at Lady Vere's in London, he was able to decipher in about two hours a letter in code that was shown to him. Cryptography remained one of Wallis's activities during the civil war, when he exercised it on behalf of the parliamentary party, and later in his life, as he wrote in his autobiography: 'being encouraged by this success, beyond expectation; I afterwards ventured on many others (some of more, some of less difficulty) and scarce missed of any, that I undertook, for many years, during our civil Wars, and afterwards. But of late years, 'the French Methods of Cipher' are grown so intricate beyond what it was wont to be, that I failed of many; tho' I have master'd divers of them. (Scriba, 'Autobiography of John Wallis', 38)' In 1643, following the death of his mother, Wallis was left a substantial estate in Kent. In the same year he published 'Truth Tried, or, Animadversions on the Lord Brooke's Treatise on the Nature of Truth'. From 1644 he acted as secretary to the assembly of divines at Westminster, London, which was charged with proposing a new form of church government. In his autobiography he provided an interesting retrospective account of the activities and debates of the Westminster assembly. Also in 1644 he obtained a fellowship at Queens' College, Cambridge, but he resigned after about a year when, on 24 March 1645, he married Susanna (1622-1687), daughter of John and Rachel Glyde of Northiam, Sussex. In 1644 he gave evidence against Archbishop Laud, but in 1648 he signed the remonstrance against the execution of Charles I and in 1649 the 'Serious and Faithful Representation'. 
During this period in London Wallis became engaged in experimental philosophy, and his circle was one of those whence the Royal Society emerged after the Restoration. His account of those early events is of considerable interest: 'About the year 1645, while I lived in 'London' (at a time, when, by our Civil Wars, Academical Studies were much interrupted in both our Universities:) beside the Conversation of divers eminent Divines, as to matters Theological; I had the opportunity of being acquainted with divers worthy Persons, inquisitive into Natural Philosophy, and other parts of Humane Learning; And particularly of what hath been called the 'New Philosophy' or 'Experimental Philosophy'. We did by agreement, divers of us, meet weekly in 'London' on a certain day, to treat and discours of such affairs. Of which number were 'Dr. John Wilkins' (afterward 'Bishop of' 'Chester'), 'Dr. Jonathan Goddard', 'Dr. George Ent', 'Dr. Glisson', 'Dr. Merret' ('Drs. in Physick',) 'Mr. Samuel Foster' then Professor of Astronomy at 'Gresham College', 'Mr Theodore Haak' (a German of the 'Palatinate' and then Resident in 'London', who, I think, gave the first occasion, and first suggested those meetings) and many others. These meetings we held sometimes at 'Dr. Goddards' lodgings in 'Woodstreet' (or some convenient place near) on occasion of his keeping an Operator in his house, for grinding Glasses for Telescopes and Microscopes; and sometime at a convenient place in 'Cheap-side'; sometime at 'Gresham College' or some place near adjoyning. Our business was (precluding matters of Theology and State Affairs) to discours and consider of 'Philosophical Enquiries', and such as related thereunto; as 'Physick', 'Anatomy', 'Geometry', 'Astronomy', 'Navigation', 'Staticks', 'Magneticks', 'Chymicks', 'Mechanicks', and 'Natural Experiments'; with the State of these Studies, as then cultivated, at home and abroad. We there discoursed of the 'Circulation of the Blood', 'the Valves in the Veins', 'the Venae Lacteae', 'the Lymphatick vessels', 'the Copernican Hypothesis', 'the Nature of Comets', 'and New Stars', 'the Satellites of Jupiter', 'the Oval Shape' (as it then appeared) 'of Saturn', 'the spots in the Sun', 'and its Turning on its own Axis', 'the Inequalities and Selenography of the Moon', 'the several Phases of Venus and Mercury', 'the Improvement of Telescopes', 'and grinding of Glasses for that purpose', 'the Weight of Air', 'the Possibility or Impossibility of Vacuities', 'and Natures Abhorrence thereof'; 'the Torricellian Experiment in Quicksilver', 'the Descent of heavy Bodies', 'and the degrees of Acceleration therein'; and divers other things of like nature. Some of which were then but New Discoveries, and others not so generally known and imbraced, as now they are; With other things appertaining to what hath been called 'The New Philosophy'; which, from the times of 'Galileo' at 'Florence', and 'Sir Francis Bacon' ('Lord Verulam') in 'England', hath been much cultivated in 'Italy', 'France', 'Germany', and other Parts abroad, as well as with us in 'England'. About the year 1648, 1649, some of our company being removed to 'Oxford' (first 'Dr. Wilkins', then I, and soon after 'Dr. Goddard') our company divided. Those in 'London' continued to meet there as before (and we with them, when we had occasion to be there;) and those of us at 'Oxford'; with 'Dr. Ward' (since 'Bishop of' 'Salisbury'), 'Dr. Ralph Bathurst' (now 'President of' 'Trinity College' 'in' 'Oxford') 'Dr. Petty' (since 'Sir William Petty') 'Dr. Willis' (then an eminent Physician in 'Oxford') and divers others, continued such meetings in 'Oxford'; and brought those Studies into fashion there; meeting first at 'Dr. Petties' Lodgings, (in an Apothecaries house) because of the convenience of inspecting Drugs, and the like, as there was occasion; and after his remove to 'Ireland' (tho' not so constantly) at the Lodgings of 'Dr. Wilkins', then Warden of 'Wadham Coll'. And after his removal to 'Trinity College' 'in' 'Cambridge', at the Lodgings of 'the Honorable' 'Mr. Robert Boyle', then resident for divers years in 'Oxford'. Those meetings in 'London' continued, and (after the Kings return in 1660) were increased with the accession of divers worthy and Honorable Persons; and were afterwards incorporated by the name of 'the' 'Royal Society', etc. and so continue to this day. (Scriba, 'Autobiography of John Wallis', 39-40)' Wallis was a founding member of the Royal Society and one of its most active fellows ['see 'Founder members of the Royal Society]. He contributed more than sixty papers on several subjects and reviews of mathematical books to the society's 'Philosophical Transactions'. 
In June 1649 Wallis was appointed Savilian professor of geometry at Oxford, and was incorporated MA from Exeter College in the same year. He held his professorship for over half a century. His predecessor, Peter Turner, was a royalist and had been removed by parliament. Wallis's mathematical accomplishments were hitherto very limited. In 1648 he had composed a 'Treatise of Angular Sections' (which remained unpublished until 1685), in which he developed results from William Oughtred's 'Clavis mathematicae' (1631), a book he read about 1647 or 1648. In 1648 he provided an explanation of Descartes's treatment of fourth-degree equations to the Cambridge Platonist John Smith (1618-1652), lecturer of mathematics and fellow of Emmanuel College and later of Queens'. Within a few years Wallis was to become one of the leading mathematicians of his time. 
In 1653 Wallis published 'Grammatica linguae Anglicanae', with a treatise 'De loquela' and a 'Praxis grammatica'. This work was often reprinted and has been praised by linguists for its deep insights and careful attention to sounds. 'De loquela' served as a theoretical basis for Wallis's attempts to teach the profoundly deaf how to speak. He reported on his attempts to teach Alexander Popham in the 'Philosophical Transactions', though failure to mention Popham's previous instructor, William Holder, led to a bitter confrontation. 
Wallis was admitted doctor of divinity in 1654. In 1658 he succeeded, by a somewhat doubtful procedure, Gerard Langbaine the elder as keeper of the university archives. His election elicited the protest of Henry Stubbe in 'The Savilian Professor's Case Stated'. Despite such inauspicious beginnings, Wallis rendered valuable services to the university archives by putting the records and other papers under his care into such exact order, and managing its lawsuits with such success, that he apparently convinced even those opposed to his election that he had been an excellent choice for that post. His repertory of the entire collection was not replaced until the twentieth century. 
Wallis was confirmed in his posts by Charles II in 1660, was made a royal chaplain, and in 1661 was appointed among the divines commissioned to revise the prayer book. He remained a loyal member of the official church throughout his life. Royal favour, together with his strenuous denials, are sufficient grounds for doubting the accusations that during the civil war he deciphered important letters relating to the royal family and public safety, making them available to the parliamentarians. In 1653 Wallis had deposited in the Bodleian Library a partial collection of the letters he had deciphered; these were later published by John Davys in his 'Essay on the Art of Decyphering' (1737). Wallis continued to decipher intercepted letters on behalf of the government for many years. In old age he passed the art to his grandson William Blencowe, but refused to impart it to Leibniz, who had requested information on it on behalf of his rulers. 
As Savilian professor, Wallis had to lecture on the 'Elements' by Euclid, 'Conics' by Apollonius, the works by Archimedes, and teach introductory courses in arithmetic. The statutes suggested also lectures on subjects such as cosmography, trigonometry, applied geometry, mechanics, and the theory of music. In the mid-1650s Wallis published several mathematical treatises within a couple of years, under the headings 'Operum mathematicorum pars prima' (1657) and 'Operum mathematicorum pars altera' (1656). They include, in the first volume, his 'Oratio inauguralis: mathesis universalis, seu opus arithmeticum', and other minor works. The second volume was an outcome of his university lectures, and in it Wallis stressed the importance of a unified notation and was influenced by William Oughtred. It also contained 'De angulo contactus et semicirculo disquisitio geometrica', already mentioned, and 'De sectionibus conicis', which dealt with a classical subject in a new fashion, namely, following the treatment introduced by Descartes. In this work Wallis introduced the sign for infinity, &infin;, and used 1/&infin; to represent an infinitesimal height. Moreover, Wallis employed the method of indivisibles in the version developed by Evangelista Torricelli, the Italian mathematician and pupil of Galileo. The method was and still is attributed to another pupil of Galileo, Bonaventura Cavalieri, whose books Wallis repeatedly sought in vain in bookshops. 
Wallis's main work, 'Arithmetica infinitorum', was also included in the second volume of 'Opera mathematicorum', though it had already been printed separately and distributed in 1655 with a dedication to William Oughtred. Newton was greatly influenced by this work when he studied it in the winter of 1664-5. Wallis was able to find an infinite series expressing the value of 4/greekLetterpi by an ingenious series of interpolations. Indeed, the very term for the method was given by Wallis, who relied in this work on techniques that appear closely related to those he had devised for deciphering coded letters. As a result of his position and publications, Wallis was engaged in many mathematical challenges and disputes, notably with Pierre de Fermat, Blaise Pascal, and especially Thomas Hobbes, who in 1655 had claimed to possess an absolute quadrature of the circle. The virulent controversy, in which Hobbes also claimed erroneously to have duplicated the cube, thus solving another of the great mathematical problems, lasted for about a quarter-century, ending with Hobbes's death in 1679. 
Following the discussion on the laws of impact at the Royal Society in 1668, Wallis, Christopher Wren, and Christiaan Huygens submitted papers. Wallis's was published in the 'Philosophical Transactions' for that year and was followed by 'Mechanica, sive, De motu tractatus geometricus' (1670-71), the major and most comprehensive work on a range of mechanical problems -- such as statics, impact laws, and centres of gravity -- published in England to that point. His last great mathematical work, 'A Treatise of Algebra, both Historical and Practical' (1685) in 100 chapters, combined technical and historical exposition. An expanded Latin edition was included in the second volume of Wallis's 'Opera mathematica' of 1693. The historical account was heavily biased towards English achievements and went as far as to claim that Descartes had gained knowledge in algebra from Thomas Harriot. The 'Algebra' also included a discussion of the methods of exhaustion, of indivisibles, and of infinite series. Moreover, the work included the first printed account, expanded in the later edition, of some of Newton's achievements. Wallis's determination to defend English priority made him press his case with Newton, lest the glory of his inventions went to a foreigner. The third and last volume of Wallis's 'Opera mathematica' (1693-9) contained a collection of letters on the priority dispute between Newton and Leibniz, the main items being Newton's so-called 'epistola prior' and 'epistola posterior' of 1676. In 'Institutio logicae' (1687) Wallis put forward influential views concerning ways of treating singular terms as if they were general and conditional statements. 
Wallis was also an active editor of works in the mathematical disciplines, including Archimedes' 'Arenarius et dimensio circuli' (1676), Jeremiah Horrocks's 'Opera posthuma' (1672-3 and 1678), Ptolemy's 'Harmonicorum libri tres' (1682), Aristarchus's 'De magnitudinibus et distantiis solis et lunae' (1688), and a fragment from Pappus (1688). His editorial work stimulated discussions at the Royal Society on musical theory, astronomy, and the theory of tides, and publications in the 'Philosophical Transactions'. 
Wallis's wife died on 27 March 1687, leaving him with one son and two daughters: John, Anne Blencowe, and Elizabeth. John married Elizabeth Harris and had three children, Anne married Sir John Blencowe and had five surviving children, while Elizabeth married William Benson and had no children. 
Between 1690 and 1692 Wallis published eight letters and three sermons in defence of the Trinity against unitarian doctrines. He employed a mathematical analogy, arguing that the mystery of the Trinity could be grasped with the help of a cubical body with three dimensions: 'This longum, latum, profundum, (Long, Broad, and Tall), is but 'One' Cube; of 'Three Dimensions', and yet but 'One Body'. And this 'Father', 'Son', and 'Holy-Ghost': three persons, and yet but One God' (Archibald, 36). Wallis's theological works were often praised for their clarity and straightforward language. In 1692 he successfully opposed the introduction of the Gregorian calendar in Britain. 
Throughout his life Wallis enjoyed excellent health and remarkable intellectual powers, with a prodigious memory for figures. Only in his eighties did he complain that his sight, hearing, and strength were not as they used to be. He died at Oxford on 28 October 1703, aged eighty-six, and was buried in St Mary's Church, Oxford, where his son placed a mural monument in his honour. 


@@@@@


doc= 28573


Wallis, John (1714-1793), antiquary and natural historian, the son of John Wallis (or Wallace) of Croglin, Cumberland, was born at Castlenook in South Tynedale, Northumberland. He matriculated from Queen's College, Oxford, on 3 February 1733, graduated BA in 1737, and proceeded MA in 1740. Having taken orders, he held a curacy for a few years in Portsmouth, where he married; his wife, whose name was Elizabeth, died in 1801. The marriage proved to be an extremely happy one (Winch, 145). Wallis then became curate of Simonburn, Northumberland, where he remained until 1771. It was here that he began to collect and record information relating to the history, archaeology, and natural history of his native county. Despite the remote nature of his parish, it is clear from his published work that Wallis travelled widely in Northumberland and had an extensive network of contacts, including other antiquarians, notably Thomas Pennant and George Allan. 
In 1748 Wallis published, by subscription, 'The Occasional Miscellany, in Prose and Verse' which contained several sermons and two poems. His chief work, however, was 'The natural history and antiquities of Northumberland, and so much of the county of Durham as lies between the rivers Tyne and Tweed, commonly called North Bishoprick' (2 vols., 1769). The first volume deals with the minerals, fossils, plants, and animals of the county. The plants, including cryptogams, are listed using the nomenclature proposed by John Ray, and although Winch notes that 'two or three of the most remarkable plants which he supposed he had discovered growing with us were not the species he took them for' (Winch, 2.45), his list is reliable and must be considered as the first substantial account of the flora of Northumberland. Swan, while acknowledging Wallis's work, notes that 'he did not attempt to include more than just a selection of vascular plants, evidently mainly those which are considered useful (e.g. medicinally) ornamental, or otherwise striking; many large groups [are] completely missing' (Swan, 11). This criticism may equally be applied to his other lists (fishes, reptiles, and so on,) but none the less Wallis provided a benchmark for today's naturalists, as well as a source of eighteenth-century English and Northumbrian names for many common species of plants and animals. The second volume deals with the antiquities, arranged in three tours through the county and is also still considered a valuable point of reference. 
On the death of the rector of Simonburn in 1771 the living was given to James Scott (1733-1813), and as a result Wallis was compelled to leave his curacy. His college friend Edward Wilson, vicar of the Northumberland village of Haltwhistle provided work until 1775 when Wallis was appointed temporary curate at Haughton-le-Skerne, co. Durham; later in the same year he moved to Billingham, near Stockton, where he remained until 1792, when increasing illness forced him to resign. 
Wallis was never financially secure, his posts as curate never earning more than $30 a year. In 1779 Thomas Pennant made efforts to secure help from the bishop of Durham. About two years before his death Wallis acquired a small estate on the death of a brother, and Bishop Shute Barrington provided an annual pension when he resigned the curacy of Billingham. Wallis moved to the neighbouring village of Norton, where he died on 19 July 1793. According to one biographer, Wallis, 'though possessed of good natural abilities, and no small share of acquired knowledge, lived and died in an obscure station' ('GM'). 


@@@@@


doc= 28574


Wallis, John (1789-1866), topographer and cartographer, born in Fore Street, Bodmin, on 11 April 1789, was the eldest child of John Wallis (1759-1842), attorney and town clerk of Bodmin, and his wife, Isabella Mary, daughter of Henry Slogget, purser in the Royal Navy. He had a twin brother, Henry, and a younger sister, Isabella Mary. He was educated at Tiverton grammar school, and afterwards articled to his father. After being admitted a solicitor and proctor about 1811 he practised as an attorney in Bodmin with his father and John Bennett until 1814. He matriculated from Exeter College, Oxford, on 17 December 1813, graduating BA on 7 July 1820, and MA on 20 March 1821. On completing his residence at Oxford he was ordained in 1817, curate at Blisland, and was then appointed vicar of Bodmin on 17 November of the same year. He was a capital burgess of the borough, and served as mayor in 1822. In 1840 he became deputy registrar of the archdeaconry of Cornwall, a post which he retained until his death. He was also vice-warden of the stannaries of Cornwall. 
Wallis was a keen topographer and cartographer of Bodmin and the surrounding districts. His first publication was a reprint of the index to Thomas Martyn's 'Map of the county of Cornwall', to which he appended a short account of the archdeaconry of Cornwall (1816). In 1825 he published thirteen outline maps of the archdeaconry and county of Cornwall, at the scale of 4 miles to the inch. Between 1831 and 1834 he published several reports and tables about Bodmin, and between 1827 and 1838 he published in twenty parts 'The Bodmin Register', which contained much historical and geographical information about Bodmin and Cornwall in general. Of his projected 'Exeter Register' only the first part was published (1831). His 'Cornwall Register' (1847-8), in twelve parts, contained particulars of Cornish parishes, and was accompanied by a map of Cornwall at the scale of 4 miles to the inch. He also wrote a 'Family Register' (1827) and several pamphlets, chiefly on topographical subjects. 
Wallis died at Bodmin vicarage, unmarried, on 6 December 1866, and was buried at Berry cemetery, Bodmin, on the 11th. He was described as amiable and energetic, able to stay on friendly terms with the many nonconformists in his parish. 


@@@@@


doc= 28575


Wallis, Sir Provo William Parry (1791-1892), naval officer, only son of Provo Featherstone Wallis, chief clerk to the naval commissioner at Halifax, Nova Scotia, was born at Halifax on 12 April 1791. His mother was a daughter of William Lawlor, major in the 1st battalion of the Halifax regiment. It has been suggested that he was related to Captain Samuel Wallis, which is not improbable. It is more certain that he was the grandson of Provo Wallis, a carpenter in the navy, who, after serving through the Seven Years' War, was in 1776 carpenter of the 'Eagle', flagship of Lord Howe in North America, and appointed by him on 3 March 1778 master shipwright of the naval yard at New York. After the peace he was transferred to Halifax. 
At an early age Wallis was sent to England, and while there at school his name was on the books of several different ships on the Halifax station. He actually entered the navy in October 1804 on the frigate 'Cleopatra' (32 guns), commanded by Sir Robert Laurie. On her way out to the West Indies on 16 February 1805 the 'Cleopatra', after a gallant action, was captured by the French frigate 'Ville de Milan' (40 guns), which was herself so much damaged that a week later (23 February) she surrendered without resistance to the 'Leander' (50 guns). The 'Cleopatra' was recaptured at the same time, and Laurie was reinstated in the command. Shortly afterwards Laurie was appointed to the 'Ville de Milan', commissioned as the 'Milan', and Wallis went with him. 
In November 1806 Wallis was appointed acting lieutenant of the 'Triumph', with Sir Thomas Masterman Hardy, and on 30 November 1808 was officially promoted lieutenant of the brig 'Curieux', which on 3 November 1809 was wrecked on the coast of Guadeloupe. After one or two changes he was appointed in January 1812 to the 'Shannon', commanded by Captain Philip Bowes Vere Broke. He was her second lieutenant in the brilliant capture of the 'Chesapeake' on 1 June 1813, and, being left -- by the death of the first lieutenant and Broke's dangerous wound -- commanding officer, took the 'Shannon' and her prize to Halifax. The prisoners, being considerably more numerous than the crew of the 'Shannon', were secured in handcuffs, which they themselves had provided. On 9 July Wallis was promoted commander, and, returning to England in the 'Shannon' in October, was appointed in January 1814 to the sloop 'Snipe'. On 19 October 1817, Wallis married Juliana, second daughter of Archdeacon Roger Massey; they had two daughters. On 12 August 1819 he was advanced to post rank. 
From 1824 to 1826 Wallis commanded the 'Niemen' on the Halifax station; in 1838-9 the 'Madagascar' in the West Indies and off Vera Cruz; and from 1843 to 1846 the 'Warspite' in the Mediterranean. He married, secondly, on 21 July 1849, Jemima Mary Gwyne, a daughter of General Sir Robert Thomas Wilson, governor of Gibraltar. On 27 August 1851 he was promoted rear-admiral, and in 1857 was appointed commander-in-chief on the south-east coast of South America, from where he was recalled on his promotion to vice-admiral on 10 September 1857. He had no further service, but was made a KCB on 18 May 1860 and promoted admiral on 2 March 1863, rear-admiral of the United Kingdom in 1869, and vice-admiral of the United Kingdom in 1870. He became GCB on 24 May 1873 and was made admiral of the fleet on 11 December 1877. By a special clause in Childers's retirement scheme of 1870 it was provided that the names of those old officers, who had commanded a ship during the French wars, should be retained on the active list, and the few days that Wallis was in command of the 'Shannon' brought him within this rule. His name was thus retained on the active list until his death. 
During the latter part of his life Wallis resided mainly at Funtington House, Funtington, near Chichester, in full enjoyment of his faculties, and reading or writing with ease until a few months before his death. On his 100th birthday (12 April 1891) he received congratulations from many, including the queen and the captain and officers of the 'Shannon'. He died at home at Funtington House on 13 February 1892 and was buried with military honours at Funtington on 18 February. Wallis was an officer of great good fortune; he had no great merits but by the death of the 'Shannon''s first lieutenant and sheer longevity he became a celebrity. 


@@@@@


doc= 28576


Wallis, Ralph (d. 1669), pamphleteer, was born in a country village, probably in Gloucestershire. Wallis describes himself as 'of mean descent for parentage' (Wallis, 'More News from Rome', foreword). The date of his birth is unknown, but by the mid-1660s he considered himself old, and in the 1620s he was memorizing anti-popish verse. His own upbringing, in a poor family, was by no means a fiercely protestant one. His parents were Roman Catholics but 'church papists', who conformed enough to the demands of the Church of England to escape persecution. His father died when Wallis was nine, leaving to his son a collection of missals, beads, and crucifixes. He moved later to Gloucester to pursue the trade of cobbler, which, he explained, meant repairing boots and shoes, not making them. 
Like many with radical protestant leanings, Wallis found that the civil wars provided him with opportunities. By October 1643, he was involved in sequestering the rents of Gloucestershire royalists on behalf of the parliamentarian garrison at Gloucester. On one of these forays, at Pamington, near Cheltenham, he was betrayed into the hands of scouts from the royalist garrison of Sudeley Castle, and was imprisoned at Sudeley and later in Oxford. His wife, Dorothy, petitioned Governor Edward Massie for relief, on behalf of her family of three children, and she was awarded 18's'. Her expressed hope that Wallis would benefit in an exchange of prisoners may have been fulfilled. According to a hostile anonymous biographer, he subsequently served as an agent to sequestrators of royalists' property. On 8 June 1648 he was appointed by the Gloucester corporation to be schoolmaster at Holy Trinity Church. The corporation was dominated by puritans of the stamp of Thomas Pury, the city's MP, and Wallis performed other duties for his masters, including acting as a messenger to London. He was regarded highly enough to be singled out for remuneration in August 1651, and on 24 September 1658 he was elected burgess and freeman in recognition of his services. He was sworn the following day, in what was the apotheosis of his public career. He is said to have begun writing pamphlets against the governments of the 1650s, but no trace of them has survived, and it seems a little unlikely in one who had benefited from republican regimes. On the other hand, the work 'Harry Hangman's Honour' (1655), which is part apology for the Gloucestershire tobacco planters, part wry commentary on public life, foreshadows much of Wallis's later style as a writer, and probably marks his authorial debut. 
Wallis never held civic office in Gloucester, and it may be assumed that he had lost his teaching post before the arrival in the city of the commissioners for regulating corporations soon after the Restoration. He reverted to his trade, and was drawn to preaching as a possible calling. In the climate of extreme hostility to protestant dissenters he was nothing daunted, and began to travel, presumably as an itinerant preacher. It was alleged that he was a frequent visitor to Kidderminster, where Richard Baxter had nurtured a godly civic culture during the 1650s. About this time he married his wife, Elizabeth, who was much younger than him; he also considered taking up offers of remuneration as a minister. A potential alternative source of income was alehouse-keeping, of which he evidently had some experience. Elizabeth declared: 'I might have been more happy in the world than to have had you, yet upon condition you will neither sell ale nor preach, I will be contented with my position' (Wallis, 'Rome for Good News', sig. A2i). Wallis was assisted financially by James Forbes, in the 1650s an Independent minister in Gloucester but by the mid-1660s a shoemaker at Clapham. Both men had come to the attention of the authorities in Gloucester and London by January 1664, but it was not until September that they were arrested by the government censor Roger L'Estrange; they were examined by him on 1 October. In late November the government evidently thought to grant Wallis bail in order to allow him to publish his work, to uncover the centre of a ring of subversives, but no such network was unveiled. In his petition to Henry Bennet, Wallis begged not to be crushed like a worm, described his own work as 'drollery', and assured Bennet he only attacked the clergy 'to teach them better manners, and will scribble as much against fanatics when the worm gets into his cracked pate' ('CSP dom.', '1663-4', 156-7). 
Thereafter Wallis suffered persecution at the hands of civic authorities in Bristol and Gloucester, and appeared before Thomas Windsor, Lord Windsor, probably in Worcestershire, in the manner endured by Quakers. It did not prevent him publishing, however, and at least three titles of his appeared between 1665 and 1668: some may have been second editions of works published earlier. At the heart of 'Rome for Good News' (1665) is the verse in ballad stanzas that he memorized forty years before: a dialogue between a Catholic priest and a supposed protestant, where the priest shows the protestant that he remains in thrall to popery. His real target is the Church of England, an 'old whore' ('Rome for Good News', 19). 'More News from Rome, or, Magna Charta, Discoursed of between a Poor Man & his Wife' (1666), written after his interrogation by L'Estrange, provides a catalogue of the scandalous and shameful conduct of Anglican clergymen, gathered mostly from the south-west midlands. Wallis returned to this theme in 'Room for the Cobler of Gloucester and his Wife' (1668), described by L'Estrange as 'the damnedest thing [that] has come out yet' ('CSP dom.', '1667-8', 357). In this grossly libellous work, Wallis adopted a prurient and scatological tone, providing outrageous if entertaining anecdotes about clergymen whose names and addresses he knew. His depiction of the rites and ceremonies of the Church of England as 'the parings of the devil's bum-hole' (Wallis, 'Room for the Cobler', 40) are among his milder observations. 
In sharp contrast to the libels and anti-Anglican polemic of these works are the dedicatory epistles to Elizabeth that precede them. Her support for Wallis, and her care for their four young children during his sufferings, were acknowledged in affectionate and touching detail. By 1665 he evidently suffered a serious disability in his right arm, and walked only with crutches, raising the possibility that his venom against the church was fuelled by chronic physical pain. He returned to Gloucester after his wanderings and died there in 1669; he was buried at St Mary de Crypt, the parish where James Forbes had ministered, on 9 February. His hostile biographer provides a description: 'His complexion was of a sunburnt gipsy colour, and his skin was rough and tawny, like singed bacon; his hair was brown and bristly upon his head, but his locks were weather-turned, like a barber's show periwig' ('Life and Death of Ralph Wallis', 20). His precise religious affiliation puzzled contemporaries, but he seems best described as an unaligned nonconformist, whose hatred of Anglicanism provided him with a driving energy. His memory lingered: 1704 saw the publication of 'The Cobler of Gloucester Reviv'd; in a Letter to the Observator's Country-Man'. 


@@@@@


doc= 28577


Wallis, Robert William (1794-1878), line engraver, was born in London on 7 November 1794, the eldest son of Thomas Wallis (died 1839), assistant to the topographical engraver Charles Theodosius Heath (1785-1848), and his wife, Ann Davies. He was taught engraving by his father, who moved the family first to Bungay in Suffolk, from 1803 to 1812, and then to Bethnal Green and Liverpool. He returned in 1818 to London, where he was rejoined by his father in 1821. He married, at Shoreditch on 25 March 1819, Janet Emily, 'nee' Munro (died 1857), with whom he had nine children. On his return to London he immediately found employment as a landscape engraver on steel, providing illustrations for the numerous travel books then reaching the market. James Baylis Allen (1803-1876) worked as his assistant. By the mid-century Wallis was judged one of the ablest landscape engravers, excelling in the interpretation of the work of Joseph Mallord William Turner. He was employed on Turner's illustrations to Cooke's 'Southern Coast of England'; Turner's 'England and Wales' and his 'Rivers of France'; 'Heath's Picturesque Annual'; 'Jennings Landscape Annual'; and the illustrations to many fine editions of popular works. Fourteen of his engravings were published in the 'Art Journal' between 1849 and 1880. His finest productions were the large plates after Turner's 'Lake of Nemi' and 'The Approach to Venice', a proof of which was exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1859. Wallis then retired, and passed the remainder of his life in the Brighton area; he died at his home, 30 York Road, Hove, Sussex, on 23 November 1878. 
Robert's brother 


