@@@@@


doc= 28578


Wallis, Samuel (1728-1795), naval officer and Pacific explorer, the son of John Wallis (1680-1768) and Sarah Barrett (died 1731), was born in April 1728 at Fentonwoon, Cornwall, and baptized on 23 April 1728 at Lanteglos. He served in the navy as midshipman and master's mate before receiving his lieutenant's commission in October 1748. After serving as lieutenant on several ships from 1753 onwards, he received his first command, the sloop 'Swan', in June 1756. In April 1757 he was appointed to the frigate 'Port Mahon', and in September 1758 to the 'Prince of Orange' (60 guns). In 1759 he took part in the Quebec campaign under Vice-Admiral Charles Saunders before returning with his ship to home waters for the rest of the Seven Years' War. 
In June 1766 Wallis took command of the frigate 'Dolphin' (24 guns) just back from Commodore John Byron's circumnavigation. The choice of Wallis for the second voyage of Pacific exploration in the reign of George III was perhaps a sign of his meritorious service during the war, which would have been observed at first hand by Saunders, now second lord of the Admiralty. In a long naval career the voyage of 1766 to 1768 represents Wallis's claim to fame. It had different objectives from Byron's voyage, for his instructions from the Admiralty, headed by the earl of Egmont, ordered Wallis to search for the great continent 'Terra Australis Incognita' in the south Pacific. Byron seems to have played an important role in framing this new directive. When sailing through the Tuamotus in June 1765 he had become convinced that there was a land mass to the south; and it appears to have been his belief in the existence of this southern continent that persuaded Egmont to point Wallis towards its discovery. 
Wallis sailed on 21 August 1766, accompanied by Philip Carteret in the old and decrepit sloop 'Swallow'. There were few problems with the well-provisioned 'Dolphin', only the third naval vessel to be copper-sheathed. After a gruelling passage through the Strait of Magellan of record-breaking length (the 'Dolphin' took 115 days, the 'Swallow' 119), the two vessels became separated on 11 April 1767 as they struggled out of the strait and into the Pacific. Carteret suspected that Wallis had deliberately abandoned the slow-sailing 'Swallow'; but it is more likely that the explanation lies in a combination of the hazardous sailing conditions off Cape Pillar at the western exit of the strait and the different sailing qualities of the two ships. While in the strait Wallis had taken the opportunity to measure the height of a group of Patagonians, and his findings -- the tallest person was 6 feet 7 inches, and most were under 6 feet -- did something to dispel the notion of 'Patagonian giants' brought back by Byron. 
Once clear of the Strait of Magellan Wallis followed his instructions to 'Stretch to the Westward... from Cape Horn, loosing as little Southing as possible' (Wallis, 2.303); but by the end of April contrary winds and scurvy among the crew forced him northwards into warmer waters. On 6 June he reached the Tuamotus, where he sighted five islands unknown to Europeans, and on 17 June the first of the Society Islands at Mehetia. The next day Tahiti was sighted, and there the 'Dolphin' stayed for five weeks. During this time the sick among the crew recovered, but Wallis (and his first lieutenant) were struck down with with 'a Bilious Disorder' (Carrington, 116). For most of the stay Wallis was too weak to keep the deck, and much depended on George Robertson, the 'Dolphin''s experienced master, and Tobias Furneaux, second lieutenant. The captain's incapacity was the more worrying, given the outbreaks of violence that marked the first days after the 'Dolphin''s arrival and thwarted Wallis's hopes of avoiding the use of force. It took blasts of grape and ball from the ship's cannon, and many dead and wounded among the Tahitians, to quell the disturbances. Wallis's description of Tahiti (as printed in Hawkesworth's 'Voyages' of 1773) as a lush and fertile land with garlanded women eager to trade sexual favours helped, along with the accounts of James Cook and Joseph Banks, to stamp an erotic imprint on Europe's image of the south seas. In practical ways, too, Tahiti was important, for it provided an ideal base for Cook and his successors. For Robertson, the island also seemed to be an outlier of the great southern continent, whose mountain-tops the master thought he had glimpsed only 60 miles to the south. Wallis's views on this are not known, but on 27 July 1767 he left Tahiti on a westerly course and made no attempt to explore to the south. Further uncharted islands were sighted as the 'Dolphin' continued west and then northwest before heading into the north Pacific. The last part of the voyage brought Wallis home by way of Tinian, Batavia, and the Cape. The 'Dolphin' reached the Downs on 28 May 1768, with Wallis still seriously ill. 
Wallis's voyage is now seen as a more creditable undertaking than was once thought. On his own count, he had discovered and charted fifteen islands, some of them admittedly tiny atolls. Although in wretched health for months on end, he had achieved much that was to help shape Cook's 'Endeavour' voyage. Tahiti provided the essential base for the astronomical observations of the transit of Venus in 1769, and rumours brought back by the 'Dolphin' of mountain-tops sighted south of the island led to Cook's instructions to sail directly south from Tahiti in search of a continent. Whether there was direct contact between Wallis and Cook in the summer of 1768 is not known, but many of Cook's measures to keep his crews healthy had already been put into practice by Wallis. He made every effort to obtain greens and citrus fruits, he kept the crew's clothes and bedding dry and clean, and he introduced a three-watch system to give the men more rest. They in turn seem to have respected and liked their captain; in a petition at the end of the voyage they applauded his 'Humane and generous treatment', and signed themselves 'the Dolphins' (Wallis, 1.47). There were serious and debilitating outbreaks of scurvy on the 'Dolphin', but not a single man died from this disease, and the mortality rate on the voyage was remarkably low: two dead from accidents, and three from malaria and dysentery. 
Wallis took a long time to recover from 'the uncommon fatigue and anxiety' of the voyage. During it he had been 'quite worn down', he told the Admiralty in February 1770, when he still suffered from bouts of ill health. He was awarded a gratuity of $525 before, in November 1770, he was given command of the 'Torbay', and later of the 'Queen'. From 1782 to 1783, and from 1787 until his death, Wallis held the responsible position of extra commissioner of the navy. He died on 21 January 1795 in Devonshire Street, Portland Place, London, and was survived by his wife, Betty Hearle, who died on 13 November 1804. 


@@@@@


doc= 28579


Wallmoden, Amalie Sophie Marianne von, 'suo jure' countess of Yarmouth (1704-1765), royal mistress, was born on 1 April 1704, the daughter of Johann Franz Dietrich von Wendt, a general in the Hanoverian army, and his wife, Friderike Charlotte, 'nee' von dem Bussche, the widow of another Hanoverian general named Welk. Her grandmother Maria Elisabeth von Meysenbug was probably the first mistress of George I in the late 1670s, and her father's intense correspondence with Ernest Augustus, duke of York and Albany, the brother of George I, has been interpreted as evidence of a homosexual relationship. In 1727 Amalie married Gottlieb Adam von Wallmoden (died 1752), 'Oberhauptmann' of Calenberg in the electorate of Hanover; they had a son, Franz Ernst, and a daughter, Friderike. 
In 1735 Amalie von Wallmoden met George II (1683-1760) on one of his visits to Hanover, and they began a love affair. According to John, Lord Hervey, the king sent a detailed account of the relationship's progress to Queen Caroline, who remained in London. Reports of Wallmoden, 'a young married woman of the first fashion' (Hervey, 2.457), alarmed the queen, who saw in her a royal mistress who could threaten the queen's influence with George II, and also Sir Robert Walpole, who saw in Wallmoden not only a rival to Queen Caroline but also an incentive for George II to remain in Germany and impede the effectiveness of the British government. During the king's stay in Hanover, Wallmoden conceived a child, Johann Ludwig von Wallmoden (1736-1811), who was widely believed to be the king's, although he was never recognized as such. George returned to Hanover to be with his mistress in 1736, but the queen was opposed to her following the king to Britain. The affair became public knowledge in London, where details, real or imagined, were seized upon by the opposition to Walpole. Wallmoden was said, without foundation, to be a Catholic, and on the king's return it was reported that he 'caused the picture of his mistress... to be hung up opposite to his bed's feet' (16 March 1737, 'Egmont Diary', 2.369-70). 
Following Queen Caroline's death in November 1737, Walpole was convinced that only Wallmoden could maintain the king's well-being; he probably also preferred a Hanoverian mistress over a British one with her own family connections, who might influence George II against his ministers. The king's casual relationship with Mary Scott, countess of Deloraine, was put aside. Wallmoden arrived in London in June 1738, and moved into apartments at St James's Palace and Kensington Palace. According to one report she was accompanied by Gottlieb Adam von Wallmoden, but with George II requiring her to act as the king's hostess at court and as the royal sexual partner there was no room for her husband, who divorced her in Hanover in summer 1740. By then, on 8 February 1740, Wallmoden had been naturalized a British subject, and on 24 March 1740 she was created a British peeress, for life, as countess of Yarmouth. She was awarded a pension of $4000 a year from the Irish revenues. 
Lady Yarmouth 'appears at the drawing-room like one that has been used to the courts of Princes' (A. Windham to [Charles, third Viscount Townshend], 22 June 1738, 'Townshend MSS', 356), but she was a newcomer to British politics. For the first few years of her period as mistress of George II it may have been true that she 'had the good sense to abstain as a rule from meddling in court intrigues' ('DNB'), but although she seems to have exhibited good sense she came to be relied upon by the king's ministers to introduce George II to people and ideas that the king might have resisted. She also took a role in the creation of peers; it was alleged that she had been allocated the fees for peerage creations in 1741, and in 1747 Horace Walpole wrote to George Montagu that she had 'touched twelve thousand for Sir Jacob Bouverie's coronet' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 9.51). These activities made her a more effective political mistress to George II than her predecessor Henrietta Howard, countess of Suffolk. Contrary to what some supposed or hoped, she did not rule the king. In the 1740s, Philip Stanhope, fourth earl of Chesterfield, thought that by cultivating her interest he could strengthen his position in Henry Pelham's cabinet, but Lady Yarmouth's approval on a personal level did not lead her to intercede in his favour, and he was eased out of office in February 1748. Lady Yarmouth was more supportive of Thomas Pelham-Holles, duke of Newcastle, when he sought the removal of John Russell, fourth duke of Bedford, as a secretary of state in 1750-51. She helped persuade George II that Bedford was a liability to the administration, contributing towards the latter's resignation in 1751. In the political turmoil of the 1750s Lady Yarmouth's word was useful even to members of the royal family; after William, duke of Cumberland, had capitulated to the French army at Kloster-Zeven in September 1757, he approached Lady Yarmouth to inform the king of his intention to resign his offices. Her alliance with Newcastle has been credited with persuading George II to remain faithful to the Pitt-Newcastle ministry formed in 1757, despite the king's antipathy to William Pitt. 
Lady Yarmouth was credited by Horace Walpole with persuading George II to support a 'jubilee masquerade in the Venetian manner' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 20.46-7) at Ranelagh Gardens as part of the celebrations of the end of the War of the Austrian Succession in 1749, but in general she appeared content with the unexciting routine of the widowed king's court. Horace Walpole said that she was left 'A strong box containing about ten thousand pounds' (ibid., 21.450) by the king when he died on 25 October 1760, to which George III added the other contents of the bureau where the money was found. She remained in Britain at first, and spent summer 1761 with the duke and duchess of Newcastle, but afterwards returned to Hanover, where she died of 'a cancer in her breast' (J. Twells to the duke of Newcastle, 31 Oct 1765, BL, Add. MS 33069, fol. 295) on 19 October 1765. She was reported to have 'left her two sons a million of crowns' ('GM', 1st ser., 35, 1765, 534), although this may express the financial rapacity conventionally ascribed to royal mistresses rather than a genuine estimate of her wealth. Her younger son, Johann Ludwig, was made a count in 1783, became a field marshal in the Hanoverian army during the French revolutionary war, and died in 1811. 


@@@@@


doc= 28580


Wallop, Sir Henry (c.1531-1599), administrator and member of parliament, was born at Farleigh Wallop, Hampshire, the first son of Sir Oliver Wallop ('c'.1502-1566), landowner, and his first wife, Bridget Pigott of Beachampton, Buckinghamshire. His father, an early protestant, served Hampshire as a justice of the peace from 1554 to 1564 and as sheriff in 1558. In 1547 Protector Somerset knighted him in Scotland. Because his brother Sir John Wallop (d. 1551), a prominent Henrician courtier and diplomat, failed to produce an heir Sir Oliver inherited his large estates which passed to Henry Wallop upon the death of his father on 28 February 1566. 
When Henry Wallop was a youth, Sir John Wallop and Oliver Wallop negotiated a marriage contract with Sir Thomas Wriothesley for a union between his daughter Anne and Henry. That agreement was cancelled on 29 August 1545 for unstated but possibly religious reasons. Henry later married Katherine (died 1599), daughter of Richard Gifford of King's Somborne, Hampshire, a prominent early protestant in the county. Otherwise his early years were uneventful. It was not until Elizabeth I's reign began that he became active in local government. Appointed a JP in 1558, he continued to hold that office until at least 1594. Bishop Robert Horne of Winchester in 1564 listed both Henry and his father as favourers of the protestant religion. 
When Sir Oliver Wallop died Henry became one of the largest landowners in Hampshire. Two months later Sir John Mason, Hampshire's senior knight of the shire, died on 21 April 1566, setting the stage for Wallop's first foray into politics. By September the government had decided to recall parliament, which necessitated a by-election for Mason's seat. The next few weeks were filled with convoluted manoeuvring by the rival factions associated with Bishop Horne and the lord treasurer, William Paulet. By election day on 4 November, Horne and a tightly knit group of protestants had picked Wallop as their candidate, while the Paulet faction had decided on the lord treasurer's grandson Sir John Berkeley. In a closely contested election Wallop lost, causing his friends to accuse the sheriff, Sir Richard Pexsall, of misusing his position. A series of fruitless suits and counter-suits followed in Star Chamber. 
The defeat did not affect Wallop's developing career. In 1569 Queen Elizabeth knighted him at Basing, Hampshire. He had also established a residence in Southampton and became a freeman of the town in 1572. That same year the town elected him as one of their burgesses. While in parliament Wallop served on committees for legal matters, weapons, port bills, cloth bills, wine, church discipline, and wharves, all things of interest to a protestant member of the gentry and a resident of Southampton. His hard work gained him a reputation for usefulness. Other local government offices came his way: he was a commissioner for musters in Hampshire in 1573, an ecclesiastical commissioner in 1575, and a commissioner for piracy in 1577. He also worked as a commissioner concerning grain exports out of Surrey and in that capacity revealed himself as a supporter of free trade, an unsurprising stand for a person who maintained his wealth by selling grain on the open market. In religious matters he became recognized as a staunch protestant. He also appears to have gained the favourable notice of Sir Francis Walsingham, the principal secretary of state. Unfortunately for Wallop, his hard work and efficiency were rewarded by an assignment to that great quagmire, Tudor Ireland. 
Walsingham approached Sir Henry in July 1579 about serving as under-treasurer of Ireland, a post that had just come open as a result of the death of Sir Edward Fitton. Wallop demurred, citing his lack of experience and money. He also requested time to settle his personal business before he could go to Ireland. While no time was especially auspicious for becoming an official in Tudor Ireland, the summer of 1579 was particularly bad as the second Desmond rebellion (1579-83) was just breaking out in Munster. Walsingham ignored Wallop's excuses and ordered him to London in early August where he received his instructions which included command of a company of troops. Adverse winds delayed his sailing from Bristol but on 10 September he was finally able to depart, arriving at Waterford two days later. 
Wallop's arrival in Ireland was not a happy one as his reports to Walsingham and Lord Burghley show. The $10,000 he carried into Ireland was consumed with alarming rapidity. Military operations against the Irish were also ineffective as the insurgents had lost their fear of English troops, having acquired up-to-date weapons and tactics. The Irish also hated the English while favouring the Spanish. By 29 December 1579 Wallop could remark to Burghley that 'It is easier to talk at home of Irish wars than to be in them' ('CSP Ire.', '1574-85', 201). He also began to develop a great dislike for the victuallers supplying the English army, all of whom he considered to be bad. Meanwhile Lord Justice William Drury had sickened and, after a long illness, died on 3 October 1579. Wallop feared for his own life when he too became ill. In an effort to take care of his family he requested that in the event of his death Sir Francis Walsingham be granted the wardship of his son Henry. His hope was that Walsingham would marry one of his daughters to Wallop's son. Wallop also started to complain about having to spend significant amounts of his own money to fulfil his Irish duties. At the same time he recognized the possibilities for economic gain in Ireland. He began to plan an increase of grain farming in Ireland in November 1579 and sought licences to export that grain. By February 1580 he had planted 1000 acres of grain. 
The strain of serving in Ireland was beginning to tell on Wallop by early 1580. From his point of view the government provided too little money which arrived consistently too late for the Irish officials effectively to fight the insurgents. His letters and reports to Walsingham and Burghley were filled with complaints and demands. Soon Burghley took exception to Wallop's tone and chided him for it, going on to offer suggestions on how he might write more diplomatically. After that exchange relations between the two men remained soured for years. Burghley viewed Wallop as a sensationalizing complainer while Wallop consistently worried, and rightly so, that Burghley disliked him. Walsingham ended up acting as a protector for Wallop and provided a sympathetic listener for his complaints. 
The Desmond rebellion was a grim time in Ireland for Wallop. Although he could report on 1 March 1581 that his troops had killed more rebels than all the other bands in Ireland, he remained deeply pessimistic. Only two weeks later he expressed his doubts to Walsingham about the government ever being able to develop policies that would bring peace to Ireland, and he also expressed his wish to return to England. Increasingly his letters included requests to be relieved of his office along with complaints about harsh treatment by Burghley and even the queen. By 25 June 1585 he was considering turning over his office to the son of the sometime lord deputy Sir William Fitzwilliam. Instead Queen Elizabeth appointed Wallop and Archbishop Loftus joint lords justices of Ireland on 25 August 1582. They held that office until 21 June 1584, an added responsibility about which Wallop complained bitterly to Walsingham. Meanwhile Wallop struggled to make his accounts satisfactory for the royal auditors. The capture and execution of Desmond on 9 November 1583 ended the rebellion and eased the pressures on Wallop and the Irish government. 
Wallop developed definite ideas on the proper way to pacify and govern Ireland. By January 1580 he was warning that the unsettled state of Ireland was consuming the queen's treasure and the lives of her soldiers with no end in sight. He also quickly became a firm opponent of co-opting Irish lords into the government as he did not feel that they could be trusted. The same observation applied to the practice of training and equipping native troops for use against rebels. By April 1581 he had come to think that such training should be forbidden because in every rebellion it was the Irish rebels possessed of English military training who always proved to be the most dangerous enemies. No admirer of Gaelic Irish people or culture, Wallop advocated the harsh expedient of putting rebels to the sword and planting better people in their stead. Such opinions reflected his typically protestant English world view and prejudices. Nothing that he experienced in Ireland during his almost twenty years of service caused him to alter his early opinions. He advocated a policy of assimilating -- or as he would have put it civilizing -- the Gaelic Irish and even the Old English settlers. For him, Ireland was a land of great economic promise. A strong economy would help to civilize the Irish, or rather it would turn them into Elizabethan English. Early on Wallop personally worked to increase Irish grain production. By 1585 he was suggesting the growing of woad as a way to develop an export commodity. If such development plans worked, everyone benefited, including Wallop. 
The English government in Dublin was riven by animosities and factionalism. Resources were few while problems were myriad and the successful implementation of policies frequently proved elusive. Under such circumstances, recriminations and backbiting among government officials were inevitable. Wallop and Lord Deputy Sir John Perrot hated each other, but most people in the Irish government also hated Perrot. Wallop also disliked and distrusted Thomas Butler, tenth earl of Ormond, but that reflected his anti-Irish stance and he was not alone in his opinion. The royal auditor Thomas Jenyson was a particular 'bete noire' of his, whom Wallop attempted to discredit by calling him a papist. In contrast Jenyson complained that Wallop kept sloppy accounts. There were occasional tiffs with other government officials such as Sir Edward Waterhouse, but overall Wallop worked well with his English colleagues and maintained relations of mutual respect. 
Wallop happily participated in the plantation of Munster that followed the suppression of the Desmond rebellion, and established his own settlement at Enniscorthy, co. Wexford. Peace brought an end to his requests to be relieved of his office. But troubles with Lord Deputy Perrot, the auditing of Wallop's accounts, and petty outbreaks of violence among the Irish continued to keep Wallop busy. He also entered into long-drawn-out struggles to obtain possession of Athlone Castle and the lands of Adare Abbey in Ireland. Beginning in 1586 he sought permission to return to England so that he could handle his personal business there. Initially refused, he obtained such permission in 1587 but the treason of Sir William Stanley that year and the Armada threat of the following year kept him in Ireland. He personally interrogated a number of Armada survivors and showed himself to be both astute and compassionate. Finally, in April 1589, he sailed for England, where he stayed until July 1595 while a deputy performed his duties in Ireland. As early as August 1592 Wallop's long absence aroused the complaint of the royal auditor Christopher Peyton, who had to travel to Wallop's Hampshire home to clear his accounts. But it was not until 19 July 1595 that Wallop returned to Ireland to serve as treasurer-at-war just as the Nine Years' War (1594-1603) was starting to take an ominous turn. He was soon predicting that it would be a long and expensive war. Always an advocate of doing things properly, Wallop called upon the government to provide adequate resources to support the troops in Ireland. All that suggestion earned him was a scolding from Burghley on behalf of the parsimonious queen. 
Wallop's final years in Ireland were unhappy as the English position deteriorated. During January 1596 he and Sir Robert Gardiner conducted negotiations with the earl of Tyrone. The earl drove a tough bargain but the agreement resulted in an extension of the peace for a much needed three months. Unfortunately Queen Elizabeth took exception to the obsequious and overly friendly tone that Wallop and Gardiner took with Tyrone. Her royal censure hurt Wallop deeply. In July 1597 Wallop proposed equipping the English army in Ireland with Irish-style clothing, a practical suggestion that was greeted with derision and cynicism. Lord Burghley accused Wallop of seeking his own personal enrichment. This setback came in the midst of Wallop's ongoing struggle to refute charges of peculation that had first surfaced in October 1596 and were still plaguing him a year later. Offended yet again, he attempted to resign but the government in London would not hear of it. They needed his experience and ability. By 22 February 1598 the ageing and ill Wallop was so desperate that he was threatening to leave his post and return to England without licence. It did no good. Meanwhile his son Oliver was brutally killed in a skirmish with some Irish rebels which added to Wallop's misery. Finally in March 1599 the queen agreed to replace Wallop as treasurer with Sir George Carey but ordered Wallop to stay on in Ireland and advise Carey for an unspecified period of time. Sadly Wallop died in Dublin on 14 April 1599, the day Carey reached Ireland. He was buried in St Patrick's, Dublin. His wife, Katherine, died soon after, on 16 July, and was buried alongside him with their son Oliver. He was succeeded by his only surviving son, Henry (1568-1642), who married Elizabeth Corbet of Shropshire and was elected to parliament many times. 
The elder Sir Henry Wallop was a typical middle-ranking Tudor official, efficient and conscientious but also continually looking to his own personal advantage. His attitudes toward the Irish were also characteristic of protestant Elizabethan England -- conquest followed by assimilation or extermination of the native population. 


@@@@@


doc= 28581


Wallop, Sir John (b. before 1492, d. 1551), soldier and diplomat, was the eldest of three sons and a daughter of Stephen Wallop ('b'. in or after 1473, died 1526/7), administrator, and his wife, Ashley (died in or after 1515), only daughter of Hugh Ashley of Wimborne St Giles, Dorset, and his wife, Elizabeth. His younger brother Giles was born in 1491 or 1492. The Wallops were substantial members of the Hampshire gentry, having acquired the estate of Farleigh Wallop near Basingstoke through marriage early in the fifteenth century. 
Little is known about Wallop's education but it must have been reasonably thorough because throughout his life he displayed an aptitude for languages (including French and Spanish, and possibly German and Italian, though not Latin). The celebrated humanist Juan Luis Vives described how Wallop knew 'the customs and tongues of many men' ('LP Henry VIII', 4/3, no. 6795). He had two brothers, Giles ('b'. 1491/2, died in or after 1530), a priest and notable scholar, and Sir Oliver Wallop ('c'.1502-1566), and a sister, Margaret ('fl'. 1502-1542), who married Thomas Barnaby. His uncles Richard Wallop (1455/6-1503) and Sir Robert Wallop (1472/3-1535) were regularly appointed sheriff of Hampshire between 1501 and 1524. 
Sir Robert Wallop may have provided Wallop with an income as feoffee of his manor in Basing, Hampshire, in the last years of Henry VII's reign but it was insufficient to provide for his needs and, with little expectation of inheriting, he pursued a military career and was constantly on the lookout for preferment. He began this career principally serving in Henry VIII's navy and reputedly participated in Sir Edward Poyning's successful expedition to the Low Countries in 1511, the year in which his father was included in the Hampshire commission of array with Sir Robert Wallop. His military proficiency must already have been evident and he was promoted captain by 1512 and knighted in 1512 or 1513. He was joint captain with Sir John Wyseman of the 'Henry Grace a Dieu' from April 1513. Wallop went on the reckless but chivalrous expedition to Brest of Sir Edward Howard, the lord admiral. He led a series of harsh raids on French coastal communities while commanding a succession of mid-size vessels during Henry's campaign in France in 1513-14 and had joint command of a large squadron with Wyseman under Thomas Howard, earl of Surrey, in May 1514. He was also made one of the king's spears and continued to serve under Surrey during the summer. He revenged the French attack on the Sussex coast in autumn 1515 by retaliating effectively in a series of devastating raids on Normandy, despite inadequate manpower. At some point after September 1513 Wallop married Elizabeth (died 1516), daughter of Sir Oliver St John of Lydiard Tregoze, Wiltshire, and his wife, Elizabeth, and widow of Gerald Fitzgerald, eighth earl of Kildare. She was a cousin of Henry VII and, although this made the match more prestigious, it is uncertain whether or not she regained control of her substantial dower lands or these passed to her son by her first marriage. She must have been considerably older than Wallop, suggesting he hoped her a rich widow. The marriage was short-lived and childless, with Lady Wallop dying on 28 June 1516. Wallop also participated in court life and his combination of martial skill, intelligence, learning, and prudence probably recommended him to the young Henry VIII, who began to employ him as a diplomat. His first mission, in August 1515, was to Margaret of Savoy, regent of the Low Countries. 
Wallop led an itinerant life, spending the majority of his career serving abroad, and had an insatiable curiosity for foreign places. He served Manuel, king of Portugal, against the Muslims from 1516 to 1518, being sufficiently wealthy to fight at his own expense, an indication that he was not a mercenary but a volunteer. He probably lived off the booty he took, fighting near Tangier in Morocco, and was made a knight of the order of Christ. Wallop continued to favour the Portuguese on his return home. He was among the pensioners appointed in September 1518 to entertain the French embassy, meaning he was an active courtier rather than a supernumerary. He served in Ireland under Surrey, lord lieutenant between 1520 and 1522. Surrey had a high opinion of Wallop, appointing him vice-treasurer of Ireland, describing him to Cardinal Thomas Wolsey in August 1520 as a 'man right mete to do the kynges grace gode service in his warrys... diligent and with goode will woll take payne in... thynges as from tyme to tyme you commande hym to do', and using him to bring money and supplies and to convey important news (TNA: PRO, SP 60/1/14, fol. 43'r'). He was integral to Surrey's more aggressive policy as a negotiator in England on his behalf and asked the king in early 1521 for 300 cavalry and 500 infantry. He benefited from service and held the office of bailiff and receiver, then constable, of the lordship of Trim, co. Meath, from 1522 to 1524. He used this revenue to support Giles Wallop's education at the University of Louvain in the early 1520s and had an almost paternal relationship with his younger brother. 
Wallop was appointed marshal of the rearward during the war with France in 1522-3 because of his expertise at leading raids, recently honed in the desultory fighting in Ireland, and in conducting sieges. He participated in the raid on Brittany and was among the first to storm Morlaix in July 1522, after which he garrisoned St Omer with 1000 men. He was then based in the Calais pale, from where he led devastating attacks on the French. He was vital to the taking of Montdidier and other French towns. Wallop was rewarded for his good service with appointment as high marshal of Calais on 31 March 1524. He defeated the French near St Omer in May but was subsequently forced to retire in the face of superior numbers. He lived at court or at one of his uncle's properties whenever he was in England and cultivated his Hampshire connections. For example, Sir John Paulet appointed him feoffee to uses on 2 January 1525. 
Wallop was used increasingly as a diplomat from 1526, as were other men with military backgrounds, such as Poynings and Sir Richard Jerningham. The 'soldier diplomat' was useful because he was regarded as tough, methodical, and honourable (Potter, 104). Promotion to gentleman of the privy chamber in 1526 enhanced his status by giving Wallop additional prestige as an intimate of the king. He was sent with a large amount of money as special ambassador to Hungary in September 1526 in response to the Ottoman invasion. This mission was very important because of the prestige Henry could gain by saving Christendom from the Muslims and Wallop was chosen because of his military expertise. Wallop received an audience with Margaret of Savoy on 16 September. Then, after spending time in Cologne, Brussels, Mainz, and Augsburg, he received an audience with Ferdinand, king of the Romans, at Prague on 5 February 1527. Ferdinand discussed the situation in detail and, among other things, gave Wallop two large gilt cups, but subsequently proved unwilling to permit him to go to Hungary to speak with his rival Jan Zapolya, 'voivode' of Transylvania. Wallop received an audience with Sigismund I, king of Poland, at Breslau in Silesia in early May at which they discussed the danger of Lutheranism. He was the first English ambassador to Poland. Wallop intended to return to Hungary in June and even considered going to Istanbul. He was at Vienna in July and probably returned to England the following month due to lack of funds. 
Wallop continued to acquire offices and rewards. He was named, with Sir Richard Page, surveyor and receiver of the subsidies on kerseys in London and Southampton on 17 March 1528 with a joint salary of $100. He was special ambassador to France between February and May and received an audience with Francois I at Poissy on 28 February. The French were keen that Wallop should not discover their intentions regarding relations with Charles V and had a very high opinion of his abilities, despite regarding him as pro-imperialist. The French ambassador in England, Jean du Bellay, bishop of Bayonne, commented that Sir John Russell was likely to replace Wallop and would be 'better than any other whose name is not Wallop' ('LP Henry VIII', 4/3, appendix, 190). Wallop returned to Calais in June. His father died at some point during 1526 or 1527 but he inherited little. 
Wallop became keeper of the lordship and park of Ditton, Buckinghamshire, on 6 April 1529, making him responsible for running the estate and for raising tenants in time of war or insurrection. He married Elizabeth (died 1552), daughter of Sir Clement Harleston of South Ockendon, Essex, at Windsor Castle on 8 June 1530. She must have been considerably younger than him and had been in service to Anne Boleyn, continuing as a member of her circle after the marriage. Wallop was promoted to lieutenant of Calais on 23 June at a salary of $56 10's'. per annum. However, his pay was often in arrears and he got into debt. He had forty-nine soldiers under him but his charge, the castle overlooking the harbour, was woefully outdated and the weakest part in the Calais pale. Wallop was now the second most senior officer in the garrison after the deputy and was a member of the council, though he did not attend council meetings frequently. He was at Calais during the extensive repairs carried out in September and October 1531. Lady Wallop handled aspects of their finances, including receiving wages from the exchequer. Wallop was in an awkward position because he did not support Henry's attempts to divorce Katherine of Aragon. There were conflicting family loyalties over the divorce because Lady Wallop continued as a member of the Boleyn circle until at least 1532, but by December 1535 she was described as Katherine's 'creatura' ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 9, no. 970). Despite this, Wallop was selected to be ambassador in France, although Surrey (now third duke of Norfolk) felt 'that such a charge was not altogether suitable for him, being more a man of war than of counsel' ('LP Henry VIII', vol. 5, no. 1109). He was resident ambassador with a salary of $486 13's'. 4died from 11 September 1532 to mid-March 1537. 
Wallop arrived at the French court by 1 January 1533 and immediately became involved in delicate but intense negotiations in an attempt to gain Francois's support for the divorce. He returned to Calais at some point before July and nearly drowned at Newneham Bridge, perhaps as a result of deficiencies in the maintenance of the network of sluices there. With Stephen Gardiner, bishop of Winchester, and Sir Francis Bryan he was present at the interview between Francois and Clement VII at Marseilles on 11 October. They were under strict instructions not to present themselves to the pope. Despite the tense circumstances, Bryan was convivial company. Wallop probably spent the first half of 1534 in England or at Calais but returned to the French court by October. He lived in a succession of inns and lodging houses. In 1534-5 he skilfully negotiated a defensive league with Francois against Charles, whose reaction to the Henrician Reformation was a source of great anxiety, and then changed tactics by re-establishing good relations with the emperor when the situation eased. Henry had become disillusioned with the French alliance. Wallop also tried to persuade Philip Melanchthon to go to England in July 1535, in the hope that the reformer would support the Henrician Reformation. Thomas Cromwell, the king's secretary, instructed him to justify the executions of John Fisher, bishop of Rochester, and Sir Thomas More, to Francois. Cromwell and he may have been at odds as a consequence of Wolsey's fall but they briefly settled their differences. Other delicate tasks Wallop carried out included renegotiating the French pension and informing Francois, not without delight, of Anne's fall in May 1536. He spent time hawking during the summer. Wallop remained with the French court between October 1535 and March 1537. He was initially unimpressed by James V's reticent character when he met him in November 1536, telling the deputy of Calais, Arthur Plantagenet, sixth Viscount Lisle, that if it were not for the talkative nature of the Scottish king's prospective bride, Madeleine de Valois, 'the house should be very quiet' ('Lisle Letters', 3.524). His reports are valuable as observations of general developments in France and he played one party off against the other with some dexterity and 'elan'. 
Sir Robert Wallop died on 16 June 1535 and Sir John Wallop, his eldest nephew, inherited most of his property. Wallop lobbied hard for his recall from France because, as Henry put it, he had 'ever right honestly referred yourself as by your sundry lettres it apperethe to Returne hither into our Realme aswel to visyte and see us as to loke uppon suche youre inheritannce as sethens your departure hathe descended and fallen unto youe' (BL, Add. MS 25114, fol. 241'r'). Despite his frequent absences, Wallop tried to keep an eye on local developments. His client, John Coke, was registrar of Winchester and was involved in an ongoing and ultimately successful quarrel with the protestant John Palmes in the 1530s. Yet Thomas Cranmer, archbishop of Canterbury, could provide another protestant, Robert Vaws, with the living of Over Wallop, despite strong opposition from Wallop and the Hampshire clergy. Wallop was JP for Hampshire from 1538 to 1551. On 3 March 1539 he appointed his cousin John Cooke as one of his feoffees to uses. Cooke was receiver and surveyor of Wallop's lands by 1551. Before August 1545 Sir John and Oliver Wallop contracted with the lord chancellor, Thomas Wriothesley, Baron Wriothesley of Titchfield, for a marriage between Henry Wallop (c.1531-1599) and Anne Wriothesley. Wallop was one of the six gentlemen of the privy chamber who supported the canopy at the christening of Edward, prince of Wales, on 15 October 1537 and his wife attended the funeral of Jane Seymour on 12 November. He was granted the extensive lands of the dissolved monastery of Barlinch, Somerset, on 29 May 1538, including the manors of Brompton Ralph, Bury, and Warleigh, all in Somerset, and Morebath in Devon. Consequently, he spent part of the autumn in Somerset and was considered as a potential candidate as sheriff of Devon for 1538-9. Wealth brought status. The schoolmaster Leonard Cox sought his literary patronage but Wallop was not supportive. Wallop did have one of his servants taught to play the viol, though. He returned to Calais in March 1539 because of renewed fears of war with France and from May was involved in the troubles there over religion through close association with William Sandys, first Baron Sandys and captain of Guines, and with Lisle. They opposed the local protestants and used this against Cromwell. According to Sir George Carew, they 'shoyth them selwys unwyllyng that the word of god shold prosper & go forward amongst us' (TNA: PRO, SP 1/151, fol. 226'r'). This divided the council and the junior officers. 
Wallop and his wife were close friends of Lord and Lady Lisle, their relationship being reinforced by vicinage, both men being leading Hampshire landowners. He was on good terms with Sir Richard Grenville, high marshal, Sir Thomas Palmer, high porter, and the other senior officers at Calais. The letters between them provide a vivid picture of life in their circle at Calais and reveal Wallop's dry sense of humour. He wrote regularly to Lisle when away, even going into detail about the situation in France normally reserved for the king. On 18 December 1536 he wrote to congratulate Lisle on his impending fatherhood and expressed the hope that his own marriage would produce children, especially if his wife and he could 'return once quietly to the Castle'. He bought Lady Lisle some special water at Avignon for the later stages of her pregnancy that, among other things, he assured her husband 'when a woman's breasts be long, it raiseth them higher and rounder, which peradventure shall be good for some of your neighbours'. However, he hoped Lisle would not misconstrue his meaning by taking his comment to be derogatory towards his wife's appearance and pointed out that her figure was fine and she 'needeth not' such cosmetic aid ('Lisle Letters', 3.571-2). Wallop had no children. 
Wallop was resident ambassador in France again from 2 February 1540 to March 1541, with an annual salary of $730, and was instructed to sever ties between Francois and Charles and build close relations with Marguerite of Navarre. His secretary, Nicholas Alexander, was involved closely in these negotiations. Norfolk and Wallop received an audience with Francois in the king's bedchamber at Abbeville on 23 February 1540. The French king was on good terms with Wallop, who was uncertain about Franco-imperial relations. However, Wallop's work was done for him when Charles baulked at handing Milan over in April. He was appointed a commissioner of oyer and terminer, despite his absence, in June. Wallop was involved in the complex negotiations with the French over the Cowswade, within the Calais pale, between October 1540 and February 1541. Henry used tension over this to renegotiate his French pension. 
Wallop was caught up in the religious faction of the early 1540s that was a consequence of Cromwell's fall. His Catholicism was well known and Henry became suspicious of him after hearing allegations of treason in June 1540. He was appointed captain of Guines, the only modernized fortification in the Calais pale, in December but was recalled from France and examined in March 1541, as was Alexander. However, Henry handled the situation with care and despite seizing his papers and trying to elicit information through subterfuge, he permitted Wallop to speak openly in his defence to the privy council. Wallop was accused of conducting treasonable correspondence with Richard Pate and, realizing his safest course was to admit his guilt, he did so and submitted to the king's mercy. He was pardoned on 21 March and was restored as captain of Guines in April, his appointment being confirmed on 7 July 1543, when he was also named commander of English forces in France. Wallop commanded a company of 100 cavalry and oversaw new engineering work at Calais in summer 1542. He frequently received instructions from the privy council on how to conduct his various duties, including provisioning the garrison and keeping 'a good eye unto the Pale, &c' and dealt carefully but effectively with numerous local matters that might impair the efficiency of his men, like the conduct of one soldier, Anthony Hutchinson, who spoke 'certeyne lewde and unsemely worddes' while drunk ('APC', '1542-7', 54, 87). To try to prevent this behaviour from recurring he appointed Thomas Audley of St Ives, Huntingdon, provost marshal in August. Wallop used his diplomatic nature to good effect by coming to an accommodation in autumn 1542 with the local French commander, Oudart de Biez, marshal of France, that made their duties easier. This was part of a wider Anglo-French 'rapprochement' in 1542-3. Biez and he became good friends. They hunted in Guines Forest together, sent each other gifts of venison, and their families dined with one another when the opportunity arose. Biez used these meetings to try to learn more about the modernization taking place at Calais, but Wallop had 'to muche practised a brode for a Frencheman / to pike [pick] any thinge owte of me' (TNA: PRO, SP 1/171, fol. 8'v'). Wallop advanced the military careers of promising young gentlemen, including that of James Wilford of Hartridge, Kent, whose aptitude for siege engineering and with ordnance he found striking when they met in June 1542. 
Henry allied with Charles in February 1543. Wallop provided a detailed plan on how to conduct the campaign and was made captain-general of an army of between 5000 and 6000 men and sent to Calais to assist in the defence of the Low Countries in June. He invaded the Boulonnais in July, destroying fortifications and harbours and devastating the countryside. He then participated in the siege of Landrecies from September to November, during which he became ill. The emperor praised him for his professionalism and he retired with his men as the campaigning season drew to a close in November. Henry was so satisfied with Wallop's performance of his duties that he agreed to his nomination to the Order of the Garter on 24 December 1543. Wallop was installed on 18 May 1544, with the king providing him with the ceremonial robes from his own wardrobe. He was busy during the invasion of France in 1544 and maintained a large force at Guines. In January 1545 he argued with the lieutenant of Hammes Castle, William Grey, thirteenth Baron Grey of Wilton, and despite attempts at mediation, their disagreement rumbled on into the autumn. Grey of Wilton was a difficult man to get on with. The privy council thanked Wallop for his bravery in June. In June 1546 he was placed on the second commission to determine the boundaries of the Boulonnais and was appointed to the third commission in March 1547. 
Wallop promptly ingratiated himself with the new regime, writing to Edward Seymour, duke of Somerset and lord protector to Edward VI, from Calais on 23 February 1547 and asking to 'remayne in suche aucthorytie and permynence at guisnes as I and other captenes have done' (TNA: PRO, SP 68/13, fol. 94'r'). He continued as captain of Guines, being placed in command of the defence of English territory in France, and was reappointed JP for Hampshire in May, although he was removed from the privy chamber. Wriothesley (now first earl of Southampton) retained him as keeper of his newly acquired manor and park of Dogmersfield, Hampshire, in July. This friendship with the disgraced former lord chancellor did Wallop no harm and reflected their shared Catholicism. Wallop was involved in the defence of the outlying forts of Boulogne and Calais against the French in 1548-9 and Russell (now Baron Russell), wrote to the lord admiral, Thomas Seymour, Baron Seymour of Sudeley, on 13 August 1548, describing how during one of the frequent skirmishes and, despite his age, Wallop 'findinge the lyke entertaynement abowte his parties [parts], made owte and slewe of those whiche came to seke playe, xij or xiiij: and put the rest to flight' (TNA: PRO, SP 10/4/44, M fol. 87'v'). Wallop was at court in early 1550 and retained the confidence of John Dudley, earl of Warwick, in the aftermath of the October coup against Somerset. Warwick wrote to the privy council on 1 February 1550 and, among others, asked them to commend him to 'myne olde acquayntance Sir John Wallop', to whom he intended to write on his return to court (BL, Cotton MS Caligula E. iv, fol. 206'r'). Wallop was considered a reliable military client and, oddly, identified as a member of Warwick's protestant party. This was a surprising but adroit shift in loyalties for the old soldier and was probably based on Warwick's genuine admiration for Wallop, whom he knew through his late stepfather, Lisle. Wallop was a commissioner for settling the boundary of English territory in France. He was rewarded too, receiving an annuity of $20 for life in June 1551. 
Wallop made his last will on 22 May 1551. Even at the end he struck a neat balance between service and faith. The opening formula declared Edward to be 'supreme hed of the churche of England and Irelande', yet Wallop, using the traditional Catholic phrasing, commended his soul to God, while 'humbly desyring our Lady saynt Marie the virgyn mother of our lorde Jesus Christ / and all the holy company in heaven to be mediators and Intercessors for me'. Testament to the strength of his marriage was his decision to appoint Lady Wallop his sole executor; she was to receive the revenue from part of his estates and his household goods during her life, and he remembered fondly, when leaving a bequest to Sir Edward Wotton, that it was 'my gilt cupp with a cover whiche I and my wief dyd use to drynke caudels in'. Among others, he left bequests to Somerset, Warwick, his steward John Smale, and another cousin, Cooke, sergeant of the king's hart hounds. He left half a year's wages to his servants and provided an annuity for Alexander, now captain of Newneham Bridge, of $6 13's'. 4died He also petitioned the privy council 'to Remytt my said debt or parte therof' (which amounted to $138 9's'. 1died in 1546), since it had been accrued through royal service, and to pay his wages until 17 October (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/34, sig. 24). Sir Oliver Wallop was his heir male and stood to inherit one of the largest estates in Hampshire. Sir John Wallop died at Guines on 13 July, of the sweating sickness, a particularly virulent disease to which, peculiarly, the fittest were most susceptible, and was buried there after a substantial funeral ceremony, probably in the churchyard (having provided $5 towards the church's restoration). His body was subsequently removed and reburied in the parish church at Farleigh Wallop. Henry Machyn's assessment epitomized the opinion of many of his contemporaries: 'gentyll sir John... was a nobull captayne as ever was' ('The Diary of Henry Machyn, Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of London, from 1550-1563', ed. J. G. Nichols, 'Camden Miscellany', 1st ser., 42, CS, 1848, 8). Wallop was the epitome of the Tudor gentleman, a brilliant naval officer and soldier (who kept abreast of changing tactics and military technology), long remembered for his skill as a commander, his professionalism, and his ferocity as a foe, a fine diplomat, and an able royal servant. His wife survived him and retired to South Ockendon but was in failing health by March 1552 and died shortly after. 


@@@@@


doc= 28582


Wallop, John, first earl of Portsmouth (1690-1762), politician, was born on 15 April 1690, the third son of John Wallop (died 1694), of Farleigh Wallop, Hampshire, and his wife, Alicia (died 1744), third daughter of William Borlace or Borlase, of Great Marlow, Buckinghamshire. The Wallop family had been landholders in Hampshire since at least the early fourteenth century, and in the eighteenth century claimed descent from the pre-conquest aristocracy. His great-grandfather was the parliamentarian and councillor of state under the Commonwealth, Robert Wallop. Following the death of his father in 1694 and of his elder brother Bluet Wallop from peripneumonia in 1707, he succeeded to the Wallop family estates in Hampshire. In 1708 he left Eton College to complete his education with an extended tour of Europe. On his way to Geneva he served as a volunteer at the battle of Oudenarde. Following a year at school in Geneva he travelled in Italy and Germany, where in Hanover he became acquainted with the elector, later to become George I. 
Wallop's background and sympathies were firmly whig, and he inherited influence over the seats at Andover and Whitchurch. He failed to be elected for Hampshire in 1713, but in 1715 was returned for both Hampshire and Andover, choosing to sit for the county. On 20 May 1716 he married Lady Bridget Bennet ('bap'. 1696, died 1738), eldest daughter of Charles Bennet, first earl of Tankerville. They had six sons and four daughters. He chose not to go into opposition with Robert Walpole and Charles, second Viscount Townshend, in 1717, and was rewarded with an appointment as a lord of the Treasury on 3 April. He was usually loyal to the Sunderland ministry, but voted against the repeal of the 'Occasional Conformity and Schism Acts' in 1719. The return of Walpole and Townshend to the ministry in 1720 forced Wallop from office, but he was compensated on 11 June with elevation to the Lords as Baron Wallop and Viscount Lymington. He took little part in state affairs but quietly worked to establish his loyalty to Walpole. In 1731 he wrote to Charlotte Clayton suggesting that he would be a better manager of government patronage than Charles Powlett, third duke of Bolton. His appointment as chief justice in eyre north of Trent on 5 December 1732 acknowledged his loyalty. When Bolton was expelled from his offices after voting against the government on the excise in 1733, Lymington succeeded him as lord lieutenant of Hampshire (7 August 1733), vice-admiral of Hampshire, and lord warden of the New Forest (2 November 1733), and later became governor of the Isle of Wight (18 June 1734) although he then surrendered his chief justiceship. On 7 August 1739 he became a governor of the Foundling Hospital. During this period Lymington rebuilt Farleigh House, his ancestral home which had been burnt down in 1667. The south front, built in 1731, remains much as Lymington left it, but the north front was altered in 1935. His wife died of apoplexy on 12 October 1738 at Lyndhurst, Hampshire, and was buried at Farleigh Wallop. She was survived by four of her sons and a daughter. On 9 June 1741 Lymington married Elizabeth Griffin (bap. 1691, d. 1762), daughter of James Griffin, second Baron Griffin, and widow of Henry Grey. They had no children. 
In July 1742, following Walpole's resignation, all Lymington's appointments were terminated. On 11 April 1743 he was compensated with the earldom of Portsmouth. On 19 February 1746 he was reappointed governor of the Isle of Wight, a position he held until his death. He continued to correspond with the duke of Newcastle on political and patronage matters, but seems to have kept his independence; when Newcastle wrote to Portsmouth in 1760, asking him to support the ministerial candidate at Andover, Sir Francis Blake Delaval, alongside his wife's nephew Sir John Griffin Griffin, he replied that he would only intervene in Griffin's favour and not on behalf of another candidate. 
Portsmouth died three months after his second wife on 22 November 1762 and was buried in St Andrew's Church, Farleigh Wallop, Hampshire. A marble monument on the south wall bears a lengthy inscription of his life. His eldest son, John, Viscount Lymington (1718-1749), MP for Andover from 1741 until his death, had married Catherine, daughter of John Conduitt, Sir Isaac Newton's successor as master of the Royal Mint, and a close friend of Portsmouth. Catherine was Newton's niece and coheir, and his papers and scientific papers were inherited by her eldest son, John Wallop (1742-1797), who following the death of his grandfather became second earl of Portsmouth. 


@@@@@


doc= 28583


Wallop, Richard (bap. 1616, d. 1697), lawyer, was baptized at Bugbrooke, Northamptonshire, on 10 June 1616, the son of Richard Wallop and his wife, Mary Spencer, sister and coheir of William Spencer of Everton, Northamptonshire. The Wallop family was originally from Hampshire. At eighteen Wallop matriculated at Pembroke College, Oxford, on 10 October 1634. He graduated BA on 2 June 1635, and was called to the bar by the Middle Temple in February 1646. 
Of his career during the interregnum nothing can be said, although Wallop may have acquired in those years the anti-royalist sensibilities that some have discerned in his later life. His marriage to Mary produced at least one daughter; his wife outlived him. In 1666 he became a bencher, and in 1673 was appointed treasurer of the Middle Temple. 
Wallop rose to prominence during the final years of Charles II's reign and throughout the reign of James II. Characterized by one contemporary as an 'eminent lawyer', he became one of the most visible of the whig lawyers, representing whig defendants in many of the great state trials of the era ('CSP dom.', James II, 2.150). In 1682 he assisted in the defence of the City of London against Charles II's writ of 'quo warranto'. He defended several whigs against charges of rioting during parliamentary elections, and represented Sir John Hampden in his trial for his part in the Rye House plot. When two men were arrested for charging the king with the murder of the earl of Essex, Wallop defended them and was himself charged with a 'zeal for faction and sedition' (Irving, 195). He also assisted the cause of the plantiff in 'Godden v. Hales', and even participated in the defence of Titus Oates on perjury charges, although on this occasion he appears to have acted as assigned counsel. Wallop's regular participation in the defence of the whigs earned him the truly remarkable hostility of Chief Justice George Jeffreys. When Wallop appeared before Jeffreys to defend Richard Baxter against sedition charges, Jeffreys said from the bench: 'Mr. Wallop, I observe you are in all these dirty causes; and were it not for you gentlemen of the long robe, who should have more wit and honesty to support and hold these factious knaves by the chin, we should not be at the pass we are at. (Foss, 'Judges', 7.697)' Jeffreys bitterly berated Wallop for his defence of Lord Grey on the charge of having 'debauched' Lady Henrietta Berkeley. During the trial of Thomas Rosewell for high treason, Jeffreys ejected Wallop from the court, refusing him even the right to observe the trial from the audience. It is doubtful whether these confrontations rendered Wallop 'eternally famous', as one nineteenth-century authority has asserted, but he is indeed mostly remembered for providing Jeffreys with opportunities for flaunting his vicious temper. 
It should be noted that Wallop was capable of representing clients whose political views he probably found less than congenial. Most remarkably he represented the duke of York when indicted for recusancy in 1681. He served as counsel for the maligned 'popish Lords' Lord Petre and Viscount Stafford in 1679-80. On 4 February 1684 he appeared before king's bench as one of the earl of Danby's councillors. Indeed, in 1685 Lord Brandon felt it plausible to recommend Wallop as a king's councillor. Perhaps not surprisingly, the earl of Sunderland declined the advice on behalf of the king. Jeffreys's biographer Irving described Wallop as 'tactless' and unlearned, but even he (a virtual apologist for Jeffreys and a biased source) admits that nothing substantiates Jeffreys's charge that Wallop had a 'hectoring and swaggering manner' (Irving, 303). Mostly Wallop seems to have had a remarkable nose for publicity. He involved himself in a great many high-profile political trials. On 16 March 1696 he was made a baron of the exchequer, but did not live to enjoy the honour for long. He died on 22 August 1697 and was buried four days later in the church at the Middle Temple. 


@@@@@


doc= 28584


Wallop, Robert (1601-1667), politician, was born on 20 July 1601, the only son of Sir Henry Wallop (1568-1642) of Farleigh Wallop in Hampshire, and Elizabeth (died 1624), daughter and heir of Robert Corbet of Morton Corbet in Shropshire. Sir Henry, one of the wealthiest members of the Hampshire gentry, and many times an MP, was heir to the substantial Irish estates acquired by his father, Sir Henry Wallop, vice-treasurer and lord justice in Ireland. The family's status ensured that Robert, who matriculated from Hart Hall, Oxford, on 5 May 1615, was certain to assume an important role in his native county, and he did so even during his father's lifetime. He was returned to parliament for Andover in 1621, 1624, and 1628, and as a knight of the shire for Hampshire in 1625 and 1626, and, having been given permission to chose his bride, was able to secure a prestigious match in the shape of Anne (died 1662), daughter of Henry Wriothesley, third earl of Southampton. 
By 1640 Wallop was probably identified with the opposition to Charles I, having offered resistance to certain government policies. He delayed paying the forced loan, refused to compound for his knighthood, and declined to contribute to the first bishops' war (1639). Returned to both the Short and Long parliaments for Andover, he made no immediate impression but became an important figure on committees relating to Ireland once the rebellion there threatened his estates in Wexford. Thereafter, Irish affairs became one of his abiding concerns, although his support for parliament rested on more than self-interest. After 1642 he also became a linchpin of the parliamentarian war effort and administration in Hampshire, and by February 1644 was sufficiently influential to secure nomination to the committee of both kingdoms, and became deeply involved in negotiations with the Scots, and in preparing for negotiations with the king at Uxbridge in early 1645. He supported those who sought a harsh settlement, and who masterminded the self-denying ordinance, and he was a stalwart of those committees on Irish affairs instigated by the Independents rather than the presbyterians. It was as an Independent that he was involved in the increasingly tense negotiations with the Scots in late 1646, culminating in the treaty whereby the king was handed over to parliament (January 1647). 
Wallop became less prominent at Westminster after the presbyterian 'counter-revolution' in the summer of 1647, perhaps because of the growing need to oversee the security of Hampshire, although he was a member of the Derby House committee during 1648. He was willing to sit in the Rump after Pride's Purge, and was made a commissioner for the high court of justice to try the king. Although he attended two meetings of the commissioners and two days of the trial, he was absent at the sentencing on 27 January, and did not sign the death warrant. He remained willing to serve the republic, however, and was probably perceived to be a zealous advocate of the new regime. He was named to the first council of state (14 January 1649), and took the engagement (19 February). He claimed to have lost $50,000 through the war and his services to the parliamentarian cause were rewarded with the grant of $10,000 out of the estate of the marquess of Winchester. Although increasingly inactive, Wallop secured nomination to the second council of state (12 February 1650), and to its most important subcommittees. He was not elected again in February 1651, but was emphatically restored to the council in the poll held on 25 November, on the back of a tide of republican fervour after the army's success at Worcester. His attendance in council was becoming erratic, however, and his interests were apparently limited to the affairs of Ireland and Scotland. He was re-elected to the council of state in November 1652 but by then he was probably growing disillusioned with the drift of political events, and the growing influence of the army. 
Wallop was prepared to accommodate the protectorate, although he probably opposed its establishment. He was able to secure election for Hampshire to both the 1654 and 1656 parliaments despite rumours of his involvement in a plot against Cromwell. His active participation in national affairs only resumed, however, as a 'commonwealthsman' during the elections for the protectoral parliament of Richard Cromwell, to which he was himself returned for Hampshire, and in which he sought to assert the power of the Commons over the protector and the 'other house'. During the restored Rump in the summer of 1659 he was chosen for the council of state, although he withdrew from Westminster in the face of growing pressure from the army, until he was able to help secure the Rump's second restoration in December 1659. Thereafter he returned to the Commons and council of state, until retiring once again with the readmission of the secluded members in February 1660. 
Although he assisted the escape of some regicides, Wallop saw no reason to flee as the Restoration approached, and even secured election to the Convention Parliament, for Whitchurch, although he was quickly made incapable of sitting. He did not face trial in 1660, since he was neither a signatory of the king's death warrant, nor accounted a regicide for having been present when the sentence was read. Nevertheless, at some point before July 1661 he was imprisoned for his part in the proceedings, having failed to secure a pardon. He protested that he 'ever did and doth from his soul abhor and detest that most horrid and execrable murder' ('Seventh Report', HMC, 151), and that he had attended the trial at the behest of prominent royalists, in order to help the king. His ill fortune may have been linked to his great wealth, and a concerted attempt was clearly made to take control of his estate. His property was eventually protected by his brother-in-law, the earl of Southampton, on behalf of the family, while he himself languished in prison, to be subjected to ritual punishment each January. Despite his illness and imprisonment, he was able to marry twice following the death of his first wife in 1662. On 16 February 1663 he married Mary, daughter of the parliamentarian general John Lambert, and on 16 May 1666 he married one Elizabeth Thompson, who was granted permission to remain with him in the Tower until his death on 16 November 1667; his body was released for burial at Farleigh Wallop, on 7 January 1668. Wallop's widow, who married one Robert Needham in May 1669, was eventually awarded portions of the Irish estate, while his son Henry Wallop sat for Whitchurch in the Cavalier Parliament. Wallop's great-grandson, John Wallop, was created earl of Portsmouth in 1743. 


@@@@@


doc= 28585


Walmesley, Charles (1722-1797), vicar apostolic of the western district and mathematician, born on 13 January 1722 at Wigan Lane House, Standish, Lancashire, was the seventh son of John Walmesley of Westwood House, and his wife, Mary, daughter of William Greaves. He was educated in the English Benedictine college of St Gregory at Douai, and in the English Benedictine monastery of St Edmund at Paris, where he was clothed in the habit on 28 September 1738 and made his profession as a monk of the Benedictine order on 29 September 1739. At the Sorbonne he took his master's degree in 1742, and his licentiate in theology in 1750 was followed by a DD. Such degrees allowed him to hold the benefice of St Marcel, near Chalons-sur-Marne. He held the office of prior from 1749 until 1753, founding a literary and scientific society for the community and its lay associates. He was criticized, however, for his undue preoccupation with his mathematical studies. In 1754 he went to Rome as the English Benedictine 'procurator in curia', his main task being the defence of the monks' privileges against the incursions of the secular clergy. It was during this time that he probably visited Mount Etna for purposes of scientific investigation. 
Walmesley's election as coadjutor, to Bishop Laurence York, vicar apostolic of the western district of England, with the right to succeed, was made by the 'propaganda fide' on 6 April 1756, and was approved by the pope on 2 May. He was consecrated at Rome with the title of bishop of Rama, 'in partibus', on 21 December 1756. He administered the vicariate from Bath after the retirement of Bishop York in 1763, and succeeded to the vicariate on the death of his predecessor in 1770. 
While administering the vicariate Walmesley continued to be involved in directing Benedictine studies, and drew up a course of studies for junior monks which recommended the study of contemporary scientists and philosophers. His own passion for Newtonian science was reflected in his most popular work, 'The General History of the Christian Church... by Sig. Pastorini' (1770), a commentary on the book of 'Revelation' which secured his gloomy prophecies about the future on a foundation of Newtonian theory. His 'Ezekiel's Vision Explained' (1778) contained a similar message. He believed his forebodings were confirmed in the destruction caused by the Gordon riots in 1780, when his property, papers, and the bulk of his library were destroyed at Bath. Among his possessions that were burned were his scientific papers. By 1747 he had become involved in the debate then being held among astronomers in Paris over 'the problem of the Three Bodies'. In December 1748 he attempted to persuade Alexis-Claude Clairaut (1713-1765), by means of Newtonian mathematics, about the source of the discrepancy in calculating the motion of the moon's apse. He followed this up with a book, 'Theorie du mouvement des apsides en general, et en particulier des apsides de l'orbite de la lune' (1749; English trans., 1754), based on Isaac Newton's propositions and a theorem of John Machin. Although he showed some skill in integrating these, the book also included some questionable assumptions. In 1749 he published his translation of the 'Harmonia mensurarum' of Roger Cotes under the title 'Analyse des mesures, des rapports et des angles', the importance of which lay in transmitting to Europe a set of rules for carrying out numerical integrations, and hence was cited by the astronomer Roger Boscovich SJ. His work on Newton's theory of fluxions brought Walmesley some fame, and in 1750 he became a fellow of the Royal Society of Berlin and the Royal Society of London. It was at this time that he seems to have been involved in the discussions on the adoption of the Gregorian calendar. Between 1756 and 1761 he published a series of papers on astronomy in the Royal Society of London's 'Philosophical Transactions'. During the 1750s he was also attempting to derive the precession of the equinoxes and the nutation through the use of Newtonian geometry. In 1758 his book 'De inaequalitatibus motuum lunarium' was published in Florence, and he presented a copy in 1761 to Thomas Birch, secretary of the Royal Society. Walmesley is reputed to have turned his back on scientific investigation when he found himself one day tracing geometric diagrams with the paten during mass. 
Following his cautious acceptance of the 1778 'Catholic Relief Act', Walmesley signed his name to the 'protestation' of the Catholic Committee, objecting to the term 'protesting Catholic dissenters' found in the oath which followed on from the 'protestation'. Henceforth, he became the principal episcopal champion of the party opposed to the Cisalpines, who sought further measures of relief from the English government in return for the loyalty of Catholics. He continued this struggle until his death at Bath on 25 November 1797. He was buried at St Joseph's Chapel, Trenchard Street, Bristol, where Charles Plowden inscribed an epitaph on his tomb. In 1906 his remains were transferred to Downside Abbey church, Bath, where a new monument carried a Latin epitaph by Bishop G. A. Burton, which translated runs: 'Proud Lancashire bore me, Rome consecrated me, and Bath, which I cared for, carried me off'. Through his consecration of John Carroll in the Weld Chapel at Lulworth on 15 August 1790, Walmesley became the father of the Roman Catholic hierarchy in the United States. 


@@@@@


doc= 28586


Walmsley, Sir Thomas (1537-1612), judge, was the eldest of the ten children of Thomas Walmsley (died 1584) of Showley Hall, Clayton-le-Dale, Lancashire, and Margaret Livesey. Having entered Lincoln's Inn in 1559, he was called to the bar in 1567 and made a bencher of the inn in 1574. He was Lent reader in 1578 and autumn reader in 1580, when he was created serjeant-at-law. In 1589 he was made a judge of the court of common pleas, which place he continued to occupy until his death. Walmsley was undoubtedly a very capable lawyer -- in 1603, the year he was knighted, Robert Cecil ranked him alongside the two chief justices for learning -- though he was in a very conservative mould: he resisted to the end what he regarded as undesirable developments in the common law, sometimes continuing his grumbling opposition long after they had become settled law. He was not a man to succumb to pressure to conform to the opinions of others. In 1591, early in his judicial career, he earned a royal reprimand for allowing bail to a prisoner accused of murder, contrary to the express instructions of the queen. Nowhere was his independence of mind more visible than in 'Calvin's case' (1608), when the judges were required to determine whether a Scot born after the accession of James I was a naturalized Englishman. Alone among the judges giving advice to the House of Lords, Walmsley refused to accept this, maintaining his dissent in the court of exchequer chamber. 
Walmsley retained strong Lancashire links throughout his life, representing the county in the parliament of 1589. His marriage 'c'.1570 to Anne Shuttleworth (died 1635) brought him an estate at Hacking, though not without litigation against her family; and in 1571 he bought the lands and mansion at Dunkenhalgh which were to be his principal home for the rest of his life. He continued to invest heavily in lands in Lancashire and in Yorkshire; according to the account of one of his descendants, Walmsley's expenditure on land in the course of his lifetime was in excess of $30,000. To the rentals from these estates and his earnings from legal practice, he added a steady stream of income from moneylending. Tradition has it that his dealings were not always fair; and his surviving account books suggest that he was, at the least, a tough dealer not given to magnanimous gestures where business was concerned. On the other hand, he was actively involved in charitable works, most notably as a governor of the grammar school at Blackburn. 
Walmsley's wife, who survived him by many years, was an unashamed recusant, and although perhaps not a practising Catholic himself, Walmsley was generally thought to have been actively sympathetic to their cause. During his time as justice of assize on the northern circuit (1589-91) the anti-Catholic legislation was enforced with the gentlest of hands, though protestant nonconformists were treated with firmness. It was perhaps because of this that he was moved in quick succession to the home circuit, then to the midland, and then to the west (where he could be watched over by the orthodox chief justice Sir Edmund Anderson). He returned to the northern circuit to ride with John Savile in 1602, and once again brought comfort to the Catholics and consternation to their opponents. 
In his later years Walmsley suffered from palsy and was plagued by gout. He died at Dunkenhalgh on 26 November 1612, at the age of seventy-five. His funeral was a lavish affair, with well over 2000 guests at the funeral feast, and many hundreds of pounds expended on mourning black. Buried at Blackburn beneath a handsome monument, which was largely destroyed in 1625, Walmsley was a local hero in northern Lancashire; the inn named in his memory at Whalley has survived to the present day. 


@@@@@


doc= 28587


Walmisley, Gilbert (bap. 1682, d. 1751), friend of Samuel Johnson, was descended from an ancient family in Lancashire. He was baptized in Lichfield Cathedral on 4 October 1682, the son of William Walmisley (died 1713), chancellor of Lichfield from 1698 to 1713, and MP for the city in 1701, who married in Lichfield Cathedral on 22 April 1675 Dorothy Gilbert, and was buried in the cathedral on 18 July 1713. Gilbert matriculated as a commoner from Trinity College, Oxford, on 14 April 1698, but did not take a degree. In 1707 he was called to the bar at the Inner Temple, and became registrar of the ecclesiastical court of Lichfield. He was probably a near relative of William Walmisley, prebendary of Lichfield from 1718 to 1720, and dean from 1720 to 1730. 
Walmisley, 'the most able scholar and the finest gentleman' in the city according to Anna Seward ('Poetical Works', 1.lxix), lived in the bishop's palace at Lichfield for thirty years; and Johnson, then a stripling at school, spent there, with David Garrick, 'many cheerful and instructive hours, with companions such as are not often found'. He was 'a whig with all the virulence and malevolence of his party', but polite and learned, so that Johnson could not name 'a man of equal knowledge', and the benefit of this intercourse remained to him throughout life (S. Johnson, 'Lives of the English Poets', ed. G. B. Hill, 1905, 2.20-21). He endeavoured in 1735 to procure for Johnson the mastership of a school at Solihull in Warwickshire, but without success. An abiding tribute to his memory was paid by Johnson in his life of Edmund Smith. 
On 30 March 1736 Walmisley, 'being tired since the death of my brother of living quite alone', married Magdalen, commonly called Margaret or Margery ('bap'. 1709, died 1786), fourth of the eight daughters of Sir Thomas Aston, bt, of Aston, Cheshire. His marriage was said to have extinguished certain expectations entertained by Garrick of a settlement from his friend. Walmisley died at Lichfield on 3 August 1751, and his widow died on 11 November 1786, aged seventy-seven. Both are buried in a vault near the south side of the west door in Lichfield Cathedral. A poetical epitaph by Thomas Seward was inscribed on a temporary monument which stood over the grave during the year after his death; it is printed in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (55/1, 1785, 166). It is said that Johnson promised to write an epitaph for him, but procrastinated until it was too late; he may be acquitted of any share in the composition printed as his in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (67/2, 1797, 726). A prose inscription to Walmisley's memory is on the south side of the west door of Lichfield Cathedral. Johnson's eulogy from his 'Life' of Smith was also inscribed on an adjoining monument. 
Walmisley's library was sold by Thomas Osborne of Gray's Inn in 1756. The Latin translation of Byrom's verses, beginning 'My time, O ye muses', printed in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (15, 1745, 102-3) as by G. Walmsley of 'Sid. Coll. Camb', and sometimes attributed to Gilbert Walmisley, is no doubt by Galfridus Walmsley, BA from that college in 1746. Some correspondence between Garrick and Johnson and Walmisley is printed in Garrick's 'Private Correspondence' and in Johnson's 'Letters'. Anna Seward commented that 'while Johnson and Garrick are remembered, their first patron will not be forgotten' ('Poetical Works', 1.lxii): Walmisley 'sowed benevolence, and reaped immortality' ('Private Correspondence', 1.1). 


@@@@@


doc= 28588


Walmisley, Thomas Attwood (1814-1856), composer and organist, was born on 21 January 1814 at 18 Cowley Street, Westminster. He was the son of Thomas Forbes Walmisley (1783-1866), composer and organist, and his wife, who was the eldest daughter of William Capon, draughtsman to the duke of York. Displaying musical ability at an early age, he was initially guided by his father and subsequently placed under his godfather Thomas Attwood, organist of St Paul's Cathedral and composer to the Chapel Royal. In 1830 he was appointed organist of Croydon parish church, where he made the acquaintance of Thomas Miller, a former fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, an amateur musician and well-known tutor. Miller not only encouraged Walmisley's interest in literature and mathematics, but was also probably instrumental in his gaining election on 1 February 1833, as organist of Trinity and St John's colleges, and in his subsequent decision to read for an arts degree. An attempt the previous year by the impresario Monck Mason to persuade him to write an opera for his season at the King's Theatre in London had proved unsuccessful, and Walmisley spent virtually the rest of his life in Cambridge. 
In 1832 Walmisley competed unsuccessfully for the Gresham prize, awarded annually for the best new anthem or service setting. On 1 July 1833 he graduated MusB from Trinity, his exercise being the orchestrally accompanied anthem 'Let God arise', and in Michaelmas 1834 he matriculated at Corpus Christi College. Later in the year he moved to Jesus College, and he subsequently took the mathematical tripos, graduating eighteenth junior optime in 1838 and proceeding MA (from Trinity) in 1841. The (non-resident) professor of music, John Clarke-Whitfeld -- under whom music enjoyed a very low status within the university -- was aged and infirm and it fell to Walmisley to compose the 'Ode for the Installation of the Marquis of Camden as Chancellor of the University', performed on 7 July 1835 under Sir George Smart and with Maria Malibran as principal soloist. After Clarke-Whitfeld's death in 1836 Walmisley, though still an undergraduate, was chosen to succeed him, and in 1848 he presented himself for the MusD. During his tenure he raised the standing of the faculty of music both through his own position and education (as the first professor to be a full member of the university) and through his institution of regular lectures. After fourteen years in office he could observe that although music was still not greatly cultivated by university members, a taste for it was rapidly increasing. 
Professorial duties apart, the main focus of Walmisley's professional activity lay in his direction of the joint choir of Trinity and St John's. This involved playing for at least four services each Sunday, but the choir achieved a reputation as one of the best in England. He composed a number of important services and anthems for them in which, like his contemporary S. S. Wesley, he developed the concept of an independent organ accompaniment. Notable in this respect are 'If the Lord himself' and 'The Lord shall comfort Zion' (both 1840) and his best-known work, the evening service in D minor (1855). Other works of note are the evening service in B[flat] for double choir (1845), which reflects his admiration for the music of J. S. Bach, and 'Remember, O Lord' (with orchestral accompaniment) which won the prize offered in 1838 by the Ancient Concerts Society in Dublin. 
Although remembered today solely for his church music, in his youth Walmisley composed extensively for the orchestra and chamber ensembles. A piano trio, two string quartets, two organ concertos, and two overtures all predate his appointment to Cambridge, but thereafter his secular works were predominantly vocal, including some attractive songs and madrigals. Noteworthy exceptions are a fine third string quartet (1840) and two sonatinas for oboe and piano ('c'.1846). He also wrote a symphony (now unfortunately lost), which was played at the Philharmonic Society in 1840; however, he was disheartened by Mendelssohn's comment 'No. 1! Let us first see what no. 12 will be!' (an allusion to the twelve symphonies for string orchestra that Mendelssohn had completed before writing his first one for full orchestra), and never returned to orchestral writing. An early supporter of the Cambridge University Musical Society, Walmisley also established a madrigal society and was active as a conductor: at a concert in the Senate House on 5 July 1847 Jenny Lind, Marietta Alboni, and Luigi Lablache were among the soloists, while the young Joachim played Mendelssohn's violin concerto. 
Although renowned locally as an organist and composer, Walmisley never sought -- or earned -- the national recognition enjoyed by S. S. Wesley. Few of his compositions were published in his lifetime and most of his church music remained in manuscript until his father edited an extensive selection in 1857. Walmisley's health was eventually affected by his fondness for wine, which probably reduced his creativity and contributed to his early death. In the autumn of 1855, by now seriously ill, he moved to the Sussex coast. He died from bronchitis at 4 Caroline Place, St Mary-in-the-Castle, Hastings, on 17 January 1856 and was buried in Fairlight churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 28589


Walmisley, Thomas Forbes (1783-1866), composer and organist, third son of William Walmisley, clerk of the papers to the House of Lords, was born in Union (later St Margaret's) Street, Westminster, on 22 May 1783. He, like all his brothers, was a chorister in Westminster Abbey, and he was a scholar at Westminster School from 1793 to 1798. He studied music under John Spencer and Thomas Attwood, a pupil of Mozart. He began his career as a teacher of the piano and singing in 1803 and as a composer of vocal music in 1805. From 1810 to 1814 he was assistant organist to the female orphan asylum in Lambeth. Also in 1810 he married the eldest daughter of William Capon (1757-1827), draughtsman to the duke of York. They had twelve children, of whom ten survived beyond infancy. Thomas Attwood Walmisley, composer and organist, was the eldest. Another son, Henry (1830-1857), also became an organist, of Holy Trinity, Bessborough Gardens, Pimlico. Frederick Walmisley (1815-1875) became a moderately successful artist. A great-niece, Jessie Walmisley, married Samuel Coleridge-Taylor (1875-1912), composer. In 1814 Walmisley succeeded Robert Cooke ('fl'. 1793-1814) as organist of St Martin-in-the-Fields, which post he resigned, on a pension, in March 1854. From 1817 he was secretary of the re-established Concentores Sodales, which was dissolved in 1847, the society's stock of wine becoming his property; and in 1827 he was elected a professional member of the Catch Club. 
Walmisley was principally a composer of glees; he wrote fifty-nine, four of which gained prizes and many of which were published in four separate collections. He also composed ten anthems, one short morning and evening service, and 'Sacred Songs' (1841). He was well known as a teacher: perhaps his most distinguished pupil was Edward J. Hopkins. Walmisley died at 19 Earl's Court Gardens, Brompton, London, on 10 July 1866 and was buried in the family grave at Brompton cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 28590


Walmsley, Sir Joshua (1794-1871), politician, son of John Walmsley and his wife, Elizabeth Berry, was born at Concert Street, Liverpool, on 29 September 1794. His father, a builder, architect, and statuary mason, who owned marble and stone quarries, designed and constructed several notable buildings in Liverpool. Joshua was educated at Knowsley, Lancashire, and Eden Hall, Westmorland. On the death of his father in 1807 he became a teacher in Eden Hall School, and on returning to Liverpool in 1811 took a similar situation in Mr Knowles's school. He was then employed by a corn merchant in 1814, and at the end of his engagement went into the same business himself, and ultimately acquired a comfortable income. He married in 1815 Adeline, 'nee' Mulleneux. 
Walmsley was an early advocate of the repeal of the duty on corn, and was afterwards an active member of the Anti-Corn Law League. In 1826 he became president of the Liverpool Mechanics' Institute, and about the same time began his close friendship and business partnership with George Stephenson. Elected a member of the Liverpool town council in 1835, he worked to improve the police, sanitary, and educational affairs of the borough; he was notable for promoting non-sectarian schools. He was appointed mayor in November 1838 and knighted in 1840 on presenting an address to Queen Victoria from the town council of Liverpool on the occasion of her marriage. In 1837 he founded the Tradesmen's Reform Association, which campaigned to secure the ballot, Liberal representation for Liverpool, and repeal of the corn laws. With Palmerston he unsuccessfully contested Liverpool in June 1841. He retired to Ranton Abbey, Staffordshire, in 1843, and at the general election of 1847 was elected MP for Leicester, but was unseated on petition. 
Walmsley was the founder in 1848, president, and chief organizer of the National Reform Association and was a supporter of the forty-shilling freehold movement. In 1849 he was returned as MP for Bolton, Lancashire, but in 1852 exchanged that seat for Leicester, where his efforts on behalf of the framework knitters had made him popular. His parliamentary campaign for a reform bill was overshadowed by continental affairs. In his dealings with continental liberals -- he was friendly with Louis Kossuth -- he opposed all violent actions and, as proprietor of the 'Daily News', he adopted a non-interventionist stance during the Crimean War. He resisted attempts to limit extension of the 'Factory Acts' and supported the protection and regulation of small workshop trades. He lost his seat in 1857, as a result of a sabbatarian coalition; from 1856 to 1869 he retained the presidency of Joseph Hume's Sunday Society, which campaigned for the opening of museums, galleries, and libraries on Sundays. 
Walmsley died on 17 November 1871 at his residence at Hume Towers, Bournemouth. His wife survived him by two years. 


@@@@@


doc= 28591


Walmsley, Thomas (1763-1805/6), landscape painter, was descended from a family of good position at Rochdale, Lancashire. He is sometimes referred to as John Walmsley. He was born in Dublin, where his father, Thomas Walmsley, captain-lieutenant of the 18th dragoons, was stationed with his regiment. He quarrelled with his family, and went to London to earn his living. He studied scene-painting under Giovanni Battista Colombo at the opera-house, and was himself employed there and at Covent Garden Theatre and the King's Theatre; he also worked at Crow Street Theatre, Dublin, after it reopened in 1788. In 1790 he began to exhibit landscapes in London, where he lived until 1795, when he retired to Bath. He showed a Welsh landscape at the Incorporated Society of Arts in 1790 and sent many pictures to the Royal Academy, chiefly views in Wales; but in 1796, the last year in which he exhibited, three views of Killarney. He painted chiefly in body colour but also in oils in a small size and in watercolours. His trees were heavy and conventional, and he had no capacity for drawing figures, but he was skilful in painting skies, especially with a warm evening glow, which was well reproduced in the coloured aquatints by Francis Jukes and others, through which he is best known at the present day. Of these several series were published both before and after his death: 'Views of the Dee and North Wales' (1792-4); 'Larger Views of North Wales' (1800); 'Views of Killarney and Kenmare' (1800-02); 'Miscellaneous British Scenery' (1801); 'Views in Bohemia' (1801); 'Views of the Isle of Wight' (1802-3); 'Miscellaneous Irish Scenery' (1806); 'Views in Scotland' (1810). Walmsley died at Bath either in 1805 (Edwards gives his date of death as August 1805) or in 1806. Examples of his work in gouache are held in the Victoria and Albert Museum and the British Museum, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 28592


Walpole, Edward (bap. 1560, d. 1637), Jesuit, was the son and heir of John Walpole (died 1588) of Houghton, Norfolk, and Catherine Calibut (died 1612) of Coxford in the same county, and was baptized on 28 January 1560 at Houghton. Educated at Norwich School between approximately 1571 and 1576 he matriculated as a fellow-commoner at Peterhouse, Cambridge, in May 1576, the year after his cousin Henry Walpole, also later a Jesuit, had entered the same college as a pensioner. In 1580 or 1581 Edward was admitted to Lincoln's Inn from Furnival's Inn. Here, as at Cambridge, he was influenced by his older cousin, especially in religious matters. Edward, raised a strict protestant, was gradually won over to Roman Catholicism. According to Henry Foley, Edward's parents were so distressed by their son's increasingly popish sentiments and by his resolution to adhere to the Roman church that they complained to the privy council. As a result Henry fled to the continent, arriving in Rheims in July 1582. Edward's parents fought back: they engaged protestant ministers first in Norfolk and then in London to demonstrate popish errors through disputation. Failure to do so resulted in Edward's being disowned by his family and thrown out of Houghton in 1585. Assuming the name of Pauper to mark his new identity he 'gave proof of a nobler spirit than was implied in the splendour of any earthly descent' (Foley, 2.260). 
Edward's plans to follow his cousin to the continent were frustrated, so he returned to Norfolk where another cousin, William Walpole, who shared his religious sentiments, offered him asylum at Tuddenham. Edward repaid his generosity by reconciling William to his wife, Mary Blackwell, from whom he had been for some years estranged. In October 1587 William died, leaving the great bulk of his large property to his cousin Edward, subject to the life interest of his widow. 
In April of 1588 Edward's father died, leaving all to his second son, Calibut, and not even naming his elder son in the will. Five months later Robert, earl of Leicester, died. The earl had a life interest in the estates of his first wife, Amy Robsart, which lay contiguous to those of the Walpoles, and these now descended to Edward Walpole as heir-at-law to Sir John Robsart, Amy's father. Edward at once surrendered by deed all claim and title on the Robsart and the Houghton estates to his brother Calibut, and the estates accordingly descended through him to Sir Robert Walpole and the earls of Oxford. Similarly Edward sold the reversion of the manor of Tuddenham for 1000 marks. 
In 1589 the Jesuit John Gerard began his successful missionary work among Norfolk recusant gentry and it was he who formally reconciled Edward Walpole to the Roman church. Under the Jesuit's direction Edward slipped away to the continent. Admitted to the English College, Rome, on 23 October 1590 he was ordained on the feast of the Ascension, 7 May 1592, in the college chapel. He departed for Flanders in May 1593 and entered the noviciate of the province on 4 July, pronouncing his first vows as a Jesuit on 25 December 1594. On 8 July 1595 he was sent to Louvain, where he studied humanities for two years before doing pastoral work in Brussels and Antwerp. By 1598 he was in England, where he remained until his death. On 21 May 1609 he was solemnly professed of the three vows in London. 
In 1621 he was superior of the Jesuits in the Worcestershire district. In 1623 he was named superior of the residence of the Blessed Stanislaus (Devon). Upon completing his three-year term, he was transferred to the residence of St Dominic (Lincolnshire), where he was superior from at least 1628 until 1630. From 1631 until 1633 he was at the residence of St Thomas of Canterbury (Hampshire). In 1634-5 he worked from the house of probation of St Ignatius (London) and in 1636 at the College of the Holy Apostles, recently established by Lord Petre, in East Anglia. Some time in 1637 Walpole returned to London where he died on 3 November 1637. 
Walpole translated Louis Richeome's 'The Pilgrime of Loreto' (1629), a notable example of the Salesian spirituality then fashionable. 


@@@@@


doc= 28593


Walpole, George (1758-1835), army officer, born on 20 June 1758 at Wickmere, Norfolk, was the third son of Horatio Walpole, second Lord Walpole of Wolterton (1723-1809), a politician, and his wife, Lady Rachel Cavendish (died 1805), the third daughter of William, third duke of Devonshire. His father succeeded his cousin Horatio Walpole, fourth earl of Orford, as fourth Lord Walpole of Walpole in 1797, and was created earl of Orford in 1806. George Walpole was educated at Eton College between 1769 and 1776, was commissioned cornet in the 12th light dragoons on 12 May 1777, and became lieutenant in the 9th dragoons on 17 April 1780. He returned to the 12th light dragoons as captain lieutenant on 10 December 1781 and exchanged to the 8th light dragoons on 13 August 1782. On 25 June 1785 he was promoted major in the 13th light dragoons, and on 31 October 1792 he became lieutenant-colonel of that regiment. 
In 1795 Walpole went with his regiment to Jamaica, and took a leading part in suppressing the insurrection of the Trelawny maroons. Descendants of fugitive slaves freed sixty years before, they numbered fewer than 700, but they had been joined by many runaway slaves, and the insurrection threatened to spread. Some feared the involvement of French revolutionaries. Jamaica's 'cockpit' country (that is, characterized by eroded basins) was extremely difficult for regular troops; two of the detachments sent against the maroons fell into ambushes and their commanders were killed. At the beginning of October, Walpole was charged with the general conduct of the operations, and the governor -- Alexander Lindsay, sixth earl of Balcarres -- gave him the local and temporary rank of major-general. By skilful dispositions he captured several of the maroon cockpits. On 24 October the governor wrote to the secretary of state: 'General Walpole is going on vastly well. His figure and talents are well adapted for the service he is upon, and he has got the confidence of the militia and the country' (A. Lindsay, 'Lives of the Lindsays', 1858, 3.80). By 22 December he had come to terms with the insurgents. They were to ask pardon, to leave their fastnesses and settle in any district assigned to them, and to give up the runaway slaves. On these conditions Walpole promised that they should not be sent out of the island, and the terms were ratified by the governor. 
Only a few of the insurgents came in, and in the middle of January, Walpole moved against them with a strong column, accompanied by hunting dogs which had been brought at his suggestion from Cuba. The maroons then surrendered and were taken to Montego Bay. In March the assembly and the governor decided to deport them to Nova Scotia. Walpole strongly remonstrated against what he regarded as a breach of faith. He argued that the treaty might have been cancelled when the maroons failed to fulfil its terms, but that the governor had deliberately abstained from cancelling it. He declined a gift of 500 guineas which the assembly voted for the purchase of a sword and obtained leave to return to England. His intemperate letter declining the sword was expunged from the minutes of the house, and the assembly even contemplated arresting him. 
Walpole was made colonel in the army on 3 May 1796, but he retired from the service in 1797. In January of that year the Cavendish family interest returned him to parliament for Derby, which he represented until 1806. A follower of Fox, he voted for reform, but when, in May 1798, he spoke on behalf of the maroons, his motion was defeated. The same month he was George Tierney's second in his duel with William Pitt. When Fox came into office as foreign secretary Walpole was appointed under-secretary (20 February 1806), but he did not retain this office long after Fox's death. He was MP for Dungarvan from 1807 until 1820, when, chronically endebted, he resigned his seat. In 1833 he was made comptroller of cash in the Excise Office for the rest of his life. He died, unmarried, in May 1835. 


@@@@@


doc= 28594


Walpole, Henry (bap. 1558, d. 1595), Jesuit and martyr, was baptized in October 1558 in Docking, Norfolk, the eldest of the ten children of Christopher Walpole (died 1596), gentleman, and his wife, Margery Warner, daughter of Richard and Alice Beckham of Narford. The Walpole family had lived in Norfolk for at least 600 years. At the end of Queen Mary's reign Henry's father settled at Docking Hall. Upon the increase of the family he acquired Anmer Hall, with a large estate in Anmer and Dersingham, in 1575. This estate was contiguous to his cousin's estate at Houghton and his nephew's estate at Herpley. The three estates covered 50 square miles. His brother John Walpole of Herpley was a serjeant-at-law. 
Christopher and John Walpole both sent their sons to the grammar school in Norwich which Edward Coke, the future chief justice of the common pleas, had also attended. Henry Walpole probably entered the school in 1566 or 1567, when his master was Stephen Limpert. In 1575 he matriculated at Cambridge and entered Peterhouse to study philosophy, and spent four years in learning languages. He took an interest in religious controversy, 'which piece of curiosity... ended in his conversion to the Catholick faith' (Dodd, 148). Henry More, however, says that Walpole was 'nurtured from childhood in Catholic tenets', and that when he was older, 'he gave such example of discretion and good sense that he could take the place of parents for his brothers' ('Elizabethan Jesuits', 254). Meanwhile John Walpole had entrusted the education of his son William to Thomas Thirlby, bishop of Ely, who was sent to the Tower of London in 1560. At the time Henry Walpole entered Peterhouse another young man of similar background, Dudley Fenner, also entered. Jessopp says that Fenner was 'a rigid and fervent Puritan; Walpole, as earnest and devoted a Catholic' (Jessopp, 75). Both were driven into exile and to exercise their ministries in Belgium, one as a puritan preacher, the other as a Jesuit priest. In 1576 Henry's cousin Edward also matriculated at Peterhouse. Along with him came four recusant neighbours -- Edward Yelverton of Rougham, John Cobbe of Sandringham, Philip Paris of Pudding Norton, and Bernard Gardiner of Coxford Abbey. Neither Henry nor Edward Walpole proceeded to a degree, presumably because of the oath required. Henry's name appears in the buttery books of Peterhouse for the last time on 17 April 1579. He was also a student at Gray's Inn in 1578, following in his father's and uncle's footsteps. Jessopp notes that 'Gray's Inn was at this time a favourite haunt of all who were 'Catholicly' inclined' (ibid., 127). 
It was not long after this that the course of Walpole's life was to change dramatically. It all began with a group of fourteen leaving Rome for England on 18 April 1580. This group was led initially by Thomas Goldwell, Marian bishop of St Asaph and the last surviving bishop of the old hierarchy, and Laurence Vaux, last warden of the collegiate church of Manchester. It was decided at St Omer that Goldwell, who was nearing eighty, and some other priests, were too old to withstand the dangers of going to England. In the end Robert Persons, Edmund Campion, and the others entered England in small groups. It was Henry Walpole's attendance at Campion's execution at Tyburn on 1 December 1581 that changed his life. Some blood from the martyr splashed onto Walpole, who had earlier attended Campion's disputation in the Tower of London, and also his trial. Walpole accepted this as a call to take up the work of Campion. He immediately wrote a poem entitled 'An Epitaph of the Life and Death of... Edmund Campion'. There was a huge demand for the manuscript. Some extracts read: '
our new apostle cumyng to restore 

the faith, wich Austen planted here before... 

they thought it best to take hys lyfe awaye, 

because they sawe he wuld theire matter marre... 

All Europe wonders at so rare a man. 
(Jessopp, 133-7)' The government made successful efforts to track down and destroy copies of this poem. It was not long before Walpole was suspected of being the author: he was already under suspicion of converting over twenty young men to his faith. Valenger, one of Walpole's friends, on whose private press it was printed, was brought before the council, and was condemned to lose his ears. Walpole considered it expedient to slip away to Norfolk and was concealed in a hiding place at Anmer Hall. In this he must have had the support of his family. On leaving Anmer Hall 'en route' for the continent he concealed himself in the woods by day and eventually arrived at Newcastle, where he took ship for France. He went to Rouen and Paris and arrived on 7 July 1582 at the English College, Rheims, where he was enrolled as a theological student. He remained about ten months, and was then accepted by the English College, Rome, on 28 April 1583. In 1584 he applied for admission to the Jesuit order and completed two years' probation at Verdun. He became prefect of the convictors at Pont-a-Mousson and was ordained priest in Paris on 17 December 1588. Later he served as a chaplain in Colonel William Stanley's regiment in the Netherlands. In the meantime his brother Richard Walpole spent three years at Peterhouse, and then followed his elder brother to the English College, Rome, in 1584. Richard was ordained as a Jesuit priest in 1589. Likewise another two of Henry's brothers, Christopher and Michael Walpole, and his cousin Edward Walpole, became Jesuit priests. 
To Walpole's five brothers sitting round their hearth at Anmer Hall in the winter of 1589 came the news that he had been arrested in Flushing when it was captured by English troops. One of the English officers, Captain Russels of West Rudham, a cousin of the Walpoles, got word back to Norfolk. Michael Walpole immediately set out for Flushing, paid the ransom, and procured Henry's release in January 1590. For most of the next two years Henry Walpole exercised his priestly functions on the continent. He met there many old friends and all his brothers, except Geoffrey, who had all left England during this unsettled period. At this time Walpole was at the Jesuit college at Tournai. Meanwhile the government was so concerned about the growth of the overseas seminaries and the activities of their alumni that in November 1591 the queen published her famous edict denouncing them. Persons immediately composed his 'Responsio ad edictum' in reply in Latin, under the name of Philopater. An English version was considered advisable, and Henry Walpole was entrusted with the task. This reply was aimed at showing that it was not the queen who was responsible for the edict and repressive measures against the seminary priests, but her council, Cecil in particular. A spy forwarded a copy of Walpole's translation to the council, and his ultimate fate was then sealed. Walpole was working on the translation when he was summoned to join Persons in Spain. He attended the opening of the chapel of the new Jesuit college in Seville in December 1592, where he met his brother Richard for the first time in years. After two months in Seville, Henry was sent to Valladolid, where he held the post of minister at St Alban's College. 
Persons told Walpole in June 1593 that it had been decided to send him on the English mission; Walpole had for some time wished to emulate the successful mission of the Jesuit John Gerard in East Anglia. Before leaving he was presented to Philip II at the Escorial. He sailed from Bilbao to Calais and then went to Douai. He joined his brother Thomas and Edward Lingen, both former officers of Sir William Stanley's English regiment. They had to wait some weeks at St Omer, awaiting a ship to England. At last arrangements were made for passage to Essex, Suffolk, or Norfolk. But the weather on the voyage in early December 1593 was so bad that Walpole's party had to land at Bridlington, Yorkshire. One of Walsingham's spies had previously disembarked from an accompanying vessel, and he went to warn the authorities in York. Ignorant of Yorkshire, and without a map, they committed the blunder of keeping together. At this time Yorkshire was under the iron grip of the president of the council of the north, Henry, earl of Huntingdon, and the party was soon apprehended at Kilham on 7 December and confined at York Castle. 
Upon questioning Walpole admitted to being a Jesuit priest, but neither he nor Lingen would incriminate others. Thomas Walpole, however, admitted all he knew, even to revealing where his brother had buried a packet of letters on landing. On 25 January 1594 Richard Topcliffe wrote to Lord Keeper Puckering: 'Much more lies hidden in the Jesuit and Lingen, which cannot be digged out without further authority than his Lordship has... They must be dealt with sharply, and more will burst out' ('CSP dom.', '1591-4', 417). Several conferences with protestant clergy were arranged, on which occasions Walpole 'discovered both his zeal and learning, which were far above the commonest'. The earl of Huntingdon wrote to Lord Burghley on 23 February 1594: 'the Jesuit Walpole and his brother shal be sent towards London..., and before they goe I will examine them bothe again... But I think Mr. Topcliffe had all with him' (Pollen, 240). On the day Walpole was sent to London, he was placed in Topcliffe's custody. It was then that his sufferings really began. He was committed to the Tower of London where there were a number of other notable recusant prisoners, including Philip Howard, earl of Arundel, and Robert Southwell. He was placed in solitary confinement for nearly two months, and on 27 April he underwent his first examination before Serjeant Drewe, Sir Edward Coke, and Topcliffe. Official records indicate the many questions and answers during the six examinations between then and 17 June 1594. So far Walpole had only disclosed facts the examiners already knew. In June he revealed a conversation with Persons on the lawfulness of assassinating the queen, when Persons had stated 'that Catholics... ought to suffer violence, but offer none, chiefly to princes' (Jessopp, 284). He was then put on the rack many times, and gradually gave more valuable information on the seminaries in Spain and the names of the students. One thing he did not do was to compromise anyone in England whose life would have been in peril as the result of revelations. But, as Jessopp points out, there were worse ordeals to come: in July 1594 he was able to write, but, after being left with Topcliffe for a further nine months, his writing had become an illegible scrawl. 
By the spring of 1595 Walpole was sent to York for trial. One of his judges was Francis Beaumont, a fellow former commoner of Peterhouse. The indictment contained three counts: that Walpole had abjured the realm without licence; that he had received holy orders overseas; and that he had returned to England as a Jesuit priest to exercise his priestly functions. According to the relevant statute, to so return was to be guilty of high treason. Walpole's own confessions, extracted under torture, were read to the court, and the jury was asked to pronounce its verdict on this evidence. The judge refused to hear Walpole in his defence, apart from a brief statement. Despite this, Walpole acquitted himself with great ability, as befitted a one-time student of Gray's Inn. The judge ordered the jury to find him guilty. While awaiting sentence Walpole managed to write to his father and friends. One of these letters was addressed to a fellow Jesuit, Richard Holtby. Jessopp quotes a letter from Holtby, then in the archives of Stonyhurst College, giving an account of Walpole's final hours. Another conference with protestant clergy was arranged in the days before he died. 
Walpole's execution in York occurred on 17 April 1595. When the day dawned, Walpole was dragged to the place of execution on a hurdle. Once again he testified his loyalty to the queen, so that some tried to persuade the magistrate to stop the execution. On the scaffold he was pushed and hanged before he could complete his prayers. He was immediately drawn and quartered. 
His father died broken-hearted in 1596, fifteen months after Walpole's execution. The Norfolk property was divided between Geoffrey and Thomas Walpole. Thomas took Anmer Hall: both he and his wife, Thomasine, were listed as Norfolk recusants in 1615. His cousin Calibut Walpole died in 1646, just thirty years before his lineal descendant Sir Robert Walpole, England's first prime minister, was born, and the fortunes of the house of Walpole rose again. A portrait of Henry Walpole is one of sixteen martyr portraits at St Alban's College, Valladolid. A copy was made for Frederick Walpole of Mannington Hall, Norfolk. In 1970 Henry Walpole was canonized by Pope Paul VI as one of the forty martyrs of England and Wales. His feast day is observed on 25 October. 


@@@@@


doc= 28595


Walpole, Horatio, first Baron Walpole of Wolterton (1678-1757), diplomatist and politician, was born at Houghton, Norfolk, on 8 December 1678, the fifth and second surviving son of Robert Walpole (1650-1700) and his wife, Mary (1654/5-1711), the daughter and heir of Sir Jeffrey Burwell, of Rougham, Suffolk. Horatio, usually known as Horace, was the younger brother and close political collaborator of Robert Walpole, first earl of Orford. Surviving letters between them when they were in their early twenties show a close and affectionate relationship, expressed in a frank obscenity characteristic of the time. Like his elder brother, Horace was educated at Eton College (1693-8) and at King's College, Cambridge (1698-1700), where he was a fellow from 1702 to 1714. He was admitted to Lincoln's Inn in October 1700 and in January 1710 he entered parliament in the whig interest, being first (and briefly) member for Lostwithiel. He sat in the Commons for the best part of forty-six years, until his elevation to the peerage on 4 June 1756. In 1713 he took over as MP for Castle Rising from his uncle, also Horace (1663-1717); between 1715 and 1717 he held the seat of Bere Alston, Devon, and from 1718 to 1722 that of East Looe, Cornwall. He represented the borough of Great Yarmouth from 1722 to 1734 and the still more prestigious constituency of Norwich from 1734 to 1756. 
Walpole owed his career almost entirely to Sir Robert, and never forgot his obligations to the man whom he still called, towards the end of his own life, 'my late, Dear, Good & Great Brother' (Sir Robert Walpole MSS, Lewis Walpole Library). He left the centre of politics when his brother resigned. Early in his public life he became involved in both foreign service and domestic politics, a combination which was to characterize the whole of his career. In 1706-7 he served as secretary to General James Stanhope, the envoy to Charles III, who ultimately failed to establish his claim to the Spanish throne. From 1707 he was secretary to Henry Boyle, Lord Carleton, who had been chancellor of the exchequer since 1701 and from 1708 to 1710 was secretary of state for the northern department. Walpole acted briefly as Carleton's under-secretary, a valuable preparation for a diplomatic career and one which he undertook again in 1714-15 under Viscount Townshend. His knowledge of office routine and procedures was to be as valuable as his understanding of treaties and protocol. From May 1709 to March 1711 he was given his first taste of regular overseas diplomacy when he was posted as secretary to the embassy at The Hague, beginning a long association with the United Provinces. In 1715 and 1716 he acted as British minister at The Hague, in place of William, Lord Cadogan, and sought Dutch help both to protect shipping convoys in the Baltic against Swedish privateers and to furnish military aid against the Jacobite rising of 1715. Though his honest and burgher-like approach made him a success in the United Provinces, he was frustrated, not for the last time, by the decentralized and slow-moving Dutch decision-making process. In October 1716 he wrote to Stephen Poyntz: 'I must own I dread the sight of a Messenger from England lest he should bring with him a Black box containing the full Powers, Black indeed to me & more terrible than Pandora's' ('Honest Diplomat', 359). 
Walpole served as secretary to the Treasury under Sir Robert Walpole from October 1715 to April 1717, and in 1717 was made surveyor and auditor-general of the revenue in America (for life), a valuable sinecure. The salary was $250 per annum, but the post was made to yield several thousands and was the subject of a charge against him in 1742 when his brother fell, and the impeachment of both men was agitated in parliament. From 1721 to 1730 Walpole was once again secretary to the Treasury under his brother, giving up the post only to become cofferer of the royal household from 1730. He exchanged this lucrative place in 1741 for a more modest one, a life sinecure as teller of the exchequer, at $3000 per annum. Walpole's avarice was a frequent subject of contemporary comment, linked to his mean hospitality and the slovenly dress on which he rather prided himself. Queen Caroline, if Lord Hervey is to be believed, found Walpole grating, 'his silly laugh hurting her ears, and his dirty sweaty body offending her nose' (Hervey, 3.732). His familiar style of writing offended her too. In 1734 Walpole apologized to his brother: 'I am extreamly sorry to find that the dress of my letters to the Q---n are not liked altho' the matter is approved, I solemnly protest to you, I doe not affect that free stile but I can no more write otherwise than I can tell how to dress my person better than I doe. (H. Walpole to R. Walpole, 9 Nov 1734, Osborn MS 48)' His manner among his equals may be gauged from a story told by his nephew: 'One Day, when the Speaker [Arthur Onslow] had voted in the Committee, against the Army, Horace Walpole... reproved Him for it: The Speaker said why really Mr. Walpole in some Things a Man must 'Feel Himself'. Feel himself! replied Mr. W. I'll tell you a Story: a Gentleman married a Girl with Forty Thousd Pds. The Morning after the Wedding night, in which He had given his Bride no Reason to think herself married, He said, well, my Dear, how do you 'Feel Yourself?' Feel Myself! replied She: did my Father give you Forty Thousand Pound for me to 'Feel myself?' (Walpole, 'Robert Walpole miscellany', 107)' Yet in parliament Walpole was a strong and effective speaker, his judgement of political affairs and personalities was shrewd, and, despite his strong Norfolk accent and lack of the usual graces and deportment of the aristocratic diplomatic world, he was able to recommend himself to a wide range of ministers both abroad and at home. The disparaging accounts of both Hervey and Horace Walpole jun., in fact, are tinged both by personal malice and by a repugnance against his reputedly plain and slatternly wife, to whom Walpole was devoted. Hervey waspishly characterized her as having 'a form scarce human, as offensive to the nose and the ears as to the eye, and one to whom he was kind not from any principle of gratitude, but from the bestiality of his inclination' (Hervey, 1.284). Horace Walpole jun. coldly referred to 'Horace and his Dirty Wife... a French Staymaker's Daughter, whom he used to call Pug, & who brought him a great Fortune, & saved him a greater' (Walpole, 'Robert Walpole miscellany', 131, 132). He married, late in life (on 21 July 1720, at the age of forty-two) but happily, Mary Magdalen (1694/5-1783), the daughter of Peter Lombard, of Burnham Thorpe, Norfolk, and they had four sons and three daughters. The eldest son, another Horatio (1723-1809), succeeded his father as second Baron Walpole on 5 February 1757 and later inherited the estates of his cousin Horace, fourth earl of Orford, the youngest son of Sir Robert, taking the title of Baron Walpole of Walpole on 2 March 1797 and that of earl of Orford on 10 April 1806. 
The foundations of this dynastic success were laid with the return to power of Sir Robert Walpole and Townshend in 1720, when Horace was made a privy councillor (Ireland) and secretary to the lord lieutenant of Ireland (1720-21). From May to July 1722 he was again at The Hague, negotiating military aid during the crisis of the Atterbury Jacobite plot. He had the confidence of his brother-in-law Townshend and of his brother as an adroit diplomat, and it was for 'his usual dexterity' that they sent him rather irregularly to Paris in October 1723 (Coxe, 2.270). His task was to displace the ambassador there, Sir Luke Schaub, and undermine the policies of their rival Lord Carteret. At first, Carteret and Schaub believed that Walpole could be confined to the specific task of bringing Portugal into the Quadruple Alliance. He swiftly dispelled that illusion, and bluntly compelled Schaub to act with him, relying on the credit of 'the persons concerned (as to myselfe I mean to whom I belong)' to gain him recognition as the principal (Stanhope to Carteret, 15 Nov 1723, BL, Add. MS 4204, fol. 328; H. Walpole to Newcastle, 12 Nov 1723, BL, Add. MS 32686, fols. 378-82). Within a month of his arrival Walpole was congratulated by the duke of Newcastle on his grasp of French policy, though this was 'the foreign court, with which you have been less conversant than any other in Europe' (Newcastle to H. Walpole, 6 Nov 1723, BL, Add. MS 32686, fol. 403). He pursued the Townshend-Walpole policy until Schaub was recalled, after Carteret's fall, in May 1724. Walpole succeeded him as ambassador-extraordinary until August 1727, then as ambassador-extraordinary and plenipotentiary until September 1730. From the beginning of his embassy his official correspondence shows that he was vigilant in employing informants and using every means to detect and forestall Jacobite manoeuvres, bringing frequent commendations from George II. Vital to his success in his Paris mission was the fact that he cultivated excellent personal relations with Andre Hercule de Fleury, bishop of Frejus, who in June 1726 became France's leading minister. Walpole called upon Fleury at Issy in December 1725, when it was generally believed that the bishop was in disgrace at court, a mark of respect and confidence which Fleury never forgot. 
Walpole's strength as a diplomat lay in his robust grasp of what was possible for ministers 'in a popular government as ours is' (H. Walpole to Newcastle, 24 July 1728, BL, Add. MS 32757, fol. 147). He never lost sight of domestic political realities amid the complexities of European rivalries and plans. His combative loyalty and closeness to his brother made him a senior member of Sir Robert's ministry, regularly informed and consulted about policy issues even when he was abroad. From Paris or The Hague, Walpole laid before the inner circle of ministers his drafts and proposals and was supplied by Newcastle with copies of correspondence in and out of the secretary of state's office. He, Newcastle, Lord Hardwicke, and later Henry Pelham made up the core of the ministry at least in its last ten years, a group among whom discussion was open and confidence was extensive, if not always quite complete. Walpole was therefore more than simply an ambassador, and he took it upon himself in his regular correspondence to inform, question, and sometimes harangue other leading envoys. When other diplomats worked alongside him, as at the congress of Soissons, when he was joined with Stephen Poyntz and William Stanhope, they were expected to take a subordinate place. Walpole's most substantial achievement in these years was to negotiate, with Poyntz, the treaty of mutual defence between Britain, France, and Spain, signed at Seville on 9 November 1729. The treaty of Seville was attacked in opposition writings as a slavish subservience to the Catholic Bourbon powers; it was popularly supposed to contain secret clauses which forced the ministry to tolerate Spanish depredations upon British shipping. Seville was a name which recurred regularly in ballads and newspapers, almost always as a reproach to the Walpole brothers. Horace himself always referred to the treaty with satisfaction, though almost as soon as it was published Sir Robert felt impelled anonymously to publish a pamphlet, 'Observations upon the Treaty', to explain and justify its clauses. 
When Townshend resigned in May 1730 Walpole declined the offer to succeed him as secretary of state and accepted the appointment of cofferer of the household, which brought him into regular contact with the king. He returned from Paris at the end of July to take up his post, and in November 1730 became an English privy councillor. From this time he acted as Sir Robert's deputy in party and Commons affairs, organizing support and sometimes sponsoring legislation, most notably the 1733 'Molasses Act'. In October 1733 he went on a special mission to The Hague to escort the prince of Orange to England for his marriage to the princess royal, and in April 1734 he returned there as ambassador, a post which he held (with a number of absences, in parliament or in Hanover) until the outbreak of war with Spain, returning to Britain permanently on 19 November 1739. His most sustained period of political activity in Westminster was over by 1734, and had not been an unmixed success. Hervey, with a characteristic combination of shrewdness and malice, dismissed him at this period as: 'a very good treaty dictionary, to which his brother often referred for facts... He loved business, had great application, and was indefatigable, but from having a most unclear head, no genius, no method, and a most inconclusive manner of reasoning, he was absolutely useless to his brother in every [other] capacity. (Hervey, 1.285)' He may have been verbose in parliamentary speaking, yet his surviving papers show Walpole to have been an indefatigable drafter of projects, memorials, and memoranda characterized by strong logic and remorseless chronological completeness. He propounded this as the only sure method for evaluating political developments and for avoiding misrepresentation and partisan argument. 'I speak this from no small experience... by the Method abovementioned, which I have used for some years past, I have been able to form a judgement which has seldom err'd in matters of the greatest importance' ('Note of facts relating to the expeditions for America', BL, Wolterton (Walpole) MSS). His were in fact valuable contributions to decision making behind the scenes, and he was often called upon to lay out papers of this kind. The same talent was exercised publicly in several closely reasoned pamphlets defending the ministry. Two of them, 'The Grand Question, whether War, or No War, with Spain' and 'The Convention Vindicated from the Misrepresentations of the Enemies of our Peace', were distributed to the extent of 11,000 copies each in 1739. 
Walpole's oratory was not of the polished or witty kind which Hervey preferred, but his strengths could be considerable, as in the important debate of March 1739 on the convention with Spain, when he led for the government in a robust two-hour speech. As a colleague Walpole was stubborn once he had taken an emotional stand and was prone to fancy his advice ignored. Though not slow to criticize others, he was himself sensitive to slights. He was inclined, too, to overreach himself, a trait which eventually seems to have lost him favour at court. In March 1737 he initially supported a bill brought in by Sir John Barnard to reduce the interest of the national debt from 4 to 3 per cent. This seemingly uncontentious step would harm the fortunes of the moneyed men behind the government, as Barnard meant it to. Walpole and the king and queen therefore worked hard to defeat it. Walpole, according to Hervey, did not trouble to conceal that he was acting against his conscience in helping to sink Barnard's bill, and wearied the queen with his complaints: 'She told him, because he had some practice in treaties and was employed in foreign affairs, that he began to think he understood everything better than anybody else; and that it was really quite new his setting himself up to understand the revenue, money-matters, and the House of Commons better than his brother. 'What are you', said the Queen, 'without your brother? Or what are you all but a rope of sand that would crumble away in little grains one after another, if it was not for him?' (Hervey, 3.732)' From 1738 onwards, and with increasing persistence from 1740, Walpole pressed for an alliance with Prussia, though he knew it ran counter to the king's 'little, low, partial, electoral notions' (Coxe, 3.535-7). This stand hastened the cooling of George II's affection for him, as he noted in his private manuscript 'Apology for the life of Mr. Walpole' (BL, Add. MS 9132). When Sir Robert resigned in February 1742, both brothers were threatened with impeachment, and Horace's notorious covetousness seems to have rankled as much in opponents' minds as Sir Robert's greater power but much freer spending. Walpole went home to Wolterton (his house designed by Thomas Ripley in the mid-1720s) and burnt large quantities of his personal papers to prevent their seizure by the secret committee set up to investigate Sir Robert. In 1743 he had a warm argument in the house, when the opposition member William Richard Chetwynd, a friend of Bolingbroke, told him that both the brothers deserved to be hanged. The two men stepped outside into Pipe's Ground and fought a duel, in which Chetwynd was wounded and Walpole was saved only by his opponent's sword striking a button. Arrested by Speaker Onslow to put an end to the affair, Walpole was pleased with his exploit: 'he thought it was a great and hard thing to fight a duel, because young fellows used to make such ado about it, but he says there is nothing at all in it now, he finds' (Francis, Lord Hastings, to earl of Huntington, 15 March 1743, 'Hastings MSS', 3.38). 
Walpole remained active in parliament, and defended the decision by his brother to take into government pay 16,000 Hanoverian troops, a measure extremely unpopular with the public. In early 1743 Lord Chesterfield's pamphlet 'The Case of the Hanover Forces' drew loud support, and in April, Walpole produced a refutation of it, 'The Interest of Great Britain Steadily Pursued', which quickly went through three editions. Soon, however, he ceased to be part of the inner circle of leading politicians, though he remained an informed political commentator. In February 1746, on the eve of the notorious cabinet walkout which compelled George II to accept Pitt as a minister, Walpole urged the king in a letter to give way gracefully. In December 1747 he lobbied the duke of Cumberland, in person and by letter, to persuade the king to make an alliance with Prussia as the only means to a lasting peace. 
Walpole continued to compile his analyses of international affairs, including 'A rhapsody of foreign politics', criticizing the 1748 treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle. He actually presented to the king his 'Observations on the system of affairs in 1751', which gave tactlessly free rein to his own anti-Hanoverian views. In February 1752 he caused a roar of laughter in the Commons when he spoke against a subsidy to the elector of Saxony yet ended with a call to the 'old corps' of whigs to join him in voting for it (Walpole, 'Corr.', 20.299-300) ['see also 'Old corps]. In 1755, when Newcastle was first minister, Walpole was once again consulted, and characteristically read to the cabinet a paper urging against the king's going abroad. Such a span of influence justifies Coxe's summary: 'it would be difficult to point out another character, who, for so long a period, was more trusted with the secrets of government, more acquainted with the motives and springs of action, and possessed more influence in the direction of foreign and domestic affairs. (Coxe, xii)' His main concern at the end of his life, though, lay in securing the interests of his family. His eldest son, Horatio, had been married in May 1748 to Lady Rachel Cavendish, the third daughter of the duke of Devonshire, and with his friend Newcastle in power Walpole sought a hereditary peerage for his son's benefit. Meanwhile he persuaded Sir Robert's 26-year-old grandson, Lord Cholmondeley, to agree to a mutual entail of the Houghton and Wolterton estates in which the benefit lay on the Wolterton side. Though in the event not harmful to the family, the agreement, which only accidentally came to the attention of Sir Robert's surviving children, was bitterly opposed by Horace Walpole jun. and created serious bad feeling. On 1 June 1756 Walpole was created Baron Walpole of Wolterton. Soon afterwards he suffered a return of the stone, a complaint common in the family, and he died at Wolterton Hall on 5 February 1757. 


@@@@@


doc= 28596


Walpole, Horatio, fourth earl of Orford (1717-1797), author, politician, and patron of the arts, was born on 24 September 1717 at his father's house in Arlington Street, Piccadilly, Westminster. The father was Robert Walpole, first earl of Orford (1676-1745), already a leading whig politician and on his way to becoming Britain's longest-serving prime minister. Though not of noble lineage, the family was of long standing in Norfolk, with a squirearchical estate to match. Walpole's mother, Catherine, 'nee' Shorter (died 1737), came of mercantile stock, and was the granddaughter of a lord mayor of London and the daughter of a dealer in the Baltic trade. The union of county and counting-house was appropriate for a whig dynasty in the making. 
Horace, named after his father's brother and close political associate 'Old Horace' ['see 'Walpole, Horatio, first Baron Walpole of Wolterton], was the late and last child of his parents' marriage. There is a story that he was the product of a liaison between Catherine Walpole and Carr, Lord Hervey, though no contemporary evidence exists to substantiate it, let alone any suggestion that Horace himself questioned his parentage. The innuendo originated with a recollection of Lady Louisa Stuart in the 1830s, which apparently derived from her grandmother Lady Mary Wortley Montagu. Malice on either of their parts might explain it. Lady Louisa remembered Walpole as 'my old ill-natured friend' (J. A. Home, ed., 'Letters of Lady Louisa Stuart to Miss Louisa Clinton', 1901, 252). 
The child was sickly and much cherished by his mother, whose domestic life was narrowed by her husband's absences with his mistress Maria Skerrett on his Norfolk estate at Houghton and in his hunting-lodge in Richmond Park. She dwelled mainly in Arlington Street, and during the summer at the family villa in Chelsea, where much of the young Horace's time was spent. Through his aunt Dorothy Walpole the family was allied to another Norfolk family, the Townshends of Rainham. Horace's early education was received among his Townshend cousins, whose tutor was Edward Weston, son of the bishop of Exeter. 
In April 1727 the boy was sent to Eton College, his father's school. There the rough and tumble of a boarding-school apparently passed him by. Perhaps being the son of the prime minister protected him. In any event, his own experience contrasted with that of others at this time who recalled their schooldays at Eton as being more bruising. The mature Walpole's characteristic self-assurance was already well developed during these years, owing something, no doubt, to his insulated, cosseted upbringing under his mother's eye. He proved adept at forming protective affinities at school, mostly with boys of less favoured families. Of these the most notable was the so-called 'quadruple alliance', made up of Walpole, Thomas Gray, Thomas Ashton, and Richard West. Walpole's three associates were all impecunious, all had literary inclinations, and all joined in their fashionable friend's wistful musings and romantic evocations among Etonian shades and springs. 
Other friends were made during these years, some of them long-lasting: Walpole's cousins Frances and Henry Seymour Conway, George Selwyn, later MP and colourful man about town, Charles Lyttelton, eventually bishop of Carlisle, the genial and indolent George Montagu, and William Cole, an enduring if unlikely friend as a tory clergyman and antiquarian. 
Walpole left Eton in September 1734, and commenced at King's College, Cambridge, in March 1735, Gray and Ashton having preceded him by a few months. There he proved a poor mathematician but seems to have done better at other subjects. Among senior members of the university he met Conyers Middleton, whose heterodox writings had made him notorious even in a time and place of some theological latitude. It is often said that Walpole's lifelong religious scepticism owed something to this connection. There is no evidence that he read widely enough to ground it in his own studies. 
The Cambridge years incidentally brought Walpole somewhat closer to his father. In the summer of 1736 he set foot in Sir Robert's palatial mansion recently completed at Houghton. Remarkably, this was Horace's first encounter with his Norfolk roots. In August 1737 Lady Walpole died, the severest personal loss that Horace had suffered or would ever suffer. His father displayed little emotion, and married his mistress Maria Skerrett soon after. But within a year of the first wife's death, the second died in childbirth, deeply afflicting Sir Robert and making any attention bestowed by his youngest son all the more welcome. 
The young Walpole attained his majority in 1738, the year in which he finally left Cambridge, after increasingly erratic appearances there. A legal career had been talked of, but his father saved him the trouble of acquiring a profession or finding a remunerated vocation. Three sinecure revenue offices that he was granted at this time he held for life: usher of the exchequer, comptroller of the pipe, and clerk of the estreates. 
For a young man of means and no duties the continental tour beckoned. Walpole invited Gray to accompany him. Despite its closeness, their friendship was ill-adapted to a travelling companionship. Gray had no resources of his own and could not but feel the inequality. Moreover, his proneness to melancholy and propensity to criticize could be hard to bear. On the other hand, Walpole's already characteristic capacity to combine personal detachment with emotional exploitation could inflict hurt. Later in life he generously recalled, 'We had not got to Calais before Gray was dissatisfied, for I was a boy, and he, though infinitely more a man, was not enough so to make allowances' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 28.114). 
Walpole and Gray left Dover at Easter 1739. Two months were spent in Paris, where they learned the first lesson of all grand tourists, that it was easier to pass time with other travellers than with the natives. Gray seems to have been the more adaptable, perhaps because he was more absorbed by what he observed than preoccupied with those he expected to meet. Even so, the variety of amusements and sights in Paris was such that neither could claim to be disappointed. 
On retreating to Rheims to improve their French, Walpole and Gray found a quiet provincial city with little to detain them. They moved south in September, were charmed by the superior manners of Dijon and Lyons, and exhilarated by a foray into the Alps which included a visit to the Grande Chartreuse. 'We stayed there two hours, rode back through this charming picture, wished for a painter, wished to be poets!' Walpole reported to West (Walpole, 'Corr.', 13.182). 
After Lyons they expected to winter in the south of France, but Walpole's father encouraged them to move on to Italy, perhaps with a view to the worsening diplomatic climate. The travellers accordingly pressed on, enduring a disagreeable crossing of the Alps, pausing briefly in Turin (where they met one of Walpole's Etonian contacts, the earl of Lincoln), and making for Florence, where they arrived shortly before Christmas 1739. As elsewhere on their journeying, Gray relished the exposure to the legacies of Rome and the Renaissance more than his companion did. Walpole threw himself into the social life of Florence. 
It might not have been so if Walpole had not had an ideal master of ceremonies. The British minister to the court of Tuscany, Horace Mann, was doubtless polite to the son of the prime minister, but at the age of thirty-eight might not have expected to strike up a close friendship with his young charges. Yet the three became genuinely close friends. In due course Mann was to be prominent in that 'tableau vivant' of personal correspondents that Walpole constructed around himself when he returned to Britain. No less significant was his meeting with John Chute, a younger son who unexpectedly succeeded to the family estate at The Vyne in Hampshire, and was in due course to bring his artistic ability and interest in classical design to his new friend's aid. 
From February to July 1740 Gray and Walpole were in Rome, to observe the eternal city in the throes of a papal election. This proved less engrossing than expected, though Walpole dutifully inspected classical sites, collected medals, and observed the activities of James Stuart (the Pretender) and his court, at a time when Jacobite hopes had been raised by the gathering clouds of a great European war. After tiring of Rome (in Walpole's case if not Gray's) the travellers returned to the routine they had established in Florence. Their friendship did not survive the tour. They left Florence together but parted company at Reggio in May 1741. The precise cause is obscure. Attempts to repair the breach, aided from a distance by Mann, failed and Gray made his own way home, assisted by clandestine grants from Walpole so that the source of the funds remained unknown. By then Walpole himself had come close to death at Reggio. He went down with a severe 'quinsy' which would have gone uncured but for the arrival of Lincoln and his tutor Joseph Spence, and the medical intervention they arranged. Walpole accompanied Lincoln's party to Venice, and thence via Genoa, Antibes (by sea), and Paris, arriving in London on 14 September 1741. 
The emotional significance of the tour in Walpole's life has been much discussed, and not only in relation to Gray. Before Italy, Walpole had expressed a passing tenderness for his cousin Anne Conway. At Florence, in tune with local manners, he became 'cicisbeo' to the wife of the Marchese Grifoni, Elisabetta Capponi. If he ever slept with any woman, it was the Grifoni. Walpole was to have a number of close but ambiguous relationships with women. Not only did he tend to avoid genuine commitment; he left considerable pain in his wake when he retreated. This was certainly the case with the Grifoni, who wept for him long after he had pretended to spare a thought for her. Even so, their relationship must have affected his understanding of his own feelings. Visiting aristocrats were accustomed to take advantage of the sexual permissiveness of Italian society. If Walpole did not avail himself of the opportunity, he was a less than typical English tourist. 
Some men had the power to hurt Walpole as women perhaps did not. Anne Conway's brother Henry Conway was one such, perhaps because he was a tangible link with his own mother (Conway's mother was her sister). Conway had been one of Walpole's circle after Eton, and was in France with him in 1740. Another young man whose Italian paths crossed Walpole's was the red-blooded young Lord Lincoln. 
There is a temptation to suppose that men of more evident masculinity than Walpole figured in his sexual aspirations and perhaps activities. It has even been suggested that the whole of his purpose during his tour had been to engineer recurrent assignations with Lincoln as his lover (Mowl, chaps. 3-4). This theory requires much deception on behalf of a number of parties, not only Walpole but also Lincoln himself and his tutor Joseph Spence. It leaves unexplained why Walpole did not always linger where Lincoln was, for example in Turin in 1740. Above all it turns his sexual ambivalence, which must remain a matter for speculation, into a consummated passion for one highly heterosexual young man whose conduct did not suggest anything like a corresponding commitment. In these matters it is easy to be misled by Walpole's epistolary language, which was sometimes extravagant but not beyond the conventions of the day among the 'jeunesse doree'. Still less exceptional was the sexual banter common among aristocratic young men, especially those educated at public school. 
Walpole's return brought him close once more to his father. The two shared homes in Downing Street, Arlington Street, and the great mansion at Houghton. Horace spent three successive summers at Houghton, revelling in the grandeur that the scion of a family of squires had conjured into stone and plaster. He also tried out his analytical skills as a connoisseur on the collection of old masters that his father had assembled. In 1742 he composed a 'Sermon on Painting' that was preached by his father's chaplain. A year later he completed his 'Aedes Walpolianae', a methodically constructed catalogue preceded by some extravagant and often dismissive judgements. It was later privately printed in 1747 and reissued in a revised edition in 1752. 
In addition to making himself familiar with the contents of Houghton, Walpole seems to have enacted a passable imitation of a country gentleman, with expeditions to neighbouring establishments including, somewhat further afield, his uncle's home at Wolterton, and hare coursing in the country around. These last sojourns with his father brought him close to the manes Walpoliani and provided vivid memories to the end of his life. But he remained a town dweller whose rural retreats were never too far from St James's Square and carefully constructed to his own design. 
In another of his father's ruling passions, politics, Horace did more than dabble. Even while making his way back to Britain in the summer of 1741 he had been elected MP for Callington in Cornwall. The seat was effectively owned by the Rolle family, into which his eldest brother had married, and though the new legislator sat for it until 1754, he never needed to pay his constituents a visit. Walpole's first session witnessed the last, tumultuous phase of his father's ministerial career, fought with characteristic tenacity against opponents who after many years of unavailing pursuit now smelled blood. Horace shared the strain of this struggle and helped provide solace when the premier retreated to Arlington Street. He also took pride in the latter's dignified retirement to the Lords, the continuing credit he enjoyed at court, and, especially after his death in 1745, a gathering public reaction in favour of a man whom his successors soon made it easy to recall with respect. These were turbulent years which witnessed growing discontent with the Hanoverian foreign policy of the new ministry, and in due course a revival of the Jacobite threat and the rising of 1745. Of all these things the son was a fascinated observer and astute narrator. 
As a participant, Walpole was no more than moderately active. He appears to have spoken only once during his first two parliamentary sessions, on 23 March 1742, against a motion for a secret committee of inquiry into his father's administration. He spoke again on 18 January 1744 for government, seconding a motion on the employment of Hanoverian troops. It included a courtly Latin compliment on the valour of George II at Dettingen, and attracted 'deserved applause from everybody' (HoP, 'Commons, 1715-54', 2.511). But this was a set piece which he would have had ample time to prepare. The cut and thrust of daily debate required qualities which he did not possess. He lacked the presence, the voice, and the combative instinct that made for success in the eighteenth-century House of Commons. Its roughness, familiarity, and practical business-mindedness were all rather alien to him. 
Walpole's politics were shaped by what he took to be the opinions of his father and those of his father's followers who had not been implicated in his downfall in 1742. The leader of these was Henry Fox, around whom there congregated a group of young whigs that included several on close social as well as political terms with Horace: George Selwyn, George James ('Gilly') Williams, Sir Charles Hanbury Williams, Richard Edgcumbe, and Richard Rigby. Between 1742 and 1746 struggles at court established Henry Pelham and his brother the duke of Newcastle in power and quelled those who had opposed the Walpole regime in the 1730s and briefly triumphed in 1742. Pelham was the obvious heir to Sir Robert Walpole, but the whigs closest to Horace showed signs of restlessness under Pelhamite rule. They believed that Newcastle had treacherously intrigued against their leader in 1742. They also found Henry Pelham's cultivation of the moderate tories objectionable. Walpole fully shared these convictions. 
On his re-election to parliament in 1747 Walpole was still considered a friend of government. In reality he secretly supported the new opposition launched by Frederick, prince of Wales. He wrote a number of anonymous articles for the press. Two of these, masquerading as 'speeches' delivered in the Commons, arose from a political dispute in Buckinghamshire, where the Grenville family sought to disable their principal opponent in the county, Lord Chief Justice Willes, by seeking an act of parliament moving the assizes and with them much political power from Aylesbury to the Grenville stronghold at Buckingham. Walpole seems to have been moved solely by sympathy with Willes on account of the latter's long-standing friendship with Sir Robert Walpole. One unfortunate result was an unseemly altercation with his father's old friend the speaker, Arthur Onslow, for which Walpole was compelled to apologize. 
A further excursion into print found Walpole attacking the Pelhams more directly, though again without revealing his identity. 'Delenda est Oxonia', defending Oxford against ministerial plans to remove the university's independence of the crown, was intercepted at the printer's before publication. This clandestine warfare did not prevent the author also wooing the Pelhams. On several occasions between 1751 and 1758 he sought to improve his income from the sinecure places that he and his brother enjoyed, all in vain. Throughout this period he was nominally a supporter in government. Yet his secret intrigues did not cease and included, in December 1752, an easily discredited depiction of the arrangements made for the education of the future George III as part of a plot to restore the Stuart government. In the pattern of politics that he had settled into on his father's death it is hard to see anything more than inherited prejudices and personal interest, combined with a tendency to mischievous intrigue. 
Walpole's inheritance from his father was the lease of the town house in Arlington Street, cash to the value of $5000, and revenues of approximately $1400 from the collectorship of the customs held by his brother Edward. These sums were additional to the sinecures that he held in his own right. His overall income from public sources was not less than $3000 per annum and was to increase over the years through no effort of his own. He never thought these perquisites incompatible with self-consciously high-minded whiggism, even fancied republicanism. 
During the summer of 1746 Walpole found a congenial substitute for his escapes to Houghton in a small house at Windsor, close enough to the metropolis to ensure that the 'longueurs' of rural life were never more than half a day's ride from town. In the following spring a more permanent solution was found when he bought the leasehold of a somewhat unpromising house in Twickenham with 5 acres of Thameside scenery. In due course the leasehold became freehold and the 5 acres became 14. 
Strawberry Hill gave its name to a whole genre of Gothic revival that has had a variable press since Walpole's 'committee of taste' transformed it into a 'little Gothic castle' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 20.111). The committee comprised, in addition to Walpole himself, his antiquarian friend John Chute and the dilettante Richard Bentley, son of Richard Bentley, the classical scholar and master of Trinity College, Cambridge. Bentley was valued by Walpole not only because, as he observed, 'his drawings and architecture are admirable', but also because he 'to all the ornament of learning has the amiable turn of mind, disposition and wit' (ibid., 16.25). He proved an at times irritating colleague, but his creativity was critical to the realization of Walpole's vision. Between 1750 and 1753, when Bentley withdrew to Jersey to protect himself from his creditors, the appearance of the house at Twickenham was transformed, though much of the early work was superficial rather than structural. Battlements and arched windows altered the appearance without radically affecting the overall layout. The one major exception at this stage was the newly designed staircase and hall, the latter monastically 'decked with long saints in lean arched windows and with taper columns, which we call the Paraclete, in memory of Eloisa's cloister' (ibid., 20.372). 
Thereafter, in 1754 new rooms were added, the refectory or great parlour, and Strawberry Hill's most remarkable chamber, its library. It was begun by Bentley (who supplied Walpole with a deputy, the German painter John Henry Muntz), but completed by Walpole and Chute, and triumphantly finished with bookcases and a chimney-piece derived from medieval tombs in the original St Paul's, Westminster Abbey, and Canterbury Cathedral. Walpole's pride in his ancestry was displayed in a variety of details in the house, but nowhere so exuberantly as in the library, where the ceiling displayed the arms of the families with which he was allied. 
Strawberry Hill bears no resemblance to Houghton, but it was to Horace what Houghton had been to Sir Robert, with due allowance for their respective resources. It complemented an urban lifestyle, providing an outlet for energies that could not be released in town, and above all created a satisfying picture of the way Walpole wished to be perceived by others. In their different ways both Houghton and Strawberry Hill were daring and imaginative projects, designed to leave a permanent public monument to their owners. 
This is not to say that Walpole lost his attachment to Houghton. In 1751, when his brother the second earl of Orford died, he did his best to engineer a marriage between the heir, his nephew George, and an heiress acquainted with his friend Chute, Margaret Nicoll. The plan was complicated by the intervention of Walpole's uncle 'Old Horace', who thought the match more appropriate for one of his own sons, and wrecked altogether when George himself rebelled on account of an unfavourable report of Miss Nicoll's looks and temper. The Horaces quarrelled bitterly and irretrievably, and the third earl of Orford retreated into a life of increasing eccentricity and, eventually, evident insanity. 
Walpole's personal relationships gradually settled into a pattern during the years that followed his father's death. In November 1745 a lasting reconciliation with Gray took place, for reasons which remain obscure. West had died in June 1742. With Ashton, who plainly viewed their connection as a means of personal advancement, relations grew cooler until Horace irrevocably parted company in 1750. Some of the young politicians with whom he consorted became close associates as his 'out-of-town party' at Twickenham in the 1750s: Selwyn, Williams, and Edgcumbe. 
As for women, the Grifoni was consigned to oblivion. There were hints in some verse that Walpole wrote in 1746 -- 'The Beauties' -- of another female attachment, Elizabeth Evelyn. It must have been at most a passing affectation of sexual ambition. Four years later she married into the Bathurst family. On the other hand, Walpole gradually acquired a reputation as a collector of ladies whose friendship nobody could mistake for sexual attraction, though with them he was prone to employ a gently ironic language of gallantry that became highly characteristic. In some cases he appreciated them as living memoirs for the historian of recent times. Lady Suffolk, at Marble Hill, had been the mistress of George II and somewhat ineffectual opponent of Sir Robert Walpole and Queen Caroline. Lady Hervey, once, as Molly Leppell, the toast of St James's and now widow of Robert Walpole's confidant Lord Hervey, was herself another repository of anecdote about an era that fascinated Walpole. Others were women of influence and wit in the high society of the day: such were Etheldreda, Lady Townshend, and Anne Pitt, sister of William Pitt the elder. 
Other exhibits in Walpole's feminine gallery were less likely, among them Kitty Clive, the actress he encountered as a neighbour in Twickenham and installed in a small house near Strawberry Hill. Her infectious gaiety and direct manner made her a surprising social asset as well as an engaging neighbour. Another incongruous friend was Lady Mary Coke, relict of an unconsummated marriage, and ridiculed for her pursuit of the royal duke of York. With her Walpole adopted a flirtatious manner that made some suspect that he was smitten with her. A further female connection that was to strengthen over the years and continue until Walpole's death was Anne Liddell, successively duchess of Grafton and, after her divorce in 1769, countess of Upper Ossory. Almost all of these women not only helped people his private correspondence but themselves became correspondents of his at one time or another. 
The rhythm of Walpole's life was predictable as well as agreeable: winters in town, summers for the most part at Strawberry Hill, each with its own cast of players, sometimes overlapping. By the mid-1750s the range of his activities provided him with all that suited him and made an admirable substitute for the political career to which he might once have aspired. Aside from the gout that began to afflict him in the mid-1750s there was little to disrupt his chosen mode of life. In these years at least, its centre of human interest was in Arlington Street. 'My jaunts to town will prevent my news from being quite provincial and marvellous', he had written to Mann during his Windsor sojourn in 1746 and the pattern was the same once he had acquired Strawberry Hill (Walpole, 'Corr.', 19.298). Balls and masquerades, opera and theatre, Ranelagh and Vauxhall, dinners, galas and routs, weddings and funerals, all appear with a vividness that could only come from the pen of an ironic spectator who also an enthusiastic participant. Anecdotes of 'politesse anglaise' abound, recording 'excellent vulgarisms', 'terrible disgrazie', and a vast diversity of social contretemps, all with malice enough to lend spice to the story but without sourness or more than a trace of detached superiority. 
Walpole saw himself as the historian of his own times, though he insisted in characteristically self-deprecating fashion that what he wrote were 'casual memoirs' for use by 'my superiors the historians of Britain' (Walpole, 'George II', xxxi). The letters to Mann, addressed to one who had been 'absent long enough to read of your own country as history' provided the obvious foundations for his work (Walpole, 'Corr.', 21.403). Walpole later stated that he had begun his history in 1751 and certainly what is known to posterity as 'Memoirs of the Last Ten Years of the Reign of George II' commenced in that year, but he had first asked Mann to return his letters in September 1748. Earlier still Gray was aware of a plan to compose 'Memoires', assuring Walpole that 'posterity will ever be glad to know the absurdity of their ancestors' (ibid., 14.9, 13). A draft of this earlier attempt is extant, though unpublished. 
Mann, who could be expected to take an interest in the doings of politicians but not necessarily in other matters, was not the only recipient of materials for the memoirs. George Montagu was regaled with London's social life, a role that was eventually taken over by the countess of Upper Ossory. Each was familiar with the class whose doings Walpole described but somewhat removed from immediate knowledge of them, the first because he rarely came to town, the second as a divorcee excluded from high society. Most of Walpole's major correspondents occupied a specialist niche in his personal gallery that provided a living and retrievable repository for his opinions, researches, and activities. Literary matters were discussed with Gray, and after his death, with William Mason. William Cole, whom Walpole had known at Eton, came to perform the same function for antiquarian topics. This pigeonholing of his friends and almost clinical replacing of them as they died or disappeared from his ken was essential to his personal project. As a contemporary historian, Walpole treated his own letters as his sourcebooks. 
Walpole also engaged with the earlier history of his country. His grand tour did not give him a lasting interest in classical antiquity or indeed the Renaissance, notwithstanding the interest in high art that his father's collection had helped inculcate. By 1752 he could write, 'I have done with virtu, and deal only with the Goths and Vandals' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 9.144). His patriotic instincts combined with the accessibility of the English past to lead him into the architectural highways and byways of medieval culture. (Its literary inheritance he was less learned in, with unfortunate results when he encountered Thomas Chatterton.) Initially, with Chute he conducted 'Gothic pilgrimages' that brought much information and insight. For one source he acquired a particular veneration. In Oxford he found 'what remains of the true Gothic 'un-Gibbs'd'' and delighted in 'the profusion of painted glass' (ibid., 35.155). This is not to say that he venerated the residents. As he later told Lady Upper Ossory, his regard was for 'the buildings, not the wretched oafs that inhabit it' (ibid., 33.483). 
Of his social connections Walpole took maximum advantage. His 'Journals of country seats', not published until the twentieth century, provide a meticulous record of his visits, which combined congenial company with close inspection of buildings and monuments. From not a few he came away with ornaments to decorate his own home. His spoliation of stained glass was unashamed and not excused by the fact that it took the form of authorized gifts or unauthorized sales. On the other hand he strongly opposed the destruction that occurred sometimes when 'a spirit of restoration and decoration has taken place', as when Wyatt's work on Salisbury Cathedral resulted in the demolition of its Beauchamp and Hungerford chapels (Walpole, 'Corr.', 42.259). 
In due course this antiquarian investment proved productive. In the meantime there were literary activities of various kinds. In 1748 some of Walpole's poems had been published in Dodsley's 'Collection of Poems'. Two years later, having inadvertently permitted Gray's 'Elegy in a Country Churchyard' to be pirated from a manuscript version that he had circulated among his friends, he undertook to see the authorized version through the press. He then persuaded Gray to allow publication of his remaining poems in an edition illustrated by Bentley. Managing the temperaments of author and illustrator was no small task, but in March 1753 the elegant, rococo result was 'Designs by Mr. R. Bentley, for Six Poems by Mr. T. Gray'. 
At the same time Walpole began publishing on his own account in a new essay periodical, 'The World', contributing a small number of well-regarded papers on diverse cultural and contemporary themes. Not the least interesting to posterity is an ironic essay on old women as satisfactory objects for love. More explicitly drawing on personal experience was his piece on the politeness of highwaymen, resulting from a brush in November 1749 with the celebrated James Maclaine (Maclean). In June 1757 his literary ambitions impelled Walpole in a new direction with the establishment of a printing press at Strawberry Hill. The first production was of two odes from Gray's hand. Neither the publicity that attended its launch nor the critical reception of 'The Progress of Poesy' and 'The Bard' pleased the hypersensitive Gray. Other volumes soon followed: an account of England in 1598 by the German Paul Hentzner, and in April 1758 Walpole's own 'A Catalogue of the Royal and Noble Authors of England, with Lists of their Works', a work which displayed the characteristic strengths and weaknesses of his brand of amateur antiquarianism. The latter brought some discomfiture. His scholarly errors were discussed in public and private, and his markedly whig bias gave much offence. 
The productions of the press included some notable coups. One was the first printing of 'The Life of Edward Lord Herbert of Cherbury, Written by Himself' in 1764, achieved only after some persuasion had been required to convince its owner, Lord Powis, that his ancestor's exploits could be revealed without exposing the family to ridicule. Much else was to follow over the years, including a number of Walpole's own writings. 'Fugitive Pieces in Verse and Prose', dedicated to Conway, had appeared in 1758. By this time he was working on his 'Anecdotes of Painting in England': two volumes appeared in 1762 and a third, together with his 'Catalogue of Engravers' in 1764. It had something in common with his 'Royal and Noble Authors', offering list and commentary in accessible and amusing dress. But it was to live longer, mainly because it was based on materials which Walpole had purchased from the widow of the engraver George Vertue in 1758. He had known Vertue himself since 1743 and perhaps owed something of his evolving interest in English portraiture to his knowledgeable encouragement. The 'forty volumes of his MS. Collection relating to English painters, sculptors, gravers, and architects' amply justified Walpole's claim that they contained 'an infinite quantity of new and curious things'. Later in life he described the 'Anecdotes' as 'the only thing I ever published of any use' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 33.574). 
Further work on Strawberry Hill had to take account of some personal awkwardnesses. Muntz was dismissed in 1759, having annoyed his employer by his 'airs and insolence' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 9.260) and his seduction of one of the maids. More distressing still, there came a breach with Bentley in 1761, ascribed partly to Bentley's unbusinesslike habits, partly to Mrs Bentley's presumptuous manners. On the credit side, Walpole gained a new assistant in the shape of the elder Pitt's nephew Thomas Pitt, a new resident of Twickenham. There were major new projects in hand for Strawberry Hill which were to double the size of the house. His Holbein chamber, decorated with tracings of Holbeins in the Royal Collection, was finished in 1759. More ambitiously, there rose up a cloister with gallery above, the latter constituting Walpole's 'chef d'oeuvre', a careful execution of variations on a perpendicular Gothic theme combined with sumptuous gold and crimson furnishings, and filled with the owner's most prized possessions. Later came the Round Tower, overlooking the road to Hampton, and a chapel or cabinet intended emphatically for the display of secular treasures rather than devotional purposes. These additions were largely complete by 1763. 
Soon after, Walpole published (though not from his own press) 'The Castle of Otranto: a Story', advertised as the translation, by one 'William Marshal, Gent', of an Italian work discovered in the library of an old Roman Catholic family in the north of England. Considering its contents this disguise was understandable, though in the event the reception was so favourable that within six months of publication he was issuing a second edition in which his authorship was revealed. 

'Otranto', set in medieval Naples, in an imaginary castle of whose actual existence Walpole was unaware until long after publication, was a wholly unbelievable tale, but its atmospheric power easily made up for its thin characterization. Impressive theatrical effects included a gigantic heavenly helmet with magical powers, a bleeding statue, a sword that could only be borne by fifty men, an anchorite whose flesh had melted away to leave only an animated skeleton, and a portrait that strode out of its frame. The fascination with the fantastic was the same that created Strawberry Hill, but unrestrained by the requirements of bricks and mortar. It caught a tide of interest in exotic evocations of ancient and medieval cultures. Later Walpole observed, more self-deprecatingly than was necessary: 'It was fit for nothing but the age in which it was written, an age in which much was known; that required only to be amused, nor cared whether its amusements were conformable to truth and the models of good sense; that could not be spoiled; was in no danger of being too credulous; and rather wanted to be brought back to imagination, than to be led astray by it. (Walpole, 'Corr.', 31.221)' Medievalism had a firm grip on Walpole by this time. Three years after 'Otranto' he published his 'Historic Doubts on the Life and Reign of King Richard the Third', another work not initially printed at Strawberry Hill. It enjoyed considerable success, re-igniting public interest in the ancient controversy surrounding the murder of the princes in the Tower. Walpole was an uncompromising Ricardian. There were several ripostes, the most damaging from Jeremiah Milles, the president of the Society of Antiquaries, who demolished the principal documentary evidence. Though Walpole did not reply in print, this hurt was sufficient for him to resign his membership of the society in due course. 
While composing the 'Historic Doubts', Walpole was also working on a blank verse drama entitled 'The Mysterious Mother'. It was published at Strawberry Hill in a limited edition of fifty copies in 1768. The feeling of his friends was that, however well it might be done, it had better not have been done at all. The story, set in pre-Reformation Narbonne, was of the unintentional double incest of a young man who had been seduced by his mother masquerading as a servant and eventually married her daughter by him. What it revealed about Walpole's personal insecurities may be debated. It certainly allowed him to trail his anti-Romish prejudices by giving a repulsive friar the responsibility for malevolently arranging the marriage. 
The passion that sustained 'Otranto', the 'Historic Doubts', and 'Mysterious Mother' perhaps had its origin in the emotional turmoil that Walpole experienced at this time. This grand climacteric was the result of a personal commitment to a political cause far beyond any that he had made before or was to make again. Since the mid-1750s Walpole had been adrift of his political moorings. It was inevitable that a man whose sole political principle was adherence to the memory, measures, and friends of his father would in time find the last of these increasingly difficult to comprehend. Clandestine opposition to Newcastle and Pelham had been justified on the grounds that both had supposedly helped to bring Sir Robert down. But when followers of his father cast their lot definitively with the Pelhams, as Fox did in 1755, it was less easy to reconcile past principles and present practice. Walpole's response was characteristically ambivalent. On the one hand he made it clear to Fox how deeply he resented his conduct. On the other he published in 'The World' in 1757 a 'character' of Fox written some years before that was almost embarrassingly eulogistic. At the same time he turned increasingly to Henry Seymour Conway, who developed a political as well as military career when in 1754 he became chief secretary to the lord lieutenant of Ireland, conventionally a stepping-stone to a higher office. 
Walpole himself took a step of some consequence when in 1757 the electors of King's Lynn, once represented by Sir Robert, more recently by 'Old Horace' and his son, sought his candidature. King's Lynn, with its still thriving trade and turbulent politics, was very different from Callington, which he represented from 1741 to 1754, and Castle Rising, another close borough for which he sat between 1754 and 1757. With some trepidation he accepted the call, presented himself in the constituency (a novel experience for him), and remained member without controversy until his retirement from parliament in 1768. He left a memorable account of his part in popular elections in a letter to Montagu about his 'new vocation': 'Think of me, the subject of a mob, who was scarce ever before in a mob! Addressing them in the town-hall, riding at the head of two thousand people through such a town as Lynn, dining with above two hundred of them amid bumpers, huzzas, songs and tobacco, and finishing with country dances at a ball and six-penny whisk! (Walpole, 'Corr.', 9.350)' Walpole's brief absence from the Commons, after his resignation of Castle Rising and before his re-election for King's Lynn, coincided with the loss of Minorca and what looked the judicial murder of Admiral Byng as the scapegoat. Walpole became incensed by the case, helped postpone the final outcome, and deplored Byng's execution when it took place. His fury was unleashed in an icily ironic little tract, 'A Letter from Xo Ho, a Chinese Philosopher at London, at his Friend Lien Chi, at Peking', exposing the absurdity of a political system that condemned an admiral for decisions made by his political masters. The episode completed his disenchantment with Fox, who had been one of the most active of Byng's detractors. 
The Seven Years' War brought Conway's military career once more to the fore, initially with unfortunate results as second in command of the disastrous Rochefort expedition of 1757. Eventually he more than regained his reputation with the British forces in Germany, watched from afar by Walpole with anxious admiration. At home Walpole admired Pitt, continued to detest Newcastle, and observed the accession of George III in 1760 and the elevation of his favourite Lord Bute, like a 'satisfied spectator', as he later admitted (Walpole, 'George III', 1.167). One of the instruments of the new regime was Henry Fox, whose irritation with his old friend culminated in the spiteful gesture of slowing down the payments due to Walpole for his exchequer office. Insult was added to injury when Bute awarded the reversion of the office to a supporter who had acted as Fox's agent in the transaction. 
Bute's successor, George Grenville, was a whig of conventional mould who quickly ruined himself in Walpole's eyes by prosecuting John Wilkes for an alleged libel on the king through the use of a 'general warrant', considered by many whigs an arbitrary and potentially tyrannical procedure. By this time Conway was again pursuing his peacetime career as a loyal supporter of government, but rebelled at the persecution of Wilkes, voting repeatedly against the use of general warrants. The response of the ministry was firm. Conway was dismissed from both the command of his regiment and his place as groom of the bedchamber. 
Walpole's behaviour at this time startled both friends and enemies. He blamed himself for Conway's downfall, and laboured frantically to have him and his friends restored to office. When the ministry commissioned a defence of its actions in the form of William Guthrie's 'Address to the Public on the Late Dismissal of a General Officer', Walpole replied with a 'Counter Address' that in turn provoked a riposte, the 'Reply to the Counter Address'. In it Guthrie resorted to brutal tactics, fastening on his antagonist's supposed effeminacy, likening him to a 'hermaphrodite horse' and attributing his animus to the 'unsuccessful passion during the course of twenty years' that he had nourished for Conway. To Conway, Walpole reacted robustly: 'They have nothing better to say than that I am in love with you, have been so these twenty years, and am no giant. I am a very constant old swain: they might have made the years above thirty; it is so long I have had the same unalterable friendship for you, independent of being near relations and bred up together. (Walpole, 'Corr.', 38.437)' The political crisis of 1764-5 was resolved by a palace revolution that had nothing to do with Wilkes and general warrants. The upshot, however, was favourable to the whigs, displacing Grenville and putting in his place the old Newcastle party, led by Lord Rockingham and featuring Conway as secretary of state and leader of the House of Commons. This should have been the moment of triumph, but for Walpole it apparently became one of the most profound humiliation. No reward for his own activities was offered by the new government, nor any arrangement that might prevent any further political meddling with his official salary. The ingratitude on Conway's part appalled him. Privately he retreated into stoical resignation. 'His temper hurt me, but I forgave his virtue, of which I am confident, and know it was superior to my own' (Walpole, 'George III', 2.152). Publicly he announced his intention to recoup his health by spending a winter in Paris. Unfortunately Conway made matters worse by treating his withdrawal as desertion. Walpole fled. 
In Paris, Walpole needed no tutoring to play the role of eccentric islander in a Francophile mode that would to his own countrymen have not seemed very English at all. He relished a reception that made him something of a celebrity, though there were features of life in Paris that disturbed him. A sceptic himself, he was none the less a little shocked by the irreligion that he found, and more irritated by the tedium of fashionable philosophical discourse. A city that welcomed not only Walpole but also David Hume, who was secretary to the embassy there, could not be considered an unalloyed blessing. He detested Hume's 'History', 'so falsified in many points, so partial in as many, so very unequal in its parts'. Of his conversation he was dismissive: 'he understood nothing till he had written upon it.' And as philosopher Hume was a 'superficial mountebank' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 10.176; 16.266; 42.78). 
Hume's employer as British ambassador was Walpole's own cousin and Conway's brother Lord Hertford. If Walpole's relations with Hume were at best polite, it is unlikely that he intended actively to humiliate him. That, however, was what he proceeded to do. In the winter of 1765-6 a principal topic of conversation in Paris was the behaviour of Jean-Jacques Rousseau, who had left Switzerland after acrimonious public disputes, believed himself to be the victim of an elaborate conspiracy, and sought congenial refuge, which Hume intended to provide by taking him to Britain. In the midst of these transactions Walpole penned a letter from Frederick II to Rousseau inviting him to take shelter in Prussia. The letter satirized Rousseau's paranoia (not the most difficult of targets), made a considerable stir in Paris, and provoked a furious reaction from the latter, who came to suspect that Hume himself had been party to it. It was an extreme example of the unintended havoc that Walpole's mischief-making could cause, and one which Hume showed magnanimity in dismissing as 'a piece of levity'. His remark about its author -- 'it is a strange inclination we have to be wits, preferably to every thing else' -- might provide a devastating commentary on much else in Walpole's life and character (E. C. Mossner, 'The Life of David Hume', 1954, 514). 
Life in Paris absorbed Walpole to the full, but increasingly his interest came to focus on the outmoded but once powerful salon of Madame du Deffand, 'a blind old lady of wit', as he described her in his journal (Walpole, 'Corr.', 7.261). She initially acted as a kind of French Lady Suffolk, a repository of knowledge about a period fast disappearing from living memory. From her standpoint Walpole was a charming newcomer who took as much trouble to fascinate her as if she had been forty years younger. Thus began a relationship increasingly charged with emotion and, not for the first or last time, on his side highly ambiguous in its commitment. 
All the evidence is that during these months Walpole confided in Madame du Deffand as much as she confided in him. When he left he can have been in no doubt of the extent to which she had become dependent on him, uncomfortable though it increasingly made him feel. One night out of Paris, on the road to Calais, he wrote in terms which can only be recovered from her reply. In it she reassured him that their correspondence would be kept secret, expressed her joy at what he had said of his feelings for her, declared 'I want to be at my ease and to say that it is impossible to love more tenderly than I love you', and urged him not to alter his relationship with her. 'Remember that you are my tutor, my director; do not abandon my education' (Craveri, 273-4). Once out of her presence, the intensity of this attachment caused him as much embarrassment as pleasure, though he never severed it. 
The correspondence that began at this time eventually involved more than 800 exchanges over fourteen years. It is one of the most famous in the history of letter-writing and has provided much evidence for the prosecution when Walpole is charged with cynicism and duplicity. 'She loves me better than all France', he told Conway in 1774 (Walpole, 'Corr.', 39.189), but his apparently frequent pleas for her not to speak of love, his horror of ridicule concerning their relationship, and his promises to return to France repeatedly broken, all appear to condemn him with his own words. Remarkably, she bore this bizarre form of devotion, agreeing to be 'amis sans amitie'. She was a woman of the world, had been once the mistress of the regent of France, and enjoyed the regard of countless men of rank or wit or both. But twenty years older than Walpole and bereft of her sight, with time heavy on her hand, she considered him the lodestar of her existence. 
Walpole journeyed again to see her in 1767, 1769, 1771, and 1775, on each occasion apparently restoring the relationship to something of the intensity that it had originally generated. He wrote to Lady Ailesbury in 1775, 'I have found my dear old woman so well, and looking so much better than she did four years ago, that I am transported with pleasure' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 39.255). Yet each time he left, the old reserve reasserted itself. These years coincided with worsening health for him, which genuinely rendered travel more uncomfortable and even threatened his life; at least, so Madame du Deffand feared. It was she who died first, none the less, in August 1780. She left him her papers, a gold box bearing a portrait in wax of her last little dog, Tonton, together with Tonton himself, whom he cherished for many years and even permitted 'to lie on every couch and chair' (ibid., 11.51). 
Walpole's apparent heartlessness toward Madame du Deffand was a hostage to fortune that he entrusted to posterity by preserving her letters to him while destroying his own to her. But another supposed instance of it was brought to a contemporary public. In March 1769 he received from the young, and at that time unknown, Thomas Chatterton a copy of selections from the manuscript remains of one Thomas Rowley, who had supposedly in 1469 described the rise of painting in England and composed poems of which Chatterton provided examples. Walpole unwarily responded by asking for further examples and offering to publish specimens. Chatterton duly obliged and requested his new patron's support in obtaining employment. By this time Walpole had grown suspicious and sought independent information about his correspondent and advice from Mason and Gray about the manuscripts, with the predictable result. There followed an exchange in which he disengaged himself 'with as much kindness and tenderness as if I had been his guardian' ('Works', 4.223). In April 1770 Chatterton made his way to London and engaged in various satirical activities that included attacks on Walpole's antiquarian researches under the pen of Baron Otranto. Walpole was probably unaware at this time that their author was Chatterton. Nor, when Chatterton committed suicide in August 1770, did he hear of it until the following April. 
In subsequent years interest in Chatterton grew. In 1777, after the publication of the Rowley poems, the allegation that Walpole had driven their author to self-murder gained currency. Restless though he was under mounting attacks, Walpole did not issue a fully public rebuttal until 1782. It made little difference. The Chatterton smear, which had no origin in truth other than his initial gullibility, was to do his reputation enduring harm. 
One of the mainsprings of Walpole's existence had long been politics, even if his pleasure in it must have been largely vicarious, since he never showed a serious interest in obtaining public office himself. In his own words he lacked 'the least tincture of ambition' but possessed 'a propensity to faction' (Walpole, 'George II', xxix). His disillusionment with Henry Seymour Conway and his decision to retire from parliament in 1768 effectively shut down this aspect of his self-constructed identity, more conclusively perhaps than he himself anticipated. He did not discontinue his memoirs of the reign of George III, which he had commenced in 1766, and what were later to be known as his 'last journals' took the story on eventually to 1783. But it was the story increasingly of an outsider. 
Walpole attended only occasionally to hear the debates of either house, recognized that the newspapers were beginning to provide accounts as accurate as anything he could offer, and in time came to feel remote from the politicians of the day. By 1785 he could confess to Mann, apropos of the leading satires of the day, 'as there are continually allusions to parliamentary speeches and events, they are often obscure to me till I get them explained; and besides, I do not know several of the satirized heroes even by sight' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 25.612). 
Walpole's own last political tract was published after the 'Stamp Act' crisis in 1766, two years before he resigned his seat. The 'Account of the Giants Lately Discovered' ironically suggested that reports of a newly found race of giants in South America would soon be followed by a parliamentary attempt to tax them. He consistently opposed the measures that led to war with America as well as the war itself, and derived no consolation from the accuracy of his prophecies on the subject. 'My English or selfish pride is mortified at seeing the decadence of our empire' he wrote when American independence was conceded by treaty in 1783 (Walpole, 'Corr.', 33.420). 
Despite his irritation with Conway, relations were repaired, though not restored to their earlier warmth, and Walpole's political sentiments remained those of whigs like him. Accordingly he was a moderate reformer at best. When economical reform threatened his sinecures in 1783, he gracefully promised the prime minister, Lord Shelburne, his co-operation, an undertaking carrying little risk since abolition without compensation was not proposed and Shelburne had political troubles that soon overwhelmed his reforming ambitions. Of parliamentary reform Walpole disapproved, characteristically offering a disarmingly casual argument. Fashion ruled all, he remarked: 'I carry this way of thinking still farther, and extend it to almost all reformations. Could one cure the world of being foolish, it were something -- but to cure it of any one folly, is only making room for some other, which one is sure will succeed to the vacant place. (Walpole, 'Corr.', 25.642)' Walpole's sympathies in the 1780s remained with the Foxite whigs who inherited the Rockingham mantle and continued to command the allegiance of Conway. Of Pitt and his supporters, especially those whigs who threw in their lot with him in 1784, he was contemptuous. He quarrelled with a friend and correspondent of some years' standing, William Mason, in the process drawing up a concise statement of his political credo at this time: 'I have for five and forty years acted upon the principles of the constitution as it was settled at the Revolution, the best form of government that I know of in the world, and which made us a free people, a rich people, and a victorious people, by diffusing liberty, protecting property and encouraging commerce; and by the combination of all, empowering us to resist the ambition of the House of Bourbon, and to place ourselves on a level with that formidable neighbour. The narrow plan of royalty, which had so often preferred the aggrandizement of the Crown to the dignity of presiding over a great and puissant free kingdom, threw away one predominant source of our potency by aspiring to enslave America -- and would now compensate for that blunder and its consequence by assuming a despotic tone at home. It has found a tool in the light and juvenile son of the great minister who carried our glory to its highest pitch -- but it shall never have the insignificant approbation of an old and worn out son of another minister, who though less brilliant, maintained this country in the enjoyment of the twenty happiest years that England ever enjoyed. (Walpole, 'Corr.', 25.351)' Many new developments of the period found Walpole equally unsympathetic. The fashionable tolerance that was improving the lot of Catholics awoke misgivings, and not only because of the plebeian outrage and violence that it unleashed in the Gordon riots of 1780s. The horror of 'popery' as a political force never forsook him: 'You know I have ever been averse to toleration of an intolerant religion', he told Mann in 1784. The Irish reforming movement that inspired many liberal whiggish sympathizers left him cold, principally on this account. He warned of the 'impossibility of satisfying 'Irish' Catholics, without restoring their estates. It was particularly silly to revive the subject in this age, when Popery was so rapidly declining' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 25.541). The rise of a new empire in the East did not comfort him. During the proceedings to impeach Warren Hastings he quipped about either 'black-washing' or 'white-washing' Hastings but entertained no doubt that India had been 'blood-washed by our countrymen!' (ibid., 25.630). When Cornwallis crushed the principal obstacle to British supremacy in India, Tippoo Sahib, in 1792, he rejoiced without rapture 'for we have usurped India till it is become part of our vitals' (ibid., 34.146). 
No very great analysis or thought went into these judgements. They were the instinctive reactions of one taught to fear those who had corrupted other societies and sought thereby to corrupt their own. Walpole approved Edward Gibbon's analysis of the decline of Rome. Even the explorations of the wider world that excited much contemporary opinion merely evoked his distaste for barbaric cultures. The famous prints of South Sea faces in James Cook's 'Voyage' he dismissed as: 'a parcel of ugly faces with blubber lips and flat noses, dressed as unbecomingly as if both sexes were ladies of the first fashion; and rows of savages with backgrounds of palm-trees. Indeed, I shall not give five guineas and half -- nay, they sell already for nine, for such uncouth lubbers: nor do I desire to know how unpolished the north or south poles have remained ever since Adam and Eve were just such mortals. (Walpole, 'Corr.', 33.436)' Such insensitivity did not imply an absence of concern for the undertrodden. Walpole opposed slavery and the slave trade long before that became a fashionable humanitarian cause of the 1770s. He did so on robustly whiggish grounds. It is doubtful whether he ever thought in terms of what were coming to be called 'natural rights'. The cult of nature of the 1760s had never impressed him, though as in other matters the contradictions in his thinking would require more pains to reconcile than he ever showed signs of taking. When, in 1780, he added a fourth volume to his 'Anecdotes of Painting', covering the reigns of the first two Hanoverian kings, he also included a neat little 'Essay on Modern Gardening', trumpeting the triumphs of English landscape gardening as pioneered by Kent and developed by Brown. His friend the former French ambassador the duc de Nivernais provided an elegant translation of the 'Essay', which was printed at the Strawberry Hill press. Walpole's extravagant dismissal of the 'unnatural' French taste in gardening does not seem to have inhibited its success across the channel. 
On the other hand, Walpole struck a modest literary blow at naturalism when he briefly figured as a dramatist on the London stage. In 1772 he had written his 'Hieroglyphic Tales', written with a child as reader in mind and later published in 1785. The fantastic incongruity of these little fairy stories was followed up with a 'moral entertainment' that he wrote in 1773, entitled 'Nature will Prevail'. It was staged by George Colman in 1778 with some success. Its moral was that in a state of nature on a desert island human nature does indeed revert to ill will and unkindness. 
If the French Revolution had a simple creed, it was that of natural rights. But the revolution appalled Walpole. He was never a Francophobe but he had always disliked the doctrinaire atheism of the professedly enlightened. His own scepticism perfectly reflected the modish theology that prevailed at court during his father's day. 'I have a real affection for Bishop Hoadley: he stands with me in lieu of what are called 'the Fathers'' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 16.282-3). By the time he wrote this, in 1785, there were other forms of fashionable latitudinarianism that he might have cited, but he took care not to read anything that might have served such a purpose. Whatever he learned from his interest in the middle ages, it had nothing to do with the spiritual belief that had underpinned so much of the Gothic legacy. He relished the story of Henry V's diversion of funds from a hospital for war victims to Archbishop Chichele's foundation of All Souls College, Oxford. 'How history makes one shudder and laugh by turns!' (ibid., 35.387). The evangelical revival passed him by, except as matter for mockery. Among his more spectacularly faulty prophecies was that of the decline of Methodism after the deaths of John Wesley and Lady Huntingdon in 1791 (ibid., 11.297). 
In all this it was taste rather than very deep thought that guided Walpole. The manner of the French 'philosophes' and indeed many others seems to have offended him more than what they said. To Lady Upper Ossory, who had ventured to praise Beaumarchais, he denounced 'the dictatorial pertness of the modern French authors' with a passion which must have disconcerted her by its brutality (Walpole, 'Corr.', 33.543). For one of Walpole's temperament and prejudices the revolution was the supreme example of the French capacity to apply a frivolous mind to serious matters. He would not have denied his own supposedly English readiness to apply serious thought to frivolous matters. That is not to say that he did not take seriously the war of ideas that the revolution unleashed. He admired Edmund Burke's 'Reflections on the Revolution', and in terms that might have surprised some. 'Every page shows how sincerely he is in earnest -- a wondrous merit in a political pamphlet -- All other party writers 'act' zeal for the public, but it never seems to flow from the heart' (ibid., 34.98). He even endorsed Burke's controversial purple passage in praise of Marie Antoinette, recalling the occasion when he himself had first set eyes on her and instantly worshipped at the same shrine. 
A younger son not expected to sustain the fortunes of his house by marriage or an active career, Walpole never lost his attachment to his family and viewed with mounting if somewhat fatalistic dismay its descent into ruin. For his beloved Houghton and its contents the prospects were bleak indeed. His father had died in debt. The second earl's fortunes were sustained by state sinecures which lapsed on his death. The third earl brought nothing but gross mismanagement and extravagance to the task of preserving his patrimony. By 1773 both the estate and his senses were in such disorder that his uncle intervened to set about restoring the former. It proved a short respite. Despite promises to reform, the third earl's folly continued. In 1779 he took the catastrophic step that his nephew had dreaded most, selling the Houghton picture collection to Catherine II of Russia. 'It is the most signal mortification to my idolatry for my father's memory, that it could receive', he wrote to Lady Upper Ossory. 'It is stripping the temple of his glory and of his affection. A madman excited by rascals has burnt his Ephesus. I must never cast a thought toward Norfolk more -- nor will hear my nephew's name if I can avoid it' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 32.86). 
Walpole's brother Sir Edward died in 1784, taking with him their mutually beneficial share of the collectorship of the customs. One of his natural daughters, Maria, to whom her uncle was particularly attached, married the much older Lord Waldegrave, whose politics were congenial. Waldegrave died only four years after the marriage, in 1763. To Walpole's embarrassment Maria became involved with one of the king's brothers, the duke of Gloucester, and contracted a secret marriage with him in 1766. When the marriage was revealed to the king in 1771, the couple and all who attended them were excluded from court, a challenge which Walpole eagerly confronted by publicly visiting the duke and duchess at the first available opportunity. Though the relationship had been cemented against his wishes, henceforward the Waldegrave family became in effect his own adopted family. 
Walpole's own legacy, at Strawberry Hill, continued to be his main preoccupation. Work on it had not ceased when the major extensions of the 1760s were complete. There followed two large bedchambers, the 'Great North' and the 'State', a new tower designed by the architect James Essex, and the Beauclerk Tower, named after illustrations of 'The Mysterious Mother' drawn by Lady Diana Beauclerk. A chapel was added in the garden mainly to house some of his ever expanding collection of painting, monuments, relics, and curios. His own catalogue of the collection was printed in 1774 as 'Description of Strawberry Hill'; a revised edition appeared ten years later. By this time the house, close to London and in a charming locality, was well placed to attract the tourist as well as its owner's personal friends. The bizarre diversity of the contents added to the impact. Walpole never pretended that his was other than a highly idiosyncratic collection, and items such as Wolsey's red hat and Henry VIII's clock with obscene pendulum certainly provided confirmation. The first royal visit had been that of the duke of Cumberland in 1754; the last was that of Queen Charlotte with eight princesses in 1795. For less privileged visitors there was a carefully arranged set of rules governing the issue of tickets and orderly behaviour. 
Walpole's circle of friends contracted during the decade following his disillusionment with Conway. Lady Suffolk died in 1767, Lady Hervey in 1768. A little later, in 1771, he lost Gray. More mysteriously, one of his earliest friends and correspondents, the country squire George Montagu, broke with him in 1770, but the most grievous deprivation was that of Chute, in 1776. 'My loss is most irreparable. To me he was the most faithful and secure of friends, and a delightful companion.' He added, most revealingly, 'I shall not seek to replace him' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 24.212). 
All through his life, on the stage that he created for himself, Walpole had manipulated the other players, not always with complete success. But as the casualties mounted replacement became increasingly difficult. Cole, with whom his relations had remained so consistent and warm, despite their divergent politics, died in 1782. In 1785 he lost his nearest neighbour, Kitty Clive, and in 1786 his most distant, Horace Mann, on whom he had not set eyes since 1741 but with whom he had corresponded regularly and fully during the intervening forty-five years. There were new contacts and correspondents indeed, but not all of a calibre to match those they might be thought to replace. A partial exception was the antiquary John Pinkerton, though Walpole cannot have been unaware of his self-serving nature. Pinkerton was later to publish his recollections of the master in 'Walpoliana'. 
Increasingly Walpole recognized his own isolation. To Conway he wrote in June 1784: 'I am very well content to be a Strulbrug, and to 'exist' after I have done 'being'' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 39.415). To Mann, soon after, he added, 'I do worse than live out of the world, for I live with the old women of my neighbourbood' (ibid., 25.542). Women certainly predominated. Lady Diana Beauclerk, like Lady Upper Ossory, a divorcee whom Walpole cultivated both before and after her fall from social grace, became a frequent companion when she moved to Twickenham following her second husband's death in 1780. For Conway's daughter, married briefly and unhappily to John Damer, who took his own life to release himself from debt, Walpole had an enduring affection. Lady Diana was a draughtswoman, Anne Damer a sculptress. Of the talents of each Walpole was an unreserved admirer. Other women who figured among his acquaintance had to work harder to earn his approval. Hannah More took his teasing about her religious views ('My dear Saint Hannah') in good part and displayed her poetic more than her puritanical side, thereby permitting to flourish what might have been a somewhat fraught relationship. 
Among the women in Walpole's life, two sisters, 'two pearls that I found in my path' came to be his close friends (Walpole, 'Corr.', 34.26). The Misses Berry, Mary and Agnes, became neighbours of Walpole's in Twickenham when their impecunious father rented a house there in 1788. 'My two StrawBerries' (ibid.) were in their mid-twenties, had polite manners without the affectation of fashionable society, and were delighted, not merely dutiful, listeners. Some of the anecdotes that he deployed they published in his 'Reminiscences, Written in 1788, for the Amusement of Miss Mary and Miss Agnes Berry'. Many of these he had originally received from that earlier neighbour in Twickenham, Lady Suffolk. 
Now in his seventies, Walpole at last needed company more than it needed him. He also found himself dropping the emotional guard which had so long kept him free of attachments that he could not control for his own purposes. For Mary especially he acquired a particular affection. His letters pursued the sisters when they toured England with their father in 1789 and again when they resorted to the continent in 1790. The dangers they were courting in France increased his fury with the revolution. 'It remained for the enlightened eighteenth century to baffle language and invent horrors that can be found in no vocabulary', he wrote to Lady Upper Ossory after the execution of Louis XVI (Walpole, 'Corr.', 34.177). The resulting anxiety and agitation made his letters to his 'dear, dear wives' unlike any others, perhaps, that he ever composed (ibid., 11.326). Their return in November 1791 was a huge relief, not least because he settled them in Little Strawberry Hill, or Cliveden, the house formerly occupied by Kitty Clive. 
For the remaining years of his life the Berrys and Mrs Damer were Walpole's principal props, though they cannot be said to have led a serene existence. Mary Berry was in love with a military friend of Conway, General Charles O'Hara, a passion interrupted by his spells abroad and terminated when she plucked up courage to leave her father and Walpole in order to marry him, only to quarrel with her fiance before they married. Mrs Damer also took an interest in Mary Berry that was not without a sexual tinge. Walpole seems to have succeeded in ignoring this emotional turbulence. From his own hand, at least, there is no suggestion that he entertained the notion of marrying Mary himself, though his evident affection for her certainly led others to speculate, if only concerning any designs she might have on his fortune. 
By this time Walpole was fourth earl of Orford, following the death of his nephew in December 1791. His inheritance was bleak indeed. The estate was heavily encumbered with debt. Houghton had been despoiled not only of its pictures but also of much else that the third earl had alienated. The new peer never appeared in the House of Lords. With the keenest sense of Sir Robert Walpole's grandeur and glory he had inherited only the ruins of the former and had no prospect of passing on the latter. 
The deaths of the 1790s removed Walpole's oldest and closest connections: Selwyn in 1791, Lincoln in 1794, Conway in 1795. Berkeley Square (which had replaced Arlington Street in 1778, when its lease was about to fall in) in winter, Strawberry Hill in summer, and a contracting circle in each provided his final scenes. His health was not good. To his gout was added recurrent rheumatism. The end came after an illness first brought on by a cold spell at Strawberry Hill in November 1796. Removal to Berkeley Square did not mend matters and he died there on 2 March 1797. He was buried in Houghton church in the family tomb on 13 March. 
In default of male heirs Houghton went to the Cholmondeley family through Sir Robert's daughter Mary. It has remained there ever since. Strawberry Hill was destined for the Waldegraves, though Anne Damer was granted possession for life, a right which she ceded in 1811. The seventh earl, who succeeded to the title in 1835, demolished portions of the house and auctioned off its treasures in 1842: the sale lasted thirty-two days and realized over $33,000. But his widow, Frances, gave it a new lease of life during her two subsequent marriages, to George Harcourt MP and Lord Carlingford. Some of the dispersed collections were restored and the house partly rebuilt. As a leading hostess she again made Strawberry Hill a place of social and political resort. After her death the house passed to Baron Stern and later into institutional hands. Having survived a German bomb in 1941, it remains remarkably well preserved to this day. 
In 1784 Walpole had explicitly condemned 'all publication of private letters in which living persons are named', claiming to have postponed publication of the fourth volume of his 'Anecdotes of Painters' on this account (Walpole, 'Corr.', 42.121). During his last years he was engaged on editing his correspondence with Mann, and the first letters from his own collection appeared soon after his death in 1798, as part of the five-volume edition of his 'Works', superintended by Mary Berry. During the following decades further instalments were issued, beginning with that of Madame du Deffand, in 1810. Few private correspondences would have withstood the resulting glare, but Walpole's moral ambiguity and malicious irony were particularly ill-calculated to appeal to a public audience. The attack from which his reputation was not to recover for almost a century was made by Macaulay when he reviewed the early letters to Mann, published with Waldegrave's support by the Conservative politician Lord Dover in 1833. Macaulay boasted that finishing his article on Walpole was 'one of the happy moments of my life:... I think that this article will be a hit.... I have laid it on Walpole so unsparingly that I shall not be surprised if Miss Berry should cut me' (Dover to Hannah Macaulay, G. O. Macaulay, ed., 'The Life and Letters of Lord Macaulay', 1886, 239). The most damaging charge was Walpole's supposedly phenomenal duplicity and hypocrisy: 'mask upon mask'. 
It would be wrong, however, wholly to blame either Macaulay or the letters for the rapid decline of Walpole's reputation. The 'Memoirs', which are very different in tone and temper as well as literary structure and style, were not much better received. Although unquestionably written with posterity in mind, their publication had been delayed by Walpole himself. He left instructions drawing attention to 'a large wainscot chest marked on the outside with a great A' which was to remain securely locked until an Earl Waldegrave attained the age of thirty-five. In due course in 1810 the sixth earl, expecting 'silver, gold or precious jewels', opened the chest to find the manuscripts of Walpole's memoirs. On Lord Holland's advice the volumes covering the reign of George II were published in 1822, almost unexpurgated. Holland made no progress with the later memoirs of the reign of George III, which were entrusted to Sir Denis Le Marchant and published in 1845. The 'Last Journals' appeared later, in 1859, edited by Alban Doran. 
To many the 'Memoirs' confirmed the impression left by the 'Letters'. The belletrist Anne Grant of Laggan was shocked by a 'Pandora's box' that poured 'forth its pernicious and very malicious contents upon the devoted heads of the sons and successors of all the great characters, whose talents and whose virtues shed lustre over names that will be honoured and revered, while that of Horace lives with the French wits and philosophers of the last century, to show, like them, how worthless are wit and talents, when perverted to be the implements of mischief to mankind. (J. P. Grant, ed., 'Memoir and Correspondence of Mrs. Grant of Laggan', 3 vols., 1844, 2.325)' The politician and reviewer John Croker, who believed Walpole 'to have been as bad a man as ever lived', devoted his critical talents to 'exposing his errors and defeating his personal malevolence' (L. J. Jennings, ed., 'The Croker Papers: the Correspondence and Diaries of the Late Right Honourable John Wilson Croker', 2nd edn, 3 vols., 1885, 1.270-71). Even approving readers tended to be less than enthusiastic. The whig wit Joseph Jekyll compared the 'Memoirs' to 'cold meat on the side table' (A. Bourke, ed., 'Correspondence of Mr. Joseph Jekyll with his Sister-in-Law, Lady Gertrude Sloane Stanley, 1818-1838', 1894, 134). The 'Memoirs' were widely read and plundered, providing a crucial source for the history of the eighteenth century, yet the author's reputation benefited little. 
It did not help Walpole's posthumous standing that he had carried to the grave personal manners that seemed to embody the least appealing features of eighteenth-century social life. The waspish wit and man about town of the 1740s was portrayed in the 1780s and 1790s by men and women whose verdict, even when well meant, damned him with subsequent audiences. James Boswell (no impartial judge considering Walpole's dislike of Samuel Johnson) called him 'genteel, fastidious, priggish' (I. S. Lustig and F. A. Pottle, eds., 'Boswell: the English Experiment, 1785-1789', 1986, 217). His physical appearance and demeanour tended to confirm the impression. He was slight and slender, reinforcing the effeminate manner that a less than strong voice, a somewhat mincing gait, and an affected mode of address conveyed. In later life the animation that all associated with him was lessened by his bowed frame and constricted movement, though to the end observers found his eyes strikingly bright. In his own generation there was nothing about his personal appearance that was not acceptable and agreeable, but changing models of masculinity tended to emphasize a more muscular, more robust, more reserved and less precious pattern of manly conduct, making him seem anachronistic and eccentric. 
Walpole was never completely swamped by Victorian disapproval, and the revival of interest in the literary legacy of the eighteenth century at the end of the nineteenth promised something of a reassessment. Austin Dobson's contribution to the 'Dictionary of National Biography' reflected this less grudging recognition of Walpole's talents. At the same time his manners and morals were coming to seem less problematic especially to a generation in the early twentieth century that found Victorian high-mindedness and solemnity increasingly oppressive or even ridiculous. On the other hand, one of his securer achievements, the generally accurate information and clear, if often biased, interpretations of the 'Memoirs', came under some severe criticism from a new school of historians. The Namier assault on whig interpretations of eighteenth-century politics fastened on sources that supported the depiction of George III as a tyrannical opponent of the constitutional balance achieved in 1688. After Edmund Burke, Walpole offered the most telling testimony and suffered accordingly. 
Even so, Walpole fared better with the twentieth century than the nineteenth. Partly this was a matter of changing intellectual fashions. Modern art history is less judgemental than it once was and his role in the Gothic revival attracts more tolerant scholarship than it formerly did. Similarly his literary and antiquarian works have gained from locating them in their cultural context rather than rating them for their canonical status. His political views are no longer central to historiographical warfare; his adherence to a mild version of whig republicanism looks less like gross hypocrisy than sentimental, if self-indulgent, antiquarianism and a logical part of the past that he constructed around himself. But above all the wealth of material that has now been published about him permits a more rounded and wholly humane picture than any selection could. 
That this is so is largely due to one man, Wilmarth Sheldon Lewis (1897-1979). Lewis was a Yale scholar who in his early twenties developed an entirely amiable obsession with Walpole and his work. With the keen support of his wife he set about collecting whatever was purchasable that had to do with Walpole, his works, or his possessions. He also engaged on a massive edition of Walpole's correspondence, which ran to forty-eight volumes, published between 1937 and 1983. At Farmington, Connecticut, a large proportion of Walpole's library has been reassembled to sit alongside a considerable number of the furnishings, portraits, and curiosities once at Strawberry Hill. Evidence of Lewis's own fixation abounds, not without self-parody worthy of his subject. A commemoration in oils to mark the scholar's seventy-third birthday depicts birthday cake, champagne, and a volume entitled 'Fifty Years of Lewis', 'by Walpole'. The history of this remarkable act of reconstruction will itself provide a fertile field of inquiry. 
Though his scholarship was immaculate, Lewis's own writings are not voluminous. He left no canonical biography nor any extended body of critical work on the subject, unless it be his charming collection of essays, 'Rescuing Horace Walpole', which provides the historical context for certain items at Farmington based on his fantasy of a divine injunction to select twenty-six objects of the many thousands that he had amassed, and an elegant collection of Mellon lectures delivered in 1960. 
Towards the end of his life Lewis was evidently well aware that his lifelong mission would provoke debate. For himself he remarked that he had grown to like Walpole 'more and more as a person'. He also recorded his judgement that Walpole was to be placed third after Franklin and Jefferson among those English-speaking men who were 'most like the versatile men of the Renaissance' (Lewis, 'Selected Letters of Horace Walpole', 1973, xix). However others judge these matters, the legacy of Horace Walpole is now the legacy of Walpole and Lewis. 


@@@@@


doc= 28597


Walpole, Michael (bap. 1570, d. 1625), Jesuit, was baptized on 1 October 1570 at Docking, Norfolk, the son of Christopher Walpole (died 1596) of Anmer Hall, near Docking, and Margery Beckham. He was the youngest of seven brothers, four of whom, including Henry Walpole and Richard Walpole, became Jesuits. After being educated at Norwich School he met the Jesuit John Gerard on the latter's arrival in Norfolk in 1588, and became his constant companion for a year. On learning of his brother Henry's imprisonment at Flushing in December 1589, he crossed the sea with ransom money for his release. He then proceeded to Rome with his cousin Edward Walpole and entered the English College on 12 May 1590. Following in the path of his brothers and of his cousin Edward he entered the Society of Jesus in September 1593. For the next ten years little is recorded of him, except that after his theological studies at Rome he appears at the English College, Valladolid, as prefect of studies in 1603. 
From about this time Walpole's life became bound up with that of a noble lady and benefactor of the English mission, Luisa de Carvajal, who took up residence in London in 1606, bringing Walpole with her as confessor and spiritual adviser. James I's proclamation of 2 June 1610, issued in response to the assassination of Henri IV of France and urging the carrying out of all penal laws against the recusants and the ministering of the oath of allegiance, led Walpole to publish 'A Briefe Admonition to All English Catholikes', under the initials M. C. P. (Michael Christopherson Priest). It contained an appeal to Queen Anne, who was known to have Catholic sympathies, if not to be a Catholic, to act as Queen Esther and intercede for the deliverance of English Catholics. In the same year he was arrested at Dona Luisa's house and imprisoned, and released only on condition of his leaving the country. 
Walpole then lived for a time at Douai, where he engaged in further controversy with George Downame, one of the royal chaplains, who had in 1603 published 'A Treatise Concerning Antichrist', against Cardinal Bellarmine. After consultation with Bellarmine, Walpole brought out an answering 'Treatise Concerning Antichrist', under the above pseudonym, in two parts (1613-14). Dedicating his book to James I, he drew the king's attention to the sufferings of English Catholics, remarking how 'many things lie hid which would astonish and amaze the world'. On 17 August 1613 Walpole was appointed superior of the English mission and returned to London in the retinue of the new Spanish ambassador, Count Gondomar. When Dona Luisa died in January 1614 he was by her side, and the following year he accompanied her body to its resting place in Spain. It was not until August 1615, on the death of the previous superior, Robert Jones, that he was able to assume fully the responsibilities of his new position. 
About this time he also turned his pen from works of controversy to translations of saints' lives. Already for Luisa de Carvajal he had translated the autobiography of St Teresa of Avila in 1611, and in 1616 he brought out his translation of Ribadeneira's popular biography of St Ignatius of Loyola. In 1619 Walpole retired to Spain, and held posts at the English College, Seville. He died in Seville on 11 November 1625 OS. 


@@@@@


doc= 28598


Walpole, Ralph of (d. 1302), bishop of Norwich and of Ely, was a Norfolk man, probably the son of Sir John of Walpole of Houghton and his wife, Lucy. He is first recorded in February 1272 when, with the degree of MA, he was admitted by Richard of Gravesend, bishop of Lincoln, to the living of Somersham, Huntingdonshire, at the presentation of Hugh of Balsham, bishop of Ely. No later than 12 July in the same year he became archdeacon of Ely, a preferment of unusual scope and responsibility. He was also a theologian, recorded as determining in a disputation in the Cambridge theology faculty in the early 1280s. By March 1287 he was doctor of theology, while in 1290 he gave his house in Cambridge to Balsham's new foundation of Peterhouse. With his intellectual interests and wide administrative experience, it is not surprising that, following the death of William Middleton, bishop of Norwich, on 1 September 1288, the electing committee of seven monks should on 11 November following have unanimously chosen Walpole to succeed him. Their decision, according to the chronicler Bartholomew Cotton, deeply offended local opinion in the diocese, but Walpole, who had travelled as far as Bonnegarde in the south of Gascony to obtain Edward I's consent to his election, was confirmed by Archbishop John Pecham on 1 February 1289. Before Pecham acted, he persuaded Walpole to renounce the right to first fruits -- the first year's revenues from a living -- which the bishops of Norwich had enjoyed since the time of Pandulf (died 1226). The temporalities were restored on 7 February, and Walpole was consecrated by Pecham on 20 March. 
As bishop of Norwich, Walpole was much engaged in local affairs, not least in what became a lengthy dispute with the townspeople of Bishop's Lynn over episcopal lordship, a dispute only settled by Walpole's successor, Bishop John Salmon, in 1309. In 1289 he conducted a visitation of his diocese. Although he did not entirely observe his undertaking to abandon his claim to first fruits (which continued to augment the income of his successors), he made only modest demands on new incumbents. His relations with his own cathedral priory seem to have been good; Walpole secured a licence from the crown enabling him to transfer three messuages in Norwich from himself to the priory, and resolved disputes between the monks and the rector of Great Cressingham and the archdeacon of Suffolk. More visibly, perhaps, he took the lead in the reconstruction of the cloister (and possibly also the chapter house), made necessary by damage inflicted in riots in 1272. Although he attended a provincial council in 1290, Walpole played little part in national affairs, secular or ecclesiastical, before 1296-7, when he gave steady support to Archbishop Robert Winchelsey in the latter's resistance to Edward I's increasingly heavy taxation of the English church. The papal decree 'Clericis laicos' in February 1296 forbade the clergy to contribute to lay taxation without papal consent; in January 1297 Walpole was one of the ecclesiastical envoys who informed the king of the English church's resolve to obey the bull, and he is said to have been one of the bishops who held out longest against royal demands. Although Walpole was one of the lay and secular magnates who, as the king endeavoured to resolve the crisis, performed homage to Prince Edward on 14 July 1297, he was still apparently regarded as one of the king's opponents in September, appearing among a group of the latter summoned to parliament. 
His position on the issue of clerical taxation did not, however, prevent Walpole's elevation to another see. Following the death of William of Louth, bishop of Ely, on 25 March 1298, the monks of the cathedral priory were divided in their preferences between their own prior, John Salmon, and the treasurer of the exchequer, John Langton, whose candidature was favoured by the king. The monks first approached Archbishop Winchelsey, and then appealed to the pope. Both candidates appeared before Boniface VIII ('r'. 1294-1303), and resigned their rights into the pope's hands. Boniface invited the monks to elect again, as a favour to their church licensing them to choose one of the abbots of an exempt Benedictine house; but their proctors could not agree, whereupon Boniface resolved the dispute on 5 June 1299 by translating Walpole to Ely, and providing Salmon to Norwich. Edward I acquiesced, the temporalities of Ely being restored on 10 October. The expenses of Walpole's proctor at Rome amounted to at least $1200. 
Walpole was bishop of Ely for less than three years. In 1300, following a visitation, he issued ordinances for the cathedral priory. The thirty-nine statutes contain little out of the ordinary, dealing with such issues as the need to maintain the full complement of seventy monks, restrictions on pocket money and on dealings with women, and the proper application of the convent's revenues. But they may also reflect the bishop's academic training, since they are essentially a compilation from earlier legislation, mostly by former archbishops of Canterbury and bishops of Ely. Ralph of Walpole died on 20 March 1302, and was buried before the high altar of Ely Cathedral on 1 April following. 


@@@@@


doc= 28599


Walpole, Richard (bap. 1564, d. 1607), Jesuit, was baptized at Docking, Norfolk, on 8 October 1564, the son of Christopher Walpole and Margery Beckham. His four brothers included the Jesuits Henry Walpole (bap. 1558, d. 1595) and Michael Walpole (bap. 1570, d. 1625). Richard Walpole entered Peterhouse, Cambridge, on 1 April 1579, a fortnight before his brother Henry left the university. He was elected to one of the scholarships lately founded at his college by Edward, Lord North, but took no degree. In summer 1584 he left England to become an alumnus of the seminary at Rheims. He left after a few months and on 25 April 1585 he entered the English College at Rome. His ability and scholarship were at once recognized and after remaining there for the next four years he was ordained priest at St John Lateran on 3 December 1589 and then sent to Spain. The intention was that he proceed from there to England but instead he gained admittance to St Alban's College, Valladolid, on 1 September 1591 and proceeded from there to St Gregory's, Seville, on 8 November 1592. In the following year he entered the Society of Jesus and spent his life assisting Robert Persons in his work for the English colleges abroad. It was in the course of his work in Seville that he met Edward Squire, who, in 1598, falsely accused him of plotting to assassinate Queen Elizabeth. Squire was hanged and Walpole was defended in writing in 'The discoverie and confutation of a tragical fiction' (1598) by Martin Aray, but remained in Spain. After the execution of his brother Henry at York in 1595 Joseph Creswell SJ had written a life of the martyr which had been translated into Spanish. The book produced a favourable impression on Luisa de Carvajal, a rich and pious lady who lived near the college at Valladolid, and she resolved to go as a missionary to England. Richard Walpole was her spiritual director and before leaving for England in 1606 she appointed him her executor. He was prefect of studies and lecturer in cases of conscience at St Gregory's College, Seville, in 1600, then confessor and consultor in Rome until 1604, when he took up residence at Valladolid. In 1603 he published a work of controversy, 'A Brief and Cleere Confutation', in response to Matthew Sutcliffe's attack on Persons. He died in Valladolid in September 1607. 
His younger brother, Christopher Walpole (1569-1606), was born in October 1569 and was one of John Gerard's early converts when that busy proselytizer was at work in Norfolk. He was admitted as a Jesuit at Rome in September 1592, thus preceding Richard into the society. He obtained permission to join his brother at Seville in 1597 and was probably ordained there between 1600 and 1603. In 1693 he was confessor and lecturer in moral theology at St Alban's College, Valladolid, and predeceased his brother, dying at the college in 1606. 


@@@@@


doc= 28600


Walpole, Robert (1650-1700), agricultural improver and politician, was born on 18 November 1650 at Houghton, Norfolk, the second but eldest surviving son of Sir Edward Walpole (1621-1668) and his wife, Susan Crane ('c'.1625-1667). From 1667 he studied briefly at Trinity College, Cambridge, but his formal education was ended by the death of his father on 18 March 1668. Walpole was only seventeen when he inherited his family's estates, from which he had to provide for seven younger siblings. About 22 February 1671 he married Mary Burwell (1654/5-1711), daughter of Sir Jeffrey Burwell of Rougham, Suffolk; the couple were subsequently the prodigious parents of seven daughters and ten sons. Of these the eldest surviving son was Sir Robert Walpole (1676-1745), the celebrated whig politician and chief minister of George I and George II, and the second surviving son was Horatio Walpole, first Baron Walpole of Wolterton. Although Robert Walpole's own achievements have largely been obscured by the brilliance of his famous son, they were significant in their own right. During his brief time at Cambridge he acquired a reputation for 'learning and study extraordinary' (North, 3.304), and his scholarly interests persisted throughout his life. He founded the great library at Houghton and regularly stocked it with good editions of the Latin classics, history, law, and theology. Fascinated by the new learning, he acquired nearly all the works of Sir Francis Bacon. 
Walpole was equally serious in the management of his own estates, where his intelligence can best be seen. He was quick to realize the value of agricultural techniques pioneered in Flanders and Holland, and by the 1670s he and his Norfolk neighbours were introducing many of the practices hailed a century later by Arthur Young as an 'agricultural revolution'. He introduced crop rotation and devoted extensive acreage to turnips, clover, and grasses in order to enrich the light, sandy soil of his farms. Swift to seize his chances when he scented gain, he successfully experimented with growing wheat and made regular profits by fattening cattle for the voracious London market. Walpole's enterprise was matched by his frugality. Holding a tight rein on his own and his family's spending, he gradually increased the productivity of his holdings. He then invested the bulk of accumulated capital in additional land, thus transforming an inheritance worth little more than $800 a year into an estate which yielded in excess of $1300 per annum (Plumb, 'Men and Places', 123-7; Plumb, 'Sir Robert Walpole', 83-6). 
Walpole also harboured political ambitions. He was appointed justice of the peace and deputy lieutenant for Norfolk in 1673 and was moderately active in those capacities. Yet in the 1670s and early 1680s he gave no overt sign of his later whiggish inclinations. He did not join his colleagues on the lieutenancy who resigned in 1676 over the ouster of the proto-whig lord lieutenant, Horatio, Lord Townshend. Furthermore, in March 1682 he surprised Townshend's tory and crypto-Catholic successor, Lord Yarmouth, by signing the loyal address abhorring the whig association. However, in 1688 he refused to consent to the repeal of the 'Test Acts' and was removed from local office (Cruickshanks, 663). When the king offered to restore him in October 1688, Walpole declined to act 'in conjunction with persons unqualified or incapacitated by the law of the realm' (Cozens-Hardy, 89). 
Restored to office by William III, in 1689 Walpole was elected MP for the pocket borough of Castle Rising on the duke of Norfolk's interest. From 1690 onwards he departed from his usual parsimony to buy up enough cottages (burgages) carrying a vote to gain control over one of the borough's seats (Ingleby, 33-4), and these investments assured his election in 1690, 1695, and 1698. However, Walpole's parliamentary career was to be curtailed by the deterioration of his health. He explained his irregular presence in the Commons after 1692 as due to his 'consumptive' condition (Hayton). Nevertheless, accounted a 'Court Whig' (Cruickshanks, 663), he was a dependable supporter of whig measures when able to attend parliament and was regarded a leader of the Norfolk whigs in the late 1690s. Walpole died at Houghton Hall on his fiftieth birthday, 18 November 1700, and was buried at Houghton. 


@@@@@


doc= 28601


Walpole, Robert, first earl of Orford (1676-1745), prime minister, was born on 26 August 1676 in the old manor house at Houghton, Norfolk, the fifth of the seventeen children of Robert Walpole (1650-1700), landowner and MP, and his wife, Mary (1654/5-1711), daughter of Sir Jeffrey Burwell, a Suffolk landowner. The Walpoles were a well-established and prominent gentry family in north Norfolk. Robert senior was an educated man who built up the library at Houghton. He also worked hard at improving the family estates, which were worth more than $2000 by the time of his death. In the years after the revolution of 1688 he sat in parliament for Castle Rising -- his father, Edward (1621-1668), had represented King's Lynn in the early years of the Restoration -- and he established himself as a whig. 
At the age of six Robert was sent to study at Great Dunham under the Revd Richard Ransome. On 4 September 1690 he was admitted to Eton College, where he developed a close friendship with Henry Bland, for whom he later secured the deanery of Durham. The Eton register falsely recorded his age as twelve in order to qualify him as a king's scholar. He was duly elected to King's College, Cambridge, on 5 August 1695 and admitted on 22 April of the following year. While at King's, where his tutor was Francis Hare, later bishop of Chichester, he fell seriously ill with smallpox and was attended by Robert Brady, the tory historian and physician. According to his early biographer, Coxe, Walpole was 'originally designed for the church' (Coxe, 'Walpole', 1.5), but these plans were cut short by the death of his eldest brother, Edward, in 1698. His second brother, Burwell, had already been killed at the battle of Beachy Head in 1690, and under pressure from his father Walpole returned to Houghton to learn about the management of the estates to which he was now heir. He resigned his scholarship on 19 May 1698. 
Once Walpole was settled at Houghton, the search began to find him a wife. Walpole and his father, assisted in their negotiations by Sir John Mordaunt, settled on Catherine ('c'.1682-1737), daughter of John Shorter, a Baltic timber merchant from Bybrook in Kent, and granddaughter of a former lord mayor of London. Her mother, Elizabeth, was the daughter of Sir Erasmus Philipps of Picton Castle. Walpole at this time was short and stout, with a tendency towards corpulence which became very marked in later life; Catherine was described by Coxe as 'a woman of exquisite beauty and accomplished manners' (Coxe, 'Walpole', 1.5). They were married on 30 July 1700 at Knightsbridge Chapel in London, Catherine bringing with her a dowry of $7000. The transformation of Walpole's life was completed in November 1700 by the death of his father, who left his son an estate considerably richer and more secure than he had inherited. However, Walpole did face financial pressures. He had to support his mother, who lived until 1711, two sisters, and two young brothers. Catherine preferred London to Norfolk and shared the extravagance of her grandmother, Lady Philipps. Her inclinations were probably shared by Walpole himself, who was keen to play a more prominent role in both political and social life. Having been elected to parliament in 1701, he quickly became part of a young, aristocratic whig circle, to which he was introduced by Charles, second Viscount Townshend, his Norfolk neighbour to whom his father had acted as guardian, and Lady Philipps, who was related to the Stanhopes. During their early years in London, the Walpoles lived with Lady Philipps in Berkeley Street, and only as Walpole's ministerial career advanced did they move, first to Dover Street in 1705 and then to 17 Arlington Street in 1715. Even so, their extravagant lifestyle meant that they were living well beyond their means -- debts accumulated, lands were mortgaged and sold, and on one occasion Walpole was saved from imprisonment for debt only by a loan from his scrivener, Thomas Gibson. 
In the early years of their marriage the Walpoles' relationship appears to have been happy. In Robert's only surviving love letter, dating from July 1702, he told Catherine that he had 'that love, that tendernesse, for you, that are there any failings in you they are still perfections to me' (Plumb, 'Sir Robert Walpole', 1.90). Between 1701 and 1706 they had two sons and two daughters. The eldest son, Robert (1701-1751), succeeded his father as earl of Orford, and was himself survived by one son, George (1730-1791). The second son, Edward (1706-1784), never married, but had four illegitimate children with Maria Clements. Of these, Laura married Bishop Frederick Keppel; Maria married first James Waldegrave, second Earl Waldegrave, and second William Henry, duke of Gloucester; and Charlotte married Lionel Tollemache, earl of Dysart. Of Walpole's daughters, the elder, Catherine, died unmarried after a long and painful illness in 1722, while the younger, Mary (died 1731), married George Cholmondeley, Viscount Malpas and later earl of Cholmondeley. From about the time of Edward's birth in 1706, however, the relationship between Robert and Catherine deteriorated. They continued to live together and publicly appearances were maintained. Catherine continued to play the role of the wife of a leading politician. When she was singled out at court by Queen Caroline in 1727 immediately after the accession of George II, it was seen as an early sign that Walpole had not fallen out of favour. 
In private, however, the marriage had broken down, the couple living virtually separate lives. In April 1716 Robert fell seriously ill, but this did not deter Catherine from making her annual trip to Bath. Her affairs became the talk of the town. The earl of Egmont claimed that 'she was as gallant, if report be true, with the men as he with the women' ('Egmont Diary', 2.431). Lady Cowper even alleged that Catherine, with the connivance of Walpole himself, had an affair with the prince of Wales. Walpole's modern biographer J. H. Plumb believed that Horatio (Horace) Walpole (1717-1797), born on 24 September 1717, may well not have been Robert's son, though the allegation made in the early nineteenth century by Lady Louisa Stuart that he was the son of Carr, Lord Hervey, lacks any contemporary corroboration. Robert probably had numerous mistresses, including Carey Daye (died in or after 1746), with whom he had a daughter, Catherine (died 1775), about 1724. Little is known about either mother or daughter, though both were living in Chichester at the time of Walpole's death. It is likely that Carey Daye's successor was Maria (1702-1738), daughter of Thomas Skerrett, a London staymaker, and his first wife, Hester Stafford, widow of John Pleydell. According to contemporary gossip, Maria was procured for Walpole by Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, and it is possible that they first met at her house at Twickenham in summer 1724. Certainly their relationship was well established by the end of that year, as the first of their two daughters, Maria or Mary (died 1801), was born in 1725. On his resignation in 1742 Walpole obtained for her a patent of precedence as the daughter of an earl, an act which, according to the ministerial whig William Hay, 'brought more Odium on him than perhaps any Act of Power' (Taylor and Jones, 176). In 1746 Lady Maria Walpole married Colonel Charles Churchill, the illegitimate son of General Charles Churchill. Their second daughter died before 1738. 
In July 1725 Walpole's eldest son (then Lord Walpole) was appointed ranger of Richmond Park (TNA: PRO, E 403/2473, p. 44), but it was his father, as deputy ranger, who regularly retreated to the ranger's lodge at weekends to spend time with Maria Skerrett in what Hervey called 'his bower of bliss' (Hervey, 3.832). On 20 August 1737 Lady Walpole died at Chelsea, and she was buried at Houghton a week later. Within weeks rumours began to circulate that Walpole had married his mistress, but the ceremony probably did not take place until shortly before 3 March 1738. Scurrilous verses circulated on the subject of the minister's marriage to 'a public whore' ('Egmont Diary', 2.471), though the scandal did not prevent the new Lady Walpole being presented at court. According to Bishop Hare, she brought with her a fortune of some $30,000, accumulated in large part by her father. The diplomatist Horatio Walpole observed that his brother's happiness was 'wrapt up' in Maria, whom he described as 'a very sensible well-behaved modest woman'. Her death on 4 June 1738 following a miscarriage flung Walpole into a 'deplorable and comfortless condition' ('Buckinghamshire MSS', 13, 17, 238), which continued for several weeks and from which he was diverted only by plunging himself into work. 
The death of Walpole's father on 18 November 1700 vacated his parliamentary seat at Castle Rising. Even before the funeral Walpole had written to Thomas Howard to secure his support at the by-election, but parliament was dissolved before the writ could be issued. He took the opportunity of the general election to stand as a candidate for Norfolk, but was decisively defeated and was returned for Castle Rising. From the moment Walpole entered the Commons, he began to play an active role in its proceedings. In his first session he took over from his brother-in-law, Sir Charles Turner, the management of a bill to establish a workhouse at King's Lynn and successfully piloted it onto the statute book. At the elections of 1702 he moved to King's Lynn, the constituency which he then represented continuously, except for a short break in 1712, until his elevation to the Lords in February 1742. At Castle Rising he exerted the family interest to secure the return of his tory uncle, Horatio Walpole. This prompted fears among Norfolk whigs that he was 'turning with the wind'. The explanation, however, lay in Walpole's desperate need for cash -- the consent of his uncle, as trustee to his mother and sisters, was necessary before he could raise money on property in Suffolk. In fact, there is no doubting his commitment to the whig cause in parliament. His closest connections at this time were with the Norfolk whigs, among whom his friend and neighbour the young Lord Townshend was emerging as a leading figure, and he developed a friendship with William Cavendish, earl of Hartington, who was for a while his fellow MP for Castle Rising. But he was also establishing a wider reputation as a rising politician, as revealed by his election as a member of the Kit-Cat Club in 1703, and he forged close relationships with other prominent young whigs, including James Stanhope and Spencer Compton. 
By the time of the parliamentary session of 1704-5 Walpole was attracting attention as a leading whig performer in the Commons. His colleagues regarded his presence as essential for major debates, such as those on the address and the 'Occasional Conformity Bill', and even the Dutch agent in London noted that he was 'un de ceux qui se distinguoient le plus parmi les Whigs' (Hayton, 5.777). At the beginning of 1705 it was rumoured that he would be offered a place in government, and in June he was appointed to the Admiralty council 'at the particular recommendation of Marlborough' (ibid.). The office carried a salary of $1000 per annum, which did a little to ease Walpole's financial problems. But he was still desperately short of money, and in later years the duchess of Marlborough liked to recall 'the beggary she first knew him in' (F. Harris, 207). The Admiralty board offered Walpole the opportunity to impress Queen Anne's leading ministers, the earl of Godolphin and the duke of Marlborough, with his energy and efficiency, and over the next few years he became increasingly identified with the 'Lord Treasurer's whigs'. He was exasperated, however, by the failings of the board, and even considered resigning in May. Despite this, in December 1708 he defended the Admiralty board, and particularly Admiral George Churchill, against an attack by both whigs and tories, justifying himself by saying to his friends that 'he should be ashamed to sit at a board, and not be in a capacity to defend its proceedings' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 5.343). 
In the reconstruction of the ministry following the resignation of Robert Harley in February 1708, Walpole's competence and moderation made him a natural choice as secretary at war, and he was appointed on 25 February. Walpole's support for the 'duumvirs', Godolphin and Marlborough, however, continued to provoke whig criticism, and at a meeting of the Kit-Cat Club in June 1708 Jacob Tonson called him 'the greatest villain' in the world for 'forsaking his patrons and benefactors the juncto' ('Portland MSS', 4.493). Even as late as the end of 1709 Godolphin still saw Walpole as a possible ally against the junto, who were trying to dominate the ministry, but by this time Walpole, like Townshend and Devonshire, had moved back into the junto camp. As secretary at war Walpole once again demonstrated his capacity for business and the detail of administration. The office brought him into close contact with the duke of Marlborough, who formed a high opinion of him as 'a very honest man' (Hayton, 5.778), and it was almost certainly through Marlborough's influence that he was made treasurer of the navy in January 1710 while still continuing as secretary at war. 
A few weeks previously, on 13 December 1709, Walpole had been appointed to the Commons committee responsible for drawing up articles of impeachment against the high-flying tory preacher Henry Sacheverell, whose sermon 'The Perils of False Brethren', denying that resistance had taken place in 1688, was regarded by many whigs as seditious. Walpole played a leading role in the trial, justifying the right of resistance in a major speech on the first article. Defending whig constitutional principles, he claimed that 'To assert non-resistance in that boundless and unlimited sense, in which Dr. Sacheverell presumes to assert it, is to undermine the very foundations of our government' (Hayton, 5.779). In a speech which delighted his fellow whigs, he went on to suggest that Sacheverell's arguments were designed to pave the way for a Jacobite restoration. Sacheverell was found guilty, but the whig triumph was short-lived. In the 1710 elections the tory campaign, based on the cry of 'the Church in danger', was fuelled by the Sacheverell prosecution. Managers of the impeachment were singled out as particular targets. At Norwich, where Walpole was standing for the county for the first time since 1701, the mob pelted him 'with dirt and stones and drove him out of his tent, spoiling his fine laced coat which they told him came out of the Treasury' (Holmes, 252). Two tories were elected and Walpole was decisively defeated, coming bottom of the poll with almost 400 votes fewer than his whig partner. Once again, however, he was returned for King's Lynn, though he never contested the county again. 
Even before the elections the ministry's position had been deteriorating. Walpole himself became embroiled in the worsening relationship between Queen Anne and the Marlboroughs. When he advised the duke to accede to the demand that Samuel Masham, the husband of the queen's favourite, Abigail, be made a brigadier, the duchess suspected him of double-dealing. The suspicions were probably unfounded, as there is little concrete evidence that Walpole was trimming. On the contrary, when the earl of Sunderland was dismissed in June 1710, the first major casualty of Robert Harley's remodelling of the ministry, Walpole was one of several junior whigs who advocated a mass resignation. But his earlier moderation encouraged Harley, who considered him to be 'worth half his party', to try to detach him from the whigs (Hayton). In September 1710 Walpole was dismissed as secretary at war, but was allowed to retain the treasurership of the navy. When parliament assembled in November 1710, however, it soon became apparent that Walpole had committed himself to opposition to Harley's ministry. On 2 January 1711 he received a letter dismissing him as treasurer of the navy and on the same day led the whig attack in the Commons on the government's policy towards the war in Spain. He continued to play a prominent role in Commons debates through the rest of the session, Swift describing him as 'one of the Whigs chief speakers' (Swift, 'Journal to Stella', 2.442). 
His prominence as a speaker aside, Swift dismissed Walpole as 'one who is otherwise altogether obscure' (Swift, 'History', 65). This judgement, however, is hardly borne out by the behaviour of the tories. First, Harley tried again to win him over in the summer of 1711, but failed. Then, when parliament reassembled in late autumn, they resolved to put him 'out of the way of disturbing them in the house' ('Bishop Burnet's History', 6.100), William Bromley, the speaker, declaring that this was 'the 'unum necessarium'' (Coxe, 'Walpole', 1.36). By the beginning of December it was known that the commissioners of public accounts had charges to bring against Walpole. On 21 December their report alleged that, while secretary of war, he had reserved part of two forage contracts for the army in Scotland for his friend and banker, Robert Mann, and that the other contractors had then bought out Mann's share for 500 guineas. More seriously, the bills for Mann's payment had been made out to Walpole, and in one case the receipt bore his signature. The commissioners therefore alleged clear proof that Walpole had been bribed. Mann swore that the money had all been paid to him, but when the case was debated in the Commons on 17 January 1712 a majority of more than fifty found Walpole guilty of 'a high breach of trust and notorious corruption' (Hayton, 5.782). He was then expelled from the house and committed to the Tower, though declining majorities in these votes reflected the partisan nature of the proceedings. Walpole continued to assert his own innocence, writing to his sister that 'this barbarous injustice being only the effect of party malice, does not concern me at all and I heartily despise what I shall one day revenge' (Plumb, 1.181). Most biographers have accepted his professions, but he was under great obligations to Mann, who had been his financial adviser since his father's death, and, as David Hayton has pointed out, Mann was committed to custody by the Commons for refusing to answer further questions from the commissioners of public accounts (ibid.). 
Imprisonment turned Walpole into a national political figure and a whig martyr. He was visited daily by the leading whigs, a ballad composed in his honour described him as 'the Jewel in the 'Tower'' (Coxe, 'Walpole', 1.39-40), and at the King's Lynn by-election he was triumphantly returned, defeating a local tory. The Commons promptly declared his re-election void, so even after his release from imprisonment on 8 July 1712 he was left without a seat in parliament. During this period he turned to pamphleteering. He probably contributed to 'Mr Walpole's Case' (1712), a refutation of the charges brought against him by the Commons. Then in 1713 he attacked the treaty of Utrecht and the commercial treaty with France in 'A Short History of the Parliament', which rapidly went through at least three editions. Horace Walpole later attributed many more pamphlets to his father, including 'Four Letters to a Friend in North Britain' (1710) on the Sacheverell affair and 'The Debts of the Nation Stated and Considered' (1711). Recent research, however, has demonstrated conclusively that these were the work of Arthur Maynwaring, although Walpole may have assisted with comments. 
At the 1713 elections the tories, benefiting from public support for the peace, increased their majority. Walpole, however, was returned unopposed as MP for King's Lynn. His election address, subsequently published, contained a fierce attack on the ministry's foreign policy and provoked new efforts to expel him from the Commons. In the next session of parliament, he played a leading role for the whigs in all the major debates. On 18 March 1714 he opened the defence of Richard Steele against tory attempts to expel him from the Commons, delivering what colleagues agreed was his best ever speech. He continued to attack the Utrecht settlement, developed the whig case that the protestant succession was in danger 'from the dubious conduct of some persons in high stations' (Hayton, 5.783), and spoke out strongly against the 'Schism Bill', arguing that papists and nonjurors posed more danger to church and state than dissenters. 
The situation of the whig party was transformed by the accession of George I. The ministry constructed in late September and early October 1714 following the king's arrival in England was dominated by whigs: the only tory to receive major office was the earl of Nottingham as lord president of the council. There was considerable rivalry between the leading whigs for power and influence, but in the early months of the reign Townshend, secretary of state for the north, appears to have emerged as the English politician who most enjoyed the king's confidence. The relationship between Walpole and Townshend was now closer than ever, as Townshend had married Walpole's sister Dolly in July 1713. Walpole himself, however, was only appointed paymaster of the forces. 
But in the House of Commons, Walpole quickly resumed the leading role in debates that he had played in Queen Anne's last parliament. The whigs enjoyed a comfortable majority, and they set about using it to consolidate their power and to attack the tory leadership. On 23 March, Walpole opened the first major debate of the new parliament by proposing the address to the king. It included a powerful denunciation of the former tory ministers and the treaty of Utrecht, and threatened those who had conspired to restore the Pretender with 'condign punishment' (Chandler, 6.13). Within a month Walpole had been elected chairman of the secret committee charged with investigating the peace negotiations and the conduct of the tory ministry. A serious illness prevented him from attending several meetings, but he was well enough to present the committee's report on 9 June and the next day impeached Viscount Bolingbroke of high treason. Similar charges were then laid against the earl of Oxford and the duke of Ormond, while the earl of Stafford was accused of high crimes and misdemeanours. The conduct of the trials was entrusted to the secret committee, which spent the next three months preparing the articles. The surviving reports suggest that Walpole was driving this process forward, and he reported the articles of impeachment against Oxford to the Commons on 7 July, followed by those against Bolingbroke, Ormond, and Stafford on 4, 5, and 31 August respectively. 
By the time that parliament was adjourned on 21 September 1715 it was clear that Walpole had emerged as the leading spokesman for the ministry in the Commons, eclipsing his friend James Stanhope, the secretary of state for the south. Walpole's reward, and confirmation of Townshend's dominance within the ministry, came with his appointment in October as first lord of the Treasury and chancellor of the exchequer. This period, however, not only witnessed his rise to high ministerial office, but also saw a dramatic increase in his wealth. J. H. Plumb has calculated that between August 1714 and October 1717 over $100,000 passed through Walpole's hands, of which more than $60,000 was invested. The rest was spent, partly paying off old debts and mortgages and partly in lavish expenditure. A large part of the investments was probably Treasury and pay office surpluses; contemporary practice allowed Walpole to enjoy the interest on these sums. It is also clear that Walpole profited from intelligent investments. Even so, the source of his wealth -- and he did suddenly become very rich -- remains a mystery. What is more, the period from 1714 to 1717 merely laid the foundations for his aristocratic lifestyle. His vast spending on building, furniture, and pictures still lay in the future. It is unfortunate that so few of his financial papers have survived. 
The dominance of Townshend and Walpole provoked suspicion and hostility among other whigs. First, there was a group of country whigs, such as Edward Wortley Montagu, for whom Walpole was tainted by corruption and consequently unfit to hold high ministerial office. Such men were clearly unconvinced that the charges made against him in 1711 were merely an expression of tory malice, but their concerns also prefigured the attacks made on him in the 1730s and perhaps reflect doubts about the sources of his new wealth. Second, various court whigs, notably the lord chancellor, Earl Cowper, believed that Townshend and Walpole were trying to dominate the ministry and monopolize the power of the crown. This belief was strengthened by the perception that Walpole was trying to fill the Treasury with his own creatures. Third, there was the earl of Sunderland, the youngest member of the junto, who felt slighted that he had received only the lord lieutenancy of Ireland on George I's accession and was little more content with his promotion to lord privy seal in September 1715. These discontents were to split the whig party and bring about the fall of Walpole and Townshend. 
Matters came to a head during George I's visit to Hanover, for which he departed on 7 July, accompanied by Stanhope. They were followed in late summer by Sunderland, ostensibly to take the waters at Aix, but intent, as Walpole foresaw, on undermining the ministry. In the early summer Walpole was still recovering from a serious illness that had prevented him from participating in the debates on the 'Septennial Act', but it was foreign affairs, Townshend's province, that provided the focus for growing ministerial tensions. Sunderland exploited the reluctance of Townshend to support George I's desire for a more active policy in support of Hanoverian ambitions in the Baltic. He also worked on the king's suspicions of the prince of Wales, who had been appointed regent, insinuating that Walpole and Townshend were intriguing with him to undermine the king's authority. More surprisingly, Sunderland won support from Stanhope. Stanhope also came to favour more active British participation in the Great Northern War, and it is likely that he was particularly alienated from his old friends, as was George, by the delays in signing the Anglo-French alliance that he was largely responsible for negotiating. Finally, on 4 December, Stanhope sent a dispatch to London informing Townshend of the king's decision to dismiss him from the secretaryship of state and offering him the lord lieutenancy of Ireland. It was accompanied by a private letter to Walpole, urging him to persuade Townshend to accept the offer, but warning him that, if he did not, plans had been made to exclude the Townshend-Walpole faction from the ministry and reconstruct it around Stanhope and Sunderland. 
Walpole was astonished, above all by Stanhope's conduct, which he found 'unaccountable' (Coxe, 'Walpole', 2.143). He and Townshend had been comprehensively outmanoeuvred. They had been totally ignorant of Stanhope's role in the intrigues at Hanover, and through the autumn they had continued to write frank letters to him confiding their fears about Sunderland and the Germans. After some initial hesitation, they decided to await the king's return and Townshend accepted the lieutenancy. Soon after the opening of the new session of parliament in February 1717, however, it became apparent that the divisions within the ministry could not be papered over. In the Commons, Walpole gave only lukewarm support to proposals for measures against Sweden following the revelation of its ambassador's involvement in plotting with the Jacobites, and some of his supporters voted against the court, reducing its majority to just four. When Townshend voted against the 'Mutiny Bill' in the Lords, he was immediately dismissed. On the following day, 10 April, Walpole resigned, followed by a number of his whig allies, including Lord Orford, William Pulteney, Paul Methuen, and the duke of Devonshire. 
Initially, Walpole appeared to eschew formal opposition, declaring on 16 April that he did not intend 'to make the king uneasy, or to embarrass his affairs' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 7.449). He continued to support the proposals for reducing the interest on part of the national debt and establishing a sinking fund, though he did so as 'a Country Gentleman' (Chandler, 6.120). A clearer indication of his intentions was provided on 12 May, when Walpole supported the proposal of William Wyndham, a leading tory, that Andrew Snape, a prominent high-churchman, be invited to preach before the Commons on 29 May. The motion was carried by an alliance of tories and opposition whigs against the government by 141 votes to 131. The depth of the personal breach between Walpole and Stanhope became apparent to all on 20 May, when Stanhope launched a personal attack on Walpole, pointedly remarking that 'he would content himself with the Salary and lawful Perquisites of his Office' (ibid., 6.133). This provoked a violent quarrel and the house had to intervene to prevent the matter being taken further. 
In so far as the origins of the whig schism lay in divisions over foreign policy, an element of political principle was involved. The same cannot be said about the behaviour of Walpole and Townshend over the next two years. To some extent whig opposition to the ministry was accorded legitimacy by the divisions within the royal family, which were formalized when the king ordered the prince of Wales to leave St James's in November 1717. The prince and princess set up an alternative court at Leicester House, where Walpole and Townshend were frequent visitors. But, in the Commons in particular, Walpole's efforts to harry the ministry led him to embrace the politics of faction to an extent that sometimes discomfited even his followers. Not only did he frequently co-operate with the tories, but he also abandoned positions which he had formerly held. In 1715 he had pressed vigorously for the impeachment of the earl of Oxford, claiming that it was essential that 'the Ax was laid to the Root' (Archbishop King papers, MS 1995-2008/2410). But in the 1717 session he stayed away from most of the meetings of the committee responsible for preparing the case, despite the fact that he was its chairman. His abandonment of whig principles was even more striking in January 1719, when he led the opposition in the Commons to the repeal of the 'Occasional Conformity and Schism Acts', two anti-dissenting measures that he had condemned in the previous reign. According to one observer, he 'bore harder upon the Court than any Tory durst attempt to do', comparing its measures to those of James II (Taylor and Jones, 214). 
Walpole's efforts to defeat repeal failed. In the next session, however, he found the perfect opportunity to embarrass the government in the 'Peerage Bill', a measure designed to limit the size of the House of Lords. His behaviour again appeared to many to be pure faction -- Arthur Onslow recalled that Walpole cajoled his allies into opposing the bill, despite their belief that they would be acting in contradiction to whig principles. However, Walpole had played a prominent role in a pamphlet debate in the spring of 1719 about an earlier attempt by the ministry to legislate on this issue. Given the sentiments he had expressed in his 'Thoughts of a Member of the Lower House', he was already committed to opposing the bill that was introduced into the House of Lords on 25 November 1719. Speaking towards the end of the Commons debate on 7 December, Walpole condemned it as a blatant attempt by the ministry to secure its power in the upper house, and he played effectively on the ambitions of country gentlemen that their families might one day be raised to the peerage. But his main argument was that it would 'subvert the whole constitution' by destroying the 'due balance between the three branches of the legislature' (Coxe, 'Walpole', 1.123). The speech was possibly the best he ever delivered, and helped to secure the defeat of the bill by 269 votes to 177. Even Onslow admitted that it 'had as much of natural eloquence and of genius in it as had been heard by any of the audience within those walls' ('Buckinghamshire MSS', 459). 
Six months after the defeat of the 'Peerage Bill', Walpole was back in the ministry. On 11 June 1720 he returned to office as paymaster-general of the forces, and on the same day his brother-in-law Lord Townshend was appointed lord president of the council. But it would be dangerous to draw the conclusion that these events were directly linked. While Walpole had demonstrated his ability to inflict a striking, if occasional, defeat on the Sunderland-Stanhope administration, he was far from controlling a majority in the Commons. What, then, led the two whig factions to sink their differences? 
Unfortunately, little evidence survives to illuminate the motives of those who participated in the negotiations in spring 1720. Walpole and Townshend were probably motivated in large part by the recognition that their current tactics were leading nowhere. Their sense of weakness was doubtless increased by the scheme introduced into the House of Commons on 22 January 1720 for the South Sea Company to take over a large part of the national debt. If that scheme was a success -- and in spring and early summer 1720 it appeared to be -- then the burden of the national debt would be reduced and the position of the ministry strengthened. More puzzling, therefore, was the ministry's willingness to enter into negotiations, especially in the light of the animosity between Walpole and Sunderland. The desire to weaken the opposition in parliament surely played a part, especially in view of the king's desire to secure the payment of the civil-list debts, an issue which it would have been easy for Walpole to exploit. Also important was Walpole's ability to bring about a reconciliation in the royal family on terms acceptable to George I. As Lady Cowper observed, the prince of Wales was 'guided' by his wife, who had been 'engross'd & Monopolis'd' by Walpole 'to a degree of shutting every body out & making her deaf to every thing [that] did not come from him' (Cowper, diary, fols. 104'v', 75'r'). The reconciliation was made public when the prince and princess were received at St James's on 23 April, and the whig schism was over. 
Publicly, harmony had been restored among the leading figures of the whig party. There was 'great hugging & kissing between the two old & two new Ministers' and they were observed walking 'all four with their Arms round each other to show they are now all one' (Cowper, diary, fol. 99'r'). But the reality was that Walpole and Townshend were joining the Sunderland-Stanhope ministry as junior partners, and their public acknowledgement of this fact was crucial to their readmission to office. They had to wait another month before receiving their offices, Walpole was not a member of the cabinet, and they were unable to secure appointments for their allies. Of those who had left government with them in 1717, only Paul Methuen received a major office, as comptroller of the household. Even William Pulteney, one of Walpole's most loyal lieutenants in the Commons over the previous three years, was left out in the cold, creating a bitter resentment that contributed to his move into opposition in 1725. 
Within weeks, however, the bursting of the South Sea Bubble had transformed British politics. Since the announcement of the scheme for the company to take over a large part of the national debt, there had been wild speculation in its stock. The price had risen from 170 at the beginning of March to a peak of 1050 on 24 June, accompanied by a more general stock market boom. In August the bubble burst. By 1 September the price of company stock had fallen to 775, and then to 290 by 1 October. The crash threatened the stability of public credit and also generated a clamour for revenge from those who had lost heavily in the fever of speculation. 
The next year was a crucial period in Walpole's political career, as he played the leading role in formulating and implementing the ministry's response to the crisis. By the middle of 1721 he had re-established Townshend and himself as key members of the administration. However, the image of Walpole as the far-sighted statesman, remaining aloof until summoned by the public to rescue the country from disaster, is simply inaccurate. To understand his role it is necessary to examine his personal finances, the policies he pursued for the restoration of public credit, and his responses to the political reverberations of the bubble. 
As J. H. Plumb has demonstrated through a study of Walpole's surviving accounts, it is simply untrue that he made a fortune by purchasing South Sea stock and selling out at the top of the market. At the beginning of 1720 Walpole held almost $10,000 of stock, but he had sold all of that by 18 March, denying himself the opportunity of profiting from the rapid rise in its value over the next three months. He did not invest again until the third subscription in June, at a time when the price was approaching its peak. Indeed, far from making a profit out of South Sea stock, it seems likely that Walpole suffered a significant loss on his June investments, and he certainly lost $27,000 in loans to Sir Cesar Child and Lord Hillsborough who were bankrupted in the crash. The losses were probably more than balanced by the 'small fortune' (Plumb, 'Sir Robert Walpole', 1.309) that he made from other investments in 1720, particularly in insurance and the Royal African Company. But Walpole had no special insight into the weaknesses of the South Sea scheme. In summer 1720 he was saved from making significant losses on insurance stocks only by the prudence of his banker, Robert Jacombe, and as late as the end of August he was willing to commit further substantial sums to the South Sea Company. Through this period Walpole was also investing heavily in land in Norfolk. This might appear a sensible response to the fever of stock market speculation, but the bubble was also pushing up land prices, and at no other time in his career would Walpole have paid as much for the estates he purchased. 
It is easy to exaggerate Walpole's importance in restoring public finances: time was more important than government action in bringing stability back to the markets. None the less, as an acknowledged expert in financial matters and one of the few members of the administration not tainted by association with the original legislation, Walpole played a leading role in ministerial and parliamentary deliberations about the crisis in late 1720 and through 1721. As early as November 1720 newspapers were referring to him as 'the famous Mr. W -- le' (Dickson, 159). He recognized that, despite the clamour, the scheme had actually succeeded in its aim of altering the structure of the national debt and significantly reducing the burden of interest payable by the government. In the Commons he strongly resisted efforts by public creditors to get out of their agreements to purchase South Sea stock, securing the endorsement of this 'Fundamental' position on 20 December (Chandler, 6.225). Other early initiatives achieved less. Walpole was probably largely responsible for the so-called bank contract, drawn up after a meeting on 19 September, but it never took effect. The first comprehensive scheme, known to contemporaries as the ingraftment, was developed by Walpole with the assistance of Robert Jacombe in the autumn and embodied in legislation which passed into law in March 1721, but it was permissive only and never put into effect. Not until August 1721 was an act 'to restore the publick Credit' finally passed. Walpole again appears to have been 'the main architect' of the provisions, which forced the South Sea Company to disgorge its surplus stock and abandon its claims to be paid in full for what it had sold, while investors had to reconcile themselves to substantial losses (Dickson, 176). 
From the time when parliament reassembled in December 1720, however, public attention focused on the campaign to punish the men responsible for the disaster, particularly the directors of the South Sea Company and those ministers implicated in the affair. Walpole felt no temptation to lead the call for revenge. Elections were due in 1722 and the destruction of the ministry could not be risked. Besides, his position in the closet would not be strengthened by joining an investigation directed at the king's favourite ministers and which might implicate the court itself in the scandal. Walpole set about doing what he could to defend the ministry. His task was made easier by the deaths of Stanhope and the two James Craggs, father and son. Even so, the South Sea directors had to be sacrificed to the popular clamour, as did John Aislabie, the chancellor of the exchequer. During the debate on Aislabie the opposition were quick to notice that 'Walpole's corner satt mute as fishes' (Coxe, 'Walpole', 2.210), an act that Aislabie resented for the rest of his life. Crucially, however, on 15 March, Sunderland was acquitted by 233 votes to 172 with Walpole leading his defence. 
Walpole was widely seen as the principal ministerial figure obstructing the investigation into the Bubble. Nicknamed 'the skreen' (Coxe, 'Walpole', 2.216-17), he attracted widespread opprobrium and abuse. But through his conduct he had done much to re-establish the power of the Townshend-Walpole faction within the ministry, demonstrating to the king that, for the time being at least, he was essential to the continuance of the government. The rewards of office soon followed. After the death of Stanhope, Townshend was again appointed secretary of state on 10 February 1721. Moreover, despite his acquittal, Sunderland was too tainted to continue as first lord of the Treasury, and he was replaced by Walpole on 3 April. 
Some historians have dated the beginning of the Townshend-Walpole ministry from this point, but there are problems with this analysis. Sunderland remained a powerful figure at court and he retained the office of groom of the stole, which gave him easy access to the king. He had ensured that one of his allies, John, Lord Carteret, succeeded Craggs in the other secretaryship, and throughout the next year many commentators continued to regard him as the leading minister. Barely a facade of harmony was preserved within the ministry, and rumours were common in London about Christmas 1721 that Walpole was on the verge of dismissal. The tensions became deeper as the 1722 elections approached -- in several constituencies Walpole and Sunderland supported rival candidates. Walpole was not in a strong position to win this battle. Sunderland still enjoyed the trust of the king, who had no love for Walpole and was resolved that he 'should not govern' (Plumb, 'Sir Robert Walpole', 1.366). However, after a short illness Sunderland died on 19 April 1722. This date is a far more convincing starting point for the Townshend-Walpole ministry, as George I had little option in the short term other than to place himself in their hands. 
Walpole and Townshend had now established their dominance of the ministry, but their position was by no means secure. The king accepted them, but only 'faute de mieux'. Indeed, a new rival for power was emerging in the person of Lord Carteret. As early as June 1722 gossip was circulating to the effect that he was now the favourite at court, one observer even remarking that he was 'looked on as Premier at present' ('Portland MSS', 7.328). In this context Walpole can hardly have been reassured by the knowledge that he was widely distrusted among the whig party in parliament. In the House of Lords the ministry was faced by a small but vocal opposition, composed mainly of tories, but led by the former whig lord chancellor, Earl Cowper, which had been brought together in reaction to the extensive political corruption revealed by the South Sea Bubble. Similar sentiments were expressed by a small group of country whigs in the Commons, who condemned the abandonment of whig principles by Sunderland and Walpole. Their ideas were developed most effectively by John Trenchard and Thomas Gordon in the popular 'Cato's Letters', published initially in the 'London Journal' in 1720-22. More generally, Walpole had damaged his whig credentials by co-operating with tories during the whig schism and screening men widely believed to be guilty during the South Sea crisis. Over the next year, however, he was able to exploit another political crisis to consolidate the position of the ministry. 
On 21 April 1722, just two days after Sunderland's death, the ministry received intelligence from the French government about a Jacobite plot, better known as the Atterbury plot after one of its leaders, Francis Atterbury, bishop of Rochester. The plot had its origins in negotiations between Sunderland and some leading tories which had begun in early 1721 as part of his strategy to undermine Walpole. These contacts came to nothing and eventually the tories realized that they were being duped, but in their enthusiasm they had sent off an invitation to the Pretender. In November, Atterbury and a number of the other conspirators committed themselves to plans for a landing by the duke of Ormond, though by April 1722 it was increasingly clear that this scheme was impractical. 
Walpole and Townshend acted immediately, and the opening of the posts produced a substantial amount of Jacobite correspondence. The ministers had a good idea who the leading Jacobites were, but as the conspirators went to ground and the letters dried up they lacked the proof needed for a prosecution or even to justify stationing troops in Hyde Park. Then, in the summer, Walpole had a great stroke of luck, as the intercepted letters of Christopher Layer, a minor plotter, revealed plans for a rebellion and the assassination of George I. This provided the justification for the arrest of Atterbury, Lord Orrery, and Lord North, as well as Layer. The evidence against Layer was clear and he was convicted of treason. His fantasies, however, were entirely unconnected with the plans of the Atterbury circle, and by the end of 1722 it was becoming clear to Walpole, as he carefully sifted the evidence, that there was not enough to prosecute Orrery and North and that even the case against Atterbury was too weak to risk a treason trial. Consequently, he decided to resort to the 'arbitrary procedure' (Bennett, 89) of a bill of pains and penalties, which simply required him to persuade parliament that it was expedient to punish a man dangerous to the state. Walpole managed to weave together the evidence from the two plots, Atterbury's and Layer's, into a continuous narrative, creating the impression that a dangerous rebellion had only just been averted. In May 1723 the bill was passed: Atterbury was deprived of his bishopric and banished. There is little doubt that he was guilty, but he was convicted on manufactured evidence. 
The Atterbury plot strengthened Walpole's position enormously. Within the ministry the plot helped him to win the support of important figures such as the duke of Newcastle, who had previously been a supporter of Sunderland. In the Commons his playing of the Jacobite card rallied the whig party behind him and helped to re-establish his reputation as a defender of whig principles and the Hanoverian succession. Above all, his vigilance earned him more of the king's trust than he had ever enjoyed before. Moreover, the plot weakened the opposition to Walpole both within the ministry and in parliament. The trial left the tories cowed and dispirited and effectively brought to an end the activities of Cowper's opposition group in the Lords. The revelations of the Atterbury plot also contributed to the posthumous discrediting of Sunderland and, by association, his protege Carteret, whose intrigues with the tories now appeared to have been very dangerous. 
The plot also highlighted Walpole's skills as a parliamentary manager. It should be emphasized how important these were to his remaining one of the king's leading ministers for twenty years. A key element in Walpole's appeal to George I and George II was his ability to get the king's business through the Commons. Conversely, Walpole's prominence within the ministry was increased because, until the emergence of Henry Pelham in the 1730s, he was the only cabinet minister sitting in the Commons and therefore took the lead in defending government policy across the full range of its activities. He never underestimated the significance of the Lords and was at times personally involved in its management, but he recognized the Commons to be of greater importance for most regular government business, above all financial legislation. For this reason Walpole chose to eschew precedent and remain in the House of Commons. In June 1723 he refused a peerage, accepting one instead for his eldest son, Robert, though he did become a knight of the Bath on the restitution of that order in 1725 and then, the following year, a knight of the Garter. The latter honour was one of which he was particularly proud, as he was the first commoner to be instituted since the Restoration. 
Many contemporaries and later historians have claimed that Walpole achieved his dominance over the Commons through the use of patronage. Places and pensions were distributed to MPs, making them dependent on the ministry and guaranteeing it a parliamentary majority. This analysis was propagated particularly effectively from 1726 in the pages of 'The Craftsman', which condemned Walpolean corruption and warned that the constitution was being undermined as parliament was reduced to little more than a rubber stamp for government policy. There is, indeed, no doubt that patronage did play a key role in Walpole's parliamentary management, or that he continued the development of the role of the first lord of the Treasury in its distribution and co-ordination. However, patronage was a blunt and limited tool of management, and there are two other reasons why he was so successful. 
First, Walpole was a party leader as well as the king's minister. The reputation which he had acquired as a whig martyr in Anne's reign had been tarnished somewhat by events between 1717 and 1721, but through his exploitation of the Atterbury plot he had done much to re-establish himself as a politician committed to the defence of the revolution and the protestant monarchy. Some groups of whigs remained suspicious of Walpole's principles and motives, but he always retained the ability to appeal to party solidarity, especially by invoking the spectre of Jacobitism and portraying his administration as the only real defence for the Hanoverian succession. At moments of crisis, as, for example, in the immediate aftermath of the excise crisis in 1733, he exploited this appeal vigorously -- some would say cynically -- to rally support to the ministry. Second, the testimony of contemporaries makes it clear that Walpole possessed unrivalled abilities as a parliament man. The earl of Shelburne later recalled that Walpole was 'eminently qualified' for managing the Commons 'by the plainness and soundness of his understanding, his steadiness, experience, and country conviviality' (Fitzmaurice, 1.32). More revealingly, perhaps, a very similar assessment was made by one of the leaders of the opposition to Walpole, the earl of Chesterfield. He was: 'both the ablest parliament man, and the ablest manager of parliament, that I believe ever lived. An artful rather than an eloquent speaker, he saw as by intuition, the disposition of the House, and pressed or receded accordingly. So clear in stating the most intricate matters, especially in the finances, that while he was speaking the most ignorant thought that they understood what they really did not. (Franklin, 114)' In this context his very public decision to decline a peerage assumes added significance. It not only revealed Walpole's assessment of the importance of the Commons in managing the king's business, but it also enhanced his standing there. As one contemporary noted, 'Mr W. chooses to give nobility to others, rather than to accept it himself' (John Wainwright to Timothy Thomas, 17 Nov 1723, BL, Add. MS 70400). 
Walpole's return to power in 1720 was reflected in his decision to rebuild the family home at Houghton. In 1700, 1716, and 1719 a certain amount of work had been undertaken modernizing the old house, and the decision to rebuild completely was taken no earlier than late summer 1720. The foundation-stone was laid on 24 May 1722 on a site a few yards to the east of the old house, and the exterior was completed in 1729, with the exception of William Kent's stables of 1733. The poverty of Walpole's heirs meant that Houghton Hall has survived remarkably intact through to the present. Unfortunately, however, relatively few sources survive to detail the building process, with the result that even the architect is not known with certainty. It is no more clear who was responsible for the design of the park, which included moving the village of Houghton and levelling the site, but it is likely that Charles Bridgeman played at least a major part. 
There is little doubt that Walpole himself took a close interest in planning and building the new hall, which had to serve a variety of purposes. On the one hand, it 'was a place of parade', which could be used to receive and entertain state guests in suitable fashion. On the other hand, it was a country retreat for family and political allies. This dual purpose was, to some extent, reflected in the design of the house. The ground floor or, as Lord Hervey described it, 'rustic story' was 'dedicated to fox-hunters, hospitality, noise, dirt and business'. The first floor, by contrast, was 'the floor of taste, expense, state and parade' (Ilchester, 71). It contained the state rooms, decorated in rich, opulent fashion by Kent -- the gold trimmings of the state bed alone cost $1219 3's'. 11died 
Above all, Houghton Hall was a statement and celebration of Walpole's power and prestige as the king's minister. It was intended to rival, if not eclipse, the seats of both political allies and rivals, and there is little doubt that it served its purpose. Robinson not only wrote that 'it is the greatest house in the world for its size, capable of the greatest reception for company', but also claimed that the interior was 'a pattern for all great houses that may hereafter be built' ('Carlisle MSS', 85). Indeed, such was the impression that the house made on contemporaries that it was the subject of 'the first monograph on a British country house', Isaac Ware's 'The Plans, Elevations and Sections of Houghton in Norfolk', published in 1735 (Moore, 24). 
The impact of Houghton Hall was all the greater because it provided a setting for Walpole's magnificent art collection, which even the earl of Oxford was compelled to admire. His earliest recorded purchase was of two landscapes by Jan Griffier senior in April 1718; by 1736 he owned 421 pictures, of which at least 400 had been acquired by him. His taste mirrored that of the age, and the collection was particularly strong in Dutch, especially Flemish, works, while containing significant numbers of paintings from the French and Italian schools. Walpole also patronized contemporary artists, notably Charles Jervas, both as a portraitist and as a copyist, and the young William Hogarth, who painted a portrait of Horace Walpole aged ten. At Houghton, the old masters were concentrated in the salon and drawing room and included such masterpieces as Van Dyck's 'The Holy Family' and Rembrandt's 'Abraham's Sacrifice'. In 1739 George Vertue described Walpole's collection of 'Paintings statues Busts &c' as 'the most considerable now of any in England' (Moore, 48). Its importance was still recognized almost half a century later, when John Boydell published 'The Houghton Gallery', a collection of 162 prints after paintings at Houghton. It is hardly surprising that, when the third earl of Orford was considering selling the collection to raise money, it attracted the attention of Catherine the Great, who purchased about 180 pictures to add to her collection at the Hermitage for between $35,000 and $40,000. 
For long periods, of course, Walpole resided not at Houghton, but in London. He continued to live at 17 Arlington Street until 1732, moving first to 32 St James's Square and then, in 1735, to 10 Downing Street, a residence accepted by Walpole from George II for the first lord of the Treasury. After his resignation in 1742 he returned to Arlington Street. It was, however, Orford House, which he occupied from 1715 as paymaster-general of Chelsea Hospital, that was his favourite London residence. Between 1715 and 1716 he employed Sir John Vanbrugh to enlarge the seventeenth-century house. He also extended the gardens at the expense of the hospital, adding a river embankment, orangery, and summer-house. 
Between 1720 and 1723 English politics had been dominated by financial and domestic affairs, and by the end of the parliamentary session of 1722-3 the Townshend-Walpole ministry was firmly established. Much of the credit for this has to be given to Walpole. However, a major rival, Lord Carteret, still occupied high office. Walpole had tried, but failed, to persuade the king to remove him from office in January 1723, and Carteret had an influential ally in Earl Cadogan, who was hoping to succeed his former patron, the duke of Marlborough, as captain-general. Once parliament had been prorogued, attention shifted to foreign policy, the province of Townshend, and over the next few months the struggle within the ministry was conducted largely in Hanover, for which George I departed, accompanied by both Townshend and Carteret, at the beginning of June. Throughout the summer and autumn Walpole was in a state of high anxiety, recalling, no doubt, how he and Townshend had been outmanoeuvred in 1716. In his desperation to secure an unequivocal demonstration of George I's support and favour, Walpole risked provoking the king by becoming needlessly involved in a dispute over Cadogan's right to command the Horse Guards. 
At Hanover, however, Townshend succeeded in outmanoeuvring Carteret over relations first with Russia and then with France, and in particular over the negotiations to marry the daughter of Countess von Platen, the king's Roman Catholic mistress, into the Vrilliere family. The sign of royal confidence for which Walpole was so desperate finally came in April 1724, after the king's return from Hanover, when Sir Luke Schaub, the ambassador to France and friend of Carteret, was recalled, to be replaced in May by Robert Walpole's brother Horatio (Horace) Walpole. Schaub's dismissal was followed two months later by that of Carteret, who was compensated with the lord lieutenancy of Ireland. London gossip had suggested that the new secretary of state would be William Pulteney; instead the duke of Newcastle was appointed. Pulteney's disappointment undoubtedly undermined further his relations with Walpole, but it is far from obvious that it is evidence, as is often claimed, of Walpole's dislike for men of talent as his colleagues. Newcastle may have been fussy and a poor parliamentary speaker, but he was an energetic minister, and any man who can hold one of the highest government offices almost continuously for thirty-eight years hardly lacks ability. More revealing, therefore, might be Hervey's claim that Pulteney was also intriguing with Carteret in 1723 (Hervey, 1.9). 
At the time of Carteret's appointment as lord lieutenant, Ireland was already deep in the crisis caused by the grant of a patent to mint copper halfpence to William Wood, a Birmingham ironmaster. Widely seen as a trick to ruin Ireland by draining it of bullion, the patent provoked strenuous opposition and prompted attacks on Ireland's constitutional dependence on Britain. Walpole later denied having any role in devising it, but late in 1723 he was determined to support it, partly because the opposition was challenging the king's right to issue such patents and partly because he believed it to be a sound measure that would benefit the Irish economy. In his view the problems stemmed from the shortcomings of the lord lieutenant, the duke of Grafton, the failings of Irish politicians, and the intrigues of Carteret with Lord Midleton, the Irish lord chancellor, in an attempt to undermine Walpole's credit with the king. The removal of Grafton in April 1724 and his replacement with a new viceroy apparently offered a solution. It says a lot about Walpole's attitude to Irish politics, therefore, that he did not believe that Carteret would succeed and instead saw his appointment as viceroy as a means of completing his disgrace. To Walpole's surprise, however, Carteret broke with Midleton and carried out the instructions of the ministers in London. But he warned them that, if they adhered to their policy, it would be impossible to persuade the Irish parliament to vote supply when it reassembled. With the same advice coming from more trusted sources in Dublin, such as the new primate, Hugh Boulter, Walpole finally capitulated and withdrew the patent in August 1725. 
With Carteret sidelined in Dublin, the Walpole-Townshend faction was able further to consolidate itself in power. The major event in the session of 1725, however, was the resignation and subsequent impeachment of the lord chancellor, the earl of Macclesfield, who was found guilty of corruption for having sold masterships in chancery. Walpole's attitude towards the trial is difficult to discern. He ensured that some ministerialists were involved in its management, probably, as Onslow claimed, to prevent the inquiry being widened. But he showed little concern at Macclesfield's fall, doubtless glad that the removal of one of Sunderland's former allies had been accomplished so easily. That was certainly the interpretation placed on events by the French envoy, Chammorel. In March 1725 Lord Carleton, another member of the Sunderland faction, died and was replaced as lord president of the council by Walpole's old friend and former colleague as MP for Castle Rising, the duke of Devonshire. Then, in May, Walpole was finally able to persuade the king to dismiss Cadogan as master-general of the ordnance, appointing the duke of Argyll in his place. 
Hitherto, in the government of Scotland, Walpole seems to have tried to maintain a balance between the two main whig factions, the Squadrone and the Argathelians, despite the fact that the duke of Roxburghe, the Scottish secretary of state and one of the leaders of the Squadrone, had been implicated in Carteret's intrigues. However, during summer 1725 serious rioting broke out in Glasgow in protest at the imposition of the malt tax. This incident was seized on by Walpole as an opportunity to undermine Roxburghe. Although there is little hard evidence to suggest that Roxburghe was behind the disturbances, Walpole's dispatches to Hanover accused him of supporting the protests against the tax and undermining the government's response to the crisis. He achieved his aim in August, when Roxburghe was dismissed and his office suppressed. Henceforth, the business of the Scottish secretary was undertaken by Newcastle and Townshend, but much of the responsibility for government policy and patronage in Scotland was handed over to the duke of Argyll and his brother, the earl of Ilay, who were to dominate Scottish politics for the rest of the Walpole ministry. 
In the course of 1724 and 1725, therefore, the old Sunderland faction was effectively destroyed as a political force. But parliament's session of 1725 was also important for two events which did much to determine the nature of the opposition to Walpole over the next decade. First, on 8 April 1725 in a speech against a proposal for discharging the civil-list debts, Pulteney delivered a fierce personal attack on Walpole. He was dismissed from his office as cofferer of the household at the end of the session, and by the summer was 'reckoned the head of the discontented party in England' (Realey, 160). Second, a bill was passed for the restitution of Bolingbroke's estates -- he had already been pardoned in 1723. Walpole supported the bill, but very reluctantly, and had to be 'forced to submit' ('Onslow MSS', 515). Bolingbroke was well aware of Walpole's hostility, which he saw as the reason for his failure to obtain the full restitution of his rights that would have allowed him to resume his political career. For some months, however, Bolingbroke continued to hope for further concessions from the ministry, and it was not until summer 1726 that he began to work with Pulteney. The first major result of their collaboration was the publication on 5 December 1726 of the first issue of 'The Craftsman', the weekly newspaper that was to be the most effective organ of the opposition to Walpole through the next decade. In its pages Bolingbroke and Pulteney proclaimed an end to party divisions: 'let the very Names of 'Whig' and 'Tory' be for ever buried in Oblivion', called the issue of 24 April 1727 ('The Craftsman', 1.252). Their aim was to create an opposition platform behind which both whigs and tories could unite in opposition to the corruption of Walpole and his allies. 
The mid-1720s also saw the development of government policy along the lines which were to characterize the rest of Walpole's administration. As first lord of the Treasury and chancellor of the exchequer Walpole's first responsibility was financial policy. In particular, he was faced with the massive burden of debt incurred during the French wars of 1689-1713. He set out, therefore, to reduce that burden, both through redeeming part of the national debt and by reducing the interest payable on the remainder. As has been seen, in 1717 he continued to support his proposals to establish a sinking fund, which would reduce the capital of the debt, even after he had gone into opposition, and he was quick to recognize that the South Sea scheme, by encouraging the holders of irredeemable annuities to exchange them for company stock, made a significant contribution to cutting interest payments. Between 1727 and 1730 the interest paid on government stock held by the three great financial companies -- the Bank of England, the East India Company, and the South Sea Company -- was further reduced from 5 to 4 per cent. Together, between 1721 and 1741, these measures contributed to the reduction of the national debt by $6.25 million net and the annual interest charge from $2.57 million to $1.89 million. 
At the same time Walpole was keen to see the burden of taxation -- or, more specifically, of the land tax -- reduced. For most of his administration, he kept the land tax down to 2's'. in the pound, even managing to reduce it to 1's'. in 1731-2. In part, this was for political reasons. He was well aware of the way in which the high level of the land tax during the French wars had stimulated toryism among the country gentry, and thus keeping rates low was one means of underpinning the electoral position of his whig administration. But in part Walpole was acting out of principle. He objected to the land tax on the ground that it was paid by only one class, the landed gentry. The working out of these ideas in practice was seen most controversially in 1732, when the salt tax was reimposed in order to keep the land tax at 1's'. More generally, Walpole's ministry saw the balance gradually shift from direct to indirect taxation. This trend can be seen as early as 1726 when higher current expenditure was funded not by increasing the land tax, as was normal in peacetime, but by raising a loan of $500,000 to be funded by a new tax on victuallers. 
Another way of keeping taxes down was to improve the efficiency of the fiscal system. It was generally accepted that widespread smuggling reduced the yields from many customs duties. To combat this Walpole brought forward a proposal in 1723 to transfer the duties on tea, coffee, and chocolate from the customs to the excise. The scheme was successful, increasing revenue by $120,000 a year, and in 1733 Walpole tried to extend it to tobacco, a proposal that will be discussed later. Customs and excise duties, however, were not simply ways of raising revenue; they also offered mechanisms for the encouragement and regulation of trade. In keeping with contemporary 'mercantilist' theories Walpole acted in 1721 to remove many of the remaining export duties on manufactured goods and import duties on raw materials, and throughout his ministry he constantly emphasized his concern for overseas trade. 
Walpole was also closely involved in developing the ministry's religious policy. Both the first lord of the Treasury and the senior secretary of state claimed the right to advise the king on the distribution of ecclesiastical patronage, and it was Walpole as much as Townshend who selected Edmund Gibson, bishop of London, as their 'Church minister' in 1723, saying 'He must be Pope' (BL, Add. MS 32686, fols. 326-7). The aim of whig policy through the next decade was, as summarized by Gibson, 'to bring the Body of the Clergy to a liking of a Whig-Administration, or at least to an acquiescence in it, and a disposition to be quiet and easy under it' (Hunt. L., Gibson papers, bound vol., no. 13). To this end the ministry pursued policies towards the church that led some to accuse it of adopting tory principles (Hervey, 1.3-4), and there was an element of truth in this. The memory of the Sacheverell affair was etched deeply on Walpole's mind and he feared the damage that a revival of the cry 'The Church in danger' could do to the stability of his administration. Consequently, he abandoned the religious liberalism of the Sunderland-Stanhope ministry and discountenanced the discussion in parliament of any question relating to the rights and privileges of the church or the extension of 'Toleration Act'. However, to some extent the description of Gibson as 'Walpole's Pope', popularized by Horace Walpole, is misleading. Through the 1720s it was Townshend, rather than Walpole, who was apparently closer to the 'Church minister' and who was more involved in the day-to-day management of religious policy, helping Gibson to achieve the creation of the Whitehall preacherships and the regius professorships of history at Oxford and Cambridge. 
Initially, too, Walpole was little involved in foreign affairs, though he was not as ignorant of them as is often made out. In 1723 he had been acting secretary of state in London; he could rely on the advice of his brother Horace, who was one of the leading diplomats of the period; and there is good evidence that he had a reading knowledge of French -- the story that he conversed with George I in dog Latin is almost certainly apocryphal. But there is little doubt that the ministry's foreign policy was made by Townshend. In 1726 the Austrian envoy, Palm, commented that Walpole 'does not meddle with foreign affairs, but receives accounts of them in general, leaving for the rest the direction of them entirely to Ld. Townshend' (Cholmondeley (Houghton) correspondence, 1379). However, there are indications that from 1725 Walpole began to take more of an interest in European affairs. In that year, responding to the threat posed by the treaty of Vienna (1724) between Spain and the Habsburg emperor, Townshend concluded the alliance of Hanover with France and Prussia. For the next three years Europe organized itself into two great armed camps, and briefly war broke out between Britain and Spain in 1726-7. This caused problems for Walpole in the Commons. He not only had to find the money for military preparations, forcing him to increase the land tax from its normal peacetime rate of 2 's'. to 4's'. in 1727 and 3's'. in 1728-9, but also had to defend a policy that was distrusted by many whigs, who had been brought up to believe in the necessity of allying with Austria to resist French aggression. Moreover, he clearly did not believe that the situation in Europe was as bad as it was portrayed, prompting rumours of tensions between Townshend and Walpole. 
In the last years of George I's reign the Townshend-Walpole ministry stood high in the king's favour. The ministers' personal standing was revealed clearly by their appointment, in 1724 and 1726, as knights of the Garter. The evidence suggests that Townshend enjoyed the closer relationship with George, and some observers still saw him as the leading figure in the ministry. But even Walpole was honoured by the king in 1726 with two visits to his house at Richmond for dinner. The parliamentary opposition presented little threat to Walpole's position: its best parliamentary performance came in 1727 when it reduced the government's majority to 107. Court intrigues proved no more effective. Through the duchess of Kendal, Bolingbroke succeeded in presenting a memorial to the king and even obtained an audience, but his complaints against Walpole were dismissed as 'bagatelles' (Coxe, 'Walpole', 2.345). The only real threat to the supremacy of Townshend and Walpole came from the hostility of the prince of Wales. 
The beginning of the prince's dislike of Walpole probably stemmed from the terms negotiated by Walpole for the reconciliation in the royal family in 1720. Certainly by 1726 it was common knowledge that the prince 'treats him very distantly and coldly, to say the least of it, and shows his dislike to him on every possible occasion' ('Foreign View of England', 175). The unexpected death of George I on 11 June 1727, while travelling to Hanover, suddenly made the opinions of the new king of the utmost political importance. Walpole himself took the news to the king and queen at Richmond on 14 June and received the curt instruction, 'Go to Chiswick and take your directions from Sir Spencer Compton' (Hervey, 1.22). This was no surprise: it was generally expected that Walpole would be dismissed and replaced by Compton, the speaker of the Commons and the prince's treasurer. Walpole was of the same opinion, confessing to Arthur Onslow that he would be content with any place at court, 'even with the Comptroller's staff' ('Buckinghamshire MSS', 517). However, later that day Compton sought Walpole's assistance in drafting the new king's declaration to the privy council, and the following day George II was discussing the civil list with Walpole. Walpole exploited his opportunity. By 15 June the French ambassador was reporting that the old ministry would remain in office, and within three weeks Compton, recognizing that his credit was declining, 'left off the constancy of his attendance' on the king (King, 454). 
Why had Walpole survived, despite the universal expectation that he would be replaced? Links with the prince of Wales's court had been kept open through the mid-1720s, notably through the duke of Devonshire, Walpole's friend and lord president of the council, who was welcome at Leicester House, and the prince's own friends were not excluded from preferment -- the earl of Scarbrough, for example, received the Garter. Of much more significance, however, was Walpole's continuing friendship with Queen Caroline. Unlike many politicians, including Compton, he had never cultivated the new king's mistress, Henrietta Howard, recognizing that she exercised no political influence. As he said, in a phrase that illustrates his occasional coarseness of speech, Compton 'took the wrong sow by the ear... I the right' (Hardwicke, 6). Certainly, Walpole and a number of contemporary commentators saw his continuance in power as a demonstration of Caroline's influence at the beginning of the new reign. Lord Hervey also emphasized the importance of Walpole's undertaking to obtain parliamentary approval for a civil list of $800,000 a year for George II, $100,000 more than his father, plus $100,000 for the queen. This 'exorbitant augmentation' (Hervey, 1.34) was certainly pleasing for the king, but it is important not to place too much weight on it. The real significance of the new civil list was that it provided a timely demonstration for George of Walpole's unrivalled ability to secure the support of the Commons for the king's business, reiterating the message that he was receiving from his wife. 
Walpole had retained his position, but in some respects it was weaker than in the last years of George I's reign. Individuals over whom he had little influence were rewarded with places. Scarbrough became master of the horse, while Augustus Schulz replaced Viscount Malpas, his own son-in-law, as master of the robes. Another of Walpole's loyal lieutenants, Sir William Yonge, was dismissed as a Treasury commissioner. Most significantly, Compton retained his office of paymaster and was raised to the peerage as Lord Wilmington, remaining a brooding presence in the ministry, his continued favour with the king demonstrated when he became lord president of the council in 1730. Even in the church Walpole's influence was curtailed by the queen's insistence on the appointment of the high-churchman and former tory Thomas Sherlock to the bishopric of Bangor. Walpole himself appears to have felt vulnerable, complaining in late 1727 that, while he enjoyed 'great credit' with the king, he was 'struck at' by those who had been disappointed at the beginning of the reign (King, 455-6). 
Most contemporaries, however, interpreted Walpole's situation very differently. His survival as the king's minister appeared to be a remarkable demonstration of his political dominance, and it is from this point that it is possible to date a real shift in the popular perception of Walpole. The description of him as 'the great man' can be found as early as 1725 ('Various Collections', 8.390), but it became a commonplace only after the accession of George II. In July 1727 'The Craftsman' coined the phrase 'the Robinocracy' to describe the Walpolean regime ('The Craftsman', 2.78). Then, on 29 January 1728 John Gay's 'The Beggar's Opera' opened in London and became an overnight success. The political satire of this work was much more pointed and personal than anything in Jonathan Swift's 'Gulliver's Travels' (1726). Audiences found it easy to draw parallels between both the highwayman Macheath and the thief-taker Peachum on the one hand and Walpole on the other. Henceforth the link between the thief and the corrupt statesman became a familiar trope in opposition literature, drawing especially on the popular accounts of the life of Jonathan Wild, the notorious mastermind of the London underworld executed in 1725 and the model for Gay's Peachum. 
Walpole's growing prominence was accompanied by a decline in Townshend's profile, and a rift began to develop between the two men. The death of Lady Townshend, Walpole's sister Dorothy, on 29 March 1726 had broken the closest personal connection between them. Matters deteriorated so far that, by the end of the decade, one quarrel led them to lay hands on each other and then on their swords before being parted by colleagues. In part, the sources of the breach lay in foreign policy, over which Walpole and Townshend quarrelled, if not over their shared aims -- reconciliation with Austria and less dependence on France -- then certainly over the approach and the cost. 
Walpole's victory over Townshend was not inevitable. During the early years of the new reign various rumours circulated about the reconstruction of the ministry. Townshend wanted to replace Newcastle as secretary of state with his ally Chesterfield as a means of strengthening his hold over foreign policy and weakening Walpole's position. Conversely, Walpole saw Devonshire's death as an opportunity to oust Townshend by making him lord president. The major weakness in Townshend's position was his lack of influence at court. His relationship with George II gradually improved and the king was not prepared to dismiss him. But crucially the Caroline-Walpole axis held firm, giving Walpole an immense advantage over his rival. The prolonged period of ministerial instability finally ended with Townshend's resignation on 16 May 1730, a recognition of the fact that he had lost what Bishop Gibson described as the 'competition for 'power'' between them (St Andrews University Library, Gibson MS 5315). 
Arguably, it is not until this point that Walpole should be regarded as having established himself as prime minister. It was, indeed, only in the 1730s that this phrase began to be used commonly, not only by the opposition but also, albeit less frequently, by ministerial MPs and even the pro-government press. Only after Townshend's resignation can it be convincingly claimed that Walpole monopolized the counsels of the king or dominated the administration and its policies. A clear demonstration of his power came within weeks when he secured the dismissal of Carteret as lord lieutenant of Ireland. Even more revealing, in some ways, was his increasingly active role in foreign policy. During the summer of 1730 he was helping to draft instructions to British envoys, and when the second treaty of Vienna was signed in March the following year, concluding a new alliance between Britain and Austria, it was portrayed in the press very much as Walpole's achievement. 
Paradoxically, the same session that saw Walpole emerge as George II's prime minister also witnessed a marked increase in the size and effectiveness of the parliamentary opposition. The position of the ministry after the 1727 elections was stronger than at the dissolution, and its critics in 1728 and 1729 were able to make little impression on the government's majority. At the beginning of 1730, however, it soon became clear that Walpole would face a reinvigorated opposition. The main force of the opposition attack came on 10 February, when Sir William Wyndham surprised the Commons with revelations that Dunkirk harbour had been repaired contrary to the provisions of the treaty of Utrecht. According to Hervey, this put the whole house 'in a flame' and the ministry was 'stronger pushed than they had ever been on any occasion before' (Hervey, 1.116). Walpole managed to have the debate put off until 27 February, by which time he was able to deflect criticism of the administration by producing an undertaking from the king of France that the works at Dunkirk would be demolished. However, in the midst of the crisis he failed by ten votes to secure the defeat of the 'Place Bill', an opposition proposal intended to limit the number of government office-holders sitting in the Commons. 
The growing effectiveness of the opposition can be explained in part by better leadership and organization bringing together dissident whigs and tories, and in particular by the role of Bolingbroke, a fact that Walpole himself recognized and exploited in the Dunkirk debate. Other factors included the struggle within the ministry between Walpole and Townshend; the growing concern both inside parliament and outside, particularly in the City of London, about the ministry's foreign policy, especially the French alliance; and, most significantly, the prominence of political corruption as a critique of the ministry. As has been seen, this analysis of the Walpolean regime stretched back through the Macclesfield impeachment to the South Sea Bubble -- indeed, opposition MPs were still fond of referring to Walpole's sojourn in the Tower during Anne's reign. But in the late 1720s and early 1730s it appeared to some that an ever more pervasive stink of corruption was hanging over the government. In 1729-30 a Commons committee uncovered a pattern of extensive abuse in the management of gaols, which was felt to reflect badly on the administration, especially when it came to be suspected that it was screening judges who might be implicated. In 1732 another Commons investigation revealed widespread fraud in the management of the charitable corporation, as a result of which Sir Robert Sutton was expelled from the house. Walpole again appeared tainted, seeking to 'skreen' Sutton and ensuring that no further punishment was inflicted on him (Hanham, 325). In the same session more frauds were revealed in the sale of the confiscated estates of the earl of Derwentwater. In the eyes of opposition writers, however, it was not only the Walpolean polity that was corrupt, but also Walpole himself. From around 1730 the personal attacks on Walpole became more pointed, and it is from this time that representations of him became common in the rapidly developing culture of satirical prints. A good example is a print of 1730, which drew an explicit parallel between Walpole and Colonel Francis Charteris, a notorious rake convicted of rape but controversially pardoned by the king (Langford, 'Walpole', 60-61). 
During the sessions of 1731 and 1732 the parliamentary opposition tried to maintain the pressure on Walpole -- in both sessions place bills passed the Commons, only to be defeated by the ministerial majority in the Lords. Walpole, however, was generally successful at containing the threat. First, the conclusion of the second treaty of Vienna between Britain and Austria in March 1731 undermined the opposition critique of the government's foreign policy by re-establishing the 'old system' and bringing to an end the Anglo-French alliance. Second, the alliance allowed Walpole to discharge the Hessian troops, whose employment had been a focus for criticism in earlier sessions. Third, the reduction of tension in Europe enabled him to appeal to the country gentry and the more independently minded back-benchers by reducing the land tax. That this strategy was not quite as straightforward as it seemed, however, was revealed in 1732, when Walpole proposed reimposing the salt tax in order to bring down the land tax to 1's'. in the pound and even hinted at the possibility of abolishing it. This proposal provoked fierce opposition, and the government's majority fell to a mere twenty-nine. The salt duty had been abolished only two years earlier, and in part the Commons were antagonized by the attempt to reverse a measure enacted for the benefit of 'the poor Artificers and Manufacturers' (Chandler, 7.52). But, more significantly, MPs were alarmed by the re-establishment of a revenue department that provided significant ministerial patronage and by the hints of the abolition of the land tax, which was valued by the country gentlemen as a tax that was voted annually, administered, and collected by them, and thus outside direct government control. These concerns were particularly significant in the light of events in the following year. 
The parliamentary session of 1733 witnessed the most serious crisis for the Walpole administration until his fall in 1741-2 in the defeat of the 'Tobacco Excise Bill', a major plank in his fiscal strategy. In outline, Walpole's proposals were simple and broadly similar to the legislation introduced for tea, coffee, and chocolate in 1723. First, all tobacco and wine (the legislation relating to wine was never introduced) were to be placed in the king's warehouse until all duties had been paid. Second, the existing customs duties, payable on import, were to be replaced for the most part by excise duties, payable when the goods were removed from the warehouse for consumption. There were sound commercial and colonial reasons for introducing the 'Tobacco Excise Bill'. The Virginia tobacco planters were lobbying for precisely such a measure, and there were even hopes that the system of bonded warehouses would stimulate trade by encouraging the development of London as a 'free port'. There is little doubt, however, that fiscal and broader political concerns were more important in ministerial reasoning. Walpole clearly saw it as an essentially technical measure that would increase government revenue, perhaps by as much as $300,000 a year, by curbing fraud and smuggling. That was a significant sum and would assist Walpole in his aim of keeping the land tax low. With trade booming and agricultural prices subdued, it appeared equitable to shift part of the tax burden away from land. But in the year before a general election there was a clear political dimension to the legislation, and there is no doubt that Walpole believed it would be a vote winner among the landed gentry. 
However, Walpole had blundered. His excise proposals provoked massive opposition. Some of this came from retailers and traders who were concerned that the legislation would subject them to inspection by excise officers. Far more important, however, was the hostility of the wine and tobacco merchants, both in London and in the major provincial ports. Many if not most of them were heavily implicated in fraud, and thus the legislation represented an attack on a powerful pressure group with a vested interest in the existing system. When the London tobacco merchants met in January, they succeeded in raising $300 to fund their campaign against the bill. More generally, the excise legislation revived issues which had been raised during the debates on the salt tax in the previous year. Opposition propaganda made much of fears that the 'Tobacco Bill' was merely the first step towards a 'general excise', a charge denied by Walpole. But underlying this was a concern about the expansion of the excise service, whose 'arbitrary' powers of search were seen as a threat to English liberties. In this context Walpole's proposals, far from appealing to the country gentlemen by reducing their tax burden, appeared to be an attempt to concentrate power still further in the hands of an already over-mighty, and possibly corrupt, state. 
Walpole's next miscalculation was to press ahead with his proposals. He had plenty of time to change tack: the drafting of the bill did not begin until January 1733. However, he did not do so, continuing to believe his scheme attractive. In March, when the proposals were introduced into the Commons against the background of large demonstrations in Westminster, it appeared likely that he would get away with it, securing relatively comfortable majorities of sixty-one and sixty in a full house. However, when parliament resumed in April after the Easter recess, his majority collapsed. On 10 April it fell to just seventeen on a motion to receive the City of London's petition against the bill. This was the occasion on which Walpole did so much to alienate City opinion by describing the petitioning merchants as 'sturdy beggars' ('Egmont Diary', 1.363). But the decision to drop the bill had already been made, and on the following day Walpole proposed that further discussion should be postponed until 12 June, by when the house would be in recess. During the celebrations in the City that night Walpole was burnt in effigy by the mob. 
If the origins of the excise crisis revealed Walpole's political failings, its aftermath highlighted his skills. On 11 April, Walpole was mobbed in the court of requests after the abandonment of the bill. The next day this riot was complained of in the Commons, Walpole himself recounting 'the design made upon his life' ('Egmont Diary', 1.362). The episode was then effectively exploited to turn parliamentary opinion against the opposition, as members reacted against what was portrayed as an attempt to influence its liberty of speech. Later in the month the opposition tried to push home its advantage by launching an inquiry into frauds in the customs service. On the evening before the vote to select members of the committee, Walpole summoned his supporters to a meeting in the Cockpit and delivered a speech in which he appealed to 'Whig principles' and raised the spectre of Jacobitism (Hervey, 1.182), implying that the revolution settlement itself was under threat. According to Hervey, his performance was so effective that 'for two or three days there seemed to be a resurrection of that party spirit which had so long been dormant' (ibid., 1.184), and the court list was carried by the comfortable majority of eighty-five. 
The key to the collapse in the ministry's majority during the passage of the bill was its failure to ensure the attendance of its own supporters, and the main reason for this was the crisis at court. A number of influential figures, including lords Chesterfield, Stair, Bolton, Clinton, and Scarbrough, made clear their opposition to the bill. They intrigued in the closet and spread rumours outside it, encouraging the belief that the support of the king and queen was wavering. Despite the claims of Hervey (Hervey, 1.149), there are hints that George II's confidence in Walpole was shaken. In any event, it was perceptions that mattered, and in this context the dismissal of Clinton and Chesterfield from their court offices on 13 April provided the public reaffirmation of royal confidence in Walpole that was crucial to re-establishing his position in the Commons. 
Walpole had demonstrated that he could not be brought down on a single issue like the excise, and despite opposition pressure in the 1734 session his majority remained solid. He even risked attempting to defeat Samuel Sandys's 'Place Bill' in the Commons, which he succeeded in doing, albeit by only thirty-nine votes. Outside parliament, however, the reverberations of the crisis continued to be felt. The flood of propaganda continued, with more being published in the year after the defeat of the bill than in the months before. In particular, there was an explosion in the production of satirical prints attacking ministerial corruption and arbitrary power, in which Walpole himself was a familiar figure, often easily identified by his Garter star. The issue of the excise, and continuing fears of a general excise, dominated the campaign leading to the elections of 1734, at which the opposition were determined to defeat 'the villain Walpole' (Hanham, 393). There was a massive movement of opinion against the government in the large, open constituencies; even the country gentry, who had most to gain from the reduction of the land tax, were roused by fears of a general excise. There is little doubt that, in what was one of the most contested elections of the century, most of the electorate voted against Walpole's ministry. In the counties and large towns the opposition did very well. But in the smaller boroughs the ministry made its influence felt, as it did in Scotland and Cornwall, with the result that Walpole was able to face the new parliament in 1735 with a majority of over ninety. 
Reviewing the excise crisis, the earl of Egmont commented that 'it may be foretold that Sir Robert Walpole's influence in the House will never be again so great as it has been' ('Egmont Diary', 1.361). This view has been shared by many historians, encouraging a tendency to portray his fall as a long process beginning in 1733. There is clearly an element of truth in this interpretation. From 1733 Walpole constantly had to work with a substantial opposition which knew that, given the right issue, it could defeat the minister. He was never again to enjoy the easy parliamentary dominance of the years before 1730. However, the contrast is relative. Walpole continued as prime minister for another eight years, and through most of that period he remained the dominating figure of politics, apparently unassailable in parliament, his power explicable to his critics only as the product of widespread corruption. Certainly, the opposition entered the new parliament divided and disillusioned. Despite their electoral success their strength in the Commons was no greater than in the previous parliament, while in the Lords they were weakened by the defeat of their supporters in the elections of the Scottish representative peers. William Pulteney made some half-hearted overtures to the ministry, Bolingbroke retired to France, and Walpole faced no significant problems in the first session of the new parliament. 
The next major crisis faced by Walpole occurred in the 1736 session. In character it was very different from that of 1733: at no time was the ministry itself threatened, but it did severely disrupt Walpole's religious policy. The roots of the crisis lay in the rising tide of whig anti-clericalism through the early 1730s and in the growing pressure from the dissenters for the repeal of the 'Test Act'. These pressures created problems for Walpole in his relations with the church, and in particular with his 'Church minister', Bishop Gibson. For Gibson, a crucial element in the church-whig alliance that he had been promoting since the early 1720s was ministerial support for the revolution settlement in the church, by which he meant a limited toleration for dissenters accompanied by a test act. In the early 1730s Gibson came to believe that Walpole was not doing enough to discourage the succession of anti-clerical initiatives which came before parliament in those years. In fact, in 1733 and 1734 Walpole was working hard to discourage the dissenters from applying to parliament for a repeal of the test. Even so, Gibson's complaints may not have been without foundation. Some of Walpole's favourite pamphleteers, including William Arnall and Thomas Gordon, were prominent in the anti-clerical campaigns, and Walpole may have been unwilling to rein in the attacks of some of his supporters on the church and clergy for fear of alienating anti-clerical whigs and strengthening further the parliamentary opposition. 
Events came to a head with the introduction of three measures into parliament in 1736 -- a motion for the repeal of the test, the 'Mortmain Bill', and the 'Quaker Tithe Bill'. There is little doubt that Walpole expected that debate on religious issues would emphasize divisions between whigs and tories, and this is certainly what happened in the Commons. During the debates about the test, Walpole adhered to the church-whig alliance by opposing repeal. But ministerial arguments on this occasion 'that this was not a proper time' (Taylor and Jones, 21) were hardly reassuring to clerical opinion, especially in the light of Walpole's support for the repeal of the 'Irish Test Act' in 1733. The other two proposals, however, left the tories isolated in opposition. The 'Mortmain Bill', an attack on high-church corporate philanthropy, passed into law despite considerable clerical disquiet. The 'Quaker Tithe Bill' proved even more controversial. Walpole had given assurances to the Quakers that he would support this measure to provide limited relief for those Friends who suffered through their conscientious refusal to pay tithes. He saw the bill as a limited and relatively uncontroversial extension of the toleration, but, as in 1733, he had miscalculated. To Gibson and most of the bishops and parochial clergy it represented a serious assault on the legal rights and privileges of the church. Gibson co-ordinated a vigorous public campaign against the bill, which was eventually defeated on its second reading in the Lords, with all the bishops present voting against. 
The 'Tithe Bill' affair created serious problems for Walpole. First, it threatened to undermine a religious policy which had been remarkably successful during the previous thirteen years in persuading the clergy that the church was safe in whig hands. Second, the support of the bench of bishops was crucial for the maintenance of ministerial majorities in the upper house. As in 1733, however, Walpole, having done much to create the crisis, demonstrated his political skills in extricating himself from the consequences of it. Among the bishops Gibson was denounced as the 'Ringleader of Sedition' (St Andrews University Library, Gibson MS 5303) and singled out for attack, provoking his resignation as 'Church minister'. Meanwhile, Walpole worked hard to restore his links with other bishops, such as Thomas Sherlock and John Potter, who became archbishop of Canterbury the following year. Anti-clerical attacks on the church in parliament stopped, and in 1739 Walpole even took advantage of another motion by the dissenters for repeal of the 'Test Act' to affirm unequivocally his support for the existing constitutional settlement. In retrospect the 'Tithe Bill' appears merely as a blip in the story of whig rapprochement with the church, though at the end of the 1730s a small group of bishops could be found in regular opposition to Walpole, alienated at least in part by his religious policy. 
Through this period, however, arguably the major issue facing Walpole and the ministry was the British response to the War of the Polish Succession that had broken out in 1733. The British government refused to intervene in support of Austria in her struggle with France, despite its obligations under the treaty of Vienna. Walpole's policy was determined in part by concerns of parliamentary management: he wished to avoid any continental entanglements that would involve expense. However, the policy of non-intervention was made much easier by the absence of any clearly perceived threat to British interests. What is much less clear is how far this policy was Walpole's. The traditional interpretation, drawn largely from Hervey's 'Memoirs', is that Walpole had to struggle hard to maintain the policy of neutrality against fierce opposition from the king and queen. More recent research, however, suggests that the views of Walpole and the king, though different in emphasis, were not that far apart, and that George was certainly not a strident advocate of intervention. It is, indeed, difficult to give much credit to the idea that Britain could have intervened, given the domestic political situation, though there is no doubt that this policy carried a price in the later 1730s, when she was left without any major ally on the continent. 
In 1737 the opposition once again attacked Walpole's financial policy. On 21 March Sir John Barnard, MP for the City of London, proposed a motion to reduce the interest on part of the national debt from 4 to 3 per cent. This was a subtle move, as the proposal appeared to be an extension of Walpole's own efforts to reduce the burden of the national debt. But if Walpole had supported it, he would have risked conceding the initiative in fiscal affairs to the opposition and at the same time alienating the financial interest in the City. Initially, therefore, he prevaricated, and Barnard's initiative opened up unexpected divisions among the supporters of the ministry. However, the opposition overplayed its hand, which allowed Walpole to oppose the second reading, securing its defeat by the comfortable majority of 115. Divisions within the opposition, partly a legacy of the previous year, were starkly revealed by this vote. However, the 1737 session also witnessed debates on two controversial issues that were to cause significant problems for Walpole in the longer term. 
The first was the affair of Captain John Porteous. Porteous had been in command of the Edinburgh city guard in 1736 when it had fired on a crowd of demonstrators, killing six people. For this action he was tried and found guilty of murder. Following a royal reprieve ordering a stay of execution, however, a highly organized riot took place in the city, seizing Porteous from gaol and hanging him. In 1737 the opposition in the Lords, led by Carteret, exploited concern about the collapse of law and order in Edinburgh to call for a parliamentary inquiry into both Porteous's trial and the subsequent riot. There is no doubt that the opposition's motive was, as Edward Harley observed, 'to ruin Sir R. Walpole with the Scotch' (Taylor and Jones, 30). Walpole was certainly placed in a very difficult position. In the Lords, Newcastle and Hardwicke supported the introduction of a bill of pains and penalties to punish Edinburgh, but it was opposed by the duke of Argyll, the earl of Ilay, and all the Scottish peers. Walpole, fearful of losing the support of the Scots in the Commons, made it clear that he was prepared to see the bill emasculated, with the result that, when it passed into law, the only penal clause remaining was one debarring Andrew Wilson, the provost of Edinburgh, from holding public office. 
The affair hinted at deeper tensions within the ministry. In part, Hardwicke and Newcastle were concerned with vindicating the rule of law in Scotland, but it was also widely suspected that they were pursuing a feud with Ilay. It is difficult to know whether there is any truth in these claims, but there is no doubt that the Porteous affair saw Newcastle and his allies within the ministry adopt a more independent attitude than hitherto. More seriously, the opposition strategy to alienate the Scots from the ministry paid dividends. Ilay abstained when the Lords voted on the bill. His brother, Argyll, by contrast, denounced it and was not reconciled by the Commons amendments. From this point he moved steadily into outright opposition to Walpole, finally being dismissed from his colonelcy of the Horse Guards in 1740. Some Scottish MPs followed his lead, but in the longer term this was less of a problem for Walpole than the considerable influence which he was able to exert in the 1741 elections, preventing the ministry from securing its usual clean sweep in Scotland. 
The second major event to disrupt the 1737 session of parliament was the debate over the prince of Wales's allowance. Relations between the prince and both his parents and the ministry had been deteriorating for some time. During the excise crisis he had talked 'violently and publicly against Sir Robert' ('Stopford-Sackville MSS', 1.157), but he had been reluctant to go into opposition and had supported the administration in Cornwall during the 1734 elections. Matters finally came to a head following his marriage, when the whig opposition proposed a motion to increase his allowance from $50,000 to $100,000, the sum that George II had enjoyed as prince of Wales. This motion was well calculated to embarrass Walpole. Many of the more independent whigs were sympathetic to the prince, remembering that the settlement of the civil list in 1727 had notionally included $100,000 for the prince's household. Younger members of the ministry, including Newcastle and Hardwicke, were concerned about the consequences of a total breach at court and urged reconciliation. However, George II and Caroline were resolutely opposed to making any concessions to their son. Before the debate commentators were predicting that the opposition would secure a majority of up to forty, and Walpole himself believed that, if the motion passed, 'it was to be followed by another to send him to the Tower' ('Egmont Diary', 2.356). With great difficulty he persuaded the king to offer to settle $50,000 a year absolutely on the prince together with a jointure for the princess. As Walpole expected the prince rejected this composition, but when the offer was revealed in the debate it helped to secure a majority of thirty against the motion, though even this narrow victory was only achieved thanks to the abstention of forty-five tories. 
In September 1737 the breach in the royal family became irreparable. Frederick established his own court, first at Norfolk House and then at Leicester House, and from this point he became ever more closely identified with the opposition to the ministry and particularly to Walpole, whom they marked out as 'the chief object of their resentment' (Hervey, 3.839). The following year Pope referred to the 'New Opposition' ('Correspondence of Alexander Pope', 4.143). In many respects the group that coalesced around the prince of Wales was different from the parliamentary opposition of the early 1730s. Pulteney and Carteret were never quite trusted at Leicester House. Instead, Chesterfield emerged as one of the leading figures, along with the group of young Cobhamite whigs, among whom George Lyttelton and William Pitt were prominent. 'Common Sense' replaced 'The Craftsman' as the leading opposition journal, preaching a 'broad-bottomed' programme of party co-operation against the corruption and self-interest of Walpolean government that was subtly different from 'The Craftsman''s rhetoric about the end of party distinctions. 
As in the late 1720s and early 1730s the opposition attracted a number of influential writers. Late in 1738 Bolingbroke, back in England again, wrote his exhortatory treatise, 'The Idea of a Patriot King', which appears to have circulated in manuscript among Frederick's circle. The ideas developed by Bolingbroke of a patriot prince who would heal party divisions, stamp out corruption, and reinvigorate the nation were common currency among opposition writers. In the late 1730s they appeared in a whole series of works, including David Mallet's 'Mustapha', Henry Brooke's 'Gustavus Vasa', James Thomson's 'Edward and Eleanora', and Richard Glover's 'Leonidas'. Henry Fielding, who had already cruelly satirized Walpole as Quidam in his 1737 play 'The Historical Register', also became an active opposition propagandist, editing and writing for the influential newspaper 'The Champion', which was first published in November 1739. 
The weakening of Walpole's position in 1737, however, should not be exaggerated. The defection of the prince of Wales had little immediate effect on his parliamentary position, and even the developing literary and newspaper campaign seems to have caused him scant concern: government subsidies to the press declined considerably in the years after 1735. The real significance of the prince's opposition to Walpole became apparent only in the 1741 elections, when he threw his influence in Cornwall against the ministry. Indeed, many contemporaries believed that the greatest threat to Walpole in 1737 was the death in November of Queen Caroline, widely seen as his most committed supporter at court and the key to his influence over the king. According to Hervey, even Walpole himself feared that his position would be undermined. As in 1727, however, those who predicted his fall were disappointed, as George appears to have become if anything even more committed to his minister. 
The parliamentary session of 1738 saw the emergence of an issue which was to prove fruitful for the opposition over the next few years and which ultimately played an important role in the disintegration of the Walpole administration. A range of problems -- British possession of Gibraltar, the establishment of the new colony of Georgia, and the depredations committed by Spanish coastguards against British merchants trading with South America and the Caribbean -- combined to turn government policy towards Spain into a major subject of debate in both press and parliament. These issues could be exploited effectively by the opposition, uniting under the banner of an expansionist, imperial patriotism and standing up for British mercantile and commercial interests against a pusillanimous ministry that was only too ready to betray them. Once more, satirical prints provided a particularly vivid summary of the opposition's case; in one, Walpole was portrayed standing by while a Spaniard removed the claws from the British lion. Allegations of Spanish depredations against British shipping proved particularly explosive, dominating debates in the Commons through March 1738. It was on this occasion that Captain Robert Jenkins helped to whip up anti-Spanish feeling by producing his pickled ear which, he claimed, had been cut off by Spanish coastguards. Walpole was anxious to deter the Commons from any action that would 'make a War unavoidable' (Chandler, 10.199), and ultimately persuaded it to reject Pulteney's aggressive resolutions by a comfortable majority. He was, however, obliged to commit the ministry to resolutions which denounced Spanish depredations and attempts to interrupt British commerce with the Americas. 
Walpole was committed to securing a peaceful settlement of the disputes with Spain. When parliament reassembled in February 1739, however, the opposition immediately attacked what it saw as the unsatisfactory provisions of the convention of El Pardo signed in the previous year, and in particular the continued assertion by the Spanish of a right of search of British vessels. The ministry's majority collapsed, and on 8 March in the vote of thanks for the convention Walpole secured victory by only twenty-eight votes in a house of nearly 500. When the Lords had debated the convention eight days earlier the prince of Wales had voted against the administration for the first time, and the opposition had mustered seventy-four votes in the biggest Lords division of the Walpole period. 
Walpole's position was not as weak as these votes might suggest, and the debates on the convention obscured deep divisions within the opposition. These differences were exacerbated when parliament reassembled in November 1739. By that time the convention had collapsed, largely as a result of the South Sea Company's refusal to pay its debts to the Spanish government, and Britain had declared war against Spain. Now that the clamour for war had been satisfied, Walpole and his ministry were clearly going to enjoy a breathing space. But Pulteney's enthusiastic support for the speech from the throne alienated many of the tories, who were 'heartily angry' with him (Colley, 226). 
In the short term, therefore, the outbreak of war impeded the opposition's campaign against Walpole, but it also did little for the unity of the administration. Tensions had been growing for some time within the ministry between Walpole on the one hand and Newcastle and Hardwicke on the other. The latter were critical of Walpole's pacific attitude and favoured a more aggressive policy towards Spain, and by the summer of 1739 the split in the cabinet was common knowledge in London. The disagreements between ministers were exacerbated by the appointment of Lord Hervey as lord privy seal in April 1740. Newcastle, who detested Hervey, was infuriated by Walpole's 'indifference' and threatened to resign -- an action from which he was dissuaded only by Hardwicke. The affair deepened the 'resentment' between Newcastle and Walpole, Newcastle complaining bitterly of 'the natural jealousy of his temper' (Yorke, 'Life and Correspondence', 1.231), while Walpole lamented 'how hard it was for him to serve with Newcastle' (BL, Add. MS 32692, fol. 450). After the collapse of the convention Walpole agreed only reluctantly to the declaration of war, and according to Henry Etough, his chaplain and the author of an early memoir, his policy having failed, he 'applied for leave to resign' and remained in office only at the insistence of the king (BL, Add. MS 9200, fol. 68'v'). However, Walpole appears effectively to have abdicated responsibility for the conduct of the war: in October 1740 he told Newcastle, 'This war is yours, you have had the conduct of it, I wish you joy of it' (Yorke, 1.251). His attitude may have had something to do with his poor health, but with Newcastle acting as 'de facto' war minister it is clear that Walpole was increasingly marginalized from the major policy decisions of the ministry over which he presided. 
Under the pressure of war, further divisions opened up within the government. By spring 1740 the earl of Egmont was reporting that there were three parties at court, the third consisting of 'Lord Wilmington [formerly Spencer Compton], Duke of Dorset and their friends' ('Egmont Diary', 3.141). Wilmington, of course, having failed to displace Walpole in 1727, had never been an enthusiastic supporter of the ministry and owed his post as lord president of the council largely to the support of the king. However, his 'party' now began to flirt ever more openly with the opposition. In 1740 George Bubb Dodington, a former protege of Walpole, threw in his lot with the opposition and was dismissed from the Treasury board. Even after this, however, relations between Wilmington and Dodington remained cordial. But the real significance of this group did not lie in the support that it could muster in the Commons, which was very limited. Rather, the fact that court politicians so close to the king were distancing themselves from Walpole communicated a powerful message about the prime minister's waning power to the wider political world. 
The opposition were very conscious of the divisions within the ministry and tried to exploit them. By Christmas 1739 some of 'the Leaders of the Opposers' had overcome their suspicions of each other and agreed to concentrate their attacks on Walpole personally, by 'using the word Minister in the singular Number in both Houses; and making it as familiar to name him there, as in Print or in private conversation' (Taylor and Jones, 164). In the press this approach was very effective, particularly as the ministry's war policy appeared increasingly muddled and ineffective following the early success of the capture of Porto Bello. The production of satirical prints increased rapidly, many focusing on Walpole himself, depicting him unflatteringly as 'the English Colossus' and comparing him with Julius Caesar, Cardinal Wolsey, and Piers Gaveston. In parliament, however, the strategy was less successful. As so often in the past, place bills offered an effective line of attack; in January 1740 Walpole's majority was reduced to sixteen. The following month, however, when Pulteney tried to revive the issue of the convention as a prelude to impeachment, Walpole was able to rally his supporters. He deliberately applied the question 'personally to Himself, Called upon those who were his Freinds to stand by Him. Said He was now upon his Tryal; and desired either Acquittal or Judgment' (ibid., 44). At the end of the debate, the opposition motion was comfortably defeated by 247 votes to 196. 
Despite this failure, on 13 February 1741, in the final session of parliament before the general election, the opposition attempted again to isolate Walpole from his colleagues. In both the Commons and the Lords motions were introduced requesting the king to remove Walpole 'from his majesty's presence and counsels for ever' (Cobbett, 'Parl. hist.', 11.1242). Proposing the motion in the Commons, Samuel Sandys launched a wide-ranging attack on the whole conduct of the government's foreign policy since the 1720s. He further claimed that Walpole had 'usurped a regal power,... possessed himself of a place of French extraction, the place of sole minister', and engrossed 'ev'ry branch of government into his own hands' (ibid., 11.1244-5). It is unlikely that Pulteney, Sandys, and their allies expected to be able to bring Walpole down; rather, they were hoping for a propaganda victory that could be exploited in the election campaign. However, the 'motion' proved to be a serious miscalculation, once more revealing deep divisions within the opposition. Seventy-eight tories and dissident whigs either voted against the motion or abstained, largely because they objected to an attempt to condemn a man without bringing specific charges against him. Consequently, the final weeks of the parliament were dominated by recriminations within the opposition. Moreover, the pro-Walpole press appeared to have been revived by recent events, and for the first time an effective series of pro-ministerial satirical prints was published, drawing attention to the failure of the motion. 
While the parliamentary opposition was deeply divided, in retrospect it is the weakness, not the strength, of Walpole's position that is most apparent as the elections of 1741 approached. Between the opening of parliament in 1735 and its dissolution in 1741, the number of tories and dissident whigs had increased by thirty, reducing the ministry's nominal majority in the Commons to forty-two. The conduct of the war provided an issue which the opposition could exploit, but, unlike the 'Excise Bill' in 1733, could not be defused by Walpole's own actions. Moreover, his position within the ministry was far more vulnerable than it had been at any time since Carteret's dismissal as secretary of state, and his vulnerability was increased by the fact that he was at best a reluctant supporter of his own administration's war policy. 
In some respects the 1741 elections went better for the ministry than might have been expected. Through most of England and Wales it appears to have slightly improved its position. However, the gains were not enough to reverse the losses to the opposition between 1735 and 1741 and they were, moreover, more than counterbalanced by what happened in Cornwall and Scotland, where the consequences of the defections of the prince of Wales and duke of Argyll were finally made clear. Contemporaries found it difficult to calculate the balance of parties in the new parliament, partly because there were 148 new members. However, Newcastle estimated that Walpole had a majority of only fourteen in the Commons, a verdict endorsed by most modern historians, who place the majority at between sixteen and eighteen. By autumn 1741 it was obvious that, as the earl of Ilay remarked, he was facing 'a very warm session' (Jones, 'Fall of Walpole', 105). 
Events before the opening of parliament on 1 December increased the pressure on Walpole and his colleagues. The war against Spain was going badly. In April 1741 a combined naval and military attack on Cartagena was a disastrous failure, a fact that Admiral Edward Vernon did not hesitate to blame on the ministry. Events in the West Indies, however, were now competing for public attention with the situation in Europe, where Frederick II's seizure of Silesia at the end of 1740 had precipitated an attempt by France to dismember the Austrian empire of Maria Theresa. Opinion in Britain was galvanized by the plight of the queen of Hungary, as Maria Theresa was known, but British efforts to rally support for Austria were undermined in October 1741 by the decision of George II, as elector of Hanover, to conclude a treaty of neutrality between the electorate and France. As Newcastle recognized, the king's actions brought the issue of Hanoverian influence over British policy to the forefront of political debate, and he believed that it would be 'impossible to prevent a parliamentary enquiry into this conduct' (Hill, 222). By the beginning of November the press was full of the issue, Horace Walpole, the prime minister's son, believing that it 'threatens to be an 'Excise' or 'Convention'' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 17.187). 
The new parliament opened promisingly for the ministry when it secured a majority of forty-five in the Lords in a debate on the address. In the Commons, however, its position was much less secure. In December, Walpole's candidate for the chairmanship of the crucial Commons committee of privileges and elections, Giles Earle, was defeated by the opposition candidate, George Lee. There is no doubt that Walpole committed a serious tactical error: Earle had made himself unpopular, and many ministerialists had expected him to propose someone more impartial. On 18 December, Walpole did manage to rally his supporters to reject a series of opposition motions for correspondence relating to diplomatic negotiations, but the year ended badly in a string of narrow defeats on the Westminster election petition. One of the biggest problems facing Walpole at this time was the abstention of normally reliable MPs, including Dorset's son, Lord John Sackville, and Charles Hanbury Williams. As the earl of Hartington observed, 'some stay away to see how things will turn out' (Devonshire MS 260.10, 17 Dec 1741). 
Walpole's own strategy at this time is difficult to determine. Some of his followers were unduly optimistic about the mood of parliament. The duke of Newcastle, by contrast, was exasperated by Walpole's inaction over Christmas, complaining of the 'fatal obstinacy of one single man, resolved to ruin, or rule the State' (Owen, 27). Indeed, relations between the two men grew so bad that the king was obliged to intervene and instruct them to make up their quarrel. Newcastle, however, had a point. Walpole's only initiative was to try to heal the breach at court, but the prince of Wales rejected the offers made to him, informing his father that Walpole's removal from power was the precondition for any negotiations. Consequently, Walpole himself emerged ever more clearly as the key to resolving the crisis. When parliament reassembled, he did succeed in defeating Pulteney's motion for a secret committee to investigate the conduct of the war, Walpole himself making an impressive and memorable speech. But the margin of victory in what was essentially a motion of confidence was so small -- 253 votes to 250 -- that it was clear that normal government business could no longer be conducted in parliament. A week later, on 28 January, the ministry was again defeated by one vote on the Chippenham election petition, and Walpole was finally persuaded to resign by his family and 'some of his particular friends' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 17.319). On 2 February, following a second defeat on the Chippenham election, 'Sir R. Walpole went out of the House immediately... and never returned; plainly foreseeing he could never for the future carry any Question in that House' (Taylor and Jones, 176). He finally resigned the seals of office on 11 February, having been created earl of Orford on 6 February. He also obtained from the king a pension of $4000 per annum, though he did not apply for it for more than two years, and secured a warrant giving his illegitimate daughter by Maria Skerrett the precedence of an earl's daughter. These final acts of power not only 'disgusted the nobility' but were also viewed even by loyal ministerialists such as William Hay as 'an Abuse of the Kings favour' (ibid.). 
One factor influencing Walpole's decision to resign was his desire to maintain whig government. He recognized that his resignation would facilitate the reconstruction of the ministry around his former supporters, 'the old corps' (Coxe, 'Pelham', 1.92), and this was precisely what happened. It is likely that Newcastle, Pelham, and Hardwicke had maintained discreet contacts with Carteret and Pulteney at least since the outbreak of war, and these now developed into formal negotiations. Walpole's colleagues saw the possibility of detaching the Carteret-Pulteney group from the rest of the opposition, and especially from the tories. Carteret was made secretary of state in place of Harrington, Sandys became chancellor of the exchequer, while Wilmington succeeded Walpole as first lord of the Treasury. Pulteney, who had often proclaimed that he had no ambition for office, was rewarded with the earldom of Bath. Meanwhile, the prince of Wales was persuaded to endorse the new ministerial arrangements by agreeing to a reconciliation with his father, and he also gave assurances to Walpole that he would not 'be molested in any shape, or upon any account' (Coxe, 'Walpole', 3.594). 
Parliament had been adjourned for two weeks to allow for the reconstruction of the government, and when it reassembled on 18 February feelings against the new earl of Orford were still running high. Part of the reason for this was that Orford was believed to be the minister 'behind the curtain' ('Egmont Diary', 3.248), a perception that was industriously cultivated by the tories. On 9 March, Lord Limerick proposed a motion for a secret committee to inquire into the conduct of Walpole's administration during the previous twenty years. The old corps, however, stood firm behind their former leader, and in the absence of Pulteney, Sandys, and some of Frederick's servants the motion was narrowly defeated by two votes in a very full house. But the leaders of the opposition were determined not to let the issue rest, and two weeks later Limerick introduced another proposal for a committee of inquiry, restricted now to the last ten years of the ministry. Even so, Orford's opponents secured at best a limited triumph, winning the vote by only 252 votes against 245. When the house came to select the members of the committee on 26 March, Pelham adopted a moderate approach, including some of the less violent tories and opposition whigs on the court list. His policy was vindicated, when five old corps whigs were elected and all of Orford's most bitter opponents were defeated. 
The results of the committee's proceedings were distinctly underwhelming. Its investigations focused on the granting of government contracts, corrupt influence in elections, and misappropriation of secret service money, but as William Coxe pointed out in 1798, hard evidence was confined to the appointment of customs officials in Weymouth and one contract for furnishing money to pay troops in Jamaica. This outcome was not, perhaps, surprising. Examination of the secret service accounts was difficult and made more so by the mixed composition of the committee. But its work was also hampered by what one leading opposition figure called efforts 'to Screen' the former minister (Taylor and Jones, 59). On 1 December 1742, at the beginning of the next session of parliament, Lyttelton attempted to revive the committee, but his efforts failed, with the earl of Bath now declaring openly that he was opposed to any further persecution of Orford. 
There is no evidence to substantiate the opposition's claims that Orford continued to act as a minister 'behind the curtain', but he still retained his interest in politics, giving his advice and support freely to his former colleagues, and especially to his former protege Henry Pelham. In August 1743, following the death of Wilmington, he urged Pelham to accept the offer of the Treasury 'however circumscrib'd, conditional or disagreeable' (Owen, 171), as it would provide a firm basis on which to consolidate his power. When Pelham's appointment was announced, he offered his hearty congratulations together with detailed advice on how to undermine the position of Carteret and Bath by drawing support from the Cobhamite, broad-bottom whigs. His suspicion of the tories, however, was as strong as ever, and he warned Pelham to 'Whig it with all opponents that will parly; but 'ware Tory!' (Coxe, 'Pelham', 1.93). Orford's interventions in debates in the Lords were infrequent and not always effective: in what may have been his last parliamentary speech on 16 April 1744, he failed miserably to secure the reversal of the lord chancellor's judgment in the case of 'Le Neve v. Norris'. But he could still be an effective politician. Contemporaries were all agreed that it was his lobbying behind the scenes that secured the ministry's victory in the debates on the employment of Hanoverian troops at the end of January 1744. 
At the beginning of November, as the struggle for power between Earl Granville (as Carteret had now become) and the Pelhams reached its crisis, George II sent a message to Orford to ask him to come to London to give his advice. Orford agreed to make the journey as soon as he could, but in his reply made it clear that he disapproved of Granville's foreign policy. When pressed further by another message, Orford explicitly declared his support for the Pelhams -- he appears never to have shared the animosity of his son Horace for his former colleagues -- and advised the king to accept the views of the majority of the cabinet. By the time that Orford arrived in London, the crisis had been resolved by the resignation of Granville. However, by this time his health was deteriorating rapidly. He had suffered from urinary gravel at least from 1718, and by 1744 he seems to have been almost constantly ill. After the painful journey from Houghton to London in November, his condition worsened. In mid-December he began to take large quantities of Dr Jurin's lixivium; this had the effect of dissolving the stone, which Orford passed on 4 February. By now, however, he was beyond recovery. For some weeks he continued in severe pain, relieved only by large doses of opium. In his last hours he showed no fear of death, but nor does his attitude appear to have been one of traditional Christian resignation. He finally died at his house at 5 Arlington Street on 18 March 1745, and was buried in the parish church at Houghton on 25 March. It is possible that Jurin's treatment had serious side effects, and a pamphlet war broke out after his death in which both his surgeon, John Ranby, and probably Jurin were involved, but a more recent medical assessment of his illness concludes that he died of 'kidney failure after impaction of a large stone in the bladder outlet' (Spriggs, 427). At his death, according to Horace Walpole, he was 'very poor: his debts, with his legacies which are trifling, amount to fifty thousand pounds. His estate, a nominal eight thousand a year, much mortgaged' (Walpole, 'Corr.', 19.32). In fact, the legacies amounted to considerably more than $10,000, and in a study of the Walpole family finances Plumb has argued that the debts were 'of no great significance in relation to Walpole's total estate' (Plumb, 'Walpoles', 204). 
Viewed from one perspective, Walpole stands at the end of a long line of leading ministers -- men like Wolsey, Burghley, and Buckingham -- who made a personal fortune during their years of royal service. No first minister after Walpole was to build a country house like Houghton. From another perspective he stands at the beginning of a line of modern ministers of the crown: as every schoolboy was long taught, he was the country's first prime minister. Some nineteenth-century constitutional writers went further, arguing that Walpole established the system of 'parliamentary government' presided over by Peel and Russell (Kemp, 128). Such claims would gain little support from modern historians, all too aware of the enormous differences between the political systems of the early Hanoverian and Victorian periods. However, the idea that Walpole was the first prime minister remains one of the truisms of British constitutional history, and it has much to commend it. The phrase 'prime minister' can be found before the rise of Walpole, but it was only during his ministry, and particularly in the years after 1727, that its use became commonplace, not only by the minister's opponents but also by his supporters. 
The development of the position of prime minister was an expression of the new conditions of the post-revolutionary political system, and one of the best definitions of the role in the early eighteenth century is provided by Clayton Roberts: 'He monopolized the counsels of the King, he closely superintended the administration, he ruthlessly controlled patronage, and he led the predominant party in Parliament' (Roberts, 'Growth of Responsible Government', 402). The emphasis on parliamentary management is important, as it highlights what distinguishes early eighteenth-century prime ministers from first ministers, like Danby, in the pre-revolutionary period. Of Walpole's predecessors, both Robert Harley and the earl of Sunderland might be thought to have a better claim than Walpole to be the first prime minister. Both were described as 'prime ministers' by contemporaries and it can be argued that they fulfil Roberts's criteria, though Harley probably never regarded himself as the leader of the tory party and Sunderland shared power with Stanhope for much of his ministry. What really made Walpole different was his longevity in office. He occupied the post of first lord of the Treasury, which by the nineteenth century had come to be associated with the office of prime minister, for twenty-one years, and he had no serious rival for dominance of the administration for eleven. Consequently, it was during Walpole's ministry that the phrase 'prime minister' passed into common usage. 
In part, Walpole's political longevity had little to do with him. The decision of George I and George II that they could not trust the tories as a party forced those monarchs to restrict their choice of ministers to whigs. In part, his success can be attributed to good fortune, including the death of some of his most powerful whig rivals. But Walpole was also an outstanding politician. He was very much at home in the intimate world of the early Hanoverian court, a fact that is too often neglected. What has been much more readily recognized by historians is his pre-eminence as a parliamentarian. He was one of the first politicians to recognize the importance of the Commons in the early eighteenth-century constitution, and there is no doubt that his decision to remain in the lower house throughout his premiership was crucial to his success. It is hardly coincidental that all the most successful prime ministers of the eighteenth century -- Walpole, Pelham, North, and Pitt -- were members of the Commons. His real skill, however, lay in his ability to link court and Commons. As Romney Sedgwick observed, he performed the 'dual role of 'minister with the King in the House of Commons' and 'minister for the House of Commons in the Closet' his influence in each place being strengthened by his influence in the other' (Sedgwick, 1.41). 
Walpole's contemporaries were very aware that he was different, even if they were not sure how. He dominated the public consciousness in a manner that no politician had ever done before. In part, this was simply a reflection of the extent and durability of Walpole's power. But it was also a consequence of the rapid development of the press during the early eighteenth century. The Walpole years saw not only the appearance of newspapers like 'The Craftsman', but also the emergence almost from nothing of an indigenous industry producing satirical prints, as a result of which visual representations of the prime minister became familiar to a large part of the population, if only from the windows of print shops. The effectiveness of the pro-ministerial press should not be underestimated. Pamphlets defending the prime minister and his policies poured from the press, and he attracted the support of some of the period's leading political pamphleteers, including Thomas Gordon, John, Lord Hervey, and Benjamin Hoadly. Even at the time, however, it often appeared that the opposition had the better of the argument. No ministerial newspaper could rival the circulation of 'The Craftsman' in the late 1720s and early 1730s or of 'Common Sense' at the end of the 1730s. In retrospect, moreover, Walpole's critics often appear to have been even more effective. One reason for this is because so many of the period's canonical authors -- Swift, Gay, Pope, Fielding, Thomson -- were critics either of Walpole or of Walpolean society. 
It can be argued that Walpole attracted criticism both because of his role as an 'early modern' royal favourite and as a 'modern' prime minister. On the one hand, his enormous wealth, flaunted most visibly in the construction of Houghton, prompted attacks. To many it seemed obvious that he was abusing power and exploiting the state to enrich himself and his family, a perception which helped to underpin the common parallel between Walpole and Jonathan Wild. To some extent Walpole was the victim of a shift in perceptions of public morality; among the next generation of politicians both Henry Pelham and William Pitt were able to make political capital out of their refusal to benefit personally from government service. On the other hand, his political methods were denounced as corrupt by the opposition. He was portrayed as using the patronage available to the ministry, government offices and pensions, to buy support of members of both houses of parliament and of the electorate. In this way Walpole was not only corrupting individuals, but he was also destroying the balance of the constitution by securing for the crown an illegitimate and corrupt influence over the legislature. 
Thus, opposition writers created an image of a regime, the Robinocracy, permeated by the stench of corruption, an image reinforced by Walpole's obvious love of power and his ruthless efforts to secure a monopoly of it for himself and his followers. This interpretation has informed a tradition of criticism that can be identified throughout the historiography of the two and a half centuries following Walpole's death, though for much of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries it was supplemented by disapproval of his private morality, his open liaison with Maria Skerrett, and the vulgarity, even lewdness, of his conversation. The most recent, and in many respects the most sophisticated, exposition of this tradition can be found in E. P. Thompson's 'Whigs and Hunters', which draws a dark picture of Walpole as a nasty little eighteenth-century mafioso presiding over a country that had 'something of the sick quality of a 'banana republic''. According to Thompson, Walpole's greatest achievement was 'his systematizing of the means of corruption, with unusual blatancy' (Thompson, 197, 214). 
In his biography of Walpole, Archdeacon Coxe observed that 'While he was in power, he was reviled with unceasing obloquy, and his whole conduct arraigned as a mass of corruption and political depravity' (Coxe, 'Walpole', 1.753). But soon after his fall a more positive view began to emerge, helped by the tributes of former opponents like Pitt and Chesterfield. By the end of the eighteenth century he was being acclaimed by the economist and political writer Josiah Tucker as 'the best commercial Minister this Country ever had' (Tucker, 222), while Edmund Burke admitted him into the whig pantheon, proclaiming him 'an intelligent, prudent, and safe minister', who 'governed by party attachments' ('Works', 3.50). This reappraisal of Walpole culminated in 1798 with the appearance of Coxe's massive biography -- ever since the starting point for all serious study of its subject, and still the only full-scale treatment of his whole life. In an interpretation which continues to exert an enormous influence over our understanding of Walpole, Coxe emphasized his parliamentary skills, his pursuit of peace, and his financial administration. Through the nineteenth century the portrayal of Walpole as a sound manager of the nation's finances and the architect of the sinking fund allowed him to be seen as the precursor of the political tradition represented by the younger Pitt, Peel, and Gladstone. 
In his influential survey of eighteenth-century England first published in 1878, William Lecky tried to present a balanced picture of Walpole, reflecting both his achievements and the corruption of his administration. But his overall appraisal was strikingly positive -- Walpole stood in 'the foremost rank of politicians', and his achievement lay: 'in establishing on an impregnable basis a dynasty which seemed to be tottering to its fall, in rendering... the House of Commons the most powerful body in the State, in moderating permanently the ferocity of political factions and the intolerance of ecclesiastical legislation. (Lecky, 328)' Most twentieth-century commentators tend to agree with this judgement. Walpole may not have been a great reformer like the younger Pitt, an inspiring war leader like Chatham, or an original political thinker like Burke, but he was a supreme exponent of the art of politics. Thus, the dominant themes of J. H. Plumb's major unfinished biography, political and financial management, are familiar to readers of Coxe and Lecky. Plumb plays down Walpole's failings -- he excuses as necessary or legitimate by the standards of the day practices frequently denounced as corrupt -- but his assessment of Walpole's achievement is remarkably similar to Lecky's. For Plumb, Walpole was the architect of the political stability that made the eighteenth century in England so different from the seventeenth: 'aided both by events, and by the tidal sweep of history, a politician of genius, Robert Walpole, was able to create what had eluded kings and ministers since the days of Elizabeth I -- a government and a policy acceptable to the Court, to the Commons, and to the majority of the political establishment in the nation at large. (Plumb, 'Political Stability', 158)' In the last quarter of the twentieth century historians began to cut Walpole down to size. Paul Langford's 'Excise Crisis', for example, raised important doubts about his political skills, demonstrating conclusively that the crisis developed from a serious miscalculation by Walpole himself. At the same time, growing scepticism is being expressed about Plumb's portrayal of Walpole as the architect of political stability. Instead, there is a tendency to see him as the beneficiary of a series of longer-term political, constitutional, and financial developments which he was able to exploit with some skill and a great deal of luck (Roberts, 'Political stability'). Inevitably, this makes Walpole's historical significance even more difficult to explain. He was not a great reformer or war leader. He has no claims to be an architect of empire. Nor, despite his pre-eminence in the Commons, was he a great orator. But if this appears a curiously negative assessment of Walpole, that impression perhaps stems from a preoccupation with measuring a politician's achievements. Walpole is a crucial figure in British history because, for twenty years, he dominated the political scene and the political consciousness of the nation in a way in which very few politicians have done before or since. Later historians have appropriated the opposition's description of his tenure of power, and he remains the only prime minister to have given his -- or her -- name to his period of office, the Robinocracy. 


@@@@@


doc= 28602


Walpole, Robert (1781-1856), classical scholar, was born in Lisbon, Portugal, on 8 August 1781, the eldest son of Robert Walpole, clerk of the privy council and envoy to Portugal, and his first wife, Diana, daughter of Walter Grossett. Horatio Walpole, first Baron Walpole, was his grandfather. He was educated at Charterhouse and matriculated at Merton College, Oxford, in 1797, but migrated to Cambridge, where he was admitted to Trinity College in 1800. He was made a scholar and won the Sir William Browne medal for a Greek ode in 1801. He graduated BA in 1803, MA in 1809, and BD in 1828. In 1805 he published 'Comicorum Graecorum fragmenta'. In 1809 he became rector of Itteringham, Norfolk, in 1815 rector of Tivetshall, Norfolk, and in 1828 rector of Christ Church, Marylebone, Middlesex. He held Itteringham and Christ Church until his death. 
Soon after going down from Trinity, Walpole travelled in Greece, and in 1817 he published his 'Memoirs Relating to European and Asiatic Turkey' (2nd edn, 1818), and in 1820 'Travels in Various Countries of the East', two interesting volumes consisting mainly of unpublished papers written by John Bacon Sawrey Morritt, John Sibthorp, Dr Hunt, and other travellers, with descriptions of antiquities and notes and excursuses by Walpole himself. He was also joint author with Sir William Drummond of 'Herculanensia', published in 1810, a work chiefly concerned with the explanation of a philosophical papyrus recently discovered at Herculaneum. 
On 6 February 1811 Walpole married Caroline Frances, daughter of John Hyde; they had two sons and two daughters. Walpole died in Harewood Street, London, on 16 April 1856. He had estates at Carrow Abbey, near Norwich, and at Scole Lodge, Osmundeston, Norfolk. 


@@@@@


doc= 28603


Walpole, Sir Robert (1808-1876), army officer, third son of Thomas Walpole (1755-1840) of Stagbury Park, Surrey, sometime British minister at Munich, and Lady Margaret (1769-1854), eighth daughter of John Perceval, second earl of Egmont, was born on 1 December 1808. Spencer Horatio Walpole was his elder brother. Educated at Dr Goodenough's school at Ealing and at Eton College, Robert received a commission as ensign in the rifle brigade on 11 May 1825, and was promoted lieutenant on 26 September of the following year. 
Walpole served during the earlier part of his career with his corps in Nova Scotia (1825-36), Ireland, Birmingham during the bread riots (1839), Jersey, and Malta (1841-3). He was promoted captain on 24 January 1834, major on 31 May 1844, and lieutenant-colonel on 2 July 1847, in which year he was appointed to the staff as deputy adjutant and quartermaster-general at Corfu, where he remained until 1856, having been promoted colonel in the army on 25 November 1854. 
In 1857 Walpole went to India to take part in the suppression of the mutiny, for which he was mentioned in dispatches. He commanded the 6th brigade of the army under Sir Colin Campbell at the battle of Cawnpore on 6 December 1857, then assisted Campbell in preparations for the siege of Lucknow. During the siege, in 1858, Walpole commanded the 3rd division, comprising the 5th and 6th brigades, in a variety of skirmishes. After the capture of Lucknow he was sent in command of a division to march through Rohilkhand. He left Lucknow on 7 April, and on the 15th ineptly attacked Fort Ruiya, and was repulsed with considerable loss, although the enemy evacuated the fort the same night. Walpole's conduct of this operation was severely censured, and Malleson, in his 'History of the Indian Mutiny', not only asserted that the second in command, Brigadier Adrian Hope, who was killed in the attack, had no confidence in his chief, but that Walpole was altogether incompetent as a general in command. Walpole was not a great commander, but the strictures passed upon him were undeserved. On the occasion in question Walpole undervalued his enemy, and in consequence many valuable lives were lost; but the commander-in-chief was fully cognizant of all that took place, and, far from withdrawing from Walpole his confidence, he continued to employ him in positions of trust and in important commands during the remainder of the fighting in India. He commanded the troops under Lord Clyde at the battle of Bareilly on 5 May, when he was wounded by a sabre cut, and his horse was also wounded in three places. He commanded the Rohilkhand division from 1858 to 1860, and commanded in person at the fight of Maler Ghat on the River Sarda on 15 January 1859, when, with 360 men, 60 of whom were Europeans, he entirely defeated 2500 of the enemy and took two guns. 
For his services in the Indian mutiny Walpole received the medal with clasp for Lucknow; he was made first a companion, and then in May 1859 a knight commander in the Order of the Bath, and he received the thanks of parliament. In 1861 he commanded the Lucknow division, but in the same year was transferred to the command of the infantry brigade at Gibraltar. He was promoted major-general on 30 May 1862, brought home in 1864 to command the Chatham military district, and selected to command at the volunteer review in 1865. He relinquished the Chatham command in 1866, was promoted lieutenant-general on 25 October 1871, and was selected for command at the autumn manoeuvres of 1872. 
Walpole married, on 29 January 1846, Gertrude, youngest daughter of General William Henry Ford of the Royal Engineers. They had nine children. Walpole died on 12 July 1876 at his house, The Grove, West Molesey, Surrey. His wife, two sons, and three daughters survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 28604


Walpole, Spencer Horatio (1806-1898), politician, was born at Epsom, Surrey, on 11 September 1806, the second son of Thomas Walpole (1755-1840) of Stagbury Park, Epsom, British minister in Munich from 1784 to 1796, and his wife, Lady Margaret Perceval (1769-1854), eighth and youngest daughter of John Perceval, second earl of Egmont, and his second wife, Catherine Compton, created Baroness Arden in 1770. His great-grandfather was Horatio Walpole, first Lord Walpole of Wolterton, brother of the prime minister; one grandfather, Thomas Walpole (1727-1803), was a friend of Chatham; the other, Egmont, had led the parliamentary opposition to George II and the Pelhams; he owed his first name to his maternal uncle Spencer Perceval, the prime minister, and his second name indirectly to the Walpoles, directly to Nelson, the cousin and friend of his father. His elder brother was Sir Robert Walpole (1808-1876). At Ealing on 6 October 1835 he married his cousin, Spencer Perceval's fourth daughter, Isabella (1801-1886), one of the beneficiaries of parliament's grant of $50,000 to the family of the assassinated minister. 
Walpole went to Eton College where he was prominent in the debating society and became head of the school. At election in 1823 he gave the speech which Lord Strafford had delivered on the scaffold; Canning, who was present and who had recited the same speech in 1787, congratulated him on the fervour and feeling he had shown. He was admitted pensioner at Trinity College, Cambridge, on 22 March 1824, had Whewell for his tutor, won the first declamation prize and the prize for the best essay on the character of William III, became an 'Apostle', was president of the union in the Michaelmas term of 1827, and graduated BA in 1828. But, from the published memoirs and correspondence of his notable contemporaries and fellow Apostles such as Maurice, Sterling, Monckton Milnes, Kemble, Donne, and Trench, it does not seem that he belonged to their inner circle of friends. 
Walpole was admitted at Lincoln's Inn on 23 June 1827 and called to the bar on 10 June 1831. Like Spencer Perceval he practised in chancery, and with considerable success and profit. He was made QC on 2 July 1846 and bencher on 2 November. On 30 January 1846, at the height of the battle over repeal of the corn laws, he had been returned unopposed in a by-election as MP for Midhurst, where his cousin George James Perceval, sixth earl of Egmont, had the preponderant interest. In his acceptance speech he claimed that he would enter the Commons pledged to no party, while declaring his fixed opposition to reducing the taxes on corn 'by an atom' ('The Times', 2 Feb 1846). When the Conservative Party split, he stayed with the protectionists. Since they were virtually without experienced leaders in the Commons, Walpole's ability as a speaker and capacity for business propelled him speedily into prominence and into the counsels of the party. He made a reactionary speech in the house on 8 February 1848 against removing Jewish disabilities, which was admired and published; in the following year he argued powerfully against the repeal of the 'Navigation Acts'; and it seems that he was one of those regarded as possible alternatives to Disraeli as leader of the protectionists in the Commons in the confused period following Lord George Bentinck's resignation (Vincent, 71). He did not aim so high, and continued to work and prosper at the bar, where he was 'a great power indeed' ('Law Magazine and Review', 371). 
When Stanley tried to form a government in February 1851, Walpole was destined to be solicitor-general, though according to the 'Stanley Journals' (Vincent, 71) he was asked and agreed to take on the Home Office just before the attempt was abandoned. He now advocated dropping the party's demand for a return to agricultural protectionism. But he remained an unbending defender of the claims and privileges of the Church of England, declaring in a strong speech against 'papal aggression' on 21 March 1851 that 'conscience is pleaded, but dominion is meant. Toleration is asked for, but empire is designed.' The speech was published and 'put him up very high, and would enable Stanley to make him secretary of State' ('Greville Memoirs', 6.397). He went on to try to stiffen the 'Ecclesiastical Titles Bill', and on 2 June had many tory MPs whipped to support his amendments. On the day, however, he backed down, partly because of 'some legal difficulties, overlooked until that moment'. This 'instant and irretrievable' 'break-down', illustrating 'his self-acknowledged tendency to vacillation', infuriated his party (Vincent, 67; 'Men of the time'). However, he was regarded as the obvious candidate for home secretary when Derby formed his first government in February 1852. It was generally understood that this meant the end of his active legal career and hence a great financial sacrifice. He made himself 'respected as an amiable and useful officer' and piloted the crucial militia bill through the Commons; but at one stage he had provoked derision by proposing in the house, without prior consultation, to give all militiamen the vote, a plan which had to be 'withdrawn as abruptly as it had been proposed' (Vincent, 71). On 15 June he issued a proclamation forbidding the wearing of Catholic vestments and ornaments in public. Intended to calm anti-papal feeling, it was held to have contributed to the Stockport riots at the end of the month. It certainly enhanced his lifelong reputation 'as a zealous protestant prone to detect Jesuitism and kindred dangers in unsuspected quarters' ('The Times', 23 May 1898). As a speaker he was described by Disraeli to the queen as showing on one occasion 'great taste and moderation' (Monypenny & Buckle, 3.354), and on another as 'addressing the House with a spirit unusual with him' ('Letters of Queen Victoria', 2.389), while Lord Henry Lennox called him 'the dear, the gentle Spencer' (Monypenny & Buckle, 3.382). By the end of this ministry in December 1852 his public character was established. 'Men of the time' (1853) described him as: 'one of the most sincere, as well as one of the most individually unobnoxious members of his party... As a lawyer, an essayist, a scholar, and a gentleman, Mr Walpole is respectable; but as a party debater, a wary manoeuvrer, a dexterous master of the prejudices and passions of a popular assembly, he is very deficient.' He had acquired a reputation for integrity and lack of partisanship which, combined with his limited ambition and means, made it natural to think of him as a possible speaker from as early as June 1852, an idea which attracted him and which repeatedly surfaced both before and after Palmerston had John Evelyn Denison elected to the office in 1857. 
While in opposition from the end of 1852 to early 1858 Walpole was a director of the Great Western Railway from 1853 and its chairman in 1855-6, when he established a committee to investigate its debts, and he resumed his directorship between 1859 and 1866, taking the chairmanship again in 1862-3. In 1853, at the instigation of the new chancellor of Oxford, Derby, he was awarded an honorary DCL at Oxford together with Disraeli, Malmesbury, and Stanley. He was active in the debates on the reform of the old universities. After a motion had been carried for admitting dissenters to them in June 1854, the Liberals, wrote Greville: 'imprudently pressed on another division in which they were beaten, though by a small majority, and this of course does away with a good deal of the effect of the first division. It seems it was Mr. Walpole who insisted on the second division,... and it was rather dexterously done. ('Greville Memoirs', 7.167 and n.)' His desire to maintain Anglican exclusiveness endeared him to the conservative majority of Cambridge dons, who encouraged him after the death of Goulburn to move from his constituency of Midhurst to represent the university, where he was elected after a disorderly contest on 11 February 1856, defeating the Liberal Denman. This was the only one of his thirteen elections which went to a poll, a subscription reimbursed him for the costs of fighting a petition to unseat him, and he retained the seat until he retired in 1882. He was one of the leading tories who, as against Disraeli, argued that they should 'support the Executive Government, because it is the Executive Government, wherever they can' (in 1854) and 'give up... all mere struggles for place & power, & act on those Conservative principles of which we are or ought to be the exponents' (in 1857: Stewart, 290, 312). Before and during the Crimean War he was 'ultra-Peace' (Monypenny & Buckle, 4.19), and in the political crisis of February 1855 he agreed with Derby that a government consisting only of Conservatives was hopeless. He continued to uphold the rights of the established church, arguing in a speech of 17 June 1856, which was published, that the national system of education in Ireland was obsolete and unfair and that schools of the Church of Ireland ought to be allowed to receive state grants even if they made the whole 'Bible' available to their pupils. In these years, as throughout his parliamentary career, he resisted dissenting and radical attacks on church rates and put forward measures intended to settle the issue in a manner advantageous to the Church of England. 
When in February 1858 Derby formed his second ministry, Walpole returned to the Home Office, but only after making difficulties, complaining that on major issues such as parliamentary reform there was no party agreement. The cabinet's debates about its 'Reform Bill' were protracted. At one point Walpole and other dissidents sent Derby a 'Chancery brief, 87 folios' (Monypenny & Buckle, 4.193) objecting particularly to the lowering of one of the county franchises to the same level as the borough franchise, and to the abolition of existing constituencies. Finally, with J. W. Henley, Walpole resigned at the end of February 1859. 'The House listened [to his rather bitter resignation speech] with an attention worthy of the gravity of the character of him who addressed it. A most elaborate, and carefully prepared essay was given to us. No smile lighted the face of any Member. After an hour... Mr W. uttered these words... 'How will you define the terms 'rotten' and 'pocket' borough?' Quick as lightning Bernal Osborne said distinctly 'Midhurst'... The effect was an instant and deafening roar through the whole House. (Fraser, 264-5)' Greville wrote on Christmas day 1859 that Walpole and Henley were now 'null' (8.276). In fact Walpole's resignation enhanced his general reputation, because, though universally known to be a poor man by comparison with most ministers, he had given up $5000 a year as home secretary only a few weeks before he would have become eligible for a ministerial pension of $2000 p.a. for life. Hence 'no man in the house is held... in higher honour than Mr Walpole' (Gurowich, 144n.). He had resisted attempts to send him to govern a colony. The absence of any but the shortest account of his life and career has no doubt had much to do with the neglect of his role: references to him seldom even get into indexes (cf. Gladstone, 'Diaries'). But it is clear that he played a crucial though unusual part in the politics of this parliament. In the spring of 1859 he and Henley 'would have followed Gladstone if he had not joined [Palmerston's] government' (Morley, 2.31). During this ministry, recorded Trelawny, 'they sit just above the gangway on the 3rd bench, from which I infer their wish to be unamenable to D'Israelite discipline' ('Parliamentary Diaries', 1.105), and Walpole seems to have acted as the unofficial leader in the Commons of those tories -- probably the majority of the party -- who preferred to allow Palmerston to remain in power rather than risk joining with the radicals or the Irish Catholic MPs, as Disraeli was tempted to do, to bring down the government. In spite or because of this semi-independent stance, Walpole was frequently consulted about party tactics by Derby and Disraeli throughout the years of Palmerston's second government (June 1859 - October 1865). When Disraeli offered his resignation as leader in June 1860, declaring that 'the Tories... chalk the walls in the marketplace with my opprobrium' (Monypenny & Buckle, 4.291), Walpole was among those mobilized to dissuade him. However, in May-June 1861 he was only with difficulty induced to support Disraeli's line, which the party had adopted, against the repeal of the paper duties; Palmerston made him chairman of a Commons committee to consider the role of the Lords in financial matters, and Gladstone recalled that 'in the plan of uniting the financial proposals in one bill... Spencer Walpole gave honourable support' ('Gladstone', ed. Brooke and Sorensen, 1.89) During this parliament Disraeli liked to boast that the Conservatives were now a church party for the first time since 1840. One reason for this was the determination of Walpole, a 'devoted' church commissioner (1856-8, 1862-6) at a salary of $1200 p.a. (Best, 431; Vincent, 193), to mobilize it against radical motions on such issues as church rate and clerical subscription. Early in 1862 he led the opposition to the government's revised code for primary education and secured numerous changes in it. At the end of the debates Lowe, the minister responsible, offered him: 'sincere acknowledgments of the manner in which he has conducted this controversy. He has had the good fortune... of having carried out substantially that which he proposed; and..., in the moment of triumph and victory, he has had the wisdom and moderation to stop short, and to leave to the enemy, almost lying under foot, the remainder to which he clung... It is a rare instance of candour, moderation, and good feeling. (Walpole, 'Twenty-Five Years', 1.513n.)' Later in the same session, however, when on 3 June the Conservatives seemed poised to defeat the government on a motion demanding financial retrenchment, Palmerston made the issue a vote of confidence and, in Disraeli's words, 'my second in command [Walpole] lost his head and heart the moment the trumpets sounded for battle' and withdrew the amendment (Monypenny & Buckle, 4.288). According to Stanley, 'Walpole's conduct is blamed by all parties', but was not simply due to his 'infirmity of purpose'. The whigs had been courting him, making vague offers of the speakership. 'Personally, Walpole is poor, has a family, the pension is an object, and Mrs Walpole,... who with her father's narrowness of mind has much of his ambition, never ceases to urge him on. (This he has told me himself.) She is further stimulated by an extreme jealousy of Disraeli, as a Jew, and as having counselled the admission of Jews to parliament: a subject on which her feelings are fanatically strong.' Stanley believed that Mrs Walpole had persuaded her husband to back down and that he had privately told Palmerston he would do so if the issue were made one of confidence (Vincent, 186-7). The general importance of Mrs Walpole's influence is supported by the story of Walpole's resignation in 1867 and by his remark to Hardy of 19 June 1858: 'I have consulted my Prime Minister here at home' (Gathorne-Hardy, 1.123). But Hardy's view of the episode of 1862 was different from Stanley's: 'Walpole has been put in a most unfortunate position, and I fear will feel Disraeli's taunts greatly. Still I am not sure that for the party he has not done good in withdrawing the amendment; for after Pam's declaration there would have been a good many defaulters, and so division within exposed. (ibid., 1.156)' 

When planning a future cabinet, Derby agreed at the end of December 1863 'that Walpole had behaved so ill that he deserved nothing' (Vincent, 203) but a month later was ready to appoint him to the 'Home Office long enough to serve for his pension, which object it seems he puts forward openly' (ibid., 206). After the election of 1865 and the death of Palmerston, his successor Russell's 'Reform Bill' provoked a split in the Liberal Party. On 8 March 1866 a meeting of Disraeli, Northcote, Cranborne, Heathcote, and Walpole agreed to work with the dissidents to defeat the bill. When this occurred in June and the government fell, Derby made overtures to some of them, but with almost no success, and so he formed his third Conservative cabinet at the beginning of July with Walpole again home secretary -- though there is some evidence that Derby tried to find an alternative. In the more technical business of the office Walpole had previously shown himself 'the most timid of politicians' in the face of the opposition of vested interests to sanitary reform (Lambert, 387). But in 1867 he brought in two bills which extended the coverage of the 'Factory Acts' to many more trades and to workshops, thus affecting, he claimed, 1.4 million women and children. One writer believed that this was in his own eyes his most important achievement ('VF', 10 Feb 1872). By the time these measures had been passed, however, he had resigned office following 'the Capitulation of Hyde Park', the event for which alone he is generally remembered, especially because of its prominence in Carlyle's 'Shooting Niagara' and Matthew Arnold's 'Culture and Anarchy'. 
The drama had two acts. The first took place just after the formation of the cabinet. Following the defeat of the 'Reform Bill' the Reform League called a meeting to revive the issue in Trafalgar Square for 2 July, which was first forbidden by the police and then permitted. The league then called for processions from all over London to converge on Hyde Park for a massive meeting on Monday 23 July. The government possessed a legal opinion, written in 1856 after an earlier confrontation over meetings in the park, stating that there was power to close the gates and exclude all citizens, whether aristocrats riding or poor men protesting, but no power to forbid just the meeting; and further, that, if the meeting became obstreperous, the police could only remove individuals as trespassers, with minimal force. Walpole concluded that the meeting must be permitted. The cabinet, however, would not accept this apparently weak course and, in order to stop the meeting, closed the park. The demonstration took place notwithstanding, the gates were broken down by the force of numbers, and the protesters occupied the park. Police and military were standing by. The president of the Reform League, Edmond Beales, and its council called on Walpole on Thursday 26 July and offered, if they were promised no military or police interference, to enter the park and urge the demonstrators to withdraw. Walpole accepted this proposal, on behalf of the government, provided that no violence occurred, and also agreed to give every facility for testing the law on the matter. He was then asked by a smaller deputation to allow a meeting the next Monday, to which he replied that he needed notice of that question. It was rumoured that he had burst into tears during the discussion. The league, however, called such a meeting, advertising it as 'by arrangement with the Government'. Walpole denied that he had made any such arrangement, and Holyoake, one of the deputation, supported his denial, denying also that he had burst into tears. The discrepancy may be explained by Stanley's remark on 26 July: 'Walpole has acted sensibly enough throughout this matter: but his extraordinary manner, (when he spoke of the railings being broken, and a few police hurt, he was on the point of bursting into tears) creates an impression of weakness' (Vincent, 261). The meeting was held and, though it was orderly, Walpole was strongly criticized for having apparently confessed that the forces of law and order could not control the 'mob' and for having effectively conceded the right to meet in the park. Derby spoke of 'this fiasco of Walpole's' (Monypenny & Buckle, 4.452), but at the end of this act he survived in office. 
In the session of 1867 the government proceeded in a zig-zag fashion towards drafting and passing a reform bill, Walpole showing greater flexibility than he had in 1858-9 and accepting household suffrage. During the debates the Reform League decided to assert what they now saw as their right to meet in the park at a great meeting on 6 May. As in the previous year, Walpole explained to the cabinet the weakness of the government's legal position and favoured letting the meeting take place. The cabinet insisted on making some sort of a stand, and caused Walpole to issue a notice asserting that the meeting was illegal and urging people not to attend it, although they had decided to take no action to stop it. Beales went ahead, the meeting was held, the government and its forces let it occur, and there was no violence. The ministry was felt to have been humiliated. Disraeli had been especially anxious to avoid a confrontation with the league, and he was at least as much to blame for the withdrawal of the government as Walpole. Further, Walpole believed, as his son tells us, that Disraeli had been behind the main attack on his conduct in 'The Times' (Walpole, 'Twenty-Five Years', 2.199). But the matter was within the home secretary's province and he accepted responsibility. 'From his somewhat weak and vacillating manner there is a tendency to assume that it was his personal doing' (Vincent, 307). Derby did not want to drop him, recognizing that the cabinet was at fault and not wishing to make him a scapegoat. But Mrs Walpole made an apparently decisive intervention: she sent a letter to the prime minister saying that her husband was not fit to continue. Hardy, who liked and admired Walpole, recorded him saying 'he was so overdone that he really was not fit for his work, and would persist in going out' (Gathorne-Hardy, 1.215). He had by now qualified for a pension of $2000 p.a. Kimberley wrote of his 'imbecility' as 'almost beyond belief. The loss of a man so utterly incapable must be a gain to the Ministry' ('Journal of John Wodehouse', 202). But he remained a member of the cabinet without portfolio until Derby was replaced by Disraeli as prime minister in February 1868. 
For the rest of the parliament Walpole played a diminished role in the Commons, chairing the committee on the redistribution of seats and managing the 'Public Schools Bill'. Thereafter, his interventions in the house were chiefly concerned with matters affecting Cambridge University and the British Museum, of which he was a trustee. He can be seen through documents in the university archives acting conscientiously on its behalf, as for example in trying to defeat a devious manoeuvre of Gladstone to establish a parliamentary commission on university property in 1871. Walpole's attitude was: 'When shall we have any quiet? Real study will never flourish in troubled waters' (Walpole to vice-chancellor, 27 Oct 1871). He had been made honorary LLD in 1860 and was high steward from 1887. It is singular that, on grounds of cost, he did not send either of his sons to university. His last years were a long decline and 'a period of oblivion' (Gathorne-Hardy, 2.367), until he died at his house at Ealing on 22 May 1898. His estate was valued at over $38,000. 
In one of the very rare descriptions we have of him, Ritchie declared that he must have been 'very good-looking' in his youth, 'with his light, fresh complexion, well-chiselled features and clear blue eyes'. 'He chiefly affects black, and might be taken for a country vicar of good family' (Ritchie, 46). More brutally, Bernal Osborne compared him to 'a high-stepping Undertaker's horse' ('Parliamentary Diaries', 1.200). As a speaker he was described as weak, dull, prosy, pompous, solemn, but he was also lucid. 'His language is very musical and harmonious. When necessary, Mr. Walpole can make a good speech' (Ritchie, 46). 'Sir R. Peel is his model. Walpole is a goodnatured person in debate, but legal training crops out too much' ('Parliamentary Diaries', 1.196). He was known for his gentleness and his personal kindness. That he was easy company is attested by his membership of the Club and Grillion's and his election as president both of the Literary Society and of Nobody's Club. He was FRS and FGS. He appears to have been deeply religious: his poem 'The Saviour of Mankind' was privately printed in 1891. His only publications other than speeches were two articles on reform in the 'Quarterly Review' for October 1859 and January 1860. 
His elder son became Sir Spencer Walpole (1839-1907). The younger, Sir Horatio George Walpole KCB, was assistant under-secretary of state for India from 1883 to 1907. A memoir by his granddaughter, Frances Holland, describes his life at Ealing Manor, in part of which he lived with his family while letting his Perceval sisters-in-law occupy the wing now called Pitshanger Manor at a nominal rent. Bought as a country retreat in 1844 for the sake of his elder son's supposedly weak constitution, by the end of his life it and its 'totally uninteresting garden' (Walpole, 'Essays', ix) were surrounded by suburbia. Walpole had taken a considerable part in supplying Ealing with amenities, especially schools and churches, and his funeral on 26 May 1898 at Ealing parish church was attended by representatives of many local bodies. The borough bought the house and grounds for $40,000 from Sir Spencer after the death of the last Perceval, and the garden is now Walpole Park. 


@@@@@


doc= 28605


Walrond, Humphrey (b. 1602, d. in or after 1668), colonial official, was the eldest son of Humphrey Walrond (died 1621) of Sea, in the parish of Ilminster, Somerset, and his wife, Elizabeth Colles. He had six siblings: Maurice, Edward, John, George, Katherine, and Elizabeth. No later than 1623 Humphrey Walrond married Grace, daughter of Dr John Seaman of Painswick, Gloucestershire, and his wife, Elizabeth. Grace and Humphrey Walrond had ten children. Four of their five sons -- George (1624-1688), Henry, John (1634-1674), and Thomas -- followed their father into prominent positions in the political life of Barbados. 
Little is known of the first forty years of Walrond's life, other than his involvement in the west fen drainage scheme in Lincolnshire in the early 1630s. Richard Ligon, a friend of Walrond in Barbados, invested in a nearby fen drainage scheme, and it is possible that the two men met at this time. 
In April 1643 Walrond appears in the records as having executed a deed intended to satisfy his debts and distribute the remainder of his estate to his family in the event of his death. He next appears in July 1645, when the defeated royalist garrison of Bridgwater handed him over to parliament as a hostage to guarantee the terms of its surrender. Despite this fact, Walrond's actions during the civil wars remain unclear. In a petition provided to parliament in October 1645, while he was still a prisoner, he claimed that he had not accepted a commission from the king. Instead, he claimed that he protected supporters of parliament, in return for which he was robbed and forced to flee to Bridgwater. Apparently contradicting these claims, he received a grant of arms by Charles I for his services in the conflict, and may have served as deputy governor of Bridgwater, perhaps holding the rank of colonel. In addition, after the Restoration his wife and children claimed that his loyalty during the civil wars entitled them to compensation of various sorts. These claims could not, it seems, be verified. In any case, his petition to compound was granted in June 1646, and soon afterward he left England for Barbados, accompanied by his brother Edward and son George. He had arrived by early October 1646. 
Humphrey Walrond and his brother were to become major figures in Barbados in the 1640s, but there is reason to doubt the long-standing portrayal of Humphrey as a staunch royalist and the history of Barbados in the 1640s as an extension of the civil war. From the mid-1640s, Barbados was transformed by sugar and plantation slavery. The island's major planters, supported by Governor Philip Bell, pursued profits and effective home rule by placing their interests as sugar planters above politics. Ligon's 'True and Exact History of the Island of Barbados' (1657) is a valuable source for this transformation and the careful neutrality of the island's planters, who informally forbade use of the words 'cavalier' and 'roundhead'. But home rule depended on the distractions of war in England, and after the execution of Charles I parliament sought to re-establish control of the island. Humphrey Walrond responded by urging an alliance with the Bermuda colony to resist parliament. After this plan was rejected, he managed to stir up dissent among the planters by claiming that parliament was behind a thwarted 1650 uprising among the island's servants. In April that year he had become a central figure in the 'rebellion' on Barbados, playing on his fellow sugar planters' many fears: that title to their plantations was insecure, that the exploding population of servants and African slaves on the island threatened their safety, and that close oversight of their affairs would restrict the new and very profitable sugar trade. 
Walrond had come very close to seizing control of the island when Francis Willoughby, fifth Baron Willoughby of Parham, arrived in possession of the proprietary rights to the island of James Hay, third earl of Carlisle, and an appointment as governor of Barbados from Charles II. Walrond was able to delay Willoughby's accession for three months, but no longer. Willoughby tried to placate parliament and retain the island's home rule by, among other things, dismissing Humphrey and Edward Walrond from their posts, but in October 1650 parliament cut off all trade with Barbados and began assembling a fleet to bring the island to heel. The fleet finally arrived in late 1651, and the island surrendered in January 1652. The settlement, known as the charter of Barbados, required Humphrey and Edward to leave the island for a year, and forbade them to return without the permission of parliament. Both returned to England. 
Humphrey Walrond was back in Barbados in October 1656, and in 1660 Willoughby appointed him president of the council. His three-year tenure was eventful. As he had been in the 1640s, he was a strong proponent of home rule. He was outspoken in the struggle over revoking the proprietorship of Barbados (on the authority of which his own office depended) in favour of a royal governor. Some of his fellow planters proposed an export duty in exchange for secure title to their lands. He opposed the export duty and even argued for Barbados's exclusion from the 'Navigation Acts', which controlled imperial trade, on the questionable grounds that sugar was no longer a profitable commodity. Home rule was simply no longer an option in the 1660s, but with characteristic directness Walrond refused to moderate his views, and in 1661 he dissolved the Barbadian assembly for disagreeing with them. 
Walrond's most controversial policy was to trade surplus African slaves to Spanish merchants in Martinique, in direct violation of both the 'Navigation Acts' and the decision of the Barbados council. As a result of this decision, in 1663 Philip IV of Spain granted him several titles -- marquess of Vallado, count of Valderonda, and count of Parama. It is uncertain whether Walrond ever received the patent for these titles, but there exists no better example of his willingness to march to his own tune. Although his decision was later approved by authorities in England, he refused to relinquish the commission paid to him by the Spanish, perhaps using the money to build the grand stone residence appropriated by Willoughby as the governor's mansion. 
The decision to trade with Spain was one of Walrond's gravest miscalculations, and it was compounded by his order that planters on Barbados be freed of prosecution for debt. Not only was this order issued without consulting the colony's assembly, but it suspiciously eased his own financial problems. In 1663 Willoughby returned to the colony, now as the royal governor. He called on Walrond to account for the sums owed to the crown from the Spanish commission, as well as others he was said to have appropriated, and Walrond resisted. After a warrant was issued for his arrest, he was reported to be riding around the island with armed servants, inciting the planters to rebellion. Despite Willoughby's efforts to arrest him and threats to prosecute his allies for sedition and treason, Walrond demonstrated that he retained some support on the island by successfully evading the patrols and eventually escaping Barbados. 
After his flight from Barbados, Walrond appeared in England, where the privy council ordered him to be imprisoned. Again he escaped, and little is known of his life after this point. In 1668 his wife, Grace, petitioned the king on his behalf, claiming that he had left England and asking that he be allowed to reappear and defend himself. There is no record of a reply, and given the many warrants for his arrest, this is hardly surprising. He does not resurface after this date, and it is assumed that he died soon afterwards. 


@@@@@


doc= 28606


Walsh, Antoine Vincent, Jacobite first Earl Walsh (bap. 1703, d. 1763), Jacobite naval officer, was baptized on 22 January 1703 NS at St Malo in France, the third son of Philip Walsh ('bap'. 1666, died 1708), a Waterford merchant who settled at St Malo about 1685, and his wife, Anne Whyte (died 1727). On 10 January 1741 NS he married Marie, daughter of Luke O'Shiell of Nantes, and they had two sons, including Antoine Jean Baptiste (1745-1798), and a daughter, Marie. After serving in the French navy Walsh became a merchant and made a fortune from the Nantes slave trade. He took a leading role in the Irish emigre community's planning and financing of Charles Edward Stuart's expedition to Scotland, which resulted in the 1745 Jacobite rising, and was 'a key figure throughout the naval side of the '45' (Gibson, 11). In their correspondence Walsh adopted the pseudonym Monsieur Le Grand and the young prince was Mr Douglas; they also had face-to-face discussions at Navarre in April 1745. 
Accompanied by Walsh, Charles Edward left St Nazaire on 3 July 1745 NS in one of Walsh's vessels, the 'Du Teillay' (18 guns, Captain Claude Durbe). On 20 July NS the warship 'Elisabeth' (64 guns), hired from the French navy as a privateer to accompany them, encountered the British 'Lyon' (58 guns) off the Lizard; the 'Elisabeth' was badly damaged and had to return to port, and the 'Du Teillay' continued alone, without the arms and Irish volunteers on the warship, landing Charles Edward at Lochailort in Loch-nan-Uamh in South Morar on 5 August NS, and departing on 17 August NS. 
On his return to France, Walsh urged Louis XV to send assistance to Charles Edward, and was put in charge of assembling coastal craft in the channel ports for an invasion of England. When the invasion plans were abandoned he sent two of his own Nantes privateers, the 'Mars' (36 guns) and the 'Bellone' (32 guns), loaded with arms and 852,000 livres, to bring the prince home if necessary; but they were attacked by three British ships in Loch-nan-Uamh after landing the supplies on 3 May 1746 NS, and nobody could stay to search for Charles Edward. 
After the battle of Culloden, Walsh sent detailed proposals for rescuing the prince to Maurepas, the minister of marine, some of which advice was acted upon, but following the failure of the rising he had fallen out of favour with the French court. He was, however, ennobled by Louis XV in December 1753, having been created Earl Walsh by James III (James Francis Edward Stuart) in October 1745, and remained a trusted friend of Charles Edward, acting as his intermediary with Earl Marischal in their dispute in 1754. He died at Cap Francais, San Domingo (Haiti), on 2 March 1763. On his death the Jacobite peerage passed to his second and only surviving son, Antoine Jean Baptiste. 


@@@@@


doc= 28607


Walsh, Edward (1756-1832), physician, was born in Waterford, Ireland, the eldest son of John Walsh (1720-1785), a merchant of Ballymountain House, co. Waterford. Robert Walsh (1772-1852) was his younger brother. After early education at Waterford, he studied medicine at Edinburgh and at Glasgow, where he graduated MD in 1791. 
Before leaving Waterford, Walsh founded a literary society there, an account of which by him appeared anonymously in the 'British Magazine' in 1830 (pp. 99-105). A poem by him won a silver medal offered by this society, and was also successful some years later after it had been appropriated by one of the competitors for the Dublin College Historical Society medal (ibid., 102). In 1792 Walsh published a poem, 'The Progress of Despotism: a Poem on the French Revolution', which was dedicated to Charles James Fox, and a year later a collection of his work entitled 'Bagatelles' appeared. About the same time he published in the 'Anthologia Hibernica' a proposal for a universal alphabet. 
Walsh began his professional career as medical officer on a West Indian packet. He was afterwards physician to the forces in Ireland during the 1798 rising, and was present at the battles in Wexford in 1798, and at the surrender of Humbert at Ballinamuck. Walsh also served in the Holland expedition of 1799, of which he later wrote an account, and at the attack on Copenhagen (2 April 1801), where his hand was shattered. He was afterwards sent with the 49th regiment to Canada, where he spent some years studying Native American life. He collected a vast amount of information for a statistical history of Canada, but never published the work. He was present during most of the battles of the Peninsular War, and at Waterloo, and also served in the Walcheren expedition. He held for some time the post of president of the medical board at Ostend. He died on 7 February 1832 at Summerhill, Dublin. 


@@@@@


doc= 28608


Walsh, Edward (1805-1850), poet and translator, was born in Londonderry. His parents were natives of Millstreet, West Muskerry, co. Cork. His father had had a smallholding there but was dispossessed after eloping with a young woman, Edward's mother, who was of a higher social standing than he. Walsh senior joined the North Cork militia for want of better employment. He was a sergeant and stationed in Londonderry when Edward was born, returning to his native place some years later. 
West Muskerry was almost entirely Irish speaking at the beginning of the nineteenth century, and Edward, who spent many years in the area, had complete mastery of the language. Indeed it is likely that he first learned Irish from his own parents. Muskerry, moreover, had a vigorous Irish scribal and literary tradition and as part of his education in local 'hedge schools' Walsh learned to read and write Irish, an ability unusual at the time in much of Ireland. The Irish form of his name was Eadbhard Breathnach, although most of his later publications appeared under the Anglicized version. Walsh eventually became a schoolmaster and was tutor for a while to the children of a local member of parliament. Walsh took part in anti-tithe agitation, which was widespread in west Cork, and is said to have been imprisoned for a period. He was appointed teacher in the national school in Glantane, near Mallow. Having written an article entitled 'What is repeal, Papa?' in 'The Nation' (founded 1842), he was dismissed from his post. 
About this time Walsh began writing English versions of Irish folk tales in the 'Dublin Penny Journal'. He was next employed as a teacher at Tourin, near Cappoquin, co. Waterford. Here he met Bridget O'Sullivan, daughter of a teacher from Aglish, co. Waterford, whom he married about 1843. They had several children. While at Tourin Walsh contributed original compositions in English and translations of Irish poetry to various magazines. Walsh moved to Dublin about 1843 in the hope of improving his position in life. He was sub-editor for a while on a weekly newspaper called 'The Monitor', a post he obtained through the influence of John O'Daly and Sir Charles Gavan Duffy, editor of 'The Nation'. He was thereafter employed as clerk in the corn exchange, where the work was particularly arduous. 
In 1844, in collaboration with John O'Daly, Walsh published 'Reliques of Irish Jacobite Poetry', a collection of his own verse translations of eighteenth-century Irish songs together with the Irish texts. A second edition appeared in 1866. In 1847 he published a collection of original works and translations under the title 'Irish Popular Songs'. A second edition appeared in 1883. Irish folk-songs are noted for their restrained simplicity; Walsh's translations are by comparison precious and effusive. Although interesting as examples of Victorian sentimentality, they are greatly inferior to the Irish originals. His verses were none the less much admired in the nineteenth century, not least because of their overtly nationalist tone. 
In 1847 poverty obliged Walsh to accept the post of schoolteacher to the young convicts in the penal settlement of Spike Island in Cork harbour. On 30 May 1848 he obtained a clandestine interview with John Mitchel, the political convict, and was dismissed. Walsh was always of delicate health; Mitchel in his 'Jail Journal' says of him, 'Poor Walsh! He has a family of young children. He seems broken in health and spirits... There are more contented galley-slaves moiling at Spike than the schoolmaster' (Mitchel, 12). On 24 August 1848 Walsh was appointed resident teacher to the Cork union workhouse at a salary of $40 per annum. His health deteriorated further and he was compelled to take private lodgings at 13 Prince's Street, where he died on 6 August 1850. Walsh was buried in the Cork Botanical Gardens. A monument was erected to his memory by the trades of Cork city in 1857. His widow and children were befriended by Sir Charles Gavan Duffy and subsequently emigrated to Australia. 


@@@@@


doc= 28609


Walsh, John (1726-1795), natural philosopher and politician, was born on 21 May 1726 in Madras, the second son of the three children of Joseph Walsh (died 1731), senior merchant in the East India Company, and his wife, Elizabeth (1697-1734), daughter of Nevil Maskelyne (1663-1711) of Purton, Wiltshire. Nevil Maskelyne (1732-1811), astronomer royal from 1765, and his sister, Margaret, wife of Robert, first Baron Clive (1725-1774), were his first cousins. Walsh's father conducted his mercantile business in partnership with his brother John Walsh of Hatton Garden, London, and, finding himself in financial difficulties in 1728, he went to London to seek his brother's help, accompanied by his elder son, Joseph ('b'. 1722), who died of smallpox there. He returned alone to India in 1729, where he died in 1731. 
Walsh was sent to England immediately after his father's death, and was raised by his uncle John. His mother went into a decline and died in 1734. In 1742 Walsh joined the East India Company as a writer, and was sent to Madras. He was in England in 1747-9, and rose to the grade of senior merchant; in 1757 he was appointed secretary to Clive, and two years later he returned to England as his agent. He corresponded regularly with Clive and, after the latter's death in 1774, with his widow, Walsh's cousin. Clive's daughter Charlotte became his ward. 
Walsh's mission in 1759 was to report Clive's military successes to the East India Company directors, and to give Prime Minister Pitt a copy of Clive's plan to reorganize the administration of Bengal. By now Walsh was a wealthy man, thanks to the booty distributed when Siraj-ud-Dawla, governor of Bengal, surrendered to Clive at Plassey. He settled in England and in 1761 purchased the manor of Hockenhull, Cheshire, which in 1771 he exchanged for Warfield Park, Bracknell, Berkshire. When his sister, Elizabeth Fowkes, was widowed and left penniless, he accommodated and educated her three children. Clive supported Walsh's election to the House of Commons to represent Worcester in 1761, claiming that he would energetically represent the whig interest. Walsh did speak occasionally on matters connected with the East India Company, but otherwise showed an independent spirit. In fact he had little taste for politics, preferring science: he was not a candidate in the elections of 1780 and 1790, and was defeated when he stood in 1784 and in the by-election of 1791. 
Elected to the Royal Society in 1770, Walsh soon became absorbed in the subject for which he became briefly famous: the electric fish. The numbing shocks felt by anyone who touched the electric ray, 'Torpedo marmorata', which inhabited the Mediterranean and other shores of Europe, had been known since classical times. In 1769 Edward Banfield reported on the more powerful electric eel, 'Gymnotus' (now 'Silurus') 'electricus', from tropical South America. Banfield proved that the eel emitted electric shocks, and Walsh set out to confirm that the ray had a similar power. In this he was encouraged by Benjamin Franklin, whose American colleagues were undertaking similar investigations. With his nephew Arthur Fowkes he spent the summer of 1772 at La Rochelle, where the ray was often captured. The fish could survive many hours out of water, and Walsh was able to conduct experiments ashore. He wired up the fish to a series of bowls of water, which were interlinked by people with a hand in each adjacent bowl. A shock was felt by all when the wire was led back to the fish and the circuit completed, proving that the ray's shocks were caused by electricity and could be transmitted through conducting substances. His letter to Franklin announcing these findings was published in the Royal Society's 'Philosophical Transactions' (63, 1773, 461-77). The surgeon John Hunter dissected the ray and identified the organs concerned; the question of how recharge occurred remained for later scientists to discover. 
The Royal Society awarded Walsh the Copley medal for his achievement, though some physicists still challenged his findings, as the ray's charge did not show the attraction and repulsion or sparks that they associated with electricity generated by the Leyden jar. Walsh and Hunter continued their experiments on the gymnotus, and Walsh endeavoured to obtain information on electric rays in Indian seas, though this work was not published; in later years Cavendish, Humboldt, and Faraday continued to investigate this animal electricity. Walsh died on 9 March 1795 at his town residence in Chesterfield Street, London. He was unmarried, and left his property to Sir John Benn, who in 1778 had married his niece Margaret. In accordance with the provisions of the will, Benn assumed the additional name of Walsh, and was the father of John Benn Walsh, first Baron Ormathwaite (1798-1881). 


@@@@@


doc= 28610


Walsh, John (1835-1881), poet and schoolmaster, was born on 1 April 1835 at Belville Park, Cappoquin, co. Waterford, of which estate his father, William Walsh, was steward. He was educated at Cappoquin national school, where he became a monitor and then an assistant teacher. In January 1853 he entered the Marlborough Street Training School, Dublin, and in October 1854 was put in charge of the Cappoquin national school where he remained until early 1869, when he held a similar position at Whitechurch, co. Waterford. He married a Tipperary woman, Julia Kavanagh (not to be confused with the Tipperary novelist and biographer of that name, 1824-1877). They had six children, including the minor poet Paul Walsh (died 1891). 
During his time in Dublin, Walsh came under the influence of the poet Robert Dwyer Joyce, who probably encouraged an interest in Irish legend and song. (Walsh is to be distinguished from the barrister John Walsh, who wrote verse for the same journal under the pseudonym Montanus. He was also unrelated to Edward Walsh (1805-1850), poet and translator.) A national schoolmaster 'could not safely parade the authorship' of poems of national sentiment ('Irish Monthly', 1892, 433) and thus Walsh had many 'noms de plume': in the 'Irish Harp' (1863) he signed himself Lyrista; in 'The Irishman', Shamrock (and later Lismore); in 'The Celt' (Kilkenny), Corner Stone; in the 'Waterford Citizen', A Cappoquin Girl; and in the 'Irish People', Kilmartin. In 'The Nation' he wrote as J. J. W., J. W., and Boz. He also wrote for 'The Emerald' in 1868, a journal edited by his brother-in-law Michael Kavanagh who had emigrated in 1848 to Washington, USA. 
Walsh's poems have occasionally been anthologized, but as they are by turns sentimental and banal, most scarcely justify collection. His 'Lament of the Ejected Irish Peasant', however, printed in 'Dublin University Magazine' (35/205, January 1850, 134-5), was republished as a broadside, and his 'Drimin donn dilis' ('Dear brown cow') found its way into the edition of Stopford A. Brooke and T. W. Rolleston, 'A Treasury of Irish Poetry in the English Tongue' (1900): '
Oh! 'drimin donn dilis!' the landlord has come, 

Like a foul blast of death has he swept o'er our home; 

He has withered our roof-tree -- beneath the cold sky, 

Poor, houseless, and homeless, to-night we must lie. 

... 

But they racked and they ground me with tax and with rent, 

Till my heart it was sore and my life blood was spent: 

Today they have finished, and on the wide world 

With the mocking of fiends from my home I was hurled. 

' Both poems have more recently been anthologized in 'The Hungry Voice: the Poetry of the Irish Famine' (1989, 77-8). 
In 1872 Walsh took charge of the national school in Cashel, co. Tipperary, where he died on 27 February 1881. He was buried in the graveyard attached to the ruins on the Rock of Cashel. 


@@@@@


doc= 28611


Walsh, John (1830-1898), Roman Catholic archbishop of Toronto, the son of James Walsh and his wife, Ellen Macdonald, was born at Mooncoin, co. Kilkenny, on 23 or 24 May 1830. After education at St John's College, Waterford, he emigrated to Canada in April 1852, entered the grand seminary at Montreal, and received the tonsure. His Irish years made him a convinced nationalist in the style of Daniel O'Connell and a strong ultramontanist. Soon after reaching Canada he was struck down by cholera and his health never fully recovered. 
In 1854 Walsh served on the Brock mission on Lake Simcoe; shortly after the consecration of Dr Lynch as bishop of Toronto in 1859, he became rector of St Michael's Cathedral in that city, and in 1862 was nominated vicar-general of the diocese. In 1864 he visited Rome and was nominated by Pius IX bishop-elect of Sandwich. Four years later he controversially removed the episcopal residence from Sandwich to London, Ontario, to which city the see was transferred by a decree from the 'propaganda fide' dated 15 November 1869. Great scope was now afforded to Walsh's administrative ability. Within three years he paid off a large debt. Ill health prevented his attendance at the 1869-70 Vatican Council, but he replied sturdily to W. E. Gladstone's campaign against 'Vaticanism' in 1874-5. In 1876, when he again visited Rome, he reported twenty-eight new churches and seventeen presbyteries built within his diocese, in addition to a college, an orphanage, and the episcopal residence at Mount Hope. In May 1881 the cornerstone of the new cathedral in London was laid, and St Peter's was dedicated by Walsh on 28 June 1885. In 1882 he visited Ireland. By a brief dated 27 August 1889 he was appointed archbishop of Toronto, and he died in that city on 27 July 1898. As a pulpit orator and a prudent organizer he enjoyed a great reputation in Canada. He was also very popular in Ireland, and took a leading part during the summer of 1896 in organizing the Irish race convention in Dublin, by which it was hoped to reconcile the various sections of the nationalist party, though he was unable to attend it personally. 


@@@@@


doc= 28612


Walsh, John Benn-, first Baron Ormathwaite (1798-1881), politician, born at Warfield Park, Berkshire, on 9 December 1798, was the only son of Sir John Benn-Walsh, baronet, of Warfield Park, Berkshire, and Ormathwaite, Cumberland. His father was the son of William Benn of Moor Row, Cumberland, a member of an old north-country family; he married, in 1778, Margaret ['see 'Walsh, Margaret Benn-, 'under' Fowke, Joseph (1716-1800)], daughter of Joseph Fowke of Bexley, Kent, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Joseph Walsh, governor of Fort St George. On 4 April 1795 he assumed the surname and arms of Walsh by royal licence, in compliance with the will of his wife's uncle, John Walsh (1726-1795), son of Joseph Walsh. He was created a baronet on 14 June 1804, sat for Bletchingly in 1802-6, and died on 7 June 1825. 
Walsh was educated at Eton College, and matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 3 December 1816. He entered parliament for the borough of Sudbury in 1830, and represented that constituency as a tory until December 1834. An energetic politician and an able writer, he published several pamphlets on parliamentary reform, the second of which, 'Observations on the Ministerial Plan of Reform' (1831), Lord Ellenborough thought would secure him 'a good efficient place' (Aspinall, 77); but he had no seat when Peel regained office in 1834. In January 1835 he contested the county of Radnor, but was defeated by a small majority. After defeat at Poole in the general election of 1837, he was elected for Salisbury at a by-election in March 1838. He then moved, unopposed, to Radnorshire at a by-election in June 1840, holding the seat unopposed (except in 1841) until 1868. Despite his ability, he did not hold office, even in the three Derby-Disraeli tory governments. 
Walsh was JP and deputy lieutenant for Berkshire, and served as high sheriff of that county in 1823. Being lord of the manor of Trewerne in Radnorshire and the owner of over 12,000 acres there (his seat was Newcastle Court), he was also JP for that county and high sheriff in 1825; he was lord lieutenant and 'custos rotulorum' of Radnorshire from 1842 to 1875. He was a staunch defender of Anglicanism in Wales. He married, on 8 November 1825, Jane (1803-1877), youngest daughter of George Harry Grey, sixth earl of Stamford and Warrington. With her he had two sons and two daughters. 
In addition to his political pamphlets, Walsh wrote 'Chapters of Contemporary History' (1836), 'Political Back-Games' (1871), 'Astronomy and Geology Compared' (1872), and 'Lessons of the French Revolution, 1789-1872' (1873). On 16 April 1868 Disraeli had him created Baron Ormathwaite of Ormathwaite. He died at his Berkshire seat, Warfield Park, on 3 February 1881 and was buried at Warfield. 


@@@@@


doc= 28613


Walsh, John Edward (1816-1869), judge and writer, was born in Tolka, co. Dublin, on 12 November 1816, the son of Robert Walsh (1772-1852) a cleric, and his wife, Ann Eliza Ellen (died 1879), daughter of John Bayly. He received his early education at Bective School, co. Dublin, and matriculated at Trinity College, Dublin, on 5 July 1832; he became a scholar in 1835 and graduated BA in 1837 with the first gold medal in both classics and ethics. In 1845 he was granted the honorary degree of LLD. He entered the Middle Temple, London, in 1838 and was called to the Irish bar in the Michaelmas term of 1839, upon which he joined the Leinster circuit. On 1 October 1841 he married Blair Belinda, the daughter of Captain Gordon MacNeill. They had five sons and one daughter. 
During his early years at the bar Walsh contributed frequently to the 'Dublin University Magazine'. He also edited several law books; one, which he published jointly with Richard Nun, 'The Powers and Duties of Justices of the Peace in Ireland' (1844), became a standard textbook on the subject. In 1847 he also published, anonymously, 'Ireland Sixty Years Ago', a well-known book in its day, which offered a portrait of life and manners in Ireland during the Grattan parliament. Walsh was a reporter in the court of chancery from 1843 to 1852 and was elected a member of the Royal Irish Academy in 1855. 
In 1857 Walsh became a queen's counsel, and, two years later, crown prosecutor at Green Street. A lifelong Conservative, he was in 1866 appointed attorney-general for Ireland in Lord Derby's third administration, and in the same year he was elected to represent the University of Dublin in parliament. Again in the same year he was raised to the Irish bench as master of the rolls, in succession to Thomas Barry Cusack-Smith. His most famous judgment was that in 'MacCormac v. The Queen's University', which invalidated the charter granted to the university in 1866 by Lord Russell's government. It was also during his tenure of office as master of the rolls that the Irish Public Record Office was reorganized under Sir Samuel Ferguson. 
After the disestablishment of the Church of Ireland, Walsh became an active member of the provisional convention for settling the new constitution of the church. His normal place of residence was Merrion Square, Dublin, but he died after a very short illness, in Paris, on 20 October 1869; he was survived by his wife. 


@@@@@


doc= 28614


Walsh, John Henry (1810-1888), writer on sport, son of Benjamin Walsh, was born at Hackney, Middlesex, on 21 October 1810, baptized at St John's, Hackney, on 22 February 1811, and educated at a private school. In 1832 he passed as a member of the Royal College of Surgeons, and in 1844 he became a fellow of the college by examination. For some time he was surgeon to the Ophthalmic Institution, and lectured on surgery and descriptive anatomy at the Aldersgate school of medicine. He married, first, on 21 July 1835, Margaret Nash Stevenson, daughter of Thomas Stevenson of Claines, Worcestershire, who died nine months later; second Susan Emily, daughter of Dr Malden of Worcester, who died eight months later. 
By 1837 Walsh was in practice at Worcester with Thomas W. Walsh in Foregate Street and The Tything. With William Harcourt Ranking, a Norwich physician, he edited 'The Provincial Medical and Surgical Journal' from 1849 to 1852. He left Worcester for London in 1852. He always had an intense love of sport, he rode well to hounds, kept greyhounds and entered them at coursing meetings, broke his own pointers and setters, and also trained hawks. He was also fond of shooting, and, owing to the bursting of his gun, lost a portion of his left hand. On 1 January 1852 he married his third wife, Louisa, eldest daughter of the Revd William Parker. 
In 1853, under the pseudonym of Stonehenge, Walsh brought out his book 'The greyhound, on the art of breeding, rearing, and training greyhounds for public running, their diseases and treatment' (3rd edn, 1875), based on articles he had written in 'Bell's Life'. Three years later, in 1856, appeared 'Manual of British Rural Sports', which covers the whole cycle of field sports, and, among other things, deals in a scientific manner with the breeding of horses. It was frequently reprinted, as were 'The Horse in the Stable and in the Field' (1861) and 'A Manual of Domestic Economy Suited to Families Spending from $100 to $1000 a Year' (1857). He wrote many other books, mostly on sports but a few of them on cookery. In 1856 he originated the 'Coursing Calendar', which he conducted through fifty half-yearly volumes. About 1856 he began to write for 'The Field', and at the end of 1857 accepted the editorship. 
Between 1858 and 1875, Walsh organized the 'Field' trials of guns and rifles, which wound up the controversy as to the merits of breech-loaders and muzzle-loaders. Again, in 1878, he endeavoured to make clear what were the respective merits of Schultze and black powder, discovering that light pressure with Schultze produced better shooting than tight ramming. Other experiments led to his invention of the 'Field' force gauge, which gave results more reliable than the paper pads previously in use. In 1879 another gun trial was carried out to determine the merits of 12-bores, 16-bores, and 20-bores. In 1883 he instituted the rifle trial at Putney to demonstrate and measure the accuracy of shooting of Express rifles at the target, and subsequently organized trials to ascertain the cause of so many breakages in guns, the testing of powders by the lead cylinder method, the various effects of nitro compounds, and the strain on the barrels of small bores. His comments on proof powder in 'The Field', when he stated that the powder used in testing gun barrels was 50 per cent below the proof required, led to an action, 'Birmingham Proof House Guardians v. Walsh', in which a verdict was given against him of 40's'. damages. However, the guardians' reluctance to provide powder for independent experts to test made a bad impression, and ultimately Walsh succeeded in obtaining some useful changes. 
Walsh was one of the founders of the National Coursing Club and of the All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club, and he was on the committee of the Kennel Club. He was a good chess player, and on the managing committees of several clubs. He died at his home, 7 Montserrat Road, Putney, London, on 12 February 1888, owing to sudden complications from kidney stones, and was buried on 16 February in the old cemetery at Putney Common. He was survived by his third wife and two daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 28615


Walsh, Nicholas (d. 1585), Church of Ireland bishop of Ossory, was the son of Patrick Walsh (died 1578), Church of Ireland bishop of Waterford and Lismore from 1551. His son Nicholas was born in the city of Waterford. He spent time in the universities of Paris, Oxford, and Cambridge and was granted the degree of BA by the senate of the University of Cambridge in 1562/3 on the grounds of his having kept twelve terms of residence at these universities. He was granted an MA in 1567. In 1571 he was made chancellor of St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin. 
There is evidence that Walsh was recommended for the bishopric of Kilmacduagh in 1572, but that he declined the appointment. In February 1578 he became bishop of Ossory. He was a conscientious bishop; he attempted to enforce the law against recusants and his contemporary, Sir Henry Wallop, said that he 'was the only man of his coat, that I ever knew born in [Ireland], that did most sincerely know and teach the Gospel'. 
Walsh was probably tall and thin for he refers to himself as 'Nicholas the Scar[e]crowe'. He was the author of a collection of sermons in Latin and was also involved in the translation of the 'New Testament' into Irish. This was a collaborative effort, initially involving Walsh, Nehemiah Donellan, and John Kearney, an associate of Walsh since their days in Cambridge together. Walsh's contribution to the translation began about 1573 while he and Kearney were both in St Patrick's Cathedral. While in Dublin Walsh and Kearney were instrumental in introducing Gaelic type into Ireland. The Irish 'New Testament' was finally published by William Daniel in 1602 or 1603. 
Bishop Walsh seems always to have been short of funds. In April 1581 he begged that he be allowed to hold 'in commendam' any benefices in his diocese that might become vacant. Otherwise, he claimed, he would have to vacate the bishopric for lack of money. On 14 December 1585 Walsh was stabbed to death in his own house in Kilkenny by James Dullard, 'a profligate wretch' whom he had cited in his consistory court for adultery; it was said that Dullard killed the bishop in order to prevent the case going any further. At the time Walsh was also engaged in proceedings to recover the properties of his see. Walsh was buried on the south side of the great aisle of Kilkenny Cathedral, where a monument was erected to him. Dullard was hanged. 


@@@@@


doc= 28616


Walsh, Peter (c.1618-1688), Roman Catholic priest, also known as Petrus Valesius, was born at Mooretown, co. Kildare, Ireland. His father was a chandler in Naas, and his mother, whose maiden name was Goodie, was alleged to have been an English protestant. 
Walsh, like many sons of the Old English Catholic gentry, was educated in Europe. About 1630 he joined the Franciscan college of St Anthony, Louvain, founded by Florence Conry in 1606. He excelled in his studies, and became a member of the order and a doctor, and later professor of divinity. His doctoral thesis was dedicated to his friend and mentor Cornelius Jansen, then bishop-elect of Ypres. Although Walsh did not share Jansen's doctrine of grace on the controversial contemporary issue of papal supremacy, his views were certainly Jansenist and Gallican. The struggle for supremacy between spiritual and temporal authority, papal and monarchical power, divided Catholic Europe at this time and would be manifested in Ireland in these decades with decisive results. It was Walsh's stance on this crucial issue, together with his future association with James Butler, first duke of Ormond, which would fundamentally affect the rest of his life and determine his place in Irish history. 
Walsh returned to Ireland in 1646, at the height of the confederate war, to Kilkenny, headquarters of the Catholic confederacy. He joined the Franciscan house, and was appointed public lecturer in divinity and later chaplain to the army in Munster. He was immediately embroiled in the political controversy surrounding the peace treaty proclaimed on 30 July 1646 and agreed between the confederate supreme council and Ormond, the king's representative. The majority of the council and the Old English Catholic nobility supported the treaty, but most of the clergy, under the authority of the papal nuncio, Giovanni Battista Rinuccini, archbishop of Fermo, rejected its terms. Rinuccini argued that the Catholic majority in Ireland should not compromise with a heretic protestant king whose current crisis presented the opportunity to insist upon the establishment of the Catholic church in Ireland. At a meeting of the clergy in Waterford, Walsh was among a minority who opposed the nuncio and the so-called unanimous decree of 12 August which declared perjured any Catholics who adhered to the peace treaty, said to have violated the previous oath of association. Walsh's defiance of the nuncio and the principle of papal supremacy in Ireland resulted in his excommunication on 1 September. Rinuccini blamed him for misleading the nobility with his heretical ideas. 
With the supreme council in prison and Rinuccini apparently dominant, Walsh continued the verbal offensive. In 1647, in nine successive sermons in St Canice's Cathedral, Kilkenny, he preached against the teaching of Cornelius Mahony, a Jesuit from Cork then living in Lisbon. In 1645 Mahony had published 'Disputatio apologetica', which argued that the English crown had forfeited the right to govern Ireland, having broken the terms of Pope Adrian's grant. Walsh was subsequently deprived of his house and appointment at Kilkenny and forbidden access to a library. However, with the support of David Rothe, bishop of Ossory, and most of the supreme council, he continued to speak out against Rinuccini's stance. Walsh argued that loyalty to a protestant king was not only consistent with Catholic faith and moral duty but also the best option for the future of the Catholic church in Ireland. 
A cessation of arms agreed between the supreme council and Inchiquin on 20 May 1648 was also condemned by Rinuccini, who proclaimed all its adherents excommunicated. The guardian of the Franciscans, Paul King, who enforced the nuncio's censure, was arrested by the council and replaced by Walsh. The council, with Walsh's assistance and the support of fourteen prelates, appealed directly to Rome against the censure. Despite the agency of Luke Wadding, another product of Louvain, the pope rejected their appeal, and unconditional absolution was only officially granted in 1688. Walsh was charged by Rothe and the supporting clergy with drafting a defence of their position. In 1648, with Owen Roe O'Neill, a supporter of Rinuccini, and the Ulster army encamped around Kilkenny, Walsh took three days and nights to write 'Queries Concerning the Lawfulness of the Present Cessation', his first publication. Thomas Dease, bishop of Meath, gave the paper his approval, and no one at the time attempted a response. Although Dease was the only bishop to support Walsh, he had significant support among the Old English Jesuits, lawyers, and gentry. 
Walsh's articulate opposition to Rinuccini brought him to the attention of Ormond, whom he met in Kilkenny for the first time in September 1648. Walsh's background and education, together with the support of many of Ormond's Old English friends and relatives, would also have recommended him. The conclusion of the second peace treaty between Ormond and the confederate council, approved by nine bishops on 17 January 1649, signalled the defeat of the nuncio and his departure from Ireland. Rinuccini's supporters were not all from a Gaelic Irish background, but the vast majority of Walsh's clerical support would have been considered Old English. It was the clergy of 'English extraction' who were later blamed for betraying the cause in Ireland in the 1640s (R. O'Ferrall and R. O'Connell, 'Commentarius Rinuccinianus de sedis apostolicae legatione ad foederatos Hiberniae catholicos per annos 1645-9', ed. S. Kavanagh, 6 vols., 1932-49, 4.212-14). 
In June 1649 Walsh was disciplined by Thomas McKiernan, provincial of the friars minor in Ireland, and sent to the convent at Castle Dermott 'for 'domo diciplinae', or prison' (Gilbert, 1.272), and there he remained until rescued by James Tuchet, earl of Castlehaven. Cromwell's victory at Kilkenny in March 1650 left Walsh without shelter and exposed to the persecution of his clerical opponents. Despite assistance from Castlehaven, who made Walsh his personal chaplain, conflict and opposition continued to plague him. The strength of feeling was such that Terence Albert O'Brien, bishop of Emly, threatened to undermine Castlehaven's forces at Limerick unless he abandoned Walsh. When the earl left for France in the autumn of 1651, Walsh was forced into hiding. 
In September 1652 Walsh was granted a passport by the parliamentary commissioners in Dublin, travelled to London, where he managed to remain until September 1654, and then went voluntarily to Madrid. On arrival in Spain he was imprisoned for several months before journeying to the Netherlands. Walsh suffered at this time from a lack of friends and supporters in the church, where the Roman hierarchy continued to censure him, and in Ireland, where his royalist connections to Ormond precluded favour. He was, however, able to live in hiding in England, only briefly venturing to Paris on one occasion. Apart from the Portuguese embassy in London, he received shelter in the homes of other Catholics or royalist associates of Ormond, with whom he maintained contact. In April 1660 he corresponded, in cipher, with the earl under the alias of Mr Weston, and was able to report positive developments in London preceding the king's restoration (MS Carte 214, fols. 71, 147). 
After the restoration of Charles II in May 1660 there were few Irish Catholic clerics better placed than Walsh or with greater potential to influence Irish politics. He was resident in London and had maintained contact with Ormond, one of the king's closest advisers. In the declaration of Breda, 4 April 1660, the basis for restoration, Charles had promised liberty of conscience, and Walsh must have been hopeful for the future. Like Sir Nicholas Plunkett and other agents for the Irish Catholic laity, he expected the terms of the peace treaty of 1649 to be honoured in respect of those that had, at great personal cost, remained loyal to the king in Ireland and served him in exile. In August, however, despite the king's personal plea, Irish Catholics were excluded from general pardon in the 'Act of Indemnity' passed by the English parliament. By October 1660 Walsh expressed his concerns in a letter to Ormond 'desiring a just and merciful regard of the Roman Catholics of Ireland' (Walsh to Ormond, Oct 1660, MS Carte 59, fols. 421-87). He urged Ormond to allay the fears and criticisms of even his 'fastest friends' (ibid., fol. 487) by acting promptly to ensure justice for the innocent and mercy for the guilty who had already suffered significantly for their crimes. The letter, later published, provoked a response from Roger Boyle, earl of Orrery. In 'Irish Colours Displayed' Boyle highlighted Catholic treachery in 1641. In his response, 'Irish Colours Folded' (1662), Walsh stated that casualty figures in the war were greatly exaggerated, and any atrocities were committed by the 'rascal multitude'. 
The king's declaration for the settlement of Ireland, issued on 30 November 1660, reflected Orrery's views and confirmed Walsh's fears. The Cromwellian settlement of former Catholic lands would be maintained except where the old proprietors could prove their 'innocence' in respect of events from 1641. It was apparent to Walsh that the recent past remained a stumbling block for future favour. Ormond had not forgotten what he considered the treachery of the Catholic prelates. Walsh therefore urged the church hierarchy to make a positive representation to the king so that their silence could not be misinterpreted as dissension. 
At the Restoration there were only three Catholic bishops in Ireland. Eugene Sweeney, bishop of Kilmore (1630-69), who was bedridden; the Franciscan Anthony MacGeoghegan, bishop of Clonmacnoise (1648-57) and Meath (1657-61), a fierce opponent of Walsh; and the primate, Edmund O'Reilly, archbishop of Armagh (1658-69). Given Walsh's position and the political context, and despite previous conflict, O'Reilly had little option but to appoint him as agent for the Catholic clergy at Whitehall. A procuration or power of attorney, dated 1 January 1661, was forwarded to Walsh by Anthony Gearnon, the queen mother's chaplain, and signed by the available members of the hierarchy including Patrick Plunkett, bishop of Dromore and Ardagh, and, by proxy, Nicholas French, bishop of Ferns. Walsh was delegated to 'obtain what favours his Majesty should think fit by connivance or otherwise, for the exercise of their religion, and to save them from persecution' (Walsh, 'History', 4-5). He was 'soundly checked' by Ormond for receiving such a document from those previously 'very obnoxious to the laws and disaffected' to the king's interest (ibid., 6), but despite initial hostility Walsh did receive his assistance in securing the release of 120 priests from prison without distinction or qualification. 
Fear and uncertainty mounted in Ireland throughout 1661. The king's declaration proved practically unworkable and, as Patrick Darcy argued, legally deficient as a basis for the settlement of Ireland. The Irish parliament, convened on 8 May 1661, with an entirely protestant House of Commons, only served to heighten political tensions. Stories of the alleged activities of Jesuits and rumours of priests collecting funds for another rebellion were widespread. The king's response to the crisis only served to enhance Walsh's political influence. On 4 November he announced that Ormond would return to Ireland as viceroy; Walsh's experience and influence were now indispensable. 
Although Walsh did not draft the Catholic remonstrance of December 1661, its author, Richard Bellings, was familiar enough with Ormond and the political context to recognize the need to offer reassurance regarding the allegiance of the Irish clergy. They were not only the focus of protestant fears but also Ormond's resentment, and Walsh was convinced that the laity would suffer in the forthcoming 'Act of Settlement' as a result. The remonstrance or loyal formulary was drafted at a small gathering in Dublin. The document was sent to England and given to Walsh by Luke Plunkett, third earl of Fingall, with the request that Ormond present it to the king. The duke dismissed the remonstrance as only a useful paper without signatures, but Walsh, acting as agent, defended their actions and pointed out that a large gathering of Catholics in Dublin at that time would have been impossible. He subsequently called together the Irish Catholic clergy then in London, and on 11 and 15 January 1662 Oliver Darcy, bishop of Dromore, and thirty other Catholic clerics met to discuss subscription. Twenty-four of their number signed the document, which was, with Ormond's approval, presented to the king on 3 February and was well received. At the time Walsh accepted plausible excuses from those who failed to subscribe, but their outright opposition later became apparent. Ninety-eight members of the Irish nobility and gentry in London signed their own copy of the remonstrance, which was an unequivocal declaration of allegiance to the king regardless of any other power or opinion either princely or papal. 
Three weeks after the remonstrance was accepted by the king, Walsh again expressed his fears to Ormond about the Irish settlement. The two men had clearly exchanged views on the subject. Walsh admitted that his conscience was troubled ever since because he had remained silent regarding what he believed to be the 'great inequality in the intended distribution of justice' (Walsh to Ormond, 24 Feb [1662], MS Carte 45, fols. 274-5) to Irish Catholics. He informed Ormond that he was morally bound to honour the peace treaty of 1649 and warned of the judgment of God on both himself and the king if they neglected their obligation. 
In an effort to explain and promote the remonstrance, Walsh published a 'little book' in 1662 entitled 'A More Ample Account', but this only seemed to galvanize opposition. By the time he reached Ireland that summer, despite the additional signatures of forty-five clerics and thirty-two members of the laity, opponents of the remonstrance were dominant, particularly among the church hierarchy. With the benefit of Ormond's patronage Walsh evidently lived quite comfortably in Kennedy's Court, near Christ Church, but by the end of that year Sir Nicholas Plunkett observed that the oath had actually added to the troubles facing the Catholic interest. They now faced not only their enemies within the protestant interest but also the united opposition of the Catholic church both at home and abroad (MS Carte 32, fol. 146). 
The oath was condemned by Walsh's own faculty at Louvain, the Brussels internuncio de Vechiis, and Cardinal Francesco Barberini in Rome. Walsh's aim had been to acknowledge and draw a line under the mistakes of the past and begin to build trust and confidence, which he believed would lead to liberty for their religion in the future. However, the division created by the oath had the opposite effect and suggested that nothing had changed in Ireland since the 1640s. Given the European controversy on this very issue, Walsh must surely have anticipated this outcome. Political and religious tensions in Ireland were such that by 1663 the king's earlier private instructions to Ormond to promote the remonstrance were rescinded. Promotion of the oath thereafter was almost negligible, and by 1665 of approximately 2000 Catholic clerics in Ireland (1200 secular, 800 regular) only 69 were remonstrants (Brenan, 481). Walsh later stated that 70 clerics and 124 members of the laity had subscribed (P. Walsh, 'Four Letters', 1686, 3). 
Walsh, like Ormond, refused to countenance other versions of the oath offered by Jesuits, Dominicans, and Franciscans, and argued that their refusal to subscribe to the 1661 remonstrance was in itself conclusive. He recalled a secret meeting in September 1664, in the backyard of Somerset House, with Peter Talbot, later archbishop of Dublin, Patrick Maginn, Redmond Caron, and the Brussels internuncio de Vechiis, who had come to England incognito. An alternate oath suggested by Talbot was dismissed by Walsh at the time and later by Ormond (Walsh, 'History', 511-12). 
In 1666, described by Walsh as a 'wonderful year' (Walsh, 'History', 664), he convinced Ormond to allow a national synod of the Catholic church because he apparently still believed that the prelates could be persuaded by debate and by observing the desperate plight of the Irish Catholic people. The theological faculty of the Sorbonne, Paris, had produced six propositions in 1663 which affirmed the supremacy of the king, and Walsh may have thought that this development would add weight to his argument. The synod met for fifteen days from 11 June in the parish house of St Audoen's, Dublin. Primate O'Reilly brought with him letters of condemnation from Giacomo Rospigliosi, Brussels internuncio, against the remonstrance and the meeting itself. The oath and the Sorbonne propositions, which denied papal supremacy, were rejected, and an alternative declaration of loyalty to the king, which they produced, proved unacceptable to Ormond. The clergy refused to acknowledge any guilt or responsibility for the events of the 1640s. Nicholas French later told Walsh that his assertion that the hostilities in the 1640s had been a 'rebellion' rather than a 'just war' had offended him more than the remonstrance itself (Walsh, 'Four Letters', 32). Walsh's opponents alleged that the synod, like the oath, was used by Ormond not only to cause division but also to justify the iniquitous settlement of Ireland by suggesting that little had changed since 1641. 
Walsh enjoyed a degree of influence in Ireland while Ormond remained in the viceroyalty, but this may well have been the case without the remonstrance. For Walsh and his supporters a fundamental problem remained. The oath, despite its unprecedented declaration of allegiance and the support of Louis XIV and the Gallican church, had secured no tangible benefits for its adherents. The whole affair proved irrelevant to the Restoration land settlement in Ireland, and, contrary to Walsh's request, existing royal chaplains and new appointees were not required to subscribe. Ormond himself had recommended Patrick Maginn (a non-subscriber) for promotion at court to the post of grand almoner to the queen (Ormond to the king, 9 Dec 1665, MS Carte 219, fol. 58). Father Thomas Talbot, brother of Peter and Richard, complained to Walsh that unless the world changed the remonstrance would prove useless (Talbot to Walsh, 19 May 1662, MS Carte 31, fols. 373-4). By the time Ormond was removed from the lieutenancy on 24 February 1669 Walsh had failed to achieve his objectives, and the few remaining remonstrant clergy in Ireland were left at a considerable disadvantage. 
The Roman authorities were determined to retain control of the church in Ireland, and Walsh observed that while Rome governed appointments to the Irish hierarchy they held real power in the country. Walsh was informed in 1669 that the papal internuncio was not interested in doctrine or debate but in obedience. Opposition to Walsh and the remonstrance had become a prerequisite for high office in the Irish Catholic church at this time. In 1669 the newly appointed archbishops of Armagh and Dublin, Oliver Plunkett and Peter Talbot respectively, were avowed enemies of Walsh. Plunkett, a stout proponent of papal authority, described him as 'a lost soul, another Luther' ('Letters of Saint Oliver Plunkett', 42). Talbot, a sworn enemy of Ormond and Walsh, referred to the latter as 'that wrangling friar' (Talbot's vindication from Walsh's opinion, MS Carte 45, fol. 283). He branded him 'Peter pence' (ibid., fol. 287) and made much of the fact that Walsh had received $300 per year from Ormond throughout these years. Walsh also had $100 per year for the seneschalship of Winchester from 1667, with Bishop Morley's approval (Burke, 12). 
Archbishop Talbot in particular relentlessly pursued the remonstrant clergy in a determined effort to force them to recant. Walsh, who was resident in England during the period of the cabal and the secret treaty of Dover, endeavoured to highlight their plight by petitioning the king, Ormond, and Lord Berkeley, the Irish lord lieutenant, on their behalf. Berkeley, however, had little time for Ormond and grew to hate Walsh because of his repeated references to his patron's superior government of Ireland. The remonstrant clergy therefore found themselves isolated, with Walsh or Ormond virtually powerless to influence events. Walsh himself was excommunicated for the second time on 24 May 1670 by the chapter-general of the Franciscans at Valladolid for publishing material without official sanction -- insubordination rather than heresy. In a petition to the king, Thomas Harold referred to the 'daring prosecution' of Walsh in London in 1669, 1670, and 1671 by the church court (petition of Thomas Harold to the king, MS Carte 45, fols. 244-8). Walsh, however, continued to publish material to support his arguments and defend his actions. In 1672 his 'Epistola prima ad Thomam Haroldum', was printed (Harold was a remonstrant and a prisoner in Brussels) and in 1673 a series of twelve letters purportedly between a Catholic and protestant gentleman, 'The controversial letters, or, Grand controversy concerning the temporal authority of the popes over the whole earth, &c.', was published. 
It was not the new administration of Arthur Capel, earl of Essex and Irish lord lieutenant (1672-7), which produced a political change but the address of the English House of Commons to the king in March 1673. Charles II was forced to cancel the second declaration of indulgence and curtail the activities in Ireland of Peter Talbot in particular, something that Walsh had been requesting for years. Essex was certainly more willing to receive petitions from Walsh and advice from Ormond regarding the Catholic clergy. However, as Walsh reflected on events since 1660 he was clearly entertaining doubts, not least about Ormond's motives in the whole remonstrance affair. In a letter to his patron he suggested that the opposition and persecution might have been prevented if his advice had been followed regarding the subscription of royal chaplains and Ormond had not stopped a circular letter from the Catholic nobility in 1663. He added that Edward Hyde, earl of Clarendon, should have published the remonstrance rather than returning it to the clergy. Walsh was also deeply troubled by stories that Ormond had deliberately divided the Catholic clergy and, in fact, used him to that purpose. He concluded by saying that he would no longer be surprised by anything because, since the restoration, he had seen so many 'strange things done, quite contrary' to equity and policy and, 'which is worst of all, to honesty and justice' ([Walsh to Ormond], 30 July [1673], MS Carte 45, fols. 407-12). By 1674 Walsh blamed himself for opening a 'spring' which turned into a 'bitter fountain' (Walsh to Essex, 4 Aug 1674, MS Carte 45, fols. 252-5). 
Walsh's major work, 'The History and Vindication of the Loyal Formulary, or Irish Remonstrance', was published in 1674. His 'Letter to the Catholics of England, Ireland and Scotland, &c.', written in 1673 and printed earlier in 1674, constituted the preface. The book, a significant account of Irish Catholic political and religious history since the 1640s, contains copies of many important contemporary documents. Walsh draws on European and Irish church history, secular history, theology, law, and philosophy to explain and defend the remonstrance. His arguments were not only Gallican but also logical and pragmatic within the Irish context, and he was convinced that they did not contradict Catholic faith and teaching. Walsh believed that, apart from addressing the practical difficulties facing Catholics in Ireland, the oath would lay a foundation of trust which could bring about a reunion of the churches of England and Rome. However, with the benefit of hindsight, Walsh was ironically philosophical regarding the whole affair. Acknowledging the failure of the remonstrance Walsh encouraged his readers to take the 'comfort of a good conscience' before any earthly gain, and look for a reward in a 'better place' (Walsh, 'History', 37). 
Throughout the remainder of the 1670s Walsh enjoyed the patronage and protection of Ormond, particularly after the duke's return to the lord lieutenancy of Ireland in 1677. Walsh was again in a position to solicit favour for his family in Ireland, albeit discreetly. Any toleration of Catholicism, however, proved difficult after 1673, but during the alleged Popish Plot and exclusion crisis it was almost impossible, and certainly politically too dangerous. 
In 1682, on the advice of Castlehaven, Walsh published the first part of 'A Prospect of the State of Ireland from 1556-1652', a rather poor historical account. His 'Causa Valesiana', written in Latin in his usual verbose style, was published in 1684. Addressed to a wider European audience, it again defended his stance and that of Caron against the church hierarchy. The details included in this work, however, caused great offence among some of Walsh's most valuable friends. The bishop of Winchester was alarmed that Walsh had publicly acknowledged his part in ensuring his payment for the seneschalship of Winchester. Morley resolved never again to communicate with Walsh (Walsh to Ormond, 21 Sept 1684, 'Ormonde MSS', 7.273). Ormond was also offended by Walsh's reference to a conversation in 1661 with an unnamed 'illustrious person' who informed him of an intention to repeal the penal laws against Catholics. The duke was most concerned that either Clarendon or himself were implicated, and Walsh was equally anxious to publish a denial (Walsh to Ormond, 10 Jan 1685, 'Ormonde MSS', 306-9). 
On the succession of James II in February 1685 the remonstrance controversy and the whole issue of oaths of allegiance was revived. The new king had not required the oaths of supremacy or allegiance from his army officers in Ireland, but was content with a simple promise of fidelity. Walsh's opponents saw this as proof that the English authorities had never demanded the remonstrance in the first place. In 1686 Walsh published his 'Four Letters on Several Subjects to Persons of Quality', who included the earl of Essex and Nicholas French, bishop of Ferns. The correspondence between Walsh and French was mostly a retrospective discussion of controversial events in Ireland and Ormond's actions regarding the Catholic interest. 
In almost forty years of association with Ormond, Walsh had never spoken of religion until 1686. He informed the duke that while the Catholic church had many faults it was still the 'mother' and the 'safest for salvation to die therein'. Ormond replied that he could not embrace what he condemned and wondered why, if he stood in such eternal danger, Walsh had not spoken to his 'good friend' sooner (MS Carte 69, fol. 78). In a letter to Sir Robert Southwell in 1687, who was himself writing a history of these years, Walsh indicated his agreement that there had been as much rebellion in the oath of association as in the covenant. He declared, however, that religion had not been the true cause of the 1641 rebellion but 'liberty and property and the shaking off of the English yoke'. He had actually substituted the word 'liberty' for 'religion' in Castlehaven's history of the time (Walsh to Southwell, 19 March 1687, MS Carte 70, fol. 564). 
On 13 March 1688, just before his death, Walsh agreed and signed a retraction of the remonstrance and submitted his 'private judgement to that of the church' (Brenan, 486). The declaration was witnessed by Genetti, the nuncio Adda's chaplain, and three Irish Franciscans, including John Everard, himself a subscriber to the remonstrance. On the same day he dictated a final letter to Ormond which contained two last requests. Walsh asked that the Franciscans be given the convent in Kilkenny which they had formerly occupied, and that Ormond would help his nephew Andrew Laborne, who had eleven children and little support (Walsh to Ormond, 13 March 1688, MS Carte 118, fol. 357). Walsh died two days later on 15 March having received absolution from Genetti. He was later buried in London, in St Dunstan-in-the-West. 
Contemporary comment on Walsh's life and historical contribution has depended not only on the author's relationship to Walsh but also to Ormond, his patron. Rinuccini described Walsh as a 'sacrilegious profaner' who 'vomited forth in one hour more filth ('sordes') and blasphemy than Luther and Calvin together in three years' (Moran, 3.72). The writer of the 'Aphorismical Discovery' branded him a 'protestant English slut's son', a 'Judas', a 'Lutheran dogmatist', and a 'hireling wolf in sheep's clothing' (Gilbert, 1.238, 273-6), among other things. Even his friend Castlehaven referred to him as the 'earl's [Ormond's] ghostly father' ('Memoirs of... Castlehaven', 117). Burnet, however, described him as the 'honestest and learnedest' member of the Catholic clergy he had ever met ('Bishop Burnet's History', 1.355). There is no doubt that Walsh enjoyed the mutual respect of several members of the Anglican hierarchy, such as Archbishop Dolben of York and Bishop Barlow of Winchester. He was also, surprisingly, on friendly terms with Arthur Annesley, earl of Anglesey. In terms of Irish nationalist historiography, Walsh has been tried and found guilty by association with Ormond, the 'unkind deserter of loyal men and true friends' and the 'avowed' enemy of Irish Catholics, according to Brenan (Brenan, 478). Although dismissed as the 'giddy friar' in the 'Unkinde Deserter of Loyal Men and True Friends', (Brussels; see Barnard and Fenlon, 181), his scholarship has been acknowledged by Corish, Millett, and Brenan. The latter described Walsh as 'naturally bold, impetuous and enterprising' (Brenan, 478), while Millett referred to him as a 'stormy petrel but a very able controversialist' (Millett, 'Irish literature in Latin', 578). Corish has also acknowledged him to be a 'man of some learning in canon law' (Corish, 'Ormond, Rinuccini and the confederates', 330). 
There is little doubt that Walsh's views represented sincerely held convictions rather than political expedients, although he reminded readers of his history that while the poor Catholics of Ireland suffered for their principles the Roman hierarchy enjoyed the comfort of that 'city of fortune' (Walsh, 'History', 27-8, 30). His attempt to address and resolve the problem of Irish Catholic civil allegiance and break the dominance of Rome over the Irish Catholic church was his most significant historical contribution. If he had succeeded, the consequences could have been far reaching not least for the Stuarts and the events which followed his death in 1688. 


@@@@@


doc= 28617


Walsh, Richard Hussey (1825-1862), economist, born at Kilduff, Tyrrellspass, King's county, and baptized at Philipstown (now Daingean) Roman Catholic Church in King's county on 3 August 1825, was the fifth son of John Hussey Walsh of Kilduff and his wife, Maria, daughter of Michael Henley of La Mancha, co. Dublin. His grandmother Margaret was the daughter and heir of John Hussey of Mull Hussey, Roscommon. After being educated by private tutors, in 1842 Walsh entered Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated BA in 1847, taking the highest honours in mathematics and physics. In the next year he obtained the senior mathematical prize founded by John Law, bishop of Elphin. On 5 May 1848 he was admitted a student of Lincoln's Inn, but he soon abandoned the study of law. 
As a Roman Catholic, Walsh was precluded from reading for a fellowship at Trinity College, and in consequence turned his attention to the study of political economy, with the intention of competing for the Whately professorship. At the prize examination in the subject in 1850 he obtained the first place and in the same year was appointed to one of the Barrington lectureships in political economy administered by the Dublin Statistical Society (later renamed the Statistical and Social Inquiry Society of Ireland). In 1851 he was elected one of the honorary secretaries of this society and was also appointed Whately professor on the results of the examination held in that year. 
In 1853 Walsh published one of the courses of lectures he gave as professor, under the title 'An Elementary Treatise on Metallic Currency'. The book was unusual for its time in attempting to set out fully the state of knowledge in this branch of political economy. It contained some perceptive comments on the likely effect of recent gold discoveries on price levels when monometallic or bimetallic standards were in use and was favourably received by Nassau Senior and J. S. Mill but was more notable for its lucidity and completeness than for its originality. Walsh also contributed papers to the 'Proceedings of the Dublin Statistical Society', the statistical section of the British Association, and 'The Economist'. Between 1848 and 1855 he also wrote elementary school books on political and domestic economy for the series of 'Education Lessons' edited by Edward Hughes. 
In the winter of 1853 Walsh acted temporarily as deputy for the professor of jurisprudence and political economy at Queen's College, Belfast, but when his term of office in the Whately chair ended in 1856, he took up a government post, under W. Neilson Hancock, as assistant secretary to the endowed schools (Ireland) commission. Because of the ability he displayed in this capacity, he was recommended for appointment as superintendent of the government schools in Mauritius, and entered on his duties in May 1857. These combined the responsibilities that in England were divided between commissioners, secretaries, and inspectors. He established new schools, and before he had been in office twenty months he increased their number from twenty to forty-four. His energy attracted the notice of the governor, William Stevenson, who placed him on a civil service commission nominated to inquire into the organization of the twenty-two civil service departments into which the island was divided. The work occupied nearly two years, and the results were highly approved by the duke of Newcastle, the colonial secretary ('Mauritius Gazette', 5 Oct 1861). Walsh was also entrusted with the conduct of the census of the island taken in 1861 and had just completed it when he suffered a brain haemorrhage. Four days later he died, unmarried, at Port Louis on 30 January 1862. 


@@@@@


doc= 28618


Walsh, Robert (1772-1852), author, born in Waterford, was the brother of Edward Walsh (1756-1832) and the younger son of John Walsh (1720-1785), merchant, of Ballymountain House, co. Waterford. He was educated at Waterford and then entered Trinity College, Dublin, on 2 November 1789 as a pensioner, his tutor being Thomas Elrington (1760-1835). He graduated BA in 1796. He was elected scholar in 1794 and was ordained in 1802, and, after being for a short time a curate in Dublin under Walter Blake Kirwan, was appointed in 1806 to the curacy of Finglas, co. Dublin, where he remained until 1820. While he held this curacy he discovered the 'cross of Nethercross', supposedly buried during Oliver Cromwell's victorious march through the country by the alarmed inhabitants. On digging in the place pointed out by some of the older people, who had been told of it by their parents, Walsh discovered a Celtic cross in good preservation. It was erected in the churchyard of Finglas. 
In 1813 Walsh married Ann Eliza Ellen (died 1879), daughter of John Bayly of Tolka. They had two children, a daughter and a son, John Edward Walsh, who became a judge and MP. 
Walsh spent several years of his earlier life as a curate preparing a 'History of the City of Dublin' (2 vols., 1815), a well-received work, in which he drew on the research of James Whitelaw and John Warburton. 
In 1820 -- during which year he received a certificate of diploma of MD from the Royal College, Aberdeen, as well as a grace for the degree of LLD from Trinity College, Dublin -- Walsh accepted the offer of the chaplaincy to the British embassy of Lord Strangford at Constantinople. He remained in that post for some years, during which time he made many extensive expeditions through Turkey and other parts of Asia, on occasion using his medical skills while in remote areas. From Constantinople he went to the embassy at St Petersburg, to which he had been appointed chaplain, but in 1828 went to Rio de Janeiro. He published the well-reviewed 'Notices of Brazil' (1830) and his investigations into the slave trade in Brazil led to his appointment to the committee of the Society for the Abolition of Slavery. 
After returning to Britain in 1831 Walsh was again sent to Constantinople. He finally settled in Ireland about 1835, and was given the living of Kilbride, co. Wicklow, which he exchanged in 1839 for that of Finglas, co. Dublin. He died at Finglas on 30 June 1852. 
Walsh wrote much for periodicals, but his main works stem from his knowledge of Turkey and include 'An Essay on Ancient Coins, Medals, and Gems' (1828), 'Narrative of a Journey from Constantinople to England' (1828), 'Residence at Constantinople during the Greek and Turkish Revolutions' (2 vols., 1836), and 'Constantinople and the Scenery of the Seven Churches of Asia Minor' (2 vols., n.d. [1839?]). Many of his publications were favourably reviewed at the time. 


@@@@@


doc= 28619


Walsh, William (1511/12?-1577), Roman Catholic bishop of Meath, is better documented than many other Irish martyrs, although parts of his career are shrouded in mystery. According to a letter he wrote towards the end of his life, he was probably born in 1511 or 1512; otherwise little is certain regarding his early years. His parentage is unrecorded, though it is known that he was conceived within wedlock. Some sources, composed in the early to mid-seventeenth century, claim he was born in Meath, at Dunboyne; others, written at about the same time, make Waterford his birthplace. The case for his being a native of Meath is supported by a papal document of the 1550s that refers to him as a priest of Meath, 'sacerdotis Midensis' (Moran, 131). 
Confusion also surrounds Walsh's early career in the church. Although it is indisputable that as a young man he joined the Cistercian order, it is not certain which Cistercian monastery he entered. It is often claimed that he joined the community at Bective Abbey, Meath, and stayed there until the abbey was dissolved by officials of Henry VIII. However, this is contradicted by the fact that his name does not appear among the documents of the dissolution pertaining to Bective. Instead, government records mention a 'William Walsh' as resident at another Cistercian house, St Mary's Abbey in Dublin, when it was dissolved in October 1539. If this is the same William as the future bishop, then he was granted a pension of $10 by the Henrician government in recompense for his loss of position. 
The sequence of Walsh's subsequent movements is difficult to disentangle. All that is certain is that in the fifteen or so years before his nomination to the bishopric of Meath in 1554 he refused to reach an accommodation with the royal government while it remained in schism. He visited Rome, studied at a European university (possibly Rome, but certainly not Oxford, as is sometimes claimed) and became a doctor of divinity, and received a papal appointment as guardian of Duleek Priory and rector of Loughseedy in the diocese of Meath. While in Italy he is reputed to have been a chaplain or follower of Cardinal Reginald Pole. In order to attain his position at Duleek, an Augustinian house, he obtained a special dispensation from Rome to become an Augustinian canon, a record of which survives in the papal archives; curiously, no Cistercian writer of the sixteenth or seventeenth century acknowledges that Walsh changed orders. Most likely he was granted Duleek in order to minister to the Meath Catholic community as the Church of Ireland moved from schism to open protestant heresy. 
Soon after the accession of Mary I in 1553 Walsh emerged to play a leading role in church and state in Ireland. In April 1554 he agreed to serve, at his own cost, as one of three commissioners chosen to proceed against protestant clergymen -- significantly, not on the grounds of their being heretics, but because they were married, 'cohabiting' contrary to canon law. It was a strategy that conformed with Pole's policy of restoring papal control by concentrating on clerical behaviour instead of belief. By 29 June the commission had had its desired effect, facilitating the deprivation of the Church of Ireland bishop of Meath, Edward Staples. Immediately, Walsh was nominated as Staples's replacement. He was elected to the vacant see in accordance with a 'conge d'elire' directed to the archdeacon and chapter of Meath by the crown, and by August he had received royal letters patent authorizing his consecration. Before he could be consecrated, however, Walsh needed to have his position confirmed by Rome 'like other bishops', and in a petition to Philip and Mary he explained that he had been too busy with other church business to attend to this. Papal recognition of his appointment arrived in September in the form of an official 'relatio', a document which also noted his ongoing association with the Augustinians. Some historians have contended that Walsh held his bishopric by royal authority only, not papal, but the 'relatio' contradicts this view. Although it was July 1555 before Cardinal Pole was made papal legate to Ireland, he had power to appoint Walsh in 1554. The bishopric of Meath, the 'relatio' states, 'though situated in Ireland is looked on as an English see'; accordingly it fell within Pole's English legatine jurisdiction (Moran, 412-13). Late in the autumn of 1554, acting at the request of Queen Mary, who recognized his superior authority in the matter, Pole issued a licence for the consecration of William Walsh, bishop-elect of Meath. The consecration occurred some time after 18 October, on which date Walsh was also granted the temporalities of his see by the royal government. 
As bishop of Meath, Walsh assumed a major role in secular affairs as a member of the Irish privy council. On occasions this necessitated his involvement in military business, despite his being a cleric: in June 1556 he undertook personally to prepare eight archers on horseback for a hosting against the Scots in Ulster; and as a matter of course he put his signature to proclamations imposing martial law and the death penalty on idlemen, vagabonds, and other offenders. Only in February 1557 did he exhibit any discomfort with this situation. A declaration of war having been drafted against a midland chieftain, Walsh and the archbishop of Dublin together felt compelled to add a postscript in the council minutes expressing their general consent 'to all thinges' contained in the proclamation, 'saving what toucheth the lief of man, whiche we forbeare to do lest we shulde incurre the daunger of irregularitie' ('Haliday MSS', 29-30). 
Involvement in government did not prevent Walsh from performing his episcopal duties successfully. Even before he assumed the bishopric the gentry of Meath had signalled their aversion to protestant doctrine, angrily rejecting his predecessor, Staples, for denying them the sacrificial mass. Walsh built on this foundation, and the continuing attachment of the diocese to Catholicism became his most lasting achievement. All his other triumphs were overthrown, however, following the death of Queen Mary in November 1558 and the succession of her protestant half-sister, Elizabeth I. Walsh vigorously opposed the return of protestantism. Within weeks of Elizabeth's accession he was reported as railing against the schismatic doctrines of Henry VIII, a dangerous instance of 'lese-majeste' under the new order; and early in 1559 he was identified by Lord Deputy Sussex as one of two prelates most likely to oppose new ecclesiastical legislation in parliament. For a time he was allowed to remain as bishop and a council member, but his continued defence of the Marian religious settlement soon brought about his deprivation and imprisonment. On 4 February 1560, having struggled in vain to obstruct the passage of the 'Act of Uniformity', he was asked to take the oath of supremacy. He refused, and by May he had been deprived of his see. 
Following his deprivation Walsh disappears from extant records for long stretches of time, probably because he was under restraint. It is impossible to ascertain the amount of time he spent in prison. In later life, having escaped to France, he claimed he had been thirteen years a prisoner, but this comment cannot be taken at face value; a letter written in 1563 reported that Walsh had spent a year in prison for the sake of his faith during 1560-61, but had recently been restored to his freedom. Unlike other Marian clergy he refused to embrace a quiet life under Elizabeth. A habitual offender against the royal supremacy, he was constantly in and out of gaol. A letter by the Church of Ireland archbishop responsible for his punishment gives a sense of the government's frustration with him: 'Ever since the parliament he hath manifestly contemned and openly showed himself to be a misliker of all the queen's proceedings: he openly protested before all the people... that he would never communicate or be present where the Protestant service should be ministered; for it was against his conscience and against God's word. (Loftus to Cecil, 16 July 1564, TNA: PRO, SP 63/14/22)' Worse, his stance brought him 'great credit amongst his countrymen' (ibid.) and prevented his protestant replacement in Meath, Hugh Brady, from making converts; the only way to silence him was to lock him up. 
Walsh's arrest on 13 July 1565 seems to have instigated a lengthier period in prison than before, for when he next appears in documents, in 1567, he was still in Dublin Castle, smuggling letters to clergy in Lord Slane's household in the pale and to Pole's old friend, Cardinal Morone, on the continent. Some time thereafter he was released again, perhaps as early as the spring of 1569, when he is known to have signed an Irish petition to Philip II seeking Spanish military assistance against 'the accursed and contagious heresy' of the English (Binchy, 365-6). He was definitely at liberty before Michaelmas 1570, when, at a time of political crisis, the commissioners for ecclesiastical causes moved to restrict his movements, confining him to certain counties and towns in the pale and ordering him not to speak or write against the established church. Evidently he paid as much attention to these conditions as to earlier ones: by 21 March 1572 he had been returned to the cells of Dublin Castle where, his health declining, he was given a servant to attend him. 
At Christmas 1572 Walsh escaped, through the efforts of his friends -- unfortunately unnamed -- slipping out of Dublin Castle and taking a ship to France. Sailing in rough seas in the middle of winter the voyage took sixteen days, finally ending, he later claimed, when the ship was wrecked off the Brittany coast. At some stage he wrote to the pope from Flanders, and he stayed in Nantes for several months before the papal nuncio helped him to reach Paris in July 1573. From there he penned a letter that was destined to form the basis of subsequent efforts of the Irish Catholic church to have him recognized as a martyr for the faith. In it he gave an exaggerated account of his sufferings while in prison: as well as claiming he had been thirteen years in gaol, confined to 'a subterraneous dungeon, damp and noisome', he described his treatment as cruel, and blamed it for his growing infirmities (Moran, 131; Brady, 2.337). Roman Catholic writers from the seventeenth century onwards have contended that his prison experience precipitated his death, yet he was strong enough to travel to Spain in 1574, to serve as suffragan to the archbishop of Toledo, and to return briefly to Ireland to oversee the provinces of Armagh and Dublin during the absence of the Roman Catholic primate, Richard Creagh. A more satisfactory explanation for his death is suggested by his last letter, written from Alcala in Spain in 1576, in which he begged the cardinal of Como to procure him a position in Brittany as, owing to his advanced years, he could no longer endure the severe temperatures of central Spain. He died at Alcala on 2 January 1577 and was buried there at the Cistercian collegiate church of St Secundinus three days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 28620


Walsh, William (bap. 1662, d. 1708), poet, baptized at Abberley, Worcestershire, on 6 October 1662, was the second of eight children (two boys, six girls) born to Joseph Walsh (1618/19-1682) of Abberley, and Elizabeth ('bap'. 1637, died 1719), daughter of Sir Bryan Palmes of Lindley, Yorkshire. Both Joseph and his father-in-law were of old county families and fought in the civil war on the royalist side. William Walsh became a gentleman-commoner of Wadham College, Oxford, on 14 May 1678 and a student of the Middle Temple on 6 December 1679. He did not take a degree, but, after the death of his father in 1682, divided his time between the pursuits of a country gentleman at Abberley and those of a conspicuously well-dressed, amorous beau in London. It was said, perhaps with exaggeration, that his wig cost $80 and required more than 3 pounds of powder. 
Walsh joined the wits at Will's Coffee House in Covent Garden, presided over by Dryden, who corrected his verse and wrote a eulogistic preface to his prose 'Dialogue Concerning Women, being a Defence of the Sex' (1691), which, despite its subtitle, is as much an attack as a defence. The 'Dialogue' was addressed to 'Eugenia', believed to be the countess of Kingston, one of Walsh's mistresses. His next publication was 'Letters and Poems, Amorous and Gallant' (1692, reprinted in 'Dryden's Miscellany', pt 4, 1716), a collection of light and pretty love poems, pastorals, epigrams, and prose love letters, with a shrewd and amusing preface. Even so, Dryden's often-quoted judgement in the postscript to his translation of Virgil (1697) that Walsh was 'without flattery, the best Critick of our Nation' was probably based more upon conversation, letters, and unpublished writings than upon this brief preface. 
A few more poems found their way into print during Walsh's lifetime: he mourned Queen Mary in an elegy (1695), he praised William III in an imitation of Horace, 'Odes', iii.3 (1706), and he celebrated the victory at Ramillies in a thanksgiving ode (1706). He probably wrote 'The Confederates', a lampoon on Peter Anthony Motteux, published in 'Poems on Affairs of State' (vol. 2, 1703), and he contributed to 'Commendatory Verses' (1700) a collective satire on Sir Richard Blackmore. In another collective work Walsh wrote the third act of 'Squire Trelooby', a comedy adapted from Moliere's 'Monsieur de Pourceaugnac', the other two acts being written by his friends William Congreve and Sir John Vanbrugh. Their play was performed three times in 1704, and, with a new third act by Vanbrugh, another four times in 1706, but was never printed. It seems that Walsh had a gentlemanly negligence about publication: most of his verse appeared in miscellanies and journals after his death, or remains unpublished. 
Walsh was a low-church whig, devoted to the revolution settlement, and war against France. In August 1698, with the support of the lord chancellor, John Somers, he became MP for Worcestershire. He was re-elected in January 1701 after a contest which prompted his unpublished ballad, 'The Worcester Cabal' to the tune of 'Pakington's Pound': one of his opponents being the tory Sir John Pakington (1671-1727). In November 1701 he lost the seat to another tory, but, with the active help of William Lloyd (1627-1717), bishop of Worcester, he regained it in August 1702. He now obtained a court appointment as gentleman of the horse under the new master of the horse, Charles Seymour, duke of Somerset (1662-1748). Responding to an anonymous tory Messianic poem on the accession of Queen Anne, Walsh wrote a polished, insolently urbane parody of Virgil's fourth eclogue, 'The Golden Age Restor'd', published in 'Poems on Affairs of State' (1703). He escaped from the exciting politics of Worcester when he was returned to parliament unopposed at a by-election for Richmond, Yorkshire, in June 1705. He was a member of the Kit-Cat Club. 
Walsh never married. He wrote of love: 'there is not one folly of that kind (excepting marriage) which I have not already committed' (W. Walsh, 'Letters Amorous and Gallant', 1692, letter 20). Political and literary enemies called him a fop; in an anonymous squib he is also called 'Master Eat-Finger' ('Poems on Affairs of State', 5.10), but no other evidence has been found of this infantile trait. He died intestate (so perhaps suddenly?) at Marlborough, Wiltshire, on 15 March 1708 and was buried at Abberley on 18 March. He was survived by his mother, who was granted letters of administration, and several sisters: his younger siblings Octavia Walsh and Walter had predeceased him. Abberley was inherited by his sister Ann, wife of Francis Bromley. 
Walsh left unfinished at his death a mock epic fragment, 'Abigail's Lamentation for the Loss of Mr Harley', satirizing Robert Harley and Abigail Masham. This and other poems appeared posthumously in various miscellanies, as did Walsh's prose satire 'Aesculapius, or, The Hospital of Fools' in 'Poems and Translations by Several Hands' (1714). Nevertheless his still unpublished poems are at least as numerous as the printed ones. 
Walsh's main literary importance is as Alexander Pope's mentor. He saw manuscripts of some of Pope's pastorals, forwarded by their common friend Wycherley, perhaps as early as 1705; certainly he wrote very encouragingly to Pope in the following year; and in August 1707, when Pope visited him at Abberley, he famously advised the young poet to make correctness his study and aim. Walsh commented upon and corrected Pope's pastorals, and Pope appropriated some of his critical ideas for his 'Discourse on pastoral poetry'. Walsh may also have seen an early draft of the 'Essay on Criticism', a poem that seems to have been conceived under his influence and concludes with high praise of Walsh as 'the Muse's Judge and Friend'. 


@@@@@


doc= 28621


Walshe, Walter Hayle (1812-1892), physician, son of William Walshe, a barrister, was born in Dublin on 19 March 1812. He studied at Trinity College, Dublin, entering in 1827, but did not take a degree. In 1830 he went to live in Paris, and at first he studied oriental languages. However, in 1832 he turned his attention to medicine. He became acquainted in 1834 with the great morbid anatomist Pierre Charles Alexandre Louis, whose 'Recherches sur la phthisie' he translated into English in 1844. Oliver Wendell Holmes and F. L. I. Valleix, the distinguished French physician, were his fellow students, and they became lifelong friends. Walshe moved to Edinburgh in 1835, graduated MD there in 1836, and in 1838 began practice in north London. 
In 1839 and 1840 Walshe wrote many articles on pathology in William Birmingham Costello's 'Cyclopaedia of Practical Surgery'. These contributions led to his election as professor of morbid anatomy at University College, London, in 1841. He lectured on morbid anatomy until 1846, when he was elected Holme professor of clinical medicine. In the same year he published a large volume, 'On the Nature and Treatment of Cancer', a collection of the then existing knowledge of new growths and hypotheses as to their origin. In 1848 he was appointed professor of the principles and practice of medicine, an office which he held until 1862. In his lectures he discussed points upon his fingers in the manner of schoolteachers, and he was fond of numerical statements of fact and of reaching a definite conclusion as a result of the denial of a series of alternative hypotheses. Sir William Jenner said that he had never heard a more able or clearer lecturer. Walshe was appointed physician at University College Hospital in 1844 and consulting physician in 1877. His clinical investigations were exhaustive, but his diagnoses were not always proportionately exact. 
In 1843 Walshe published 'The Physical Diagnosis of Diseases of the Lungs', a complete and useful treatise, which was superseded before his death by Samuel Gee's 'Auscultation and Percussion'. In 1851 Walshe published 'A Practical Treatise on Diseases of the Lungs and Heart', of which several editions appeared, and part of which was enlarged into 'A Practical Treatise on the Diseases of the Heart and Great Vessels'. In 1852 he was elected a fellow of the Royal College of Physicians. He first lived in Upper Charlotte Street and afterwards in Queen Anne Street, and he had for some years a considerable practice as a physician. On 16 December 1869 he married Caroline Ellen ('b'. 1838/9), daughter of John Durand Baker, a clergyman; they had one son. 
Walshe's pupils maintained that his was the first accurate description of the anatomy of movable kidney and of haemorrhage into the 'dura mater', known as haematoma; he was also the first to teach that patients with regurgitation through the aortic valves are likely to die suddenly. However, Sir Andrew Clark considered that he had little ability in the treatment of disease. Besides his books Walsh wrote many contributions to medical journals and transactions, and in 1885 he published 'The Colloquial Linguistic Faculty and its Physiological Groundwork'. He was well read in acoustics, had a taste for music, especially Italian opera, and published in 1881 a short treatise, 'Dramatic Singing Physiologically Estimated'. Walshe died at his home, 41 Hyde Park Square, London, on 14 December 1892. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 28622


Walsingham, Sir Edmund (b. in or before 1480, d. 1550), soldier, was the eldest son of James Walsingham (1462-1540), landowner, of Scadbury, in Chislehurst, Kent, and his wife, Eleanor ('b'. before 1465, died after 1540), daughter of Walter Writtle of Bobbingworth, Essex. His pedigree traces family ancestors to thirteenth-century Walsingham, Norfolk, but his earliest documented forebears were London citizens: Alan Walsingham ('fl'. 1415), a cordwainer; Thomas Walsingham (died 1457), a vintner, who bought Scadbury in 1424; and Thomas Walsingham (1436-1467), his grandfather. Edmund Walsingham's brother William (died 1534), was the father of Sir Francis Walsingham (c.1532-1590). 
Walsingham inherited Scadbury only in 1541 and was not a JP in Kent until 1547. Earlier he became involved in Surrey politics, marrying Katherine ('b'. before 1495, died 'c'.1526), daughter of John Gunter of Chilworth, and widow of Henry Morgan of Pen-coed, Monmouthshire, by 1510, and entering service with Thomas Howard, earl of Surrey, by 1513. The couple had four sons, including Sir Thomas Walsingham (1526-1584), father of Sir Thomas Walsingham (1560/61-1630), and four daughters. In 1513, outside Guildford, Walsingham, John Westbroke, and John Shirley (all Howard men) 'mayhaymed' Nicholas Eliot of Shalford, cut off his ears, and so abused his wife that 'what with fear and with the hurt she had than she was seke [sick] many a daye' (TNA: PRO, STAC 2/26/355). Cardinal Thomas Wolsey's investigation of Surrey corruption in 1519 revealed that when Sir William Fitzwilliam informed the earl of Surrey, the three assailants agreed to pay Eliot 20 nobles but probably reneged. Walsingham fought at Flodden on 9 September 1513, and Surrey knighted him four days later. After Henry VIII created Surrey second duke of Norfolk in 1514, Walsingham became a Surrey JP, but only briefly (perhaps owing to fluctuating Howard fortunes locally). He was frequently a subsidy commissioner for Surrey from 1523 until 1545, when he was elected knight of the shire with Sir Anthony Browne, and a muster commissioner in 1544. He also served on other commissions in Essex, Kent, London, and Surrey. 
Walsingham accompanied Henry to meetings with Francois I at the Field of Cloth of Gold and Charles V at Gravelines in 1520, and when the emperor visited England in 1522. In 1521 he served on the jury at the treason trial of Edward Stafford, third duke of Buckingham, became a sewer in the royal household, was made a freeman of the London Mercers' Company, and gained appointment as lieutenant of the Tower of London. Though the constable held higher rank, the lieutenant was actually in charge of prisoners. Walsingham resided there with an annual salary of $100 and collected lucrative fees from inmates, for example $14 10's'. 0died a month for Arthur Plantagenet, sixth Viscount Lisle. The king rebuilt his house in 1539 at a cost of $66 and prisoners exited the Belfry through it. 
Walsingham had many famous prisoners, including Anne Boleyn and Katherine Howard. Some complained of their treatment, including John Fisher, bishop of Rochester, Margaret Pole, countess of Salisbury, and Agnes Howard, duchess of Norfolk. However, Walsingham allowed Anne Tankerfelde such liberty that she escaped temporarily. He was kind to Curtoyse, the chaplain of Sir Thomas Cromwell, the principal secretary; to the protestant John Frith, of whom he wrote, 'it were a pity to lose him if he may be reconciled' (Webb, Miller, and Beckwith, 123); and to Sir Thomas More, who joked upon ascending the executioner's scaffold, 'I pray you, Master Lieutenant, see me safe up and, for my coming down, let me shift for myself' (Roper, 254). Besides executions, Walsingham supervised torture, but the story that he refused the command of Thomas Wriothesley, Lord Wriothesley, the lord chancellor, to continue racking Anne Askew is erroneous (it was his successor, Sir Anthony Knyvet). Walsingham relinquished his position in 1543 and became vice-chamberlain of Katherine Parr's household in 1544. She perhaps helped him win election to parliament as MP for Surrey in 1545. 
Walsingham acquired a substantial estate including St Paul's Cray, Swanton Court, West Peckham, and Yokes in Kent; Gomshall Towerhill in Surrey, which he sold in 1549 for $600; nine houses in London (in 1539); and various leases. Katherine Walsingham died about 1526. Between 1535 and 1543 Walsingham married Anne Drury (died 1559), daughter of Sir Edward Jerningham of Somerleyton, Suffolk, and his wife, Margaret Bedingfield (died 1504). She had been widowed four times. The couple had no children. Walsingham died on 10 February 1550. His will was dated 8 February and requested burial at Chislehurst 'within the chapell there, where myself have usually sitten' (Webb, Miller, and Beckwith, 378). Most of his estate went to his heir, Thomas. His widow received $40, much jewellery and plate, and his property at Yokes, and returned the lease on a house in Blackfriars which she had brought to the marriage. Walsingham left a further $29 13's'. 8died in bequests, $12 18's'. 8died in annuities, and additional leases and goods. His widow lived latterly as Lady Anne Grey and was buried on 6 April 1559 beside her first husband, Sir Edward Grey (died 1517), at St Clement Danes, Westminster. In 1581 Thomas erected a monument, above which hang Walsingham's helmet and sword. 


@@@@@


doc= 28623


Walsingham, Edward (d. 1663), royalist author, possibly came from the 'genteel' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.': 'Fasti', 2.60) family of Exhall, Warwickshire, distantly related to Elizabeth's secretary of state, Francis Walsingham. He came under the patronage of the Digby family of the earls of Bristol, a dominant aristocratic force in Warwickshire, and following the outbreak of the civil war became secretary to the secretary of state, George, Lord Digby, under whose favour, as high steward of Oxford, he was made MA (or possibly LLB) of the university in 1643. He went on to compose a series of elegiac tributes to cavalier commanding officers fallen in the civil war, writings which etched out royalist propaganda themes. One of the messages of these works was the equation between royalism and rank -- as in his tribute to Sir Henry Gage, 'Alter Britanniae heros' (1645) -- and the obverse equation of parliamentarianism and base birth. As a royalist military obituarist, in his panegyric on Sir John Smith, 'Britannicae virtutis imago' (1645), he was celebrating the disappearing chivalric world of a man said to have been the last banneret, knighted on the field, 'That noble, valiant, gallant knight renowned Smith' (Carlton, 193). The same hero, though, was the victim of some of Walsingham's less felicitous versifying: '
His name was Smith, who for his king fighting 

Unto his foes seem'd a flash of Lightning. 
(Walsingham, 143)' However, the primary purpose of these elegies was not to make a social point about royalism but a religious one, and specifically a distinctively Catholic one: that Catholicism and self-sacrificial loyalty to the crown were entirely compatible, and that the Catholic faith formed the foundations for royalist martyrdoms. It was in his memorial to Sir John Digby, 'Hector Britannicus', unpublished until 1910, that Walsingham achieved the fullest 'subsuming of the Catholic gentleman with the Royalist cause' (Newman, 210). While all his heroic subjects in this series were Catholics by faith, Walsingham's Digby was the very perfect gentle Catholic knight, whose defiance of the Scots in the bishops' war -- 'Sr I am a Roman Catholique and so am resolved to live and dy' (Walsingham, 77) -- he lovingly recalled. Already by the mid-1640s, then, when his own sympathies were so clearly Catholic, he was showing that tendency that was to haunt the remainder of his life, that of subjugating the interests of political royalism to those of religious Catholicism. 
Even so, Walsingham was deeply involved in royalist espionage work in the mid-1640s. From the personal tone of the intelligence-gathering correspondence that he sent to Digby from Oxford -- 'Sir John Digby's death affect me greatly' ('CSP dom.', '1645-7', 51-3) -- we may assume that the letters were his own. They provided broad, informed, and sharply written surveys of current affairs in Britain and the rest of Europe and, on the basis of these briefings alone, it would be possible to agree with the description of him as the 'young Catholic intellectual... brilliantly gifted' (Roy, 85) who served George Digby, feeding in particular his rivalry with Prince Rupert and his ambitions as a Catholic royalist leader: 'Now is the time for your Lordship to make this poor kingdom happy' ('CSP dom.', '1645-7', 140). 
Malice and meddling were the darker sides of Walsingham's high gifts. In February 1648 he could still be described, by the Anglican royalist secretary of state, Sir Edward Nicholas (whose protestant royalist circle detested Walsingham), as a 'pragmatical knave' (Roy, 86), 'busy instrument of the Jesuits' (Warner, 2.142), and 'great babbler of his most secret employments' in the character of 'Lord Digby's intimate servant' (Walsingham, 63, 94 n. a). However, by late August, Digby was reported 'discarding Walsingham for giving offence' (ibid., 94). 
Walsingham's capacity for disruptive conduct in the most delicate affairs was shown at its worst in 1648 in Ireland, where his busy aim of obtaining maximum religious gains for Irish Catholics ran counter to the marquess of Ormond's patient negotiations between September 1648 and January 1649 to achieve accord between protestant royalists and Catholic confederates based on Ormond's assent to 'the repeal of the penalties in any statutes which affected the free exercise of the 'Roman' Catholick Religion' (Carte, 2.48). Part of Walsingham's fault line was, clearly, his tendency to present -- and distort -- material in line with his own passionately partisan commitment, so that, for example, when it was reported in March 1651 that he was to have charge of editing Ormond's papers, it was claimed (by Nicholas) that 'all honest men' would disvalue the edition that had come 'through his hands' (Warner, 1.225). In the early 1650s he was a focus of the Catholic factionalism that threatened to disrupt the already divisive life of the English court in Paris (where he had already spent some time between 1646 and 1648). In April 1651 it was reported that the queen's favourite Lord Jermyn, in his bid to become 'first Minister of State' ('CSP dom.', '1651', 127) in the government in exile, had picked Walsingham for a secretary. More dangerously, in terms of a realistic Stuart hope of the family's return to a devotedly protestant country, between June and November 1655 he was hard at work attempting to convert Charles II's youngest brother Henry, duke of Gloucester, to Rome: Parisian 'cures' were said to be offering prayers of gratitude for that outcome and rooms in the Jesuits' college were being prepared for the duke. Key features of Walsingham's character -- hero worship, especially for Lord Digby, combined with malice and innuendo, exaggeration of his own role in the world, excess religious partisanship, and hyperbole, are seen in the reports of his Paris conversation with Gloucester in November 1654: he 'spared none of you [the Nicholas cavalier circle] there or any loyall person elsewhere, [and] told 'the' 'Duke of Gloucester' that he was a confident of his blessed father even above his 'Councell', and that 'Lo. Digby' was soe much the ablest 'Councell' to the 'King'... and that this 'Lo. Digby', as he had allwayes told him [Walsingham] he preferred the Romish before the English church, had now put himselfe into a 'Jesuites'' colledge, where he had declared himselfe a 'Papist'. (Warner, 2.134)' Understandably, in December, Nicholas was hoping that Walsingham would soon be forbidden Gloucester's company. 
In the following year, though, Walsingham did not devise but instead scotched, by disclosing it, a conspiracy -- one, or rather two, mooted by Catholic and presbyterian royalists to remove the indispensable Edward Hyde (later earl of Clarendon) from Charles II's counsels. Whatever Walsingham's motives were in this disclosure, Hyde seems to have been grateful to him for it, and in July 1659 had confidential correspondence entrusted to him, identifying him as a relative of the earl of Bristol. Yet Walsingham did not return with the royalist exiles in 1660; he was ordained a Catholic priest in the year of the Restoration and stayed in France as secretary to the confessor of an English 'emigre' convent. He returned to England in 1663 and died there on 9 October of that year. He was ardent, hyperactive, passionately sincere, and gifted, a victim and archetype of the sterility of Stuart royalism for much of the 1640s and 50s. 


@@@@@


doc= 28624


Walsingham, Sir Francis (c.1532-1590), principal secretary, was born either in London or at Foots Cray, Kent, the only son of William Walsingham ('b'. after 1480, died 1534), lawyer and landowner, of Scadbury in Chislehurst, Kent, and his wife, Joyce (1506/7-1560), daughter of Sir Edmund Denny of Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, and his second wife, Mary. He had five sisters, including Mary (1527/8-1577), who married Sir Walter Mildmay (1520/21-1589) on 25 May 1546, Elizabeth (died 1596), who married Peter Wentworth (1524-1597), and Christiana, who married John Tamworth ('c'.1524-1569), keeper of the privy purse from 1559 to 1569, in 1562. His uncle was Sir Edmund Walsingham (b. in or before 1480, d. 1550), lieutenant of the Tower of London from 1521 until his death. Like so many of Elizabeth I's servants he came from a family with existing court connections. 
William Walsingham was a member of Gray's Inn and autumn reader in 1530. He was also involved in local administration in Kent and purchased Foots Cray in 1529. His last will was written on 1 March and proved on 23 March 1534 and left Foots Cray to his son, Francis Walsingham. About 1536 his widow married Sir John Carey of Plashy in Hertfordshire, the younger brother of William Carey, who married Mary Boleyn ('c'.1499-1543) ['see 'Stafford, Mary], and with whom she had two sons. Francis Walsingham probably first went up to King's College, Cambridge, as a fellow-commoner in spring 1548. He was certainly there by 2 June and matriculated as a pensioner of the college on 29 September. Thanks to its provost, Sir John Cheke, the ethos of the college was strongly reformist after 1547, with emphasis on study of scripture to justify one's argument, and on learning rhetoric and dialectic through the works of Aristotle, Plato, and Cicero. As befitted his status Walsingham left on 29 September 1550 without taking a degree. According to the inscription on his tomb, after leaving Cambridge he apparently travelled on the continent, though where and in what capacity is unknown, but he had returned by 1552, when his stepfather died, and he was admitted to Gray's Inn. 
Walsingham returned to the continent in the reign of Mary I, but under circumstances that pose a number of questions. He is first encountered in Basel in autumn 1555 escorting his cousins, the three sons of his mother's brother Sir Anthony Denny (1501-1549), of Cheshunt. However, by the end of the year he had moved to Padua, where he enrolled as a student in civil law at the university and on 29 December 1555 was appointed 'consilarius' or spokesman for the English students there, a position he retained until 8 April 1556. Thereafter his movements are unknown. The Dennys had in fact been in Padua in autumn 1554, together with Walsingham's future brother-in-law Tamworth, and there is no reason why he could not have been with them then. 
In December 1555 Padua was the centre of much activity. Francis Russell, second earl of Bedford, had been living in Venice since June, and Edward Courtenay, earl of Devon, arrived in Padua in January 1556 'en route' for Venice. The assembly of Englishmen there has been associated with the conspiracy known as the Dudley plot, which was halted first by the French, who signed the truce of Vaucelles with Charles V on 5 February, and then by the exposure of the plot in England in March. Devon died in Padua on 18 September. During 1556 many of the Englishmen there dispersed and it is possible that Walsingham returned to Basel. In moments of stress in later life he recalled his time in Switzerland almost with longing. On 28 March 1586 he complained to Robert Dudley, earl of Leicester, 'the opynion of my partyalytie contynewethe [continueth] noryshed by factyon, which makethe me weerye of the place I serve in, and to wysshe myself emongst the trewe harted Swy[ss]', and he expressed similar sentiments on 22 June 1588: 'I would... we were... in Basil [Basel] to pray for Princes' ('Correspondence of Robert Dudley, Earl of Leycester', ed. J. Bruce, CS, old ser., 27, 1844, 192; 'Salisbury MSS', 3.332). 
Although it is not known precisely why he went into exile, or how far he was involved in the conspiracies of 1555-6, several of Walsingham's later associates were companions abroad. Three works of John Foxe, Basel's most famous English resident, were later dedicated to him. More immediately significant may have been the connection to Bedford, for Walsingham is next detected as an MP for Bossiney, Cornwall, in the parliament that assembled on 23 January 1559 to enact the settlement of religion. Bedford (who was lord warden of the stannaries) is the obvious patron, though it is also clear that his west-country seats were used as a form of reserve for men the privy council wished to see returned as MPs. In 1563 Walsingham was returned for Lyme Regis, Dorset; there is a reference by Sir William Cecil, the principal secretary, to wishing to see him in the parliament. However, Walsingham made little impression on the House of Commons in the 1560s, and even when he was principal secretary his parliamentary performances as knight of the shire for Surrey (1572, 1584, 1586, and 1589) were perfunctory. P. W. Hasler has observed that 'it is clear that the House of Commons held little appeal for him' (HoP, 'Commons, 1558-1603', 3.573). 
No less mysterious is the apparent absence of any public employment before 1568, given Walsingham's sudden rise to international prominence after 1570, or of much information about him at all during the 1560s. One reason is the disappearance of his personal papers. As secretary, Walsingham organized his official papers very carefully. A pocket index compiled by his secretary Thomas Lake about 1588 survives, now entitled 'Walsingham's table book' (BL, Stowe MS 162). As well as the standard bundles of correspondence, Walsingham's papers contained 'books of matters' (effectively reference books), and 'Diaria' or repertories, either indices to bundles of correspondence or letter-books. Their fate after his death was complicated. According to his brother-in-law Robert Beale (1541-1601), writing about 1592, 'all his papers and bookes both publicke and private were seazed on and carried away' (Read, 'Walsingham', 1.431). Other evidence shows them kept as a collection, though whether they remained as such or were taken into the Cecil papers later in the 1590s is less clear. Only a few of the books survive, but the correspondence now forms a large part of the Elizabethan state papers. In the process all private material was weeded out and has disappeared with the exception of two semi-official diaries or 'leigerbooks', one covering the years 1570 to 1583 (Martin, ed., 'Journal of Sir Francis Walsingham'), and the other 1583 to 1584 (BL, Harley MS 6035). Like that of his protege William Davison -- but unlike Leicester's -- Walsingham's official career can be reconstructed in detail, but his private life remains largely a blank. 
Walsingham's mother died in 1560 and was buried beside his father in St Mary Aldermanbury, London. In 1562 Walsingham married Anne (died 1564), daughter of Sir George Barne of London, and his wife, Alice, and widow of Alexander Carleill. They had no children. She was a wealthy woman when she died in summer or autumn 1564 (her will dated 28 July and proved 22 November), leaving her children in Walsingham's care. These included the future soldier and naval commander Christopher Carleill (1551?-1593), for whom he had a particular affection and whose career he promoted assiduously. It was probably to his marriage that he owed his association with the Muscovy Company. Sir George Barne was one of the founders of the company and Alexander Carleill had been one of the original stockholders. Walsingham was involved heavily in the company's activities by summer 1568 and became an assistant the following year. 
In autumn 1566 he married Ursula (died 1602), daughter of Henry St Barbe of Somerset and widow of Sir Richard Worseley of the Isle of Wight. His courtship was probably the reason for his earliest surviving letter, a ponderously jocular request to Sir William More of Loseley, Surrey, on 23 October 1565 for his help in persuading 'the gentlewoman from her resolution of sole lyfe' (Surrey RO, Guildford, Loseley corresp., 3/56). The couple had two daughters, Frances ('c'.1568-1632), who married Sir Philip Sidney (1554-1586) on 21 September 1583, and Mary, who died as a child in 1580. After 1566 Walsingham established his household at his new wife's house, Appuldurcombe, on the Isle of Wight, and then nearby at her late husband's house, Carisbrooke Castle. On 6 September 1567 an accidental explosion of gunpowder at the gatehouse at Appuldurcombe killed his two stepsons from his second marriage. Consequently legal action began over Ursula Walsingham's rights in the Worseley estate at Carisbrooke Priory which continued until July 1571. Ursula Walsingham features little in the surviving record but she was regarded with genuine affection by her husband's friends, including Leicester, whose distant cousin she was. 
Walsingham's residence in the Isle of Wight in the late 1560s may explain his escape from public employment. On the other hand, by 1568 he was an established protege of Sir Nicholas Throckmorton, an association that probably began through their connection with Bedford during the Marian exile. Walsingham may have served in an unrecorded capacity with Throckmorton on one of his Scottish embassies in the late 1560s. His earliest surviving letter to Cecil was written on Throckmorton's behalf in August 1568 and dealt with a subject of major importance. This was the mission of Robert Stewart, who brought from Louis de Bourbon-Vendome, prince de Conde, and Gaspard de Coligny, admiral of France, the first proposal that Elizabeth should marry Henri, duc d'Anjou. 
On 20 December 1568 Walsingham wrote to Cecil that 'there is lesse daynger in fearinge to myche then to lyttle', and 'ther is nothinge more dayngerowse then [than] securyte' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/48/61, fol. 165'r'). In this case by 'securyte' he meant carelessness or a culpable absence of anxiety. These statements became his credo. In autumn 1569 Cecil used Walsingham as the guardian of Roberto di Ridolfi. However, Walsingham's handling of Ridolfi was not assured and his reports to Cecil about him appear naive in retrospect. Conyers Read thought that Walsingham might have been the anonymous author of a tract produced at this time attacking the prospective marriage between Mary, queen of Scots, and Thomas Howard, fourth duke of Norfolk (BL, Harley MS 290), but the attribution has since been challenged. 
In February 1570 Walsingham and Henry Killigrew were nominated as successors to Sir Henry Norris as resident ambassador in Paris. The embassy to the French court was the only permanent English residency (it had been agreed by treaty in 1518), but it was notoriously considered very expensive. Norris (for example) was married to the heir of a baron. Although Killigrew was the more experienced, Cecil appears to have considered him 'in livelihood much inferior' to Walsingham, and by summer 1570 Walsingham was the main candidate (Read, 'Walsingham', 1.94). If he lacked diplomatic experience, he possessed the requisite linguistic skills. He was fluent in both French and Italian, though not (on his own admission) Spanish. 
Walsingham was initially appointed special ambassador to France on 11 August 1570 (with a diet of $2 per day), to assist Norris in persuading Charles IX to bring the third War of Religion to an end -- but even before he left England the peace of St Germain was signed (8 August). He had an audience with Charles on or about 29 August, which consisted largely of congratulations on the settlement. Shortly afterwards he was informed that he would be Norris's successor, but he was allowed to return to England to organize his private affairs first, and left Paris on 29 September. His letters of instruction for the resident embassy were dated 19 December. He had protested that he could not afford the embassy, and as a result his diets were increased to $3 6's'. 8died per day, slightly more than Norris had received. Walsingham took with him as secretary his brother-in-law Beale (married to his wife's sister Edith), who served with him until his own appointment as clerk of the privy council in July 1572. Walsingham presented his credentials at a formal audience with Charles on 25 January 1571. 
Cecil and Leicester had backed Walsingham's appointment, and he was clearly on very close terms with both. Leicester addressed him throughout his embassy as 'my good Francis'. Paris was the cockpit of Europe during the two and a half years of Walsingham's residence (which lasted until 10 May 1573), and as a result he became an international figure, forming a range of friendships and contacts that he sustained throughout his future career. His correspondence files for the embassy were later obtained by Sir Robert Cotton (probably purloined from the state paper office), and numerous copies of them were made. One was published in 1655 as 'The compleat ambassador', the first printed collection of diplomatic papers in English. 
Initially Walsingham had a much easier task than his predecessors. After the peace of St Germain the Huguenots were prominent at court, the Guise had withdrawn, and Catherine de' Medici was eager for good relations with Elizabeth. This marked a major turning point in Elizabethan foreign policy, for since the beginning of the reign relations with France had been tense at best. However, the trade war with Spain that began in 1569 and suspected Spanish intrigues in Ireland suggested that Philip II now posed the greater danger. This was confirmed during the first year of Walsingham's embassy by the exposure of the Ridolfi plot (summer 1571), which revealed that Philip was prepared to support the deposition of Elizabeth in favour of Mary. 
Walsingham's contribution to the formulation of policy was to argue along these lines, and certain themes that became central to his future approach to foreign affairs can be detected in his correspondence from France. Like many protestants he remained convinced that a Catholic league had been made at Bayonne, where Charles IX and Catherine met Fernando Alvarez de Toledo, duke of Alva, between 15 June and 2 July 1565, but he was now convinced that Spain represented the greater threat. If not entirely persuaded by the expressions of goodwill from the French royal family he considered that so long as the Huguenots remained powerful France could not harm England. The most immediate danger to Elizabeth was the queen of Scots, and he never ceased to regret publicly that she was not executed in 1572. On the other hand he felt that Elizabeth could be assured of Scotland if she subsidized the protestant and Anglophile king's party. 
Two major issues came to dominate Walsingham's embassy: the proposed marriage to Anjou and the Netherlands enterprise. The Huguenots, who had first proposed the Anjou marriage in 1568, revived it in autumn 1570 as a means of making a close alliance between England and France which would sustain their newly won security. The suggestion was well received by Catherine, though for her own motives: Anjou was her favourite son, and she was convinced by a prophecy that all her sons would wear crowns. At the same time alliances with both England and the Holy Roman empire (Charles IX married Maximilian II's daughter Elizabeth in 1570) would neutralize the Huguenots' main foreign allies. Elizabeth was less enthusiastic, particularly over the age difference (she was thirty-seven and Anjou nineteen). Moreover, as had been the case with Archduke Karl between 1565 and 1567, she expected to be wooed, and thus the negotiations tended to be conducted either through the French ambassador in London, Bertrand de Salignac de la Motte-Fenelon, or by special envoys. Walsingham's contribution to the negotiations was to keep her informed of the attitude of Catherine and Charles. 
Early in 1571 a draft set of the French terms was sent to England. The English response was that overall Anjou would be offered the terms granted to Philip when he had married Mary I in 1554, but Elizabeth would not (as she had previously refused the Archduke Karl) grant him public exercise of Catholicism. For his part Anjou had no desire for the marriage. At the beginning of 1571 he had openly described Elizabeth as a woman of immoral character (which his mother anxiously denied), and by the summer he made it clear he would accept nothing less than public exercise of his religion. 
By then Walsingham had become involved heavily in the Netherlands enterprise. This was the plan devised by the supporters of William of Orange and the Huguenots for an alliance of England, France, and the German protestant princes to support a revolt in the Netherlands against Philip's governor-general, Alva. Once the Spaniards had been driven out the Netherlands would be partitioned, France obtaining Artois and Flanders, and Elizabeth Holland and Zeeland, while the remaining provinces under the immediate government of Orange would rejoin the Holy Roman empire. On 19 July 1571 Louis of Nassau, Orange's brother, presented the plan to Charles IX at an interview arranged by Coligny. On 6 August Louis had a similar meeting with Walsingham. 
The Netherlands enterprise set the tone for Walsingham's future approach to foreign affairs. It was a bold stroke, and risks would have to be run, but the advantages success offered outweighed the risks. Together with his detailed reports on his conversations with Louis of Nassau and others he drafted a short memorandum on the subject: 'Whether it may stand in good policy for her majesty to join with France in the enterprise of Burgundy'. A number of manuscript copies (including BL, Harley MS 168, fols. 154'r'-157'v') of the memorandum survive, but Read curiously overlooked it. Some of the copies attribute the memorandum to Cecil (Baron Burghley from 1571), but similarities in phraseology between the memorandum and Walsingham's reports to London in August 1571 establishes him as the author. Walsingham used the memorandum to answer the main objections to the plan: that it would engage Elizabeth in a major war, that it would break the old alliance with Burgundy, and that the French motive for participating was simply to annex the Netherlands. He justified the enterprise on the grounds that recent events had revealed Spain to be Elizabeth's main enemy, that under Philip's rule the Netherlands were no longer an ally, and that partition would prevent French expansion. Moreover, Charles's reception of Louis of Nassau suggested that the French crown was sincerely committed to the enterprise. 
Thanks to the enterprise it was vital that even if the marriage failed a formal alliance should still be made with France. Leicester may have suggested the alliance as an alternative to the marriage at the beginning of July, but Walsingham gave it his support early in August, and Charles at roughly the same time. Elizabeth and Burghley were more sceptical, but in early September they came round and the queen agreed to send a special envoy to join Walsingham in negotiating the treaty. At this point Walsingham was forced to take to his bed for nearly four months (3 November 1571 to 28 February 1572). The cause was a urinary complaint -- a 'certaine difficulte de uryne qui le travaille fort', as la Motte-Fenelon described it -- that dogged him for the rest of his life ('Correspondence', ed. Teulet, 4.247). Killigrew was sent to Paris to substitute for him, followed by Sir Thomas Smith, who was to join him in making the treaty. 
As soon as he had recovered Walsingham and Smith negotiated what became the treaty of Blois, signed on 19 April 1572. On instructions from London the Anglo-French alliance was kept strictly defensive and the Netherlands enterprise was not mentioned, although it was implied in the agreement to shift the English cloth staple from the Netherlands (actually based in Hamburg since the embargo of 1569) to France. The most debated items were the English demand that the defensive arrangements should override religious considerations ('etiamsi causa religionis'), so that France was committed to aid England in the event of an attack by Spain, and the French demand for the inclusion of the queen of Scots. In the event a compromise was struck and neither was included. Walsingham was prepared to accept an assurance of assistance in a private letter from Charles, while the French effectively conceded to the ascendancy of the king's party over the Marians in Scotland. 
The negotiation of the treaty of Blois was accompanied by Catherine's revival of the marriage proposal, now on the part of her youngest son, Francois, duc d'Alencon. Against the obvious objections to the even wider difference in age (Elizabeth was almost thirty-nine, Alencon only seventeen) and his facial deformities, Catherine offered the assurance that he would be more flexible in religion than his brother. Elizabeth was even less happy with the Alencon proposal, but it initiated a major revolution in her 'courtships'. Alencon displayed an enthusiasm for the marriage and sent his current favourite, Joseph de Boniface, seigneur de La Molle, to England to begin the wooing in summer 1572. However, the cautious Anglo-French negotiations had already been overtaken by the revolt in the Netherlands that followed the landing of the Sea Beggars at Den Briel on 1 April. While various Huguenot forces attempted to come to the rebels' assistance, neither Charles nor Elizabeth (for their various reasons) were prepared to fulfil the role planned for them in the enterprise. Walsingham was left in the position of exhorting London not to let the opportunity slip. He wrote to Leicester on 28 May: 'I hope it shall manifestly appear unto you, that upon the good success or evil success of this [enterprise depends the] common cause of religion. And besides, the same not well proceeding, her Majestie cannot promise to herself any great safety, having so dangerous a neighbour, whose greatness shall receive no small increase, if he overcome this brunt. I pray God therefore that her Majestie may incline to do that which may be for her safety. ('Compleat Ambassador', ed. Digges, 216)' The Netherlands enterprise was one of the many casualties of the massacre of St Bartholomew's eve (23-4 August). Walsingham has left no account of his experiences, and the extent of his personal danger is unclear. His residence was in the Faubourg St Germain on the left bank, at a distance from the main riots, and he was able to provide a refuge for Sidney and other Englishmen in Paris, and possibly some Huguenots as well. He carried himself with considerable dignity and restraint in his first audience with Catherine after the massacre (14 September), but the experience scarred him and shaped his future attitude to France. 
At the audience Catherine emphasized that the massacre was purely an internal affair, that the treaty of Blois remained in force, and that she was still keen for the marriage of Elizabeth and Alencon, even proposing that she and Elizabeth meet. Both Walsingham and Elizabeth regarded these professions of goodwill with scepticism, and Elizabeth was ready to recall him immediately. However, in view of the confused situation it was decided that he should remain for the meantime as a gesture of her goodwill, while a successor was chosen. But as Walsingham admitted candidly to the privy council a month afterwards, he had been wrong about the French royal family and his whole Netherlands strategy was in ruins: 'I may seem to have dealt over-confidently; but I know your honours do consider that my error in that behalf was common with a great many wiser than myself, and therefore I hope you do hold me excused' ('Compleat Ambassador', ed. Digges, 257). Like his colleagues in London he considered that the assurance of Scotland through an effective alliance with the king's party was now the most immediate concern and entered into a direct correspondence with the Scottish regents to that effect. The remainder of his embassy in France was something of an anticlimax. Apart from reporting the course of the fourth War of Religion, which broke out after the massacre, his main activity was to help London evaluate the bona fides of Jerome de l'Huillier, seigneur de Maisonfleur, whom Alencon sent to Elizabeth in November to persuade her that he had opposed the massacre and wished to seek refuge in England. At last in May 1573 Dr Valentine Dale was dispatched to relieve him and Walsingham was able to return. 
On 20 December 1573 Walsingham was appointed a principal secretary, and on the following day a privy councillor. This was the final stage of the first major reshaping of Elizabeth's privy council since the beginning of the reign. After the appointments of Leicester and Norfolk in 1562 the privy council had remained effectively static, except for the deaths of older members (six, all peers, died between 1570 and 1573) and their replacement. There was an established inner ring of Cecil, Leicester, and Sir Nicholas Bacon, whom Elizabeth showed no desire to change. What initiated the reshaping was Cecil's creation as Baron Burghley on 25 February 1571. At the time Leicester informed Walsingham that Burghley would be appointed lord privy seal as well. This did not happen, and instead in March, Smith, who had been principal secretary from 1548 to 1549 as well as ambassador to France from 1563 to 1565, was sworn of the privy council, perhaps to assist Burghley in the secretaryship. A possible alternative, Throckmorton, was eliminated by his death on 12 February 1571. The death of the lord treasurer, William Paulet, first marquess of Winchester, on 10 March 1572 triggered a more complicated reshuffle. On 13 July (after his return from France) Smith was appointed principal secretary and William Howard, first Baron Howard of Effingham, surrendered the lord chamberlaincy to Thomas Radcliffe, third earl of Sussex (who had been sworn of the privy council in December 1570). On 15 July Burghley was appointed lord treasurer, and Howard, lord privy seal, but he died only six months later on 12 January 1573. 
This reshuffle brought little new blood into the privy council. Apart from Sussex, Smith, and George Talbot, sixth earl of Shrewsbury (also in 1571), the only other new privy councillor since 1569 was Leicester's brother Ambrose Dudley, earl of Warwick (5 September 1573). Walsingham may have expected appointment as principal secretary on his return, for Leicester had informed him on 8 January 1573, 'you know what opinion is here of you, and to what place all men would have you unto... besides that, the place you alreadie hold is a Counsellours place' ('Compleat Ambassador', ed. Digges, 322). However, Elizabeth may have baulked initially at the appointment of a second principal secretary -- a novelty for her reign. Retrospectively, Walsingham's appointment was seen as the consequence of his diplomatic achievements, creating a widespread belief that the secretaryship would be the culmination of a successful diplomatic career, but in practice this rarely occurred. 
A few surviving privy council memoranda in his hand from early January 1574 reveal Walsingham already at work, but tracing a specific influence thereafter is less easy. Read noted that 'the actual information which we possess about his life' during Walsingham's first four years as secretary, from 1574 to 1578, is 'lamentably little' (Read, 'Walsingham', 1.372). The secretaryship was perhaps the most onerous of the major offices, involving almost constant attendance on the queen as well as the privy council. As the handler of routine correspondence the secretary was the primary point of contact for a range of diplomats and officials, as well as the multitude of suitors to the crown. In the absence of a lord privy seal the secretary also had charge of that seal. However, the loss of privy seal records in the Whitehall Palace fire of 1619 has made it almost impossible to assess that side of his duties. Walsingham's urinary complaint (which may have been a kidney stone) forced him to take frequent sick leave. He was absent from the court for nearly four months between 24 December 1574 and 17 April 1575 (though writing letters furiously from his bed), and further absences were noted at the beginning of 1576, 1577, and 1578. In the autumn of 1576 he informed Burghley that he was exhausted and wished to resign. 
The reshuffle had made little difference to the size of the privy council, which numbered sixteen in 1574 as against fifteen in 1568. Moreover, the principal figures, Leicester, Burghley, Bacon, and, after 1571, Sussex, retained their dominant influence with Elizabeth. Walsingham only slowly obtained a position similar to theirs. Smith was the senior secretary in 1574, but he was elderly, his health was deteriorating, and he retired sick in April 1576, dying on 12 August 1577. Sir Thomas Wilson quickly replaced him on 12 November 1577, the day on which Sir Christopher Hatton was appointed vice-chamberlain and sworn of the privy council. Walsingham's observations on the pressure of business at the time of Wilson's appointment make it clear that an assistant was considered necessary. Although Wilson was considerably older than Walsingham and had recent diplomatic experience in the Netherlands, Walsingham was now clearly the senior secretary, as was reflected in his knighting on 1 December 1577. 
Walsingham's entry into high politics was very much as subordinate to Burghley and Leicester. He acted as their agent in executing the abortive plan to free Alencon on the eve of Charles's death on 30 May 1574 and then in sending a subsidy to Friedrich III, the elector palatine, to aid Alencon and the Huguenots during the fifth War of Religion in autumn 1575. The triumvirate of Burghley, Leicester, and Sussex dominated Irish affairs, and it was only in 1575 that Walsingham began to join them. Walsingham's own hand is clearest in French policy, not least because his agents (like the Italian Jacomo Manucci) continued to serve his successors. He also took a particular interest in Scotland, cultivating close contacts with the regent, James Douglas, fourth earl of Morton, whom he openly admired, and who in turn relied on him for news and information. 
The Netherlands proved the most difficult area. There is some evidence that Burghley (with Elizabeth's backing) had hoped to use the treaty of Blois and her refusal to execute Mary as a means of persuading Spain into a peaceful settlement of the trade war. In the months after St Bartholomew's eve Burghley moved swiftly to restore trade with the Netherlands and Spain (the convention of Nijmegen, March 1573). Thereafter he retained a close control over negotiations with the Netherlands, seeking to mediate a settlement between Philip and the rebels, rather than give open support to Orange. On the other hand Walsingham had had close Orangeist connections since 1571 and they clearly saw him as a sympathetic figure. When in December 1575 a delegation from the states of Holland and Zeeland offered Elizabeth the sovereignty of the provinces, Walsingham apparently warned them they were wasting their time. However, several months later, when a crisis developed over the Dutch attempt to prevent the English trading with Antwerp, he was instrumental in arranging a settlement between Orange and the queen. A major transformation occurred in autumn 1576, when the success of the revolt, coupled with the arrival of the new governor-general, Don John of Austria, widely believed to be planning the liberation of the queen of Scots, converted Elizabeth to a policy of defending the 'status quo'. 
This time, however, there was no trusting the French crown: indeed the outbreak of the sixth War of Religion in spring 1577 revived suspicions (shared by Walsingham) that there was indeed a Catholic league. This assessment contained a fatal flaw that would cause Walsingham major problems in formulating policy towards France. Despite his flamboyant Catholic devotion Henri III (the former duc d'Anjou), once firmly on the throne, had no interest in foreign adventures and was a great admirer of Elizabeth. Walsingham never fully appreciated this, and, being fed appraisals of French politics by his Huguenot friends such as Philippe Duplessis-Mornay, who were obsessed by the supposed ambitions of Henri Guise, third duc de Guise, constantly overrated his influence on the king. 
The events of 1577 also showed that there would not be much help from the German princes either. By the end of the year, as relations between the states general of the United Provinces and Don John deteriorated, the issue became one of unilateral intervention. This caused an important division of opinion between Burghley and Walsingham, especially after the defeat of the states' army by Don John at Gembloux on 31 January 1578. Burghley was doubtful of Dutch political coherence and considered a mediated settlement the best way out, while Walsingham, supported by William Davison, then agent in the Netherlands, as well as by Bacon, argued that the strength of the Dutch cities would, with adequate assistance, make a reconquest impossible. However, the risks of full-scale war with Spain were heightened when Morton was dismissed as regent of Scotland on 12 March, while Sir Thomas Stukeley was preparing an expedition for Ireland in Italy and Spain. In these circumstances Elizabeth decided to send only limited military and financial assistance to the Netherlands to stabilize the situation and encourage a mediated settlement, while keeping a larger expedition in reserve. 
It was at this point (February and March 1578) that Alencon, now duc d'Anjou, launched his own eccentric version of Coligny's 1571 Netherlands enterprise. Although he had shown recurrent interest in a Netherlands enterprise since 1576 his behaviour in the sixth War of Religion had discredited him and he was notoriously at odds with his brother. The latter aspect of the Anjou enterprise was crucial, as Walsingham noted immediately, writing to Davison on 28 March that: '[I] cannot tell what to make of his dealings with the States being divided as he is from the French king without whose aid he shall not perform anything' (BL, Add. MS 19398, fol. 88'r'). On the other hand Henri's ultimate intentions proved almost impossible to penetrate, and Walsingham's deep suspicion of the French crown led him to assume the worst: 'it will behove the Prince [Orange], therefore, to look substantially into the matter and not to forget the late accident on St Batholomew's Day' (Read, 'Walsingham', 1.377). 
Elizabeth's initial response was to try to keep Anjou out of the Netherlands by threatening to withdraw all assistance if the Dutch negotiated with him, but he bullied his way into discussions in April. In May she adopted a dangerous two-pronged approach. A special embassy was to be sent to the Netherlands to assess the situation, while she sought to divert Anjou by dangling marriage before him -- this was communicated to the French ambassador, Castelnau de Mauvissiere, through Sussex. Leicester wanted to head the embassy, but instead Elizabeth chose Walsingham, despite his objections (possibly on grounds of health), together with William Brooke, tenth Baron Cobham. Their instructions were drafted on 12 June and they arrived at Dunkirk on the 23rd. 
At the beginning of June the Holy Roman emperor, Rudolph II, suddenly offered to mediate a settlement in the Netherlands. As a result the Walsingham-Cobham embassy was instructed first to persuade Don John to agree to the imperial mediation. If unsuccessful, they were to co-ordinate the defence against him, including Anjou if he was prepared to co-operate. Last, if necessary, Elizabeth would send major English assistance, particularly if Anjou allied with Don John, a recurrent fear during spring and summer, for it was widely known that Catherine had tried to marry him to one of Philip's daughters. Including Anjou in the defence of the Netherlands, rather than diverting him, was a recent and major concession. 
Walsingham and Cobham arrived in grand style, Walsingham's own expenses for the embassy coming to $1298 4's'. 6died They were lavishly entertained by the Dutch when they reached Antwerp on 1 July, not entirely to Walsingham's taste, but much to the chagrin of Anjou's penniless agents. Their ambassadorial train also included a number of military officers, whose role was to assess the strength of the Dutch towns. Walsingham found his earlier assumptions justified, as he wrote to Leicester on 14 July 1578: 'the more I consider of the state of this country the harder I find it for the King of Spain ever to recover the full possession thereof, unless God should take away the Prince [of Orange], whose advice they cannot well spare, though their towns by the new fortifications be made impregnable' (Kervijn de Lettenhove, 10.588). Otherwise the embassy was difficult and awkward, exacerbated by the plague epidemic that killed Don John on 1 October. The military situation did stabilize when, on 1 August, Don John attacked the states' camp at Rijmenamt and was fought off, the English contingent playing a distinguished role. However, in mid-July Anjou himself arrived secretly at Mons, demanding a conclusion to his treaty with the states general. At the same time he sent agents to Elizabeth offering to place himself at her disposal and confirming his desire to marry her. 
Walsingham had found the states unwilling to treat with Don John and equally unwilling to abandon the treaty with Anjou. This was signed on 28 August, though in practice it meant little. He and Cobham entered a formal protest, but it was difficult to sustain given Elizabeth's reception of Anjou's envoys. However, they finally persuaded the states to send an embassy to Don John, which they and Pomponne de Bellievre, whom Henri had sent to impede the Anjou enterprise, accompanied. On 26 August Walsingham had a personal interview with Don John at his headquarters in the village of Perwez near Louvain. Don John refused to negotiate on the terms the states offered, but then several days later (1 September) announced that Philip had accepted Rudolph's mediation. On receipt of this news Elizabeth gave Walsingham and Cobham leave to retire, which they did on 27 September, arriving at Richmond Palace on 7 October. 
Walsingham returned deeply frustrated by what he regarded as Elizabeth's failure to seize the opportunity. His own assessment of the situation, which he had argued since the spring, was that the queen should pre-empt Anjou by making a firmer financial and military commitment. When taken with his praise for Orange -- he described him to Leicester on 6 July as 'the rarest man in Christendom' -- it made him the target of criticism (possibly from the French) that he and Orange were conspiring to bounce Elizabeth into taking on the protectorate of the Netherlands. She in turn had made things more difficult for him by negotiating with Anjou directly. How much Walsingham knew about her revival of the marriage before he left for the Netherlands is unclear, but he was certainly informed of it by Leicester at the end of July. Leicester also warned him not to let himself be identified as an open opponent of the marriage. He answered with his often quoted observation that he understood why Anjou would wish to marry Elizabeth, 'being as she is the best marriage in her parish', but he also found the marriage difficult to square with Anjou's place in the French succession, for Henri had publicly admitted earlier in the year that he and his wife would have no children (BL, Cotton MS Galba C. vi, fol. 94'r'). 
The acceptance by the states general of the imperial mediation, which resulted in the Cologne conference in summer 1579, brought Anjou's enterprise to a halt, much to his frustration. Before Walsingham left the Netherlands, Elizabeth had returned Anjou's agents with a reiteration of her long-established requirement that a personal and informal interview -- so that they could assess their mutual compatibility -- was essential if the marriage negotiations were to proceed. During the summer there had been much perplexity in England about both Anjou's motives in proposing marriage and Elizabeth's seriousness in entertaining his offers. Leicester assumed her motive was to divert him from the Netherlands, but did not see why he would surrender his ambitions there for something so uncertain. Burghley was worried that a rebuff over the marriage would simply drive Anjou into the arms of Spain. Sussex was the only privy councillor to see the marriage in a positive light, arguing that Henri would not abandon his brother and therefore Anjou was a force to be reckoned with -- and that consequently the marriage would make Elizabeth the arbiter of Europe. Walsingham stuck to his assessment that the marriage was ultimately impossible and therefore Elizabeth should not waste her time on it. He wrote to Hatton on 9 October 1578, 'I would to God her Majesty would forbear the entertaining any longer the marriage matter. No one thing has procured her so much hatred abroad as these wooing matters, for that it is conceived she dallieth therein' (H. Nicolas, 'Memoirs of the Life and Times of Sir Christopher Hatton', 1847, 94). 
Anjou did not accept Elizabeth's invitation. Instead he sent his 'maitre d'hotel', Jean de Simier, baron de St Marc, to negotiate a marriage treaty, despite warnings relayed by Walsingham in November that Elizabeth would not discuss a treaty before the interview. Nevertheless Simier arrived on 6 January 1579 and Elizabeth commissioned Walsingham, together with Burghley, Leicester, and Sussex to treat with him. Simier demanded to negotiate on the basis of the French articles of 1571, only to be told again that the interview must come first. At the end of March Anjou informed Simier that he would come in advance of a treaty, and in turn Elizabeth ordered the English commissioners to discuss the terms. It soon became clear that the English were not prepared to accept the 1571 articles, while the all important religious conditions were held over for discussion at the interview. At the end of April, according to the Spanish ambassador, Bernardino de Mendoza (who was well informed if obviously hostile to Anjou's Netherlands ambitions), Elizabeth asked her privy councillors for an individual written assessment of the marriage. This is the best explanation (as Read, alone of those who have written on the subject, has observed) for the large number of personal memoranda. They survive from Burghley, Sussex, Mildmay, and Wilson, as well as Walsingham (printed in Read, 'Walsingham', 2.14-18). Only Hatton and Leicester are missing, though Sidney's famous letter to the queen may have been written on his uncle's behalf. 
Once again the most outspoken supporter of the marriage was Sussex, who saw it as a diplomatic master-stroke. This provoked a violent reaction from Mildmay. By contrast the difference between the views of Burghley and Walsingham was much narrower. They surveyed many of the same points, both positive and negative, and expressed concern (as did Wilson) that if Anjou were rebuffed over the marriage he would turn to Spain. What tipped Burghley into support was his concern that the marriage was the final chance for an heir of Elizabeth's body, while Walsingham (along with Davison in private correspondence) was both sceptical that she would conceive (she was then forty-six) and worried that she might damage her health as a result. More fundamentally Walsingham continued to argue that Anjou's place in the French succession made the marriage impossible, and his residual suspicion of the Valois caused him to doubt Anjou's sincerity: he considered the wooing of Elizabeth simply a ploy to encourage a counter-offer from Spain. 
Whatever their individual opinions the English still had no intention of agreeing a treaty in advance of the interview, which was never certain until Anjou actually arrived on 17 August 1579. His visit coincided with two of a series of external events that reshaped the context of the marriage negotiations over the following years. The first was the landing of James fitz Maurice Fitzgerald in Ireland on 18 July, the second the arrival of Esme Stewart, sixth seigneur d'Aubigny, at Leith on 8 September. Although fitz Maurice was killed shortly afterwards, his very arrival was evidence of Spanish hostility and made good relations with France all the more important. It also inspired the rebellion of Gerald fitz James Fitzgerald, fourteenth earl of Desmond, in October, which crippled Elizabeth financially until 1583. Aubigny's motive for venturing to Scotland was actually the private one of securing his rights to the Lennox inheritance, but he was seen (not least by Walsingham) as an agent of the house of Guise, and this strengthened English suspicion of France. 
Anjou's interview lasted almost a fortnight (17 to 28 August 1579). He spent the whole time privately with Elizabeth at Greenwich Palace, and what transpired there remains as much a mystery as it was to contemporaries, except that they both expressed public satisfaction with each other's company. In late September Elizabeth took a short progress into Essex, making much of Simier and Mauvissiere, but in no hurry to proceed to a treaty. Only after hectoring from Simier did she summon the privy council to discuss the terms. On 6 October twelve privy councillors met: the majority rejected the marriage outright, and the four in favour (Sussex, Burghley, Wilson, and Henry Carey, first Baron Hunsdon) were not enthusiastic. It took further badgering from Simier for Elizabeth to commission a group of privy councillors to provide him with draft articles in late November. The religious conditions remained unresolved, and the final treaty was to be concluded by a formal embassy from France when Elizabeth summoned it. 
Although Walsingham was in attendance during the Essex progress, 4 October was the date of his last recorded presence on the privy council until 24 December, with the exception of 9 November. He thus missed the October debates, and there is conflicting evidence as to whether he was included in the commission that drafted the articles for Simier. The precise cause of his absence remains unclear. There are references in correspondence of late November to improvements in his health, which would suggest that it was another urinary attack. Mendoza, however, reported on 16 October that Elizabeth, greatly irritated with those who opposed the marriage, had told Walsingham 'begone and that the only thing he was good for was a protector of heretics', although he was not sure whether this was all artifice (Hume, 1568-79, art. 607). On 30 December, just after his return, Walsingham informed the new ambassador in France, Sir Henry Brooke (known as Cobham), that he had 'no access of speech to her majesty since my repair to court, being still entertained as a man not thoroughly restored to her favour' ('CSP for.', '1579-80', art. 112). Yet, when reporting Walsingham's return and the queen's moderating her 'tres mauvayse chere' against him and Leicester to Henri on 16 January 1580, Mauvissiere referred to his having been 'absent y mallade' (TNA: PRO, PRO 31/3/28, fols. 9'v', 10'v'). 
Walsingham's absence has inspired speculation about his involvement in John Stubbe's pamphlet 'The discoverie of a gaping gulf', which appeared in September 1579. However, no direct connection has ever been discovered. Although many of Stubbe's arguments against the marriage were little different than those advanced by Walsingham earlier, he stridently demanded that the privy council prevent a silly woman making a fool of herself. Elizabeth's hostility to controversy in print was well established, and it is difficult to believe that someone in Walsingham's position did not appreciate that it would only make things worse. 
From the end of December 1579 Walsingham was again in regular attendance at court, but it is not known what influence he may have had on Elizabeth's informing Anjou in January 1580 that no religious concessions would be granted. However, the spring of 1580 saw the marriage negotiations transformed by yet further events. The interview had coincided with the failure of the Cologne conference and subsequently Anjou's Netherlands ambitions had revived. By the beginning of 1580 Orange had made clear his intention of repudiating Philip's sovereignty and nominating Anjou instead. The Dutch debate over Anjou had strong similarities to the English one, and Orange deployed the marriage to Elizabeth as evidence of Anjou's bona fides. It was now vital for Anjou to avoid a rebuff in England, even if the continued negotiations were only a pretence. On 31 January the cardinal-king Enriques of Portugal died and Catherine's bizarre yet obsessive interest in the Portuguese succession raised the possibility of a Franco-Spanish contest over Portugal. Lastly, the spring of 1580 saw the outbreak of the seventh War of Religion. Anjou acted as mediator, while simultaneously negotiating with the Dutch, on the assumption that Henri would reward his efforts by supporting his enterprise. The treaty of Plessis-les-Tours (19 September 1580), in which the states general recognized Anjou as their 'seigneur', was contingent on Henri's commitment, but despite Anjou's lies about having the support of his brother, this was not forthcoming. Nevertheless, in spring 1581 Anjou proceeded with his Netherlands enterprise, focusing in the summer on the relief of Cambrai. 
For all Anjou's protestations of allegiance Elizabeth had little control over his actions, except to refuse to proceed with the marriage treaty until peace was made in France. However, in September 1580 the simultaneous return of Francis Drake from the circumnavigation voyage and the landing of the Italian-Spanish relief force in Ireland threatened a new confrontation with Spain. During autumn 1580 Henry Cobham was instructed to hint discreetly at an alliance over Portugal. Henri responded on 28 February 1581 by commissioning a large embassy to conclude the marriage treaty. Henri's motives are still debated: whether he deliberately made marriage to Elizabeth the price of assistance to his brother, counting on her refusal; whether he believed the marriage was necessary to tie the queen into an alliance against Spain; whether the revival of the marriage was yet another attempt to divert his brother from the Netherlands; or (on Catherine de' Medici's part) whether it was intended to divert Anjou from a marriage to Catherine of Bourbon, which she opposed. The spring of 1581 also saw the final session of the parliament of 1572, which tightened substantially the laws against recusancy, possibly as a signal to France that no concessions would be made on religion. Walsingham played his usual minor role, relaying his jaundiced view of parliament to Henry Hastings, third earl of Huntingdon: 'otherwise there hath no past any matter of importance, so careful have men been to prefer their private causes before the common benefits of the state' (Hunt. L., Hastings MS 13062). 
The French commissioners arrived on 16 May, Anjou seeking to cross as well but being driven back by bad weather. Walsingham was sceptical about their chances: 'the issue of great causes is uncertain... yet if I can judge anything and others that have some cause to know her majesty inwards, I see no reason to fear the matter' (Hunt. L., Hastings MS 13066). He was ill at the time of their initial reception, but at a meeting on the 30th he informed the French commission that parliament had expressed considerable opposition to the match and that as a result Elizabeth intended to settle the controversial aspects directly with Anjou. He then hinted that she would be prepared to consider an alliance, only to find that the commissioners were not empowered to negotiate anything other than the marriage. On 11 June a marriage treaty was signed, but the religious clauses and other contentious issues were reserved for settlement between Elizabeth and Anjou. 
Elizabeth had kept Walsingham at a remove from her communications with Anjou during 1580. He in turn became increasingly fixated by the rise of Aubigny in Scotland. He was convinced from the start that Aubigny was a Guise agent, and by spring 1580 was growing frustrated at the failure to find evidence. For this Cobham was blamed, the source of some hostility to Walsingham thereafter. Walsingham was also certain that Aubigny (first earl of Lennox from March 1580) was intending the overthrow of Morton. However, here he and Burghley made a mistake by seeing Lennox as the sole issue, which could be countered by his removal or (on Morton's advice) by buying James VI with a large subsidy. What they failed to appreciate was the depth of hostility to Morton among James's protestant councillors, the treasurer, William Ruthven, fourth Baron Ruthven, in particular. Morton was arrested on 5 December 1580 on trumped-up charges of complicity in the murder of Henry Stewart, Lord Darnley. 
The issue was now what could be done to save him. Walsingham, whose loyalty to Morton was unquestioned, argued for military intervention, if necessary. However, his cousin Thomas Randolph (1525/6-1590) (whom he always referred to as uncle), who was sent to Scotland in early 1581 to assess the situation, undermined the case for intervention by reporting that there was no internal support for Morton's restoration. Elizabeth backed away from formal intervention on an apparent verbal promise from James that he would spare Morton's life. To this Walsingham gave a typical response in a letter to Huntingdon of 5 April: 'by which account I see that Scotland is clean lost, and a great gate opened thereby for the loss of Ireland' (Hunt. L., Hastings MS 13067). James's promise was broken by Morton's execution on 2 June 1581, and it opened a new chapter in Anglo-Scots relations, dominated by Elizabeth's distrust of the adolescent king. Although Mendoza is the source for her denunciation of James as 'that false Scots urchin', Walsingham recalled during his 1583 embassy to Scotland 'the impression I have always found that your majesty had of the disposition of this young king... as your majesty has always doubted, so I think you shall find him most ungrateful' (Hume, 1580-86, 207; 'CSP Scot.', '1581-3', 611). 
On 22 July, however, Walsingham was sent on an embassy to France that lasted until 21 September. Just after the marriage treaty was signed Henri had informed Elizabeth that he was prepared to consider a full alliance after the marriage was concluded, yet at the same time it was obvious that he was trying to obstruct his brother's Netherlands plans. The basic purpose of the embassy was to discover what he was up to and to keep Anjou's enterprise alive. The complex instructions Walsingham was given reflect the genuine English puzzlement over Henri's intentions. Walsingham tried to escape the embassy, fearing a repetition of 1578, but without success. There was, however, a challenge for him. During the spring he had become increasingly interested in plans for a naval expedition to aid the Portuguese pretender, Dom Antonio, and invested in it himself. In May Dom Antonio had sent an envoy to Elizabeth, who claimed that Henri had promised him assistance. When Elizabeth offered to share the costs the French king replied that he would do so only after the marriage. Walsingham observed to Huntingdon on 29 June, 'yt is to be gathered by this could [cold] answer that yf the mariadge take not place, the portugalls can look for no relefe out of France and that the French King will come some other coorse' (Hunt. L., Hastings MS 13070). 
Once in France, Walsingham went first to see Anjou at his crowded headquarters at La Fere-en-Tardenois on 3 August 1581, where they had to retire to the latter's bedchamber to escape the noise of the courtiers in the adjoining apartment. Here he expressed Elizabeth's concern that the marriage would commit her to an open war with Spain, though she was willing to ally with France and would aid him discreetly. Anjou replied that his brother would do nothing until the marriage was concluded. However, he responded to her promise of assistance by requesting a loan to keep his forces in the field. Walsingham thought this a good way of retaining control of him. Shortly afterwards Walsingham encountered Catherine, who had come to dissuade Anjou from the enterprise and to agree to a Spanish marriage, but he apparently managed to persuade her to support an English alliance. He then went to Paris, where he had his first audience with Henri on 10 August. He found him difficult to pin down, but concluded that without the marriage Henri would not agree to an alliance. On 24 August Elizabeth followed Walsingham's advice by agreeing quickly to the loan Anjou had requested. However, at the same time Walsingham discovered that his negotiations with Henri were being sabotaged by reports from Mauvissiere and Anjou's agent Pierre Clausse, sieur de Marchaumont, that Elizabeth would ultimately proceed with the marriage. With this stalemate his embassy came to an end. 
Walsingham's expenses had come to $625 19's'. 7died, and he returned frustrated that yet another opportunity had been let slip. He blamed Elizabeth for failing to clarify her position over the marriage, for had she been amenable to it the alliance posed no problem. Instead she had given the impression that her only concern was to avoid expenditure, which, using one of the medical metaphors he regularly employed, he argued was impossible: 'common experience teacheth that it is hard in a politique body to prevent any mischief without charges as in a natural body diseased to cure the same without pain' (Read, 'Walsingham', 2.87). On his return he revised his old memorandum of 1571 under a new title, 'Whether it be good for her majesty to assist the duke of Anjou in his enterprise of the Low Countries'. Many of the arguments of the earlier memorandum reappeared. Spain was clearly the chief enemy and the Netherlands should not be allowed to return to Philip's allegiance. France was less of a threat, thanks to the Huguenots, and the danger of French annexation of the Netherlands was a hypothetical risk that could be run. With regard to Anjou himself, the old fear that if rebuffed he might turn to Spain remained and therefore his enterprise had to be encouraged and supported. However, the most radical section was a new one that dealt with finance. Walsingham considered that parliament should be acquainted with the reasons for aiding Anjou to pre-empt criticism, and if an open war with Spain followed then 'some portion of the Bishops' temporalities may by sale be converted into fee farms' (BL, Harley MS 1582, fols. 38'r'-41'r'; Read, 'Walsingham', 2.94). The discreet subsidizing of Anjou was in fact the policy Elizabeth followed in 1582. 
On 30 July 1581, just after Walsingham arrived in France, Leicester relayed a message from the queen: 'she willed me to say thus unto you that as she doth know her Moor cannot change his colour, no more shall it be found that she will alter her old wont, which is always to hold both eyes and ears open for her good servants' (Read, 'Walsingham', 2.60). In the letter he wrote to Elizabeth on 2 September, criticizing her for failing to clarify her position, Walsingham replied with laboured jocularity: 'the lawes of Ethiopia my native soyle are verie severe against those that condemne a person unheard... I should then be worthie to receave the most sharpe punishment that either the Ethiopian severitie or Dracus lawes can yeilde' (BL, Harley MS 6265, fols. 71'v'-72'r'). Although -- as with all the nicknames that Elizabeth used -- the precise origin of 'the Moor' is unknown, it marks Walsingham's admission into what was the true elite of Elizabethan England, the queen's intimates. 
Owing to the loss of his private papers Walsingham's personal life at this point is difficult to detail. He certainly maintained a substantial establishment. From the 1560s his London residence was in Seething Lane, a house that survived the great fire of 1666. The Victorian office block on the site still bears his name. In February 1579 Elizabeth granted him the lease of the manor of Barn Elms in Surrey, close to Richmond Palace, his brother-in-law Beale's house at Barnes, and Dr John Dee's at Mortlake. This became his principal suburban residence. He also had a country house at Odiham in Hampshire. It was to Odiham that he invited Leicester and Warwick for 'a Friday night's drinking after the ancient and catholic order' on their return from a journey to Wilton in Wiltshire in November 1578 (Cottrell Dormer MS, MSS letters, 1570-1630, art. 25). 
None of Walsingham's houses appears to have been architecturally prepossessing, and nothing remains of any of them. Of all the Elizabethan grandees he seems to have been least interested in creating or leaving behind him a major architectural monument. He was, however, a notable patron of learning, upwards of forty books being dedicated to him, chiefly on religion, philosophy, and exploration. Edmund Spenser wrote a dedicatory sonnet to him in his 'The Faerie Queene' (1590), calling him '
the great Mecenas of this age, 

As wel to al the civil artes professe 

As those that are inspird with Martial rage. 
('The Faerie Queene', ed. A. C. Hamilton, 1989, 742)' Walsingham's clearest personal tastes were for gardening (an interest that he shared with Leicester and Burghley), falconry, and music. The composer John Cosyn dedicated his work 'Musike of six, and five partes' to him in 1585. Walsingham also employed the young lutenist and composer Daniel Bacheler, whose apprenticeship was signed over to him in June 1586 and who composed various works for mixed instruments for him. 
The most famous of all the books dedicated to Walsingham was the first (1589) edition of Richard Hakluyt's 'The principall navigations'. His interest in exploration may have been a product of his early association with the Russia Company. He supported Martin Frobisher's three attempts to unlock the north-west passage (1576, 1577, 1578) but became more cautious with each venture. If he remained fascinated with the north-west passage it was for strategic rather than commercial reasons, for he hoped it would be a way into the Pacific free from the Spanish. Dee's journal records a conference in 1583 with Adrian Gilbert, John Davis, and Walsingham over the significance of the north-west passage. Walsingham later sponsored Davis's heroic series of voyages deep into the Arctic in 1585, 1586, and 1587. 
Walsingham's main rewards from the queen were a series of export licences for cloth (and occasionally wool), beginning in 1574. He received one other office in these years, the honorific dignity of the chancellorship of the Order of the Garter (22 April 1578). At the same time, his stature was also reflected in expanding local influence. He was named of the quorum of the peace for Hampshire about 1573, added to the quorum for Hertfordshire about 1574, promoted 'custos rotulorum' for Hampshire in 1577, and was of the quorum for Surrey by 1579. More significant was the fact that boroughs felt it important to gain his goodwill. Colchester appointed him recorder in 1578, and he was high steward of Salisbury (1581), Ipswich (1581), Winchester (1582), Kingston upon Hull (1583), and King's Lynn (1588). 
After the death of Sir Thomas Wilson on 20 May 1581 no second secretary was appointed until 1586, possibly for financial reasons. As a result Walsingham's own informal secretariat expanded dramatically and was at the centre of many of his subsequent activities. He relied heavily on Beale, who, although clerk of the privy council, deputized for him during his embassy in Scotland in 1583. His immediate team of secretaries included Francis Mylles, who had been in his service since 1566, Laurence Thomson, who entered his service about 1575 and served as his secretary in the Netherlands embassy of 1578, and lastly Nicholas Faunt, who was in his service from 1578. They were later joined by Lake and possibly Thomas Edmondes. When Walsingham became secretary there was an established coterie of diplomatic agents, including Killigrew and Randolph, but however personally close, they were of an older generation. The first of his own proteges to follow a diplomatic career was Davison, who may have been with him in the French embassy of 1571-3. In the 1580s he relied increasingly heavily on more shadowy figures: Edward Burnham, Francis Needham, and Walter Williams. Burnham, Williams, and his Italian agent, Manucci, were all with him in the Netherlands in 1578. It was this rather loose organization that Beale later criticized (Read, 'Walsingham', 1.427). 
On 21 September 1583, while Walsingham was in Scotland, his surviving daughter Frances married Sidney, and as part of the marriage arrangement they lived in Walsingham's home. Walsingham had known Sidney since 1572, and in political terms the marriage appeared to reflect the ties between him and Sidney's uncle Leicester. Yet Sidney's father, Sir Henry Sidney, had been unhappy, relating in a famous prolix account of his life that he lacked the estate to endow his son sufficiently, while Elizabeth was annoyed at not being consulted first. However, Walsingham cherished Sidney's intelligence, and Sidney's steady emergence as a political figure in 1584-5 took place under his tutelage as well as Leicester's. By spring 1585 he too was deputizing for Walsingham during his repeated illnesses. 
Walsingham's religious allegiances, on the other hand, are puzzling. As early as 1574 la Motte-Fenelon labelled him a puritan, by which he meant an ally of the Huguenots; the term was also used by the queen of Scots to identify her enemies and by Spanish agents to identify Orange's sympathizers. There is evidence of Walsingham's assistance to individual puritan divines, and he left $100 in his will for a lectureship for John Reynolds at Oxford. However, John Foxe is the only prominent author found in the twenty or so books on religious subjects dedicated to him. The only other noteworthy feature is the dedication to him of a number of polemics against the Jesuits during the early 1580s, which may reflect active encouragement on his part. 
Read was struck 'by the almost complete absence of any evidence revealing a disposition on his part to support the puritan movement in his conduct of office' (Read, 'Walsingham', 2.262). While Davison, Beale, Tomson, and Faunt, and others close to him, were famously outspoken on the subject, his own caution and discretion are summed up by his warning to Davison: 'I would have all reformations done by public authority. It were very dangerous that every private man's zeal should carry sufficient authority of reforming things amiss' (ibid., 265). On the other hand his proposals for the sale of temporalities in 1581 and his disparaging description of the bishops as 'assez refroidis' to a Genevan envoy seeking a loan in 1582-3 are revealing. This hostile attitude to the episcopate helped to shape the defence of the church that John Whitgift mounted after his appointment as archbishop of Canterbury in 1583. 
Walsingham's embassy of 1581 had an unexpected side effect. In Paris he had learned of 'the association' from Archibald Douglas, a Church of Scotland minister accused of involvement in Darnley's murder who had fled to France after Morton's fall. This was the response of the queen of Scots to the new situation in Scotland, a plan for restoring relations with her son, in which she would recognize him as king if he revoked her demission (abdication) of 1566 and ruled jointly with her. Walsingham also learned of the mission of the Jesuit William Crichton (or Creighton) to Scotland, though not its full import. It was this conjuncture that inaugurated his career as a spymaster. 
Various English attempts to persuade Mary to clarify her relations to her son met with hints that she knew more than she was prepared to let on and that she had extensive contacts in Scotland. Her attitude confirmed Elizabeth's and Walsingham's suspicions of James and underlined the pressing need to separate him from Lennox. Lennox was finally excluded from James's presence on 23 August 1582, by what is known as the Ruthven raid, in which supporters of Ruthven (now first earl of Gowrie) kidnapped the king. After Morton's execution his nephew Archibald Douglas, eighth earl of Angus and later sixth earl of Morton, and a few supporters had gone into exile in England, and Walsingham has been widely suspected of instigating this conspiracy through them. However, the lack of control the English had over subsequent events in Scotland suggests the opposite. The cause lay in Lennox's attempts to revive the episcopate, which had alarmed both the kirk and the protestant nobility. 
The Ruthven raid provided Walsingham with two key pieces of intelligence: evidence of discussions about the Association between agents of Mary and James in Paris in autumn 1581 (with Henri's apparent approval), and evidence that Mauvissiere had been informing Lennox about English contacts with Angus and with Lennox's enemies in Scotland. The latter Mauvissiere had obtained from Archibald Douglas, who had followed Walsingham to England and cultivated Angus. Mauvissiere had managed to turn Douglas by offering Mary's help in obtaining a pardon for him for his role in Darnley's murder. The full details are difficult to establish because there are large gaps in Mauvissiere's surviving correspondence after June 1581. 
This evidence of French duplicity, despite Elizabeth's assistance to Anjou, led Walsingham to treat Mauvissiere as a legitimate target. He was able to turn Douglas into a double agent (apparently by threats to send him back to Scotland to stand trial) and in spring 1583 gained the services of the mysterious Henry Fagot, a member of Mauvissiere's household. By the end of 1583 he had also suborned one of Mauvissiere's secretaries, who provided him with drafts of much of the French ambassador's correspondence. In 1991 and 1999 John Bossy published two detailed accounts of this intelligence operation in which he argued that Fagot was none other than Giordano Bruno, and showed how much can be reconstructed of Walsingham's intelligence work from the elliptical, unsigned, and encrypted records that remain. There were further ramifications. Because Mauvissiere acted as agent for the French crown with the imprisoned Mary, Walsingham was able to tap into her correspondence as well. From Fagot, and possibly others, he also learned in early 1583 that Lord Henry Howard was an informant of Mendoza. This is confirmed by Mendoza's own reports. Following a row with Elizabeth in September 1580 over Drake's circumnavigation voyage Mendoza visited the court on only one further occasion, and all his information on English court politics came from Howard. 
Although this intelligence operation was to yield major rewards over time, the immediate situation in Scotland deteriorated. Lennox was forced to retire to France at the end of 1582 (he died there shortly afterwards), but James openly resented the Ruthvenites and the question of his understanding with his mother remained. To solidify their position the Ruthvenites turned to England for help, not simply for money, but to pacify James by granting him the English lands of his grandfather Matthew Stewart, thirteenth earl of Lennox. There was, however, a rival claimant, his cousin Lady Arabella Stuart, whose interests Elizabeth was not prepared to sacrifice. Elizabeth's attitude alienated Colonel William Stewart, who engineered James's escape from the Ruthvenites on 29 June 1583. 
The dismissal of Gowrie and the restoration of Lennox's former ally, James Stewart, earl of Arran, soon followed James's escape. The resurrection of Arran was the cause of what became Walsingham's final embassy, his mission to James from 13 August to 21 October 1583. Because of his poor health he travelled slowly. Prior to his audience with the king at Perth on 8 September, he decided to take a high line: 'the best way to make them seek her majesty is make little account of them' (Read, 'Walsingham', 2.211). He lectured James on his choice of privy councillors, and when James responded that he was an absolute king, he told him he was too young to make serious political decisions. At a second interview he returned to the theme, criticizing James for the destruction of 'so well-deserving a servant' as Morton, and refusing to meet Arran (ibid., 2.217). 
Although he considered James's hostile response proof that he was operating on his mother's advice Walsingham very quickly appreciated that he had perhaps overreached himself, for he had only exacerbated the king's resentment. He had also miscalculated about Arran, who, if mercenary, was a committed protestant. Arran's response was what Walsingham soon dubbed the 'by-course'. This was a complaint to Elizabeth through Hunsdon, the governor of Berwick, that Walsingham had slandered James. James was not in league with his mother and wished friendship with Elizabeth, but he also intended to discipline the protestant nobles and the kirk. Walsingham considered the by-course a device of Mary's that Hunsdon was too naive and ambitious to appreciate, and Elizabeth remained too suspicious of James to be convinced by it. 
About the time that Walsingham left for Scotland, the privy council caught the first glimpses of what became known as the Throckmorton plot, in particular the visit to England of the Roman Catholic exile Charles Paget in August and September to canvass support among the nobility for a landing by the duc de Guise on the south coast. This was a revision of an earlier plan to free Mary discussed between Crichton and Lennox at Dalkeith in March 1582. The plot was broken on 4 November 1583 with the arrest of Francis Throckmorton, who had acted as a confidential messenger between Mary, Mauvissiere, and Mendoza. Papers found in Throckmorton's possession and his own confession (possibly under torture) in December incriminated Lord Henry Howard, Philip Howard, thirteenth earl of Arundel, and Henry Percy, eighth earl of Northumberland, all of whom were arrested, while Thomas Paget, third Baron Paget, and Charles Arundell fled to France. 
There are still several unexplained aspects to this affair. Throckmorton, who was the crown's only witness, was tried on 20 May 1584 and executed on 10 July, yet no proceedings were undertaken against the peers, who simply remained in prison. Mendoza was expelled in January 1584 for refusing to hand over papers Throckmorton had left with him, and diplomatic contact between England and Spain came to an end. Yet no action was taken against Mauvissiere, who was far more deeply involved. John Bossy has supplied the reason here. Walsingham was tapping Mauvissiere's correspondence through his suborned secretary and had no desire to see him depart. Lastly, there was Walsingham's own role. His agents, Fagot among them, provided the information on the comings and goings in Mauvissiere's residence, yet Walsingham did not return from Scotland until a fortnight before Throckmorton's arrest. Burghley in fact supervised much of the investigation. 
The most important consequence of the plot was its apparent confirmation of an 'enterprise of England' to replace Elizabeth with the queen of Scots, in which Spain, the papacy, the Jesuits, the Guise, some Scots, and possibly Mary herself were involved. The enterprise provides the leitmotif for English policy in 1584-5. In the immediate term it caused an invasion panic in January 1584, which a month later inspired a naval treaty with Orange, the first of the many steps that drew England and the United Provinces closer together and lay behind the Dutch participation in the defeat of the Spanish Armada. Walsingham, who was ill in bed between 8 February and 10 March 1584, drafted the treaty. 
The wider diplomatic response to the Throckmorton plot dogged Walsingham for the next four years. This was his awkward relationship to the most controversial of Elizabethan ambassadors, Sir Edward Stafford, who was appointed to succeed Cobham as resident at the French court on 15 September 1583. Stafford's French was fluent, he was socially at ease in the French court, and he had been Elizabeth's preferred confidential agent with Anjou since 1578. He was also married to Leicester's former mistress, Douglas Sheffield, dowager Baroness Sheffield. He was not Walsingham's first choice, but as so often happened the others on the shortlist were not available. Walsingham considered his doubts about the new ambassador confirmed when in December Stafford and his wife entertained her cousin Arundell at the Paris embassy, claiming to be ignorant of his reasons for leaving England. During 1584 relations between the two rapidly descended into mutual bickering, Walsingham accusing Stafford of wasting money and laziness, Stafford complaining at Walsingham's constant carping and criticism. There was also an issue of substance. Walsingham never lost his residual suspicion of the French royal family, while Stafford appreciated that however bizarrely Henri behaved he was determined to maintain his independence of action and was no pawn of the Guise. 
The situation in 1584 has supplied considerable evidence for students of Elizabethan faction. Even before he left for France, Stafford had ostentatiously sought Burghley's protection, and thereafter sent him copies of his reports to Walsingham. At the same time Hunsdon turned to Burghley for support for the by-course in Scotland. Yet for all Burghley's encouragement of their confidence, there is no evidence that the lord treasurer was actively pursuing different policies from Walsingham's. It is dangerous to argue from archival survival, but a secret correspondence between Stafford and Burghley does not survive, and apart from complaints about Walsingham, the copies of his reports that Stafford sent to Burghley contain no additional material. By the same token, Walsingham was fully aware of Hunsdon's progress with the by-course. The explanation may be that Burghley, aware of Walsingham's temper, was simply keeping the options open. 
At the beginning of 1584 Scotland posed the more immediate problems. In spite of Walsingham's warnings, at the end of 1583 James had the Ruthven raid condemned as treason by a convention of estates, and those involved were ordered into exile. In response Andrew Melville denounced James as a tyrant and Gowrie and his allies mounted a hasty rebellion in spring 1584. Gowrie was captured immediately and executed on 3 May. Angus and John Erskine, second earl of Mar, briefly occupied Stirling Castle (17 to 23 April) and then fled to England followed by a substantial body of ministers. All later acknowledged the generous treatment they received from Walsingham. At the time James claimed that the English had instigated the rebellion, but there is no reliable evidence for more than vague foreknowledge. There was, however, a rapid response in which Davison was sent to aid the lords in their effort to remove Arran, with instructions drafted by both Walsingham and Burghley. However, they had abandoned Stirling before he reached Berwick. It is revealing of the depth of Elizabeth's distrust of James that unusually for her she defended the exiled lords against his accusations of treason. 
Given this stalemate the by-course revived, with Arran now offering to restore amity between Elizabeth and James. Elizabeth responded with charges that James had wronged her by making the Association with his mother and demanded that to prove his bona fides he should reveal all he knew of the plots against her. This Arran agreed to do in a personal meeting with Hunsdon, but Walsingham confided to the exiled Scottish minister James Carmichael that 'he lukit that his [Hunsdon's] injunctions being so strait, and not satisfied fullie, sould compt himself to haif bin trompit with fair words in tyme bypast' ('Letters and papers of Mr. James Carmichael', 415). The meeting took place at Foulden church near Berwick on 13 August, and was reported by Hunsdon to Walsingham the next day. Arran promised that Patrick Gray, master of Gray, whom he intended to send to England, would reveal all to Elizabeth. The queen was underwhelmed. 
Concerning Mary herself there was the practical issue that she had to be removed from Shrewsbury's custody after he had been compromised by his wife's denunciations of his relations with her. At the beginning of the year Elizabeth had intimated that in view of the revelations of the Throckmorton plot and events in Scotland she was unwilling to discuss Mary's release any longer. Mary had responded by claiming that she still wished to negotiate, and in May she was asked to demonstrate her goodwill by mediating the return of the exiled lords to Scotland. Mary, however, demanded her release first. It was in these circumstances that she was moved from Sheffield in September, still claiming that James had agreed to be ordered by her in all things. 
In summer 1584 greater matters intruded with the death of Anjou on 10 June, and then the assassination of Orange on 10 July. Their deaths initiated both the crisis over the fate of the Dutch revolt and the even greater crisis over the French succession. In the face of the bold exploitation of Dutch political disunion by Alessandro Farnese, duke of Parma, in 1583, during the spring of 1584 Elizabeth had been encouraging Henri to back his brother more effectively. What he would do after his brother's death was now the question, but Henri was more than usually elusive and more concerned with reaching an agreement with Henri of Navarre that would pre-empt Catholic opposition to a protestant succession. Yet at the same time he sent mixed signals to the Dutch over whether he would support them in the crisis surrounding the siege of Antwerp. Finally in August he sent Roch de Sorbies, seigneur de Pruneaux, Anjou's former agent, to The Hague to announce that he would accept an offer of sovereignty. Stafford had great difficulty in supplying solid information during these months, which merely increased Walsingham's doubts about him, especially as he himself was reading Mauvissiere's mail. 
Walsingham was convinced that Elizabeth could not abandon the Dutch whatever happened, a case he argued in a memorandum on 14 July: 'Points to be considered touching the peril that may grow by Spain when he shall have full possession of Holland and Zeeland' (BL, Cotton MS Galba C. viii, fols. 94'r'-95'r'). In August the states of Holland and Zeeland, who were unhappy about accepting the French king, appealed to Elizabeth to take them under protection, but her preference was for a joint intervention with Henri. Her response encouraged a majority of the provinces to accept the French offer, a process concluded by early October. 
At the same time Walsingham scored another major intelligence coup. On 23 August Crichton was caught by a routine Dutch naval patrol on a voyage to Scotland, carrying various papers in English and Italian about a great enterprise against England. The local Dutch commander sent these to Walsingham, and he immediately responded by sending a warship to bring Crichton to England. By 14 September he was lodged in Walsingham's house. What Crichton possessed was a copy of the old Lennox invasion plan of 1582, which Walsingham immediately recognized lay behind the Charles Paget-Throckmorton scheme of 1583. Walsingham also learned that 'the Scottish Queen was made privy', but that 'the French king hath no way been a party in them, which ought to move the queen the rather to accompt of his friendship'. Last, and most important, according to Crichton, the enterprise was merely suspended, and would be put in execution 'when the king of Spain shalbe ridde of his low cuntryes trowbles' ('State Papers and Letters of Sir Ralph Sadler', 2.400-01; TNA: PRO, SP 12/173/13; BL, Cotton MS Caligula C. ix, fol. 133'r'). 
Crichton's revelations lay behind two major decisions taken in mid-October. A full-scale meeting of the privy council was held on the 10th, which agreed that Elizabeth could not afford to let the Netherlands collapse, and would need to intervene unilaterally if the French did not. This would involve making a settlement with Scotland. The other was the bond of association, signed by the privy council on 19 October. In contrast with the records of the discussion over the Netherlands, no memoranda concerning the bond have survived, nor was it mentioned in the privy council discussions of the 10th. The bond committed its signatories to defend Elizabeth's life and 'pursue, aswell by force of armes, as by all other meanes of revenge, all maner of persons, of what estate soever they shalbe... that shall attempt... the harme of Her Majesties Royall Personne'. Members swore 'to prosecute such person or persons to the death, with joint or particular forces; and to take the uttermost revenge on them... for their utter overthrowe and extirpation', and no pretended successor by whom or for whom the queen's assassination was attempted or committed would be accepted (TNA: PRO, SP 12/174/1, fols. 4'v'-5'r'). Its origins can be found in various proposals by Burghley, some dating back to the 1560s, and in an advice to Elizabeth written by Leicester earlier in 1584. Burghley and Walsingham were responsible for drafting it, and Burghley, Walsingham, and Leicester took responsibility for its circulation. 
The targets of the bond were Mary and James; ironically Mary was allowed to sign it at her own request. Its title was an equally ironic -- not necessarily conscious -- reference to Mary's and James's Association. Yet it quickly became superfluous, thanks to the arrival of Gray early in November. Gray was expected to conclude the by-course by revealing the plots, which he did not in fact do. But he did dissociate James from his mother, and also offered to overthrow Arran, apparently out of revenge for the execution of Gowrie, who was a relative of his. In the course of his embassy he forged social links with Leicester, Sidney (who became a personal friend), and Walsingham. Thanks to Gray a new Scottish policy was formulated in winter 1584. Once James abandoned his mother, negotiations with her ceased, and in January 1585 she was moved to Tutbury, Staffordshire, with her communications severely restricted. After John St John, second Baron St John of Bletso, escaped appointment as her governor, Sir Amias Paulet was named in April. The new relationship with James was initially more difficult. Gray brought with him his allies Sir Lewis Bellenden of Auchnoll and Sir John Maitland of Thirlestane. However, the Scottish exiles distrusted Gray, and getting James to accept their return would not be easy. 
Overshadowing the Scottish situation was the Netherlands. English policy was in suspension until Henri had decided whether to accept the offer of sovereignty, and Davison was sent to The Hague in November as an observer. Walsingham, who was ill again in December 1584 and January 1585, had been sceptical all along that the French king would ever accept, but Elizabeth, now aware that Henri had no interest in joint intervention, wished to prevent the French from acting independently. The tension boiled over in a spat with Burghley, in which Walsingham initially accused him of opposing his suit for the customs farm of the outports, though later accepted his 'playne manner of proceading' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/176/19, fol. 34'r'). The news that Henri had in the end rejected the Dutch offer reached England on 6 March 1585, and the response was swift. A privy council meeting was held on the 8th, and on the following day Burnham was sent to Davison with an offer of English assistance. 
This offer was presented formally to the states general on 30 March, and the provinces were then consulted. By the beginning of May all except Zeeland had agreed. Zeeland delayed the embassy for nearly a month, and when it finally departed it had a difficult voyage and did not reach England until 23 June. The negotiation of the two treaties of Nonsuch took place over the next month and a half, conducted largely by Burghley and Walsingham on Elizabeth's behalf. The contract, as the treaties became known, was hastily drafted, and this was one cause of the Anglo-Dutch tensions of the following two years. Not the least of the reasons was that it was not the only major diplomatic issue of those months. In May Walsingham's cousin Edward Wotton, later first Baron Wotton (1548-1628), was sent to James to negotiate a new relationship, and Walsingham's correspondence with him provides a valuable running commentary on the Nonsuch treaty. 
What complicated the Scottish negotiations was Gray's decision in June to arrange Arran's assassination. This Walsingham and Leicester thought a course unduly ''bluddy'... wherunto that 'nation' is overmiche bent' (Bain, 2.648). They felt that English complicity, or even the appearance of it, would compromise Elizabeth's position with James. Instead Walsingham was prepared to accept a settlement in Scotland in which Arran was permitted to remain but watched closely by Gray and his allies, with either a tacit or an overt alliance with England. However, Gray was not so easy to control. On 22 June it was reported that there was great 'disdaining' between Arran and Gray, who was attempting to draw the king from the earl's influence while creating a league against him ('CSP Scot.', '1584-5', 498). Walsingham, seeing a personal victory many months in preparation now slipping away, was privately angry: 'I have bestowed a great deale of care and cost in vayne; and therefor I am now fully resolved [not] to have any further dealyng therein than as the rest of my colleags' (Bain, 2.694). 
In the event, the fortuitous death in a border fracas of Francis Russell, Lord Russell, on 27 July during a day of truce attended by Arran led to the toppling of the earl's regime. Russell's death was exploited adeptly by Gray and Wotton, who claimed that Arran planned it to disrupt the amity between Elizabeth and James. By early November Angus, Mar, and the exiles were at Stirling, and Arran panicked and fled west. In spring 1586 Randolph returned to Scotland to negotiate the league with England, which was signed by Roger Manners, fourth earl of Rutland, on behalf of Elizabeth at Berwick on 2 July 1586. James was now formally allied in return for a pension of $4000, and at least a facade of a friendly government in Scotland was restored. 
Henri's rejection of the Dutch offer of sovereignty was in part a response to a Guise-led revolt in France in spring 1585. In the summer, partly under pressure from his mother, he reached an agreement with the Guise, but at the price of revoking the edicts of toleration and thereby provoking Huguenot resistance, the eighth War of Religion. Navarre sought assistance from Elizabeth in June and July 1585. Much to the anger of the Huguenots the queen would provide only limited aid, given her commitments in the Netherlands, and they were encouraged to seek further help from the German protestants. At this point a significant disagreement broke out between Walsingham and Stafford. Walsingham was convinced that Henri had finally showed his true colours and that there was now an active international Catholic league. Stafford, acutely enough, reported to Burghley on 5 July that, whatever the appearances, 'there is great heartburning and mistrust between the King and them [the Guise] which wille never be quenched' (TNA: PRO, SP 78/14/30). Walsingham was furious, insinuating, 'I should be abused and by thatt meanes abuse her majestie concerning theire procedynges', not least because it gave Elizabeth a counter to his case that Navarre needed full-scale assistance (TNA: PRO, SP 78/14/15). 
The eighteen months from summer 1585 were probably the most dramatic of Walsingham's life, but the strains undoubtedly caused a serious deterioration of his health and helped to bring on his death. After the Nonsuch treaty was concluded Leicester departed for a holiday at Kenilworth. Walsingham was intending to join him, but cried off at the last minute owing to the bad weather, much to Leicester's disappointment: 'I am persuaded that nothing in the world would have done you more good, nor any man in England should be more welcome than yourself' (Adams, 'Household Accounts', 285, 290). He was thus in post when the news of the surrender of Antwerp was received and was able to respond quickly by sending Davison back to the Netherlands with Elizabeth's offer of increased assistance, including Leicester as commander of the English forces. However, this placed Walsingham in the middle of the tensions between Elizabeth and Leicester over the Netherlands. They continued throughout 1586, as Leicester's political and military difficulties increased. At the same time Walsingham knew Elizabeth was following another by-course, by entertaining peace feelers from Parma through Burghley. 
However, what dominated 1586 was the destruction of Mary. In September 1585 the replacement of Mauvissiere by Guillaume de l'Aubespeine, baron de Chateauneuf, caused Walsingham further to restrict Mary's communications by ordering that all correspondence formerly sent through the French embassy (which he had been reading since 1583) should now be sent through him. At the end of the year Mary was moved from Tutbury (which she hated) to the house of Robert Devereux, second earl of Essex, at Chartley in Staffordshire. It was at this point that Walsingham devised a scheme to encourage her to re-establish her secret correspondence, probably modelled on his treatment of Mauvissiere. A plausible double agent, Gilbert Gifford, presented himself to Mary and the French embassy, claiming to be able to provide a vehicle for communication with the outside world. In a complex intelligence operation, from January 1586 Mary, through letters apparently smuggled in and out of Chartley in beer barrels, was able to read and reply to over a year's backlog of correspondence. All these letters, both incoming and outgoing, passed through Walsingham's office, where they were deciphered by Thomas Phelippes. Through this lethal mechanism Mary replied to Anthony Babington, a gentleman who sought her blessing on 6 July for a genuine, if imprecise, plot on Elizabeth's life. Mary, for whatever reason, perhaps as a result of her many years' imprisonment, compromised herself by conveying assent in a ciphered commission to Babington on 17 July. 
On 2 August Phelippes asked Walsingham whether Babington should be arrested, 'or otherwise played with' (Pollen, cl). Walsingham replied the following day, telling Phelippes that 'you wyll not beleve howe much I am greved with the event of this cause [an]d feare the addytyon of the postscrypt hathe bread the jealousie' (BL, Cotton MS, appx L, fol. 144'r'). By 'jealousie' he meant suspicion. Walsingham had added a postscript to Mary's letter to Babington of 31 July, asking him to name the six gentlemen who would assassinate Elizabeth. He now feared that this had made Babington suspicious and risked the entire operation. It shows how carefully he manipulated the situation to entrap Mary. Luckily for Walsingham, in mid-August Babington and his fellow conspirators were arrested. Walsingham balanced the need to use men he trusted with a clear desire not to be associated with the arrests, and wherever possible warrants were issued by other privy councillors. It is not clear that Walsingham expected to uncover an assassination plot of this type, but he had been convinced for years that Mary was at the centre of the enterprise of England, and her apparent willingness to countenance an assassination justified all his suspicions. Walsingham was certain that now was the time to deal with her once and for all. Mary saw through his ploys, and at her trial at Fotheringhay Castle in Northamptonshire on 14 and 15 October she formally accused him of engineering her destruction by falsifying evidence. He rose to his feet and denied this: 'I call God to witness that as a private person I have done nothing unbeseeming an honest man, nor, as I bear the place of a public man, have I done anything unworthy of my place. I confess that being very careful for the safety of the queen and the realm, I have curiously searched out all the practices against the same. (Read, 'Walsingham', 3.53)' He could have been speaking his credo.The trial was moved to Westminster Palace on 25 October, where the 42-man commission, including Walsingham, found Mary guilty of plotting Elizabeth's assassination. As Walsingham had expected, Elizabeth proved reluctant to execute her rival and prevented a public verdict being decided after the trial. At this point various personal matters intruded. Elizabeth had been generous to him in August 1585 by granting the farm of the customs of the outports, which he had been seeking since the beginning of the year. In September she had eased the secretarial burden by appointing Davison a principal secretary, as well as the Latin secretary, Sir John Woolley, to the privy council. However, during the course of Mary's trial Walsingham learned of the death of Sidney on 17 October 1586 as a result of a wound received at the battle of Zutphen. This brought with it the burden of Sidney's financial affairs, complicated by the recent death of his father, Sir Henry Sidney. Walsingham was faced with honouring $6000 of debts. 
Walsingham's request to Elizabeth for further financial assistance to deal with the Sidney debts met a hostile response. Davison said that the queen should aid Walsingham 'as one to whom under God she ought to acknowledge the preservacion of her life... alleaging unto her the hard estate you stand in and the dishonour must fall uppon herself if such a servaunt shuld be suffered to quaile' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/195/54, fol. 99'r'). Burghley and Leicester ('I confess I see what you find and find like you have found') added their support, but without success (BL, Harley MS 285, fol. 266'r'). With this something snapped and Walsingham retired to Barn Elms in mid-December, transferring the signet and the privy seal to Davison's custody. He did not return to court until 14 February 1587. The combination of personal and political grievance led to a physical collapse: 'the grief of my mynd hath brought me into a dangerous dysease' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/197, fol. 6'v'). 
As a result Walsingham was absent from Greenwich when Elizabeth signed Mary's death warrant in Davison's presence on 1 February. Her famous sardonic joke that Davison should inform Walsingham, 'the grief thereof will go near to kill him outright', mirrors his own humour (Read, 'Walsingham', 3.63). Yet Walsingham's role was more than passive. By February he had moved to Seething Lane, and when Davison saw him there on the night of the 1st Walsingham arranged for him and Beale to meet the following morning. There they made the arrangements for Beale to convey the warrant to Fotheringhay and for sending the executioner (whom Walsingham had in readiness) in secret (BL, Add. MS 48027, fol. 636'r'- 'v'). After the privy council signed the order for dispatching the warrant under Burghley's leadership on the 3rd it was sent to Walsingham for his own signature. Although Beale readily undertook the mission, in later years when he was singled out as one of Mary's enemies, he never forgave Walsingham, which helps to account for his tart comments about his brother-in-law. 
Mary was executed on 8 February. Walsingham was recalled to court on the 14th and resumed sitting on the privy council on the 15th. Ironically, for all his laments over Sidney, unlike Leicester he did not take part in his funeral at St Paul's Cathedral on the following day. Elizabeth had no doubt of his role in Mary's execution, but she was angrier with Burghley and Davison. Walsingham was in constant attendance until August, when he was 'taken with the stopping of my water, as I dispaired... of recovery', followed by a fever in September that kept him in bed until mid-December (BL, Cotton MS Galba D. i, fol. 248'r'). Ironically, for all his complaints the previous December, Elizabeth gave him several manors in fee farm in April 1587. He also received the chancellorship of the duchy of Lancaster, vacant following Sir Ralph Sadler's death, on 15 June 1587, although he had to surrender his chancellorship of the Garter to his main competitor, Sir Amias Paulet. 
Walsingham's immediate task in February 1587 was to deal with the Scottish and French reactions to Mary's execution. These, as he had half predicted, were muted, although he continued to fret at Elizabeth's refusal to agree to James's demands for the Lennox lands. France proved more complex, owing not least to Walsingham's continued suspicions of Stafford. However, German assistance for Navarre proved difficult to raise, and Elizabeth refused to bear the full burden. As a result the German army under John Casimir of the Palatinate that finally entered France to campaign for Navarre in summer 1587 was both too little and too late. Although Walsingham initially doubted Stafford's claims that Henri had no desire to see Navarre eliminated and was seeking a compromise settlement, during the course of 1587 he slowly came to see some truth in it, although he found the king's inability to take action frustrating. On the other hand he appears to have been ignorant of Stafford's contacts with Mendoza in January 1587. 
The most difficult issue was the Netherlands, and here Walsingham engaged in manoeuvres that have puzzled many. The stalemate of the Leicester intervention had caused Elizabeth to take more seriously the peace feelers Parma was sending forth. Walsingham never saw them as more than a smokescreen for the Spanish invasion preparations and a tactic for causing dissension between Elizabeth and the Dutch. On the other hand he was also aware of the collapse in relations between Leicester and the states general and tensions within the English army. On 3 December 1586 he invited Thomas Wilkes, the resident English agent, to write to him confidentially and sent him a cipher, in which Leicester was identified as Themistocles. From Wilkes came a stream of criticisms against Leicester's administration ('CSP for.', '1586-7'; BL, Add. MS 48127; Brigham Young University, Salt Lake City, Beale-Walsingham state papers). In January 1587 a Dutch delegation arrived both to complain against Leicester and to demand a further increase of Elizabeth's assistance. Her solution was to send Thomas Sackville, first Baron Buckhurst, in March to attempt reconciliation, and from Buckhurst too came a stream of complaints against Themistocles. 
In the face of the criticisms and the crippling debts he had incurred in going to the Netherlands in 1585, Leicester wished to resign. Yet in April 1587 the decision was taken to send him back, with the almost paradoxical mission of stabilizing the military situation (in particular the threat to Ostend and Sluys) and persuading the Dutch to co-operate in Elizabeth's peace negotiations. On his arrival at the end of June, Wilkes, Buckhurst, and Sir John Norreys returned to England rather than meet him. For this contempt, Leicester demanded and obtained their imprisonment. In July Walsingham sent his agent Needham to accompany Leicester, and he too sent a stream of criticism using the Themistocles cipher. 
There has been much speculation about a cooling of relations between Walsingham and Leicester in 1587. Read, relying on the gossip of Catholic exiles, attributed this not just to Walsingham's doubts about Leicester's competence, but also to personal matters, especially Leicester's refusal to help him over Sidney's debts and opposition to his appointment as chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster. Yet of the latter there is no other proof. The one clear sign of the former was Leicester's distress on learning in July that Walsingham, 'one whom the world accompted & he esteemed his dearest friend', had eased the terms of Wilkes's imprisonment (BL, Harley MS 287, fol. 37'r'). It may be significant that Leicester, who had named Walsingham an overseer of his will of 1582, omitted him from the will he was drafting in July 1587. Walsingham clearly regretted the dissensions surrounding Leicester, and may have felt an obligation to Wilkes -- for he had observed in 1585 that Leicester was 'a shrewde ennemye where he taketh' -- but he may have been doing no more than keeping the lines open as Burghley had done with Stafford (Bain, 2.666). 
In autumn 1587 the overwhelming evidence of Spanish invasion preparations heightened the tension over Elizabeth's continued desire to pursue peace negotiations. Walsingham was grateful that his illness prevented her from including him in the delegation. On 12 November he wrote to Leicester: 'the manner of our cold and carelesse proceeding here in this time of perill and daunger maketh mee to take no comfort of my recoverie of health, for that I see apparently, unlesse it shall please God in mercie and miraculously to preserve us, we cannot long stand. (BL, Cotton MS Galba D. ii, fol. 192'v')' However, Elizabeth did agree to larger sums being spent on secret intelligence than before; these amounted to $3300 between March 1587 and June 1588. 
Walsingham's return to attendance in December 1587 was broken by 'a defluctyon into one of my eyes', which kept him in bed during January 1588, but thereafter he was in constant attendance during the year, except for another illness in October ('CSP Scot.', '1586-8', 535). He was at the centre of the preparations against the Armada. Although, like everyone else, he was uncertain whether the Armada would ever depart, he was confident that without it there was no threat from Parma's army. Once it arrived in the channel, he informed Henry Radcliffe, fourth earl of Sussex, on 24 July that 'we have certainlie discovered that their whole Plott and Desseigne is against the Cittie of London' (Adams, 'Armada correspondence'). His correspondence with Leicester at Tilbury provides one of the best sources for the assessment of the situation at court. He supported Leicester's plan for Elizabeth to visit the army at Tilbury, despite the danger of assassination, and intended himself 'to steale to the campe, when her majestie shall be there', joining the queen on her visit on 8 and 9 August (BL, Cotton MS Galba D. iii, fol. 227'r'). Like many others he was frustrated by the failure to achieve a more conclusive victory against the Spanish, lamenting on 8 August 'our halfe doings doth breed dishonour, and leaveth the disease uncured' (T. Wright, 'Queen Elizabeth and her Times', 2 vols., 1838, 2.385). 
In the eighteen months after the Armada, Walsingham's health deteriorated sharply. He was absent from the privy council for almost the entire period from 15 February to 5 June 1589, although he rallied in the latter half of the year and attended until a week before his death. As a result his influence over the shaping of policy diminished. Although he supported the expedition planned by Drake and Norreys in autumn 1588 (afterwards known as the Portugal voyage), he had little to do with its final departure in spring 1589. Perhaps his last important intervention came after Henri's assassination on 1 August 1589, when he urged Elizabeth to support Navarre, now the new protestant king Henri IV. She responded rapidly with a loan of $35,000 and an army of 4000 men under Peregrine Bertie, thirteenth Baron Willoughby de Ereseby. 
Walsingham wrote his last will on 12 December 1589, and it was proved on 27 May 1590. It was found in a secret cabinet on the day after his death. The tone is somewhat pessimistic; Walsingham could not resist commenting on the need for God's 'mercyfull protection especiallye in this tyme wherein Synne and iniquitie doth so muche abounde'. He stipulated that he should 'be buryed without any such extraordinarie ceremonyes as usuallye apperteyne to a man servinge in my place in respect of the greatnes of my debtes and the mean state I shall leave my wife and heire in'. His 'moste kynde and lovinge wife' was appointed sole executor and residuary legatee, with Edward Carey, Beale, and William Dodington as overseers (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/75, sig. 33). Their daughter was granted $100 per annum from Walsingham's lands in Lincolnshire in lieu of the dower portion she should have expected from her first husband and on top of the $200 per annum already settled on her. Presumably she would enjoy more land when her mother died. Surprisingly Walsingham had already cleared most of his debts and left his remaining goods, chattels, plate, and jewels to his wife. Yet for all his care with his own estate Walsingham died owing the queen about $42,000, largely from expenditure on the crown's business without obtaining privy seal warrants, or so Beale later claimed. This debt appears to have been waived in James I's reign. 
Walsingham died at his house in Seething Lane on 6 April 1590 and was buried in St Paul's in the same tomb as Sidney at 10 o'clock the following evening in a simple ceremony. The tomb was destroyed during the great fire of 1666, and a plaque now commemorates Sidney but not Walsingham. Ursula Walsingham died suddenly at Barn Elms on 18 June 1602 and was buried near her husband after a simple ceremony the next evening. 
Walsingham's stock has fluctuated among historians over the centuries. To the historians of the seventeenth century, including William Camden and Sir Robert Naunton, Burghley and he were the twin pillars of the Elizabethan state. Camden described Walsingham as wise, hard-working, devout, and cunning, with the interests of the realm at heart. Historiography since the nineteenth century has valued Walsingham in terms of its contemporary attitudes to the causes in which he believed: protestantism, a vigorous foreign policy, exploration and empire, suppression of Catholicism in England, destruction of Mary, queen of Scots, union of Scotland and England, and the necessity of espionage. James Anthony Froude's 'History of England from the fall of Wolsey to the defeat of the Spanish Armada' (1856-70) provided the classic study of Burghley and Walsingham holding together the government despite Elizabeth's incompetence, and created Walsingham's lasting image as her spymaster. In 1899 Sidney Lee wrote in his approving article on Walsingham: 'his methods of espionage were worked at the expense of some modern considerations of morality, but his detective weapons were those of England's enemies, and were employed solely in the public interest' ('DNB'). 
Between 1902 and 1908 Karl Stahlin produced a series of detailed studies of Walsingham, although his planned biography did not go beyond 1573. In 1925 the American historian Conyers Read produced his monumental three-volume study, 'Mr Secretary Walsingham and the Policy of Queen Elizabeth', running to nearly 1400 pages. He too approved of his subject's motives and methods. His work was more than just a biographical treatment, and sought to analyse and assess all aspects of Walsingham's role in policy making. Thanks to its scale and the depth of Read's research it has dominated the subject since and discouraged a new substantial biography. Interestingly Read helped to set up, under William J. Donovan, the research and analysis branch of the office of strategic services (the precursor of the Central Intelligence Agency). 
Walsingham is now best remembered in the popular imagination for his role as a spymaster, which continues to generate a certain notoriety. His casual and brief employment of Christopher Marlowe as an agent in 1587 still gives rise to implausible conspiracy theories. Above all the Babington plot lives on in the popular memory. The film 'Elizabeth' (1998), in which Geoffrey Rush memorably portrayed him, put a new spin on the popular image of Walsingham. It was a dazzling, romantic concoction, playing fast and loose with chronology and fact. Walsingham was shown as godless and Machiavellian, as well as homosexual, but the performance did capture his intensity and obsession with the queen's security. 
Readers of Walsingham's extensive correspondence gain a sharply critical impression of Elizabethan government, full of complaints about Elizabeth's prevarications and half measures. Despite his conspiratorial reputation he was notoriously indiscreet with those whom he trusted -- Davison or Wotton for example. Leicester had to warn him of this habit during his first French embassy in early 1573. One effect of these indiscretions was his constant portrayal of malign and factious forces at work, as he admitted to Burghley during their spat in January 1585, 'when I sawe somme cawse to sospect that the grownde therof grewe of factyon (that reyghnethe ordynarylie in coortes)' (TNA: PRO, SP 12/176/19, fol. 34'r'). As a result he has been a major source for students of Elizabethan faction, especially Read, who concluded that during the period from 1578 to 1587 it dominated Elizabeth's government. 
When Read came to his life of Burghley thirty years later he modified his conclusions on faction considerably. Several general observations are worth making. Walsingham had an impulsive streak and never ceased to complain when he felt opportunities were lost. Second, Read focused on the Netherlands and Anjou debates of 1578 to 1585; these were issues of considerable disagreement, but this was not necessarily the case with other areas of policy. Third, the malign forces Walsingham suspected during his embassies of 1578 and 1581 may have been French envoys rather than his colleagues. Last, as sophisticated students of Tudor politics have observed, factions were powerful only when the monarch was weak. 
In this respect the most important relationship of Walsingham's career was with Elizabeth. It lacked the long acquaintance of the queen's relationships with Burghley and Leicester and the emotional dependence she placed on Leicester and Hatton. Her tolerance of his constant nagging and complaining has puzzled generations of historians. On the other hand like Burghley, Walsingham was a workaholic, whose efficiency was undoubted and whose sardonic humour mirrored her own. If they disagreed over the Netherlands or Anjou, they were in close agreement over James and Mary. It is possible that Elizabeth accepted retrospectively that she had blundered in accepting James's promise over Morton in 1581, and that Walsingham had been right. 
Walsingham's absences during the crucial months in 1579 and 1586 are to some extent the keys to their relationship. The genuine weakness of Walsingham's health has not been fully appreciated, although he had no compunction in using ill health as an excuse for a certain 'je m'en foutisme'. Yet, however irritated Elizabeth may have been with him, she made no effort to replace him. This certain distance from the court is also reflected in Walsingham's quite precocious employment of the vocabulary of the state, something not shared by his colleagues. 
On the surface Walsingham's views on foreign affairs appear ideological. He never lost his residual suspicion of a Catholic league, the ambitions of the queen of Scots, and (after 1572) the French royal family. His loyalties to foreign protestants were open and sincere. Yet he was no fanatic and his assessments of situations were always balanced. He was right about Anjou, less on ideological grounds than in his appreciation that the duc's motives and behaviour did not make sense. 
Perhaps the best way to conclude is with two contemporary comments on Walsingham's death. On 8 April 1590 a Spanish spy in London wrote to Philip with the news, telling him, 'Secretary Walsingham has just expired, at which there is much sorrow'. On receiving the letter, the king scribbled in the margin 'There, yes! But it is good news here' (Hume, 1587-1603, 578). On 30 June, when considering the impact of Walsingham's death, Burghley began a letter to a friend, 'I am fully perswaded... the Queen's Majesty, and hir realm, and I and others his particular frendes have had a great loss, both for the publyck use of his good and paynfull long services, and for the privat comfort I had by his mutuall frendship' (BL, Lansdowne MS 103, fol. 194'r'). 


@@@@@


doc= 28625


Walsingham, Francis (bap. 1577, d. 1647), Jesuit, was born in Berwick and was baptized on 7 February 1577, the son of Edward Walsingham (died 1576) of Exhall, near Alcester, Warwickshire, a kinsman to the secretary of state, Sir Francis Walsingham. His father having died before his birth, his mother, who was a Catholic, brought him to London and entrusted his education to his guardian, Humphrey Walsingham, a citizen of London, who sent him to St Paul's School. He appears to have studied theology at All Souls College, Oxford, and then spent some time as a soldier in the Low Countries under Sir Robert Sidney, governor of Flushing. Then, after returning to London, he took up the study of civil and common law. He also taught for a time at Kingsbury in Middlesex and was ordained deacon by the bishop of Ely in 1603. 
About this time he began to have misgivings about his position in the Church of England, after reading Robert Persons's book 'A Defence of the Censure' (1585). So deep were his misgivings that he decided to set them forth in a memorial which he presented to James I at Greenwich on 6 April 1604; he was told by the king to discuss the matter with his new archbishop of Canterbury, Richard Bancroft. Under the latter's direction he had further discussions with two Anglican divines, William Covell and George Downame, as well as the former Jesuit diplomat Christopher Perkins -- but to no avail. Finally, on meeting an imprisoned priest, Edward Tempest, he made a spiritual retreat and was reconciled to the Roman Catholic church. 
In 1606 Walsingham was one of forty-seven priests banished from England after the Gunpowder Plot. Entering the English College, Rome, on 27 October 1606 he was ordained priest on 12 April 1608 and was sent back to England the following April. However, on reaching Douai in June 1609 he retraced his steps to Rome and entered the Society of Jesus there. Now with the assistance and encouragement of Robert Persons, rector of the English College, he set forth an account of his spiritual pilgrimage in 'A Search Made into Matters of Religion' (1609), with a dedication to James I. This work, by which he is said to have 'immortalized his name' (Foley, 6.241), went into a second edition in 1615 and was reprinted in 1843. He went on in 1618 to publish 'Reasons for Embracing the Catholick Faith', but no copy of it seems to have survived. 
Walsingham was sent on the English mission in 1616 under the alias of John Fennell, and there he laboured, as Foley says, 'with indefatigable zeal and abundant fruit' (Foley, 2.382), first in the Leicestershire district until 1633, then in the Derbyshire district until his death on 1 July 1647 there at the age of seventy-one. It is said of him that he engaged in 'many conferences with Protestant ministers, in which he displayed great learning and talent', but that for the most part 'his mission lay amongst the poor, for it was his delight to instruct the ignorant and needy', especially the children (ibid., 2.382). All the time he was never far from danger, especially from pursuivants; but he eluded their searches in ways that often seemed miraculous. He is praised as a man of prayer, 'possessed of the sweetest manners and a dovelike simplicity' and 'athirst for the glory of God' (ibid., 2.383). 


@@@@@


doc= 28626


Walsingham, John (supp. fl. 1326), supposed Carmelite friar and theologian, is first recorded in Johann Tritheim's 'Catalogus scriptorum ecclesiasticorum sive illustrium virorum' of 1531. Bale's 'Scriptorum illustrium maioris Brytanniae, quam nunc Angliam et Scotiam vocant, Catalogus' (published in Basel in 1559), Pits's 'Relationum historicarum de rebus Anglicis tomus primus' (published at Paris in 1619), Casanate's 'Paradisus Carmelici decoris' (published at Leiden in 1639), and Leland's 'Commentarii de scriptoribus Britannicis' (published at Oxford in 1709) all add details. They tell of his education at Norwich and Oxford, his growing fame as a theologian, his election in 1326 to be provincial of the English Carmelites, and his services to the papacy in the cause of doctrinal orthodoxy. The information provided by these authors, as the article on John Walsingham in the 'Dictionary of National Biography' cautiously indicates, is often uncorroborated. The detail given for his life could easily have been inferred from general information about the Carmelite order, student life at Oxford and Paris, and from theological discussions of papal authority in the relevant era. As the 'Dictionary of National Biography' article and its sources wisely indicate, moreover, there are great inconsistencies in the various accounts of John Walsingham's life and works. The 'Dictionary of National Biography', while not going so far as to question John's existence, nevertheless concluded that 'the silence of his contemporaries attests that Walsingham's writings exercised no influence on his age'. 
B. M. Xiberta, in his 'De scriptoribus scholasticis saeculi XIV ex ordine Carmelitarum', after diligently examining the manuscript evidence given by John Bale on page 378 of his 'Catalogus', concluded emphatically that John Walsingham never existed. He found that many of the details of the life of John were details that also fit the life of Robert Walsingham. Other items belonged in reality to John Baconthorpe or John Walsham. Even the seemingly more solid manuscript evidence lost its strength before Xiberta's careful eye. Joannes W. had wrongly been inferred to be Joannes Walsingham. MS Digby 41 in the Bodleian Library, Oxford, mentions a Joannes Walssinbham, but the work is a treatise against the Lollards and belongs to a much later time than that of the supposed early fourteenth-century Carmelite. William Bintre (died 1493) is said to have named a John Walsingham among the defenders of transubstantiation, but since this work is now lost and it is Bale who provides the reference, this information, like all the rest, lacks a guarantee. 


@@@@@


doc= 28627


Walsingham, Thomas (c.1340-c.1422), historian and prior of Wymondham, probably came from Walsingham in Norfolk. An entry in the register of Simon Sudbury (died 1381), bishop of London between 1362 and 1375, mentions that Thomas Walsingham, a monk of St Albans from the diocese of Norwich, was ordained priest on 21 September 1364. That entry suggests he was born 'c'.1340. It is probable, although not entirely certain, that some time before 1376 Walsingham studied at Oxford, for in criticizing the university in his 'Chronica majora' on account of its association with Lollardy, he disclaimed any disloyalty on his own part. The one piece of evidence to determine his position within St Albans before the 1390s is an entry in the 'Liber benefactorum' (BL, Cotton MS Nero D.vii) which he himself compiled in 1380. There he is described as precentor and 'scriptorarius' of St Albans Abbey, and appears twenty-second in a list of fifty-four monks. In September 1394 he became prior of the cell at Wymondham, Norfolk, and this is the only time when he is known to have been absent from St Albans. In 1396 he was recalled to St Albans at his own request after the death of abbot Thomas de la Mare in that year. The abbot's death appears to coincide with a change in Walsingham's position. After 1396 he was no longer termed 'scriptorarius', and he never again held a senior post within the abbey. None the less he continued work on his chronicles for a further twenty years. The last historical work with which his name is undoubtedly associated is the 'Ypodigma Neustriae', which he dedicated to Henry V about 1420. He almost certainly died shortly after this, about 1422, probably at St Albans. 
Walsingham has been described as the last of the great medieval chroniclers. But although he was pre-eminently a writer of history, his interests were by no means confined to historical writing. Apart from the 'Liber benefactorum', a work of St Albans piety, Walsingham wrote a treatise on monasticism which follows the 'Gesta abbatum' in BL, Cotton MS Claudius E.iv, and also a treatise on mensural music. This latter work (BL, Lansdowne MS 763, fols. 97'v'-104'v') arose out of his duties as precentor. In this treatise Walsingham discussed such matters as the note shapes, the durational values of various note forms, and concluded with a consideration of rhythmic modes. Walsingham's treatise is one of a handful surviving in England from this period, and the knowledge of continental treatises that it reveals lends weight to the possibility of an Oxford background to his writing. Walsingham also displayed an interest in the literature of antiquity. This interest is seen in a number of works, including the 'Archana deorum', which was a commentary on Ovid's 'Metamorphoses', dedicated by Walsingham to Simon Southerey, prior of St Albans (1396/7-1405). Walsingham also wrote the 'Dites ditatus', which was a version of Dictys of Crete's history of the Trojan War, a history of Alexander, and the 'Prohemia poetarum', which contained an account of classical and medieval authors. 
Walsingham's historical writing was cast in a traditional mould. If he is the last true representative of the great St Albans school of history that is partly because of the influence of Matthew Paris (died 1259). That influence is seen not only in the form of Walsingham's history, but also in his attempt to make his 'Chronica majora' a continuation of the work of Matthew Paris. Although it was once thought that there were at the end of the fourteenth century a number of chroniclers writing at St Albans, the work of V. H. Galbraith has shown that during the late fourteenth and early fifteenth centuries there was one author only, namely Thomas Walsingham, who in addition to a 'Chronica majora', which he began in 1376, wrote a number of other historical works. The most authoritative text of the 'Chronica majora' itself is found in two manuscripts, BL, Royal MS 13 E.ix, which contains a text to 1392, and Bodl. Oxf., MS Bodley 462, a later manuscript, which continues the narrative to 1420. Internal references indicate that Walsingham was the author of the Royal manuscript, which was written at St Albans during the late 1390s, and of the early part of the 'short chronicle', which was an abbreviation of the 'Chronica majora' extending to 1419. Although there are no personal references to Walsingham in the later part of the 'Chronica majora', or in the 'short chronicle', he is the most probable author of these parts of the narrative also. It seems likely that both the 'Chronica majora' and the 'short chronicle' were initially composed in stages during the 1380s and 1390s, and that drafts of both versions were in circulation before Walsingham went to Wymondham in 1394. At some point Walsingham added a retrospective section to the 'Chronica majora', beginning in 1272, in order to link the history of his own times to those of Matthew Paris. 
One problem relating to the 'Chronica majora' concerns the opening section of the contemporary chronicle in 1376. This opening section is notable for its criticism of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, and its sympathetic account of the Good Parliament of that year. Because of the outspoken references to Gaunt it appears that this section was removed from the Royal manuscript by the monks at St Albans during the 1390s, and possibly as late as 1399. The opening is now to be found in three manuscripts: Bodl. Oxf., MS Bodley 316 (a 'Polychronicon' in which only one leaf of this early history remains); BL, Harley MS 3634 (a section of which once formed part of Bodley 316); and BL, Cotton MS Otho C.ii, which survives in a fragmentary and mutilated form. These three manuscripts contain the so-called 'scandalous chronicle', a narrative of the years 1376-7, and a comparison of their texts reveals that the process of revision had begun before the removal of this section of the chronicle from the Royal manuscript. 
If Walsingham is traditionally the chronicler of the Lancastrian revolution, his history is also a major source for the history of Richard II's reign. It describes in detail events such as the peasants' revolt, the emergence of John Wyclif (died 1384), and the political struggles of the reign. Walsingham's account of the early Lancastrian kings, although valuable, was composed on a smaller scale, and after 1399 he never again quite recaptured the zest of his earlier writing. His work, considered as a whole, is significant for several reasons. It preserves firstly a valuable record of political events. St Albans was an important centre, and Walsingham was well placed to receive information concerning events in London and elsewhere. His history gives some indication also of the change in attitude of the St Albans community towards the leading personalities of the day. Although Walsingham began his chronicle in 1376 in a manner bitterly hostile to John of Gaunt, during the 1380s his opinion of Gaunt changed, and he came to praise the duke for his patience and moderation. Yet as Gaunt's star rose so that of Richard declined in Walsingham's narrative, and he viewed more critically a king whom he felt did not adequately fulfil the role of kingship. Walsingham's work is again of the greatest interest because of the manner in which it reveals a medieval history in the process of being revised. 
Although Walsingham was for a time the official chronicler of his house, and many of the opinions expressed in the 'Chronica majora' were undoubtedly those of the St Albans community, he brought to his work a viewpoint and qualities of his own. Thus Walsingham was more of a scholar than Matthew Paris if less of a literary artist. In outlook he was thoroughly conservative, resisting change, and particularly hostile to the ideas of John Wyclif. His interests were mainly if not entirely insular. Although he dealt with events such as the conciliar movement, it was England and the political struggle at home that concerned him most. Throughout the 'Chronica majora' his prejudices inform his writing. Thus he disliked foreigners, had little sympathy with the lower sections of society, and disapproved of the mendicants. 
In addition to the 'Chronica majora' and the 'short chronicle', Walsingham's other historical writings are of some importance. In the 'Gesta abbatum' he once more continued the work of Matthew Paris. He recast Matthew Paris's account of the abbots of St Albans which had been continued to 1308, and wrote a further continuation from 1308 to 1393 dealing at length with the abbacy of Thomas de la Mare. It seems probable that the 'Gesta abbatum', written in the early 1390s, was never put into a final shape because of Walsingham's move to Wymondham and Abbot Thomas's death. A continuation which extends to 1411, found in Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MS 7, is unlikely to be the work of Walsingham himself. Walsingham's last piece of historical writing was the 'Ypodigma Neustriae', an epitome of English history from 911 to 1419. From 1377 to 1419 this was little more than a recapitulation of the 'short chronicle'. With Walsingham's death the 'Chronica majora' itself came to an end, and with it a form of historical writing that went back to the days of Wendover and Paris. 
In its own day Walsingham's narrative attracted an audience outside St Albans. It was used by the first author of the 'Historia vitae et regni Ricardi secundi', and parts of its text were incorporated in certain of the 'Polychronicon' continuations. In more recent times the 'Chronica majora' has suffered from the disadvantage of not having been printed as a continuous whole. A form of the text of the 'Chronica majora' to 1406 is found in three separate publications in the 'Rolls Series', in the first two of which it is combined with sections from the 'short chronicle'. The years 1376-7 are found in the 'Chronicon Angliae' (pp. 68-147); 1377-92 in the 'Historia Anglicana' (1.329-484; 2.1-211); and 1393-1406 in the 'Annales Ricardi II et Henrici IV' (pp. 155-420). The 'Chronicon Angliae', edited by E. Maunde Thompson, was taken from an early and partially revised manuscript of the 'Chronica majora' found in BL, Harley MS 3634, which concludes in 1382. This edition contains the valuable opening to Walsingham's contemporary history beginning in 1376, which Thompson skilfully reconstructed from the Harley manuscript itself and from two other sources (BL, Cotton MS Otho. C.ii, and Bodl. Oxf., MS Bodley 316). The 'Historia Anglicana', edited by H. T. Riley, contains the best available printed text of the 'Chronica majora' from 1377 to 1392. Although printed not from BL, Royal MS 13 E.ix, but from a late transcript (Coll. Arms, Arundel MS 7), it preserves for the years 1377-82 a more fully revised text than that found in the Harley manuscript. Despite his reliance on the Arundel transcript, Riley was fully aware of the value of the Royal manuscript, and in an appendix to volume 2 of the 'Historia Anglicana' (pp. 360-410) printed passages from the Royal manuscript that had been omitted in the Arundel text. The concluding section of Walsingham's 'Chronica majora', which was not included in the 'Rolls Series' publications, was printed in 1937 by V. H. Galbraith as the 'St Albans Chronicle, 1406-1420'. Work on a new edition of the 'Chronica majora', to be published in the 'Oxford Medieval Texts' series, is now in progress. 


@@@@@


doc= 28628


Walsingham, Sir Thomas (1560/61-1630), literary patron, was the third son of Sir Thomas Walsingham (1526-1584) and Dorothy, daughter of Sir John Guildford of Benenden, and grandson of Sir Edmund Walsingham (b. in or before 1480, d. 1550), lieutenant of the Tower. In his youth Thomas was probably employed by his father's first cousin, Sir Francis Walsingham, to gather intelligence of Catholic plots against the crown. In 1589 he inherited the manor of Scadbury, Chislehurst, Kent, from his elder brother Edmund. 
In 1590 Thomas Watson dedicated a Latin eclogue, 'Meliboeus', on the death of Sir Francis Walsingham, to Thomas Walsingham where he is figured as Tityrus and the author, Corydon, speaks of him as 'sweet friend'. At this time, Thomas had already become a close friend of Christopher Marlowe, for on 18 May 1593 the privy council instructed: 'Henry Maunder, one of the messengers of H. M. chamber to repair to the house of Mr. Thomas Walsingham in Kent, or to any other place where he shall understand Christopher Marlowe to be remaining, and to bring him to the court. ('APC', '1592-3', 244)' On 1 June 1593 Marlowe was killed in a tavern at Deptford; Ingram Frizer, who was responsible for Marlowe's death, was ironically a servant of Thomas Walsingham. In 1598, when Edward Blunt published his edition of Marlowe's 'Hero and Leander', he dedicated it to Sir Thomas and the 'Preface' speaks of Walsingham's close association with Marlowe: 'wee thinke not ourselves discharged of the duty we owe to our friend, when wee have brought the brethlesse bodie to the earth... the impression... of the man, that hath beene deare unto us, living an after life in our memory, there putteth us in mind of further obsequies due unto the deceased... knowing that in his life time you bestowed many kind favors.' Walsingham was, apparently, one of the mourners present at Marlowe's funeral. 
In 1596 Walsingham was appointed justice of the peace for the hundred of Rokesley and in the same year, when a second armada threatened, he, with others, was directed to take 1080 men to protect the chain strung across the River Medway for the defence of Rochester. By this time he had been knighted, and in the following year Elizabeth visited Scadbury, where she planted an oak. In the same year he was allowed to extend his estates to include the manor of Dartford. It was also in 1597 that Sir Thomas first became MP for Rochester; he served again in 1601 and 1603. His wife, Audrey Shelton (died 1624), daughter of Sir Ralph Shelton of Shelton, Norfolk, was a favourite of the queen; both husband and wife gave and received many gifts to and from Elizabeth. In 1599 Thomas was granted the reversion of the keepership of the Great Park at Eltham. After the death of Elizabeth, Audrey Walsingham was one of the ladies sent to accompany James's queen, Anne of Denmark, to London. Initially the queen took a dislike to Audrey but James appointed Sir Thomas and his wife as keepers of the queen's wardrobe and, in 1604, granted Audrey a pension of $200 per annum for life. The Walsinghams remained royal favourites and Audrey took part in the queen's many masques including Ben Jonson's 'Masque of Blackness' (1604/5). 
In the early 1600s Walsingham had become a close friend of George Chapman, who in 1605 dedicated 'All Fooles' to 'my long lov'd and Honourable friend Sir Thomas Walsingham' and dedicated a sonnet to him in affectionate terms. Again the 1608 edition of 'The Conspiracie and Tragedy of Charles Duke of Byron' is dedicated 'To My Honourable and Constant Friend... And to my much loved from his birth... his sonne'. Since this son, also Thomas, was only eight in 1608 Chapman appears to have been on terms of intimate friendship with the whole family. Thomas died on 11 August 1630 at Chislehurst and was buried in the Scadbury chapel in St Nicholas's Church, Chislehurst; his wife, Audrey, predeceased him in 1624. 


@@@@@


doc= 28629


Walter (d. 1079?), bishop of Hereford, was of Lotharingian origin, according to John of Worcester. He evidently must have been one of the fairly numerous group of Lotharingian clerics invited into England by Edward the Confessor to serve the royal court. The life of King Edward refers to Walter as a man of learning. He became chaplain to Edith, Edward's queen, before 1060. 'Domesday Book' records that he held from King Edward the church of the manor of Basingstoke, Hampshire, in 1066. This church had no connection with the endowments of the see of Hereford and may have been remuneration for his position as chaplain. At Christmas 1060 Ealdred, bishop of Worcester, who had been supervising the see of Hereford in the vacancy following the death of Bishop Leofgar in July 1056, was made archbishop of York, and Edward appointed Walter bishop of Hereford. To avoid being consecrated by Archbishop Stigand, Walter and a fellow bishop-elect, Giso of Wells, were commanded by Edward to travel to Rome so that they could be consecrated by Pope Nicholas II. They probably formed part of the band of English travellers to Rome headed by Earl Tostig and Ealdred, the newly appointed archbishop of York. The consecration took place during the Easter Synod of 1061 (15 April). On the first day of the return journey, the group of English travellers was ambushed and had to return to Rome, and the date of Walter's return to England is uncertain, although if he accompanied Giso he would have reached England in June. 
Walter seems to have played, as bishop, little part in public life either before or after the conquest, although after Hastings he was one of the bishops who submitted to William the Conqueror at Berkhamsted. He also attended the ecclesiastical councils held at Windsor, on 27 May 1072, and London, between Christmas 1074 and Michaelmas 1075. Walter's activities within his diocese are hard to trace. No charter issued by him survives. He seems to have allowed some of his church's holdings to depreciate and, in exchange for less valuable land, granted to William fitz Osbern, earl of Hereford, a site which William promptly used to set up a huge new market place, outrivalling the previous market, which had been in the part of the city belonging to the bishop. 
Walter's death is not recorded in any narrative source save William of Malmesbury's 'Gesta pontificum', where it is said that the bishop, consumed with lust for a seamstress in Hereford, lured her into his palace on the pretext of requiring clothes to be made for his attendants, that when he tried to rape her she stabbed him with a pair of scissors, and that William the Conqueror suppressed news of this story for fear of scandal (Malmesbury, 'De gestis pontificum', 300). Since Malmesbury introduces the story with the phrase 'unless rumour lies' it is possible that it was merely gossip, though the silence of other sources on Walter's death may perhaps suggest that his decease was not wholly respectable. Certainly Hereford Cathedral made no attempt to record his death in its obit book nor to include Walter in the series of elaborate tombs constructed in the late thirteenth century to commemorate most of the post-conquest bishops. Walter died before 29 December 1079, when his successor, Robert the Lotharingian, was consecrated. His place of burial is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 28630


Walter (d. 1190), archbishop of Palermo, was assumed by earlier authorities to have been English from his nickname Offamil, which they rendered 'Of the Mill', but this is now interpreted as meaning chief counsellor, from the Latin 'protofamiliaris'. When he became archbishop of Palermo in 1168, Peter of Blois's letter of congratulations to him referred to Walter's humble birth, although his mother Bona was a patron of Cluny, and was described by the king in 1172 as 'devota et fidelis nostra'; his father's name is unknown. 
Walter is first recorded in court circles in 1160, when he was Latin tutor to the sons of William I ('r'. 1151-66). From 1169 he was prominent in government, one of a small group of royal familiars who managed the administration of the kingdom. After William II died childless in 1189, it was Walter who crowned as his successor William's cousin Tancredi di Lecce, at the behest of Pope Clement III ('r'. 1187-91). A conscientious bishop, he rebuilt Palermo Cathedral, where he was eventually buried. John Bale, writing in the late 1550s in the belief that Walter was English, attributed various works to him, including a book on the rudiments of the Latin tongue. On account of this attribution, Hervieux saw in Walter the likely author of twelfth-century adaptations into rhythmic Latin of Aesop's fables, even suggesting that they were intended to provide the young William II with appropriately instructive and attractive reading matter. 


@@@@@


doc= 28631


Odington, Walter (fl. c.1280-1301), Benedictine monk and scholar, was also known as Walter Evesham and as Walter de Otyngton, monk of Evesham, and has in the past had his identity masked by sixteenth-century bibliographers, who attributed important treatises on music and science to separate writers bearing some variants of these names. Thus Leland ascribed the scientific works to an Odendunus active around 1280, and the musical treatise to a Gualterius de Evesham, whom Bale described as working about 1240. Only with the reintegration of these two figures into one has a more accurate assessment of his work become possible. 
Odington was probably born at Oddington in Oxfordshire and became a monk of the Benedictine abbey of Evesham near Worcester, for which he produced a 'Kalendarium' beginning with the year 1301. In 1298 he was named in the distinguished company of the abbots of Malmesbury, Tewkesbury, and Pershore as a member of a committee for the administration of Gloucester College, the Benedictine college at Oxford for monks of the Canterbury province. In 1463 William Worcester noted on a manuscript of a 'Declaratio motus octavae spherae' that it was the work of 'Master Walter Evesham who made his deliberations at Oxford about 1316' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Laud misc. 674, fol. 75'r'). On this basis Odington has been misidentified with a Walter Evesham who was a fellow of Merton College documented between 'c'.1331 and 1346. (He was also confused with Walter of Eynsham, an unsuccessful candidate for the see of Canterbury in 1228.) A fellowship of Merton and membership of a religious order were mutually exclusive, and if Odington did indeed work at Oxford it would presumably have been at Gloucester College. John North has questioned Worcester's note, arguing for the accuracy of Leland's estimate that Odington flourished 'c'.1280, thus placing his birth around 1260 or earlier. The date of the 'Kalendarium' and the placement of Odington's musical treatise about 1300 extend the period of his activity into the fourteenth century. 
Surviving works ascribed to 'Frater Walterus de Evesham' consist of an alchemical treatise, the 'Ycocedron' (so called from its division into twenty -- 'eikosi' -- chapters), extant entire or in part in five manuscript sources (Bodl. Oxf., MS Digby 119; ed. P. D. Thomas); the 'Summa de speculatione musicae', in three manuscripts (Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MS 410; ed. F. Hammond); a 'Tractatus de multiplicatione specierum in visu'; an 'Ars metrica'; a compilation of the fifth book of Euclid; and the almanac for Evesham (all CUL, MS Ii.1.13). The 'Declaratio motus octavae spherae' occurs in two manuscript sources of which MS Laud misc. 674 in the Bodleian Library (ed. J. D. North) contains Worcester's note. John of Ashenden, writing in 1347, ascribes to Odington another work, a treatise on the age of the world: 'Odynton monachus de Evesham in suo tractatu de etate mundi' (Oxford, Oriel College, MS 23). Leland ascribes to Odendunus a 'Kalendarium', a treatise on planetary motions, and a treatise 'de mutatione aeris'. Tanner, two centuries after Leland, reunites the two Odingtons and lists among his works the 'Summa' (which he knew at first hand), 'Ycocedron', 'Declaratio', 'De aetate mundi', and planetary tables. (Thorndike's assignment of Richard Wallingford's 'Exafrenon' and an 'Ars completa' to Odington has been dismissed by North.) 
Odington's importance, like the story of his life, has been as much obscured as it has been clarified by historians. The manuscript tradition of his works suggests that his scientific writings -- notably the 'Ycocedron' on the fascinating subject of alchemy -- were of greatest interest to his contemporaries. North points out that the 'Ycocedron' suggests the possibility of quantitative measurement of certain virtues, such as heat and dryness, and that Odington employs the concept of intension and remission of qualities, a terminology which he also applied to musical pitch. However, the first of Odington's treatises to be published in a modern edition was not the 'Ycocedron' but the treatise on music, the 'Summa' (Coussemaker, 'L'Art harmonique', 1865); but the importance of this work has been distorted by inaccurate dating and inappropriate scholarly claims. 
Owing to Bale's separation of the scientific writer from the author of the musical treatise, which he dated more than half a century before its probable composition, the 'Summa' appeared a prodigy to later scholars. Charles Burney -- that rich source of slightly inaccurate information -- in 1776 accepted the dating of 'c'.1240, and was followed by Fetis, Coussemaker, and Eitner. The 'Summa' was also seized upon by Hugo Riemann, who employed its misdating in order to claim the treatise as the source of two 'progressive' and 'English' tendencies, the theoretical recognition of duple metre and the acceptance of the third as a consonance. The first is a misreading, but Odington did raise the question of employing intervals of the third and sixth as musical consonances, which was admitted in practice in fourteenth-century music, although such intervals lacked the theoretical justification of the simple mathematical proportions demonstrated by the octave (2:1), fifth (3:2), and fourth (4:3). 
Far from being an isolated monument, as Burney claimed, the 'Summa de speculatione musicae' fits into the context of Odington's other work as one element in a corpus of treatises encompassing the mathematical arts: arithmetic, geometry, music, and astronomy. The encyclopaedic character of Odington's musical treatise resembles the apparently little-known work of Jerome of Moravia, dated between 1272 and 1304, and the 'Speculum musicae' of Jacques de Liege ('c'.1330). The first four of the six books comprising the 'Summa' are theoretical in nature. Book I deals with arithmetic, Book II with music as number related to sound. Book III demonstrates these proportions in a discussion of musical instruments on a theoretical rather than a practical level. Book IV treats poetic metres as examples of the same proportional relationships. Book V is a tonary, a handbook of ecclesiastical chant, and Book VI comprises a treatise on writing metred polyphonic music or discant. Most of Odington's sources are conventional ones: Boethius's 'De arithmetica' and 'De musica' for Books I-II, the 'De musica' and a number of anonymous treatises for Book III, Isidore of Seville's 'Etymologiarum' for Book IV, the Sarum 'Tonale' for Book V, and the works of Jean Garland ('c'.1240) and Jerome of Moravia for Book VI. However, Odington also cites lesser-known writers such as Fulgentius and Avicenna, and the division of knowledge which he ascribes to Adelard of Bath follows one attributed to Garland by Jerome. 
In his description of musical forms and genres, Odington was the only musical theorist to describe the rondellus, a three-voice piece based on a technique of canonic voice exchange, which was 'known as typically and rather quaintly English as early as 'c'.1225' (Sanders, 'Rondellus', 171) and disappeared after 1300. This genre forms an important part of the musical fragments connected with Worcester Cathedral -- only 15 miles from Evesham Abbey -- between 'c'.1270 and 'c'.1290. 


@@@@@


doc= 28632


Walter, Henry (1785-1859), Church of England clergyman, natural philosopher and historian, born at Louth in Lincolnshire on 28 January 1785, was the eldest of the eighteen children of James Walter (died 8 Feb 1845), master of the grammar school at Louth and afterwards rector of Market Rasen in Lincolnshire, and his wife, Frances Maria Walter. After education at Brigg he was admitted to St John's College, Cambridge, on 1 March 1802, and graduated BA in 1806, being classed as second wrangler in the mathematical tripos. In the same year he was elected to a fellowship at St John's, a position which he held until his marriage on 3 June 1824 to Emily Anne, daughter of William Baker, of Bayfordbury, Hertfordshire. In January 1813 his kinswoman Jane Austen wrote of her satisfaction at hearing him described by a St John's man as 'the best classick in the university' (Faye, 199). He was ordained priest on 23 March 1810. On the foundation of the East India College, Haileybury, in 1806, he was appointed professor of natural philosophy and mathematics, and he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in November 1819. In 1830 he took up residence at the rectory of Hazelbury Bryan, Dorset, to which he had been instituted in May 1821 on the presentation of the duke of Northumberland, who had been one of his pupils at Cambridge. 
Walter was a notable scholar of the English Reformation, and edited three volumes of works by William Tyndale for the Parker Society (1848-50). In 1825 he published an edition of Edward VI's primer. His other publications included a seven-volume school book, 'History of England' (1840), 'intended to consider Man and Events on Christian Principles', and minor works of an evangelical or didactic nature. Walter died at Hazelbury Bryan on 25 January 1859, and was buried in the parish churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 28633


Walter, Hubert (d. 1205), justiciar and archbishop of Canterbury, was born during Stephen's reign, probably at West Dereham, Norfolk, and retained his East Anglian connections throughout his life. 
Hubert was the son of Sir Hervey Walter, a Norfolk knight of middling status, and Matilda de Valognes, daughter of Theobald de Valognes, lord of Parham, Suffolk, and Hickling, Norfolk. Hubert Walter's most important relationship, however, was with his mother's sister Bertha de Valognes and her husband Ranulf de Glanville, sheriff of Yorkshire and, after 1178, justiciar for Henry II. Hubert and his brother Theobald Butler were brought up in Glanville's household, acquiring there a set of connections that in Hubert's case would influence the rest of his career. 
Hubert Walter is not known to have spent any time in the schools, and in later life his lack of formal education was sometimes an embarrassment to him. He received a wealth of administrative and legal training in Glanville's household, however, and it was in his uncle's service that he rose to prominence around the royal court during the 1180s. As Ranulf de Glanville's chief deputy in England, Walter was involved in the full range of administrative business for which the justiciar was responsible, serving as one of the barons of the exchequer during the 1180s, and sitting regularly with Glanville and others as a justice of the exchequer court. He developed considerable expertise as a justice during these years, and several of his legal opinions are cited respectfully in the contemporary law book known as 'Glanvill' (1187-9). During the last few years of Henry II's reign, the king employed him in chancery and diplomatic work also. Walter carried money to south Wales for the king's troops, and conveyed messages between England and the king in France. On Henry II's orders, he also tried to mediate the dispute between Archbishop Baldwin of Canterbury and the monks of Christ Church over Baldwin's proposal to establish a house of canons at Lambeth. 
In 1186, during a vacancy at York, the king appointed Hubert Walter dean of York Cathedral. A few months later the chapter named him as one of five candidates to be the new archbishop, but the king refused to accept any of the nominations and the see remained vacant. In 1188, in a fitting acknowledgement of the debts he owed his patron, Walter founded a Premonstratensian monastery at West Dereham to pray for himself, his family, and his aunt and uncle, Bertha and Ranulf de Glanville. 
When Richard I came to the throne in 1189, Ranulf de Glanville was compelled to resign as justiciar. Many of Glanville's followers also lost their offices at this time. Hubert Walter, however, survived the purge, and although disappointed yet again of the archbishopric of York, which went to the new king's half-brother Geoffrey, on 15 September 1189 he was elected bishop of Salisbury at King Richard's command. Consecrated in St Katherine's Chapel, Westminster, on 22 October 1189 by his long-time friend, Archbishop Baldwin of Canterbury, Walter quickly found himself embroiled yet again in attempts to settle the dispute between the archbishop and the monks of Christ Church. 
The new bishop of Salisbury spent little time in his see. Like others of the Glanville faction, including Ranulf himself, Hubert Walter had vowed to go on the crusade that King Richard was now gathering in earnest. Until Richard's departure in December 1189, Walter was almost constantly at court. Thereafter he may have visited Salisbury briefly, but by March 1190 he was in Normandy with the king. After a brief visit to England, he was back on the continent from 3 July until 5 August, when he set sail from Marseilles for the Holy Land. 
Hubert Walter arrived in Tyre on 16 September 1190, in a party that included Ranulf de Glanville and Archbishop Baldwin. In early October they joined the crusader army besieging Acre. Conditions in the crusader camp were terrible, and the leaders of the English contingent, including Glanville, Baldwin, and the earl of Derby, were all dead by the end of November. As bishop of Salisbury, Walter thus became the leader of the English contingent at Acre, and quickly began to reorganize the camp; an executor of Baldwin's will, he used the archbishop's possessions to pay wages to the sentries and buy food for the starving common soldiers. He led sorties against Saladin's camp, and also ministered to the religious needs of the army. Morale rose; and when King Richard at last arrived at Acre in June 1191, having spent the winter in Messina, he found the army in far better shape than it had been six months before. 
Hubert Walter's stature in the crusading army continued to grow after Richard's arrival. He distinguished himself in several battles, and handled a variety of sensitive negotiations between the competing crusade leaders. In August 1192, when Richard fell ill, it was Walter who arranged a truce in the fighting. Soon afterwards he negotiated a more permanent peace treaty with the Muslim leader Saladin that guaranteed free access for Western Christians to Jerusalem and restored Latin services in Bethlehem, Nazareth, and the church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem. Walter then fulfilled his crusader's vow by leading one of the first contingents of Western pilgrims to visit Jerusalem under the terms of the new peace treaty. 
Hubert Walter and King Richard both left the Holy Land in October 1192. Walter's route home took him to Sicily and then to Rome, where he met with Pope Celestine III in January 1193. It was probably in Rome that rumours of Richard's captivity first reached him. By March 1193 Walter, accompanied by the exchequer clerk William de Ste Mere-Eglise, had found the king at Ochsenfurt, on the River Main. They were the first of his subjects to reach him. Walter immediately began negotiating terms for Richard's release. In late March he and Ste Mere-Eglise left for England carrying letters from the captive king concerning his ransom. Among these letters was the king's command to Queen Eleanor, the justiciars, and the monks of Christ Church to have Hubert Walter elected archbishop of Canterbury. The monks of Christ Church complied, electing Walter on 28 May at Canterbury, one day in advance of the council summoned to London for this purpose. On 29 May the monks went up to London to announce their election to the royal council, where the suffragan bishops of Canterbury, too, voted to elect him. Papal permission to translate him from Salisbury to Canterbury was received, and on 7 November 1193 a papal nuncio invested Hubert Walter with the archiepiscopal pallium at Canterbury. At Christmas 1193 the captive king appointed him his justiciar also. 
Hubert Walter had returned to England in April 1193 as King Richard's representative, to restore peace to a country disturbed by the rebellion of Prince John, the king's brother, and to raise money for the king's ransom. His appointment as justiciar regularized his position, but did not substantially alter the sweeping nature of the governmental responsibilities he had already undertaken. His formal appointment as justiciar may, however, have given him the immediate authority he needed to begin military operations against John's castellans. After summoning a council to condemn John and his followers, in February 1194 Walter himself led the successful siege of Marlborough Castle. A few weeks later he personally accepted the peaceful surrender of Lancaster Castle by its constable, his brother Theobald Walter, John's butler since 1185, whom Hubert now reconciled with the king. By 13 March 1194, when King Richard returned to the country, John's rebellion was over. As archbishop of Canterbury, Walter took part in Richard's solemn crown-wearing at Winchester on 17 April. A few weeks later Richard returned to Normandy to take charge of the war with Philip Augustus, king of France. For the next four years both the temporal and the spiritual government of England would rest in the hands of Hubert Walter. 
A series of remarkable administrative developments followed. The four and a half years of Hubert Walter's justiciarship were characterized by the systematization of existing procedures and the creation of new ones. None of the changes was in itself revolutionary; most built upon developments that went back to the days of Glanville's justiciarship. Nor were they the product of disinterested administrative reflection. Behind the reforms lay the relentless demand for money to support King Richard's war in France. The full measure of Hubert Walter's administrative genius is therefore to be found less in the efficiency of his governance, although that was considerable, than in his ability, as justiciar, to raise the enormous sums needed for war, while retaining, and even enhancing, the confidence of the king's subjects in the fairness of royal justice. It was an achievement his successors as justiciar might envy, but could not repeat. 
The first clear sign of the new justiciar's plans came in September 1194, when Hubert sent teams of itinerant justices throughout the country on a general eyre. Within two months, royal justices had visited every shire in England, with the justiciar himself heading up the eastern circuit. The remarkable speed with which this eyre was carried through testifies to the urgency of the situation facing the justiciar. Hubert Walter wanted a quick restoration of royal justice after the disorders that had marked John's rebellion. But as the articles of the eyre made clear, he also wanted a full accounting of the lands and goods forfeited by the rebels, and of the crown's other financial resources in the shires, including the profits of justice. To this end, local knights were now to be elected as coroners in every shire, to record crown pleas and present them to the justices on eyre. Beyond the hearing of crown and civil pleas, the eyre justices in 1194 were also ordered to inquire into the royal demesne manors, recording their fixed rents, present stocking levels, and economic potential if fully and properly stocked. More such inquiries followed in 1195, when a number of demesne manors were removed from the sheriffs and transferred into the hands of specially appointed custodians. In 1194 the eyre justices also inquired into escheats, custodies, and wardships that either were or should have been in the king's hands. All such lands were now to be handed over to local men for exploitation and restocking. In turn, these local escheators were to answer either to Hugh Bardolf (in the north) or William de Ste Mere-Eglise (in the south), exchequer officials whom Hubert Walter had appointed earlier in the year to supervise the management of the crown's escheats. Such reliance on local knights as administrators was one of the hallmarks of Angevin government, but it was a particular feature of Hubert Walter's reforms. 
The eyre of 1194 also initiated a new system for the administration of debts owed by Christians to Jewish moneylenders. After first making a record of all Jewish property the justices were ordered to establish special chests in six or seven different towns. These chests were to be supervised by two Christians, two Jews, two scribes, and a royal official. Henceforward, all lending by Jews was to be done by two-part chirograph. One part of each document was deposited in the chest; the other, sealed by the debtor, was to be given to the Jewish lender. All transactions concerning Jewish debts were to take place only before the supervisory officials, who would keep a written record of payments, debits, or other alterations to the original loan. These local officials were in turn placed under the supervision of William de Ste Mere-Eglise and his clerk, William de Chemille, who would now exercise a general oversight over all exchequer business involving Jews. 
These measures must have provided the king with a better sense than he had had before of the wealth of his Jewish subjects. The main purpose of the new arrangements was not, however, exploitative. In fact, under Hubert Walter the government of England taxed its Jewish subjects very moderately. The new system was principally intended to control fraud in connection with moneylending. Once a debt had been deposited in the chests, the receipt rolls would prevent a dishonest borrower from claiming falsely to have paid it. At the same time debtors who had paid off their debts would have verifiable evidence of the payments they had made, even if their charters of indebtedness were not returned to them. And this, in turn, helped to ensure that paid-up debts would not pass into the king's hands as if they were unpaid, and be summoned again for collection by the exchequer. The new system offered advantages to everyone, and that must be one of the reasons why it endured. 
Further administrative and financial measures were also speedily undertaken. A new forest eyre was launched in 1194. Scutages were imposed in 1194, 1195, and 1196; the tallages begun by the justices on eyre in 1194 were continued and extended in 1195 and 1196; carucages were imposed in 1194 and again in 1198; and a new assize of measures was pronounced in 1196. In 1195 Hubert Walter also issued an important edict on peace-keeping, the first significant such measure since the assize of Clarendon in 1166. Itinerant justices continued to visit individual shires, and Walter himself took an active role in negotiating fines and offerings from individuals seeking the king's favour. The wording of judicial writs continued to evolve, and in 1195 Walter personally introduced a new three-part form of chirograph. He may also have begun the systematic retention of plea rolls from the royal court. The earliest such rolls to survive date from 1195. Walter also began the practice of recording private conveyances and agreements on the royal judicial rolls. Files of these 'feet of fines' begin in 1195, and were particularly valued by the small landowners of East Anglia and Lincolnshire, whose interests Hubert Walter understood especially well, having grown up among them. Finally, in 1198 he laid the groundwork for a new kingdom-wide inquiry into serjeanties and another general eyre, both of which would be carried through by his successor as justiciar, Geoffrey fitz Peter. 
Perhaps the most lasting administrative development of Walter's justiciarship was, however, the increasing judicial specialization of the king's court. In 1194 jurisdiction over legal cases involving Jews was removed from the justices on eyre and transferred to the exchequer court. By 1196 a clear differentiation of judicial from exchequer business was beginning to develop within the exchequer court itself, a development that would lead by 1198 to the emergence of the common bench as a body of legal experts distinct from the barons of the exchequer. In the autumn of 1198, just a few months after Hubert Walter's resignation as justiciar, there emerged yet another separate body of justices, the exchequer of the Jews, before whom legal cases between Jews and Christians would hereafter be heard and determined. As justiciar, Walter himself linked these increasingly specialized curial groups together. As justiciar, he presided over the exchequer, he served as chief justice in legal proceedings, and he was responsible for crown policy toward the Jews. But beneath him, the king's court was becoming an increasingly professionalized and specialized set of institutions. 
As justiciar Hubert Walter ruled England as the king's vicegerent. To be effective, he had to have the support both of the king and of the English magnates. Walter's relationship with Richard came briefly under stress in 1196, when Richard dispatched the abbot of Caen to England to audit the justiciar's accounts. The abbot died before his accounting could proceed too far, however, and the matter was not raised again. Whether this incident lay behind Hubert Walter's reported request in 1196 to resign as justiciar can only be a matter of speculation. Richard rejected the request, however, declaring that 'there was no one else upon whom he could rely to rule the country' (Young, 115). Thereafter Richard's support for his justiciar remained steadfast. Between June and October 1197 Walter represented Richard in diplomatic negotiations with the king of France, the count of Flanders, and with the archbishop of Rouen over Richard's decision to build Chateau Gaillard on archiepiscopal property. 
By 1198, however, support for the justiciar among the ecclesiastical magnates of England may have been wearing thin. Hubert Walter's reputation among churchmen had already been compromised in 1196, when the church of St Mary-le-Bow in London was set on fire in order to drive from sanctuary William fitz Osbert, who had led a popular rising against the city's oligarchy. In December 1197, when Walter confronted a council of churchmen with King Richard's request that they supply him with an additional force of 300 knights for a year's service in Normandy, the bishops of Lincoln and Salisbury refused to comply, and the council broke up in confusion. The saintly Bishop Hugh of Lincoln, a long-time critic of Hubert Walter, escaped unscathed; but the bishop of Salisbury paid heavily for his temerity, and Hubert Walter seems finally to have succeeded in raising the force the king required. At the same time Walter's reputation as a guardian of ecclesiastical liberties was being further blackened by the furious resistance of the monks of Christ Church to his attempts to revive Archbishop Baldwin's plans to build a collegiate church at Lambeth staffed by canons holding prebends. The accession of a new pope, Innocent III, a man unsympathetic to churchmen holding secular office, may have been the final straw. In July 1198 Hubert Walter resigned as justiciar. This time King Richard accepted the resignation, citing the burden of the work and his justiciar's ill health as grounds for the resignation. 
Hubert Walter's resignation as justiciar did not, however, mean that he was retiring from governmental affairs. In September 1198 he returned to Normandy at Richard's request to negotiate peace with France. Walter was still on the continent in April 1199, when news of Richard's death reached him in Normandy. He had known Prince John since at least 1182-3, when John was being educated in the household of Ranulf de Glanville. Despite Walter's role in suppressing John's rebellion in 1194, there was probably never any serious prospect that he would support any other claimant to the English throne after Richard's death. Stories that he did so, told independently by the St Albans chronicler and by the biographer of William (I) Marshal, are almost certainly projections of authors writing many years after the event. Contemporary chroniclers, by contrast, report that Walter, together with William Marshal, quickly organized the Norman magnates in support of John. The English magnates were in John's camp already; and on 27 May 1199 Hubert Walter crowned him king of England in Westminster Abbey. On the same day John appointed Walter his chancellor. 
Walter brought to the chancery the same systematizing and reforming spirit he had exhibited as justiciar. Immediately upon taking office he instituted a new, fixed schedule of chancery fees. Within two weeks he had begun to insist that outgoing chancery writs and charters be enrolled in chronological order on special rolls. Copies of some royal charters were being kept on rolls before 1199, but as C. R. Cheney has remarked, 'there was nothing comparable to the comprehensive and continuous series which began within a few weeks of John's accession' (Cheney, 108). Nor are there any exact parallels for such chronological enrolments in the known procedures of other contemporary chanceries. Whatever precisely the inspiration, the innovation seems to have been Walter's. 
Even as chancellor, Hubert Walter continued to play an active role both at the exchequer and in judicial proceedings. The justiciar, Geoffrey fitz Peter, was an old friend who had also begun his career in Glanville's household, and he frequently sought Walter's advice on difficult cases. The two men co-operated in collecting taxation, particularly the seventh of 1203; and in 1203 they led a joint diplomatic mission to the Welsh marches. Walter also remained active in negotiations with France, first in the spring of 1202, and again in the spring of 1204. As an elder statesman, he also played a crucial role in mediating between the impetuous king and the unfortunate victims of his wrath, as he did, for example, in negotiating a settlement between the king and the Cistercians in 1200. He also acted as a stabilizing influence on policy. In June 1205, only a few weeks before his death, Hubert Walter and William Marshal are reported to have persuaded King John to abandon his plans to lead a new expedition to France. 
Remarkable as it was, Hubert Walter's political career is but one aspect of his public life. While serving as justiciar and chancellor he was also archbishop of Canterbury and, from 1195 until 1198, resident papal legate in England. As archbishop, Hubert Walter reorganized the archiepiscopal estates and increased their revenues. He acquired new lands and erected new buildings. Although he was often personally absent from Canterbury, his officials administered the spiritual affairs of the diocese with conscientious efficiency. As metropolitan, Walter was an energetic visitor of monasteries and vacant bishoprics, a task made easier by his simultaneous position as papal legate. At papal request, he also headed commissions of inquiry for the canonizations of Gilbert of Sempringham and Wulfstan of Worcester, and served frequently as a papal judge-delegate. Walter was also an active legislator, issuing canons for the archdiocese of York in 1195, and for Canterbury in 1200. The Canterbury canons were particularly ambitious, and formed the basis upon which Archbishop Langton would erect his own more famous canons of 1213. His quarrel of 1197-1200 with the monks of Christ Church notwithstanding, Walter was also generally regarded as a friend and supporter of monks. He took the habit of the Augustinian canons upon becoming archbishop, and remained on warm terms with the Cistercian order, which accepted him into confraternity in 1195. A generous man, he was particularly noted for his gifts of elaborate vestments to monastic houses, including the Carthusian house at Witham. 
Hubert Walter died on 13 July 1205 at the manor of Teynham, Kent, of a high fever resulting from an untreated carbuncle on his lower back. He was buried the following day in Canterbury Cathedral, in the south ambulatory of the Trinity chapel. His tomb was opened in 1890, and the vestments and ornaments removed. They are now displayed in the cathedral library. In his will, which he updated annually, the archbishop left the monks of Christ Church a much more splendid set of vestments, but King John took these, and presented them to Peter des Roches for the latter's enthronement as bishop of Winchester in 1206. Hubert Walter's executors, James Savage and Master Elias of Dereham, accounted for debts of $913 1's'. on the pipe rolls. The total value of Walter's estate is unknown, but it must have been considerably greater than his debts. 
Hubert Walter had at least five brothers. Osbert Walter, a royal justice under King John, died in 1206; Roger, Hamo, and Bartholomew Walter are occasionally mentioned in charters, but are otherwise unknown. Hubert's heir was his brother Theobald, the ancestor of the Butlers of Ormond, who died before Michaelmas 1205, and whose interests Hubert was particularly assiduous in promoting. Concerned though he was to advance his family's interests, Hubert Walter was also undoubtedly a pious man. Piety, however, did not in his eyes require poverty. He was an ambitious man who enjoyed the trappings of power, including wealth. Nevertheless, he was not a hoarder. He was famous for keeping a lavish household, rivalling even the king himself, and his hospitality was unfailing. He was a generous and effective patron to his followers, his family, and his supporters, just as Glanville had been for him. But also like Glanville, he chose men of real ability to staff his household, and many of them went on to make famous careers of their own in the service of church or crown. Walter's reputation as a just and compassionate judge was deserved, but he was at the same time one of the most active purchasers of wardships and custodies in England, both for himself and his relatives. Inevitably there was an occasional clash of interests. When this happened, the conflict usually turned out to Hubert's advantage. Few men can have worn so many hats with such success, both for himself and for those he served, as did Hubert Walter. 


@@@@@


doc= 28634


Walter, John (d. 1412?), astronomer, probably came from south-west England. It has often been claimed that he was educated at Winchester College. This cannot be strictly true, since he was at Oxford well before 1383, that is, before the school's foundation (1387), but it is possible that he was at the school it superseded. Walter's name first occurs in Oxford records in connection with his renting a school from Exeter College in 1383 and 1384, by which time he was master of arts. By 1386 he was a fellow of Winchester's sister foundation in Oxford, the newly founded college of St Mary (commonly known as New College, founded in 1379). Ordained successively subdeacon (1387) and deacon (1388), he was made subwarden of the college in 1389, finally vacating his fellowship in 1393. He became rector of Shere in Surrey in 1390, a position he had vacated by May 1407. 
Two surviving astronomical works are ascribed to Walter, both of them chiefly concerned with a single narrow problem, that of casting the houses for an astrological figure (that is, calculating a horoscope). The first, apart from some standard astrological and astronomical material drawn largely from elsewhere, is a table of houses of a straightforward kind, prepared for the latitude of Oxford and provided with canons explaining its use. The canons in one manuscript (Bodl. Oxf., MS Laud misc. 674) that has strong associations with William Worcester (died 1482) end with a statement associating Walter with Winchester and New College and saying that they were copied by William Worcester in 1438. While there was much work in calculating the original tables -- much more than in the simple canons for their use -- they were done according to a standard method and could have drawn on earlier Oxford work. 
The second work ascribed to Walter is of a higher level of mathematical originality, although in certain respects somewhat muddled. The disadvantage of standard tables of astrological houses was that they held good only for a particular geographical latitude. The astronomer calculating them made use of tables of ascensional differences, likewise generally done for one latitude; but the Oxford astronomer John Maudith earlier in the century had made use of Toledan tables of the latter type that applied to any latitude. It seems likely that some English astronomer of the fourteenth, or possibly early fifteenth, century, familiar with this work, was trying to make use of the same idea when he drafted the universally applicable tables for the houses in what is now Cambridge University Library, MS Ee.3.61. Lewis Caerleon (died in or after 1495) makes it clear in this, his own copy of the work, that he is sceptical about John Walter's authorship and about the exactness of the method. The work is certainly ascribed to Walter in an earlier copy (in Bodl. Oxf., MS Rawl. D.238), but he can at best have been responsible for only a part of it. 
John Walter's name is often mentioned in later astrological writing, simply because he was the author of tables of the astrological houses which were much in demand as they could lighten the burden of calculation. He seems not to have been responsible for anything more profound. In his lifetime he presented a book to New College, an exposition of the 'Apocalypse'. It is not known when he died. John Leland provides information that might not have been as purely speculative as some of his other comments: he claims that Walter returned to Winchester and died and was buried there in 1412. 


@@@@@


doc= 28635


Walter, Sir John (bap. 1565, d. 1630), judge and politician, was baptized at Ludlow, Shropshire, on 1 May 1565, the second son of the common lawyer and Welsh judge Edmund Walter (died 1592), of Ludlow, and his wife, Mary Hackluit (died 1583). After matriculating from Brasenose College, Oxford, in 1579, John followed his elder brother, James, to the Inner Temple, where he was admitted gratis as a bencher's son on 21 April 1583. Called to the bar by the Inner Temple parliament on 22 November 1590, Walter took his place at the bar table on 6 June next year, and served as reader of Lyon's Inn in 1595. 
The details of Walter's immediate professional ascent are scanty, but by 1600 he was pleading in Star Chamber, admittedly as the junior of three counsel (Baildon, 116). On 24 February 1601 he married Margaret Offley (died 'c'.1620) of London, with whom he would rear a family of four sons and four daughters. By 1604 Walter had entered Queen Anne's service as a fee'd counsellor at law. His call to join the bench of the Inner Temple in 1605 came a good five years earlier than strict seniority and the average continuance of those so promoted over the previous decade would predict, while his reading in the summer of 1607 on the statute 43 Eliz. I c.1 (confirmations of patents) was sufficiently well received for a fellow practitioner on the Oxford circuit to characterize him as 'a reader of great reputation' ('Liber famelicus', 31). As 'worthy Counsellor' to the University of Oxford Walter advised Sir Thomas Bodley on his founding endowment of the university's library, and in 1609 refused a fee for drafting the deed of grant (Wood, 2.912); the following year he was retained by the crown to defend the royal title to aulnage before the House of Lords. In 1613 Walter became attorney-general to the prince of Wales, and received an honorary MA from the University of Oxford. By 1615, when he bought the widowed Lady Cope's substantial house in the Strand ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 1.594), Walter was among the leaders of the Westminster bar, even in chancery, where his closeness to Sir Edward Coke may not have facilitated his practice. Having previously acquired a house and lands in the north Oxfordshire parish of Sarsden, Walter next year bought the former abbey of Godstow and the manor of Wolvercote outside Oxford, which became his main residence. At this time 'in regard of his good deserts and experience in the government of the house' ('Inner Temple Records', 2.100), Walter's Inner Temple colleagues agreed to seat him at the head of the bench table in hall. 
Yet high professional standing was in itself insufficient to guarantee further preferment. Although 'all the world had destinated' Walter to succeed Henry Yelverton as solicitor-general in 1617 ('Liber famelicus', 54) the office went instead to his Inner Temple junior Thomas Coventry, a mere 'green reader' (ibid., 53). Next year's closely fought election for the recordership of London saw Walter nominated in place of his 'verye good friend' Whitelocke (ibid., 31), once the king himself had declared the latter unacceptable. In these circumstances his narrow defeat was no disgrace, and the knighthood conferred on Walter in May 1619 can hardly have been a consolation prize, especially since two more of the prince's legal officers received the same honour. His notably forceful stance against monopolists and projectors in the parliament of 1621, where he sat as member for the Cornish borough of East Looe, may however reflect Walter's continuing distance from court power and patronage. If so, when he was next returned for the same constituency on Prince Charles's nomination in 1624, that gap had much narrowed, as Walter now urged his fellow members to send military support to their distressed protestant brethren abroad by voting the crown at least four subsidies. 
During the vacation after Hilary term 1625, in the last month of James I's life, Walter and Sir Thomas Trevor, the prince's solicitor-general, both received writs to be called serjeant immediately, along with patents as king's serjeants. This irregular procedure of swearing in serjeants during vacation was possibly part of a plan to make Walter the fifth justice of king's bench, a promotion he apparently did not welcome, since it would reduce the fee income of all puisne justices. That potential difficulty was resolved in April by Sir Robert Tanfield's death, enabling Walter to be made chief baron of the exchequer. Meanwhile a judicial conference reinstated the traditional process for calling serjeants, with writs returnable on the first day of Easter term; in Walter's case his patrons were Lord Keeper Williams, Buckingham, Pembroke, and Baron Ley (Baker, 'Serjeants', 358-9, 438). On 12 May the lord keeper finally administered Walter's oath as chief baron, 'and his response was good, grave, and full of honesty' ('Diary of Sir Richard Hutton', 58). 
The gravity contemporaries deemed particularly fitting to his office epitomized Walter's judicial demeanour; when a colleague on the western circuit remarked 'My Lord, you are not merry', Walter supposedly replied 'Merry enough, for a judge' (Fuller, 'Worthies', new edn, 1840, 3.62). Yet despite a rumour in January 1626 that Walter would succeed the recently deceased Sir Henry Hobart as chief justice of common pleas, the position remained unfilled until late November, when it went to the more pliant Thomas Richardson. Whatever the truth of that rumour, Walter's chances of further promotion were irretrievably damaged by his prominent role in the judges' resistance to government attempts from mid-October to secure their collective endorsement of the forced loan. Walter was one of the trio who represented the judiciary in negotiations with Lord Keeper Coventry. These culminated in Chief Justice Crewe's dismissal after a personal interview with Charles I, who then summoned Walter: 'and much passed between them and again the Chief Baron was constant and would not change' ('Diary of Sir Richard Hutton', 66). 
On this and later occasions Walter was protected by his patent, which gave him tenure during good behaviour, and he continued to discharge his duties, including attendance on Lords' committees during the 1628 parliament. The illness which excused him from judicial consultations on the king's questions in May of that year was possibly genuine, since in January sickness also prevented his sitting in Westminster Hall. The same reason was given for his absence in May 1629, when the judges faced further royal enquiries touching the habeas corpus applications of the imprisoned MPs. But while the crown could hardly complain at the handling of Richard Chambers's suits against tonnage and poundage by Walter's court that June, at the beginning of Michaelmas term he was pressed to resign his place. Walter now apparently constituted the main individual obstacle to Charles's preferred handling of sensitive politico-legal issues and, according to Bulstrode Whitelocke, 'His Opinion was contrary to all the rest of the Judges' (Whitelocke, 'Memorials', 16). His refusal to step aside, since, 'as he often affirmed, he had never given any cause of offence to the king in any matter that he knew of' ('Diary of Sir Richard Hutton', 83). led the king on 22 October to suspend him from exercising his office. 
Walter's continued insistence on knowing the cause of royal displeasure ensured that disablement continued throughout the final year of his life. He died well prepared at Serjeants' Inn, Fleet Street, on 18 November 1630 and was buried at Wolvercote. This 'grave, religious man, of great learning, sound judgment and good conscience' ('Diary of Sir Richard Hutton', 83) left large benefactions to Jesus College, Oxford, to his second wife, Anne Biggs ('nee' Wytham), whom he had married on 18 July 1622, and to the surviving children of his first marriage. Several manuscript collections of his law reports and notes taken at his Inner Temple reading survive; his name is also attached to a printed abridgement of Plowden's 'Commentaries' (1659). 


@@@@@


doc= 28636


Walter, John (1739?-1812), printer and newspaper proprietor, was born in London, the third son of Richard Walter (1704?-1755?), coal merchant, and his wife, Esther. The couple had two other sons: Robert (1731?-1785) and Richard (1733-1773). John Walter began in the coal business at about the age of sixteen, immediately after the death of his father. He married Frances Landen (died 1798) on 31 May 1759, with whom he had four daughters and two sons, including John Walter (1776-1847), later proprietor of 'The Times'. He also had an illegitimate child, Walter Wilson (1781-1847), with Catherine Wilson. He traded as a coal merchant for twelve years and became head of the firm of Walter, Bradley, and Sage and chairman of the coal market. Although he was initially successful and made a great deal of money, in later years Walter began to find the business less profitable, and decided instead to concentrate on insurance underwriting; he joined Lloyds in 1781. However, a combination of American privateers, French men-of-war, and a hurricane off Jamaica forced him into bankruptcy the following year. Walter had to leave a house in Battersea Rise, Clapham, which he had owned for ten years, but was allowed to keep most of the contents of his residence in Queen Square, Bloomsbury, except for his valuable library, which was sold. He appears to have been determined to clear his debts, and this he seems to have managed by 1790. 
After this financial disaster, Walter relied on his friends to secure him a government post, but the dismissal of North's administration in 1782 ruined his chances. He then decided to turn his attention to another type of career altogether, and specifically to developing a new method of typographical composition. This had been invented by the London printer Henry Johnson for use in the making of lottery blanks, which Walter hoped to extend to the general letterpress. This method used 'logotypes' or founts composed of complete words instead of separate letters, which was supposed to speed up composition and cut down on printing errors. In 1782 Walter bought the patent to the logographic system and worked with Johnson on developing it further. Two years later, and supposedly with money given to him by his creditors on the settlement of his bankruptcy, he purchased the former King's Printing House in Blackfriars and reopened it as the Logographic Press on 1 June 1784. From the start, Walter appears to have obtained the job of printing 'Lloyd's list', the daily shipping news, presumably because of his earlier connections. In the following year Walter began to print a newspaper, the 'Daily Universal Register', using his logographic method. In 1789 he changed the title of the paper to 'The Times'. Although the paper was to become relatively successful in Walter's lifetime, it was not until the early nineteenth century, under the leadership of his son John, that it became the best-selling and most influential newspaper in the country. Walter's own input to the content of 'The Times' before then appears to have been limited. The paper's politics were almost certainly decided by an editor, and were not particularly distinctive. Under Walter, 'The Times' was overshadowed by more opinionated and successful newspapers such as the 'Morning Chronicle' and the 'Morning Herald'. 
In addition to his newspaper, Walter also published books and pamphlets at his Logographic Press, as well as undertaking some official printing work for the government. He failed in his attempt to become printer to the Stationery Office, but in 1787 he secured the position of printer to the customs office. A connection with John Trusler of the Literary Society also ensured a steady supply of new works, which included the infamous 'Apology for the Life of George Anne Bellamy'. Despite Walter's attempts to improve the quality of printing, his publications were often attacked for their frequent typographical errors. Undeterred, in 1789 he opened a bookshop in the West End. However, the book publishing side of his business does not appear to have flourished. The word 'logographic' disappeared from the heading of 'The Times' in 1792 and the whole experiment seems to have come to an end. Walter later wrote somewhat disingenuously that the failure was due to a lack of patronage and resistance from journeymen printers: 'I was advised to get a number of nobility and men of letters... to patronise the plan, to which his majesty was to have been the patron. But happening unfortunately, as it turned out, to correspond with Dr. Franklin, then ambassador at Paris, whose opinion I wished for, his name was among my list of subscribers... Thus ended royal patronage; and when it [the invention] was used by me in business, the journeymen cabaled and refused to work at the invention without I paid the prices as paid in the common way. Thus all the expense and labour I had been at for some years fell to the ground. (Walter to Lord Kenyon, 6 July 1799, 'Kenyon MSS', 552)' With the failure of the logographic method, the newspaper side of his business increasingly predominated, and was the source of most of his profits. From 1788 'The Times' was edited by William Finey, and the paper appears to have enjoyed a period of success, claiming sales of almost 3000 per day in 1792 and 4000 in the following year. In 1790 Walter also began an evening paper, the 'Evening Mail'. However, his success was not without its problems. On 15 March 1786, for example, Walter was fined $50 for a libel in 'The Times' on Lord Loughborough. Much greater trouble was to come. Like other newspaper proprietors of the period, Walter received money from the Treasury to ensure a degree of favourable coverage. During the later 1780s and 1790s this amounted to $300 a year. Part of the agreement required Walter to publish certain paragraphs approved by the government. However, this turned out to be a disastrous bargain for Walter, since on 21 February 1789 he printed articles from Thomas Steele, the joint secretary of the Treasury, which accused the royal dukes of insincerity in celebrating the king's recovery from illness and of conducting an opposition party. Steele's articles were declared by the courts to be libels on the royal dukes. Walter was sentenced in November to a $50 fine and a year's imprisonment for his attack on the duke of York. While still in prison, Walter was further tried for libels on the prince of Wales and the duke of Clarence, and sentenced to an additional $200 in fines and a further year in prison. 
Walter complained bitterly of his sentence. In a letter written from Newgate to Bland Burges he railed: 'Little did I ever expect ever to be an inhabitant of this vile receptacle or that any political sin would doom me to so severe a sentence. I am the more astonished when I daily read in the Opposition prints the most atrocious libels and treasonable paragraphs against those who gave birth to my prosecutors and yet without notice. ('Letters and Correspondence', 157)' Some years later, Walter noted that 'Had I disclosed the authors and their employers, I might have escaped prosecution myself, and proved it on others' ('Kenyon MSS', 552), but instead he remained silent. One of Walter's daughters, Mary Knox, appealed to the prince of Wales. This, in addition to Walter's letters of complaint to various politicians, appears to have had some effect; he was released on 9 March 1791 and $250 was given to him from the Treasury, apparently as a form of compensation. 
In 1795 Walter retired from active involvement in his printing business and moved to a house in Teddington. He claimed in 1799 that his earlier imprisonment had 'produced a corpulence of habit, and I was frequently attacked by fits of the gout' ('Kenyon MSS', 552). His wife, Frances, died at Printing House Square on 30 January 1798. His elder son, William Walter, took over from his father for a time, although he was not a success and two years later was joined by his brother, John Walter, who took over completely in 1802. Walter's government subsidy was stopped abruptly in 1799 following the publication in July of a paragraph criticizing the administration, and his position of printer to the customs board was also ended. The same year also saw him convicted of a libel on Lord Cowper. In 1800 Grenville declared 'The Times' to be 'a paper which, under cover of a pretended support of Government, is in decided hostility to it' (Lord Grenville to the earl of Carysfort, 16 Dec 1800, 'Fortescue MSS', 6.409). 
Walter died on 16 November 1812 at Teddington. It has been suggested that he may have fallen out with his son John at some point, since his will failed to leave him a majority share in 'The Times', which the son had effectively saved from failure after 1795. Instead John Walter's daughters, Anna, Catherine, Fanny, and Mary, were left one-sixteenth share each, as was his illegitimate son, Walter Wilson, and his nephew, also John Walter, who had already been given three shares in 1801, 1806, and 1810. The pattern of ownership that resulted from Walter's will produced lengthy and costly litigation which continued for many years. 


@@@@@


doc= 28637


Walter, John (1776-1847), newspaper proprietor and politician, was born at Battersea on 23 February 1776, the second son of John Walter (1739?-1812), printer and founder of 'The Times', and Frances Landen. He was educated at the Merchant Taylors' School, and at fourteen was apprenticed to Thomas Longman, the publisher and bookseller, and later to his father. In 1794 he matriculated at Trinity College, Oxford, where he stayed for a year. In 1797 he became a master printer and assumed a half interest in his father's printing business. In 1803, on the retirement of his elder brother, William, he became sole manager of both the printing business and the two newspapers published at Printing House Square, 'The Times' and the 'Evening Mail'. Although he engaged in a number of civic and political activities throughout his life, his contemporaries always identified him with 'The Times'. At his death in 1847 he was still directing the future course of the paper; indeed, he died at Printing House Square a few days after settling who would succeed him as editor and proprietor. 
In the spring of 1801 Walter's father gave him a one-sixteenth share in 'The Times', signalling his intention for his son's future. By the time he took over the sole direction of 'The Times' in 1803, the newspaper had gone through several years in which it had made very little profit, mainly because William Walter had been both an ineffective editor and an indifferent businessman. In addition, John Walter sen. had lost money on the printing business through some poor publishing decisions and a disastrous attempt to modernize his printing processes with an experimental logographic press. Even the family's branch bookshop in Piccadilly had lost money. Walter began his new career by focusing his attention on expanding 'The Times', reasoning quite rightly that the success of the newspaper would also mean success for the print shop. His plan was simplicity itself: he would concentrate on gathering and publishing news, both foreign and domestic, and publish it before rival newspapers could. To do so, he established his own corps of foreign correspondents on the continent, whose job it was to read and translate articles of importance in the foreign press and send summaries to the London office. 
Unfortunately, this practice brought 'The Times' into conflict with the Post Office, which had years before established the foreign newspaper post to supply continental newspapers and summary translations to the London press for a fee that varied from about 60 to 100 guineas per annum. The system was open to abuse: some journals managed to obtain priority treatment by bribing postal clerks. Walter continued to pay his annual 60 guineas to the foreign post office, but dispensed with their 'services' by having his correspondents send reports to him privately. Because he did not have to depend on the vagaries of government clerks or observe the foreign post office courtesy of allowing government officials and diplomats the first opportunity of perusing dispatches from the continent, he made few friends either among other journalists or in the government. The foreign post office's reaction was to hold up foreign mail addressed to 'The Times'. In response, Walter arranged with several businesses in the City to have his mail delivered to them, since the foreign post office had no control over mail delivered to commercial houses. Walter devised a code, which he varied regularly, so that the businesses could identify the mail intended for 'The Times'. Unfortunately, while this complicated plan worked well for the delivery of letters, postal officials could easily identify and confiscate foreign newspapers. 
Walter protested regularly to friends in the government, but to no effect. When he complained to Francis Freeling, secretary to the Post Office, that some rival journals received their foreign newspapers undisturbed while his were regularly 'lost', Freeling replied that newspapers supporting the administration received certain favours, and that 'The Times' might be similarly honoured were it to pledge a similar support. Walter refused to accept the offer, and in 1807 began to attack the Post Office generally and Freeling specifically for corruption. As a result, Walter was charged with libel and stood trial (with his father as co-defendant) on 3 July 1807. The government won the case, and father and son were required to print an apology and pay costs and a $200 fine. 
This temporary set-back did not, however, slow Walter in his attempts to gather continental news independently. As the Napoleonic wars dragged on and the blockade of the continent ended normal ship traffic, Walter, with the tacit approval of John Wilson Croker, the secretary to the Admiralty, employed blockade runners to deliver French newspapers. Walter's success in publishing news that was, in many cases, weeks ahead of even the diplomatic channels made 'The Times' one of the most powerful, most profitable, and most widely read newspapers in England. 
Walter also boosted the pre-eminence of 'The Times' by establishing a professional, independent theatre review department. At the beginning of the nineteenth century, stage reviews were usually little more than puff pieces, often written by the theatre owners and playwrights themselves. Influential theatre reviewers were regularly bribed to write good reviews. Walter, taking his cue from Leigh Hunt, insisted that plays be reviewed honestly; in 1805 he hired Barron Field, a twenty-year-old friend of Hunt's, as theatre critic. Field was not allowed to accept free tickets, nor did he mix socially with theatre managers on a regular basis. His candid reviews drew the ire of the theatrical establishment; indeed, Richard Sheridan, who had been friendly with Walter's father, threatened him with a libel suit or worse after a particularly biting review. In addition to insisting on honest criticism, Walter also insisted that the theatres pay full price for inserting advertisements in 'The Times', in contravention to the common practice of requiring payment only of the stamp duty. Drury Lane at first refused to pay, and attacked Walter through newspapers heavily under the influence of the theatre interests. However, the growing power and circulation of 'The Times' made it imperative that play notices be published in it, and eventually all of the theatres bowed to 'The Times''s policy. 
While he increased the circulation of 'The Times' substantially in the first decade of the nineteenth century, Walter was frustrated by the slow process and significant costs of manual printing. As early as 1804 he had invested in the development of a steam press, an investment which was opposed by his father, and which eventually yielded nothing. In 1812 the German inventor Frederick Koenig demonstrated his newly designed steam press; Walter immediately contracted for two of the machines, and Koenig began to build them in a house in Whitecross Street, next to 'The Times''s offices. Walter instinctively knew that the new machines would revolutionize the newspaper industry, both by increasing exponentially the number of newspapers that could be printed and by decreasing labour costs. In anticipation of the first issue, his contract with Koenig required that the inventor not sell any of his machines to a rival newspaper for less than the price Walter was paying for them. In anticipation of the second issue, which would clearly cause labour difficulties among the printers, Walter bound Koenig and his workers to secrecy during the construction stage. And to protect himself in case the machines did not work to their specifications, Walter contracted to sell them back to Koenig if they would not print a minimum of 1100 sheets per hour. Finally, Walter contracted to buy any future machines that might print more efficiently than the ones Koenig was building for him. 
Walter had reason to be concerned about the reaction of his pressmen. All his life he had fought the formation of 'combinations', or unions, in the printing business. In 1810, when his compositors struck for a wage equivalent to that being paid on other newspapers, Walter prosecuted them for combination, and nineteen were convicted and gaoled. In addition, the promise (or threat, depending on the point of view) of mechanized printing had been around for years, and pressmen all over London had vowed to smash any machines that might take their jobs from them. Finally, on 28 November 1814, Walter personally supervised the printing of the next day's edition of 'The Times' on the new presses, then announced to the pressmen waiting for copy that the newspaper had already been printed. He did show his humanity on that occasion, however, by announcing that he would continue the wages of his suddenly redundant compositors until they could find suitable work elsewhere. Eventually, the Koenig machines were able to print 1800 sheets per hour; the new press reduced the time required to print an issue of 3000-4000 copies from ten hours to three. In five years, Walter more than doubled his circulation, and revenue from sales and advertising made 'The Times' the leading daily in England. Interestingly, he did not stop tinkering with printing machinery; in 1827 he contracted with Cowper and Applegarth to build a machine with four cylinders capable of printing 4000 sheets per hour. 
From the day in 1803 that he assumed editorial control of 'The Times', Walter reserved the right to offer criticism as well as support to the sitting government. His policy toward the administration was something like his policy toward the theatres: if he accepted nothing from them, he owed them nothing. In a leader published on 10 February 1810 he explained that he strove to conduct the paper with an 'independent spirit' that could support 'the men in power, but without suffering them to repay ['The Times''s] partiality by contributions calculated to produce any reduction whatsoever in the expense of managing the concern'. He went on to say that the '[Addington] Administration, therefore, had, as he before states, his disinterested support, because he believed it then, as he believes it now, to have been a virtuous, and an upright Administration; but not knowing how long it might continue so, he did not chuse to surrender his right of free-judgment, by accepting of obligations, though offered in the most unexceptionable manner.' That independence was bound to lead to trouble at a time when most newspapers were allied to a political faction. In 1804 Walter allowed 'The Times' to take sides against Pitt in a cabinet squabble. In retaliation, the secretary of the Custom House informed Walter on 26 April 1805 that he was cancelling a lucrative Custom House printing contract with the family firm. Walter sen. was furious with his son, but nothing could be done until Pitt lost power. In February 1806, with a new coalition government in place, Walter asked to resume the Custom House contract. Even though he supported the new government editorially, his request went unanswered. When it was suggested to him that he make a formal petition for reinstatement, he refused on the grounds that such a move might encourage some in the government to believe that, by granting him a favour, they might have influence over him. When his friends presented a petition on his behalf, he refused to support it, causing the rift with his father to widen. 
Walter's political independence did not, of course, protect him from charges of corruption. Twice he was accused of being in the pay of the French, once for supposedly accepting payments for inserting letters in support of the French monarchy but written by the French secret police, and another time for taking a large bribe from the duc de Blacas, again for supporting the Bourbons. The first charge was rather vague, and had been made against a number of the leading London journals; in some cases, it may have been true, although it was never proven. The second charge was decidedly untrue, and led to some spectacular developments. Barry O'Meara, a surgeon and former British soldier, had served for a brief time as medical adviser to Napoleon. In 1822 he published his reminiscences, 'Napoleon in Exile, or, A Voice from St. Helena', in which he charged that in 1816 Blacas had paid Walter $3000 for editorial influence on behalf of the Bourbons. A 'Times' leader called the charge a lie, and O'Meara determined to horsewhip Walter publicly. He waited outside the Stratford Club, and when the man he was told was Walter emerged, O'Meara began thrashing him. The man turned out to be William, John Walter's older brother, who had O'Meara arrested for assault. The matter was finally concluded on 12 November 1822, when Walter published a letter from Blacas in which the duke stated unequivocally 'nothing was ever given or offered to you by my intervention' ('History of 'The Times'', 225). Although O'Meara continued to insist on the truth of his accusation through the rival 'Morning Chronicle', Walter appears to have been generally vindicated by Blacas's letter. 
John Walter sen. died on 16 November 1812. Although he had apparently been on good terms with his son for several years, his will reflected his anger over the loss of the Custom House contract and probably the fine for libel, as well as some pettiness over his son's printing decisions. Instead of leaving his shares in the newspaper to Walter jun., he merely left him the opportunity to buy two of the shares at an inflated price, and directed that Walter Wilson's share should revert to Walter jun. at Wilson's death. On the positive side, the will required that Walter jun. be sole manager of 'The Times' and be paid an annual salary of $1000, with provisions for a sliding-scale reduction if profits were to slip below $5000 per annum. 
Even though the will made him a minority stockholder, the legal recognition of his position as chief proprietor gave Walter the chance to build 'The Times' both as a business venture and a journalistic force. Sole control was an important issue; Walter did not get on well with his sisters and his older brother, who were all stockholders. As early as 1808 he had worried, during a serious bout of illness, that the family might interfere disastrously in the conduct of 'The Times'. Apparently they felt that his independence diminished their profits. However, he soon recognized that he could not manage the printing business, the business affairs of the paper, and the routine editorial affairs involved in publishing a daily. As early as 1805 he had cast about for young talent and, in addition to hiring Field as theatre critic, he had hired John Dyer Collier to report from the court of king's bench; Collier's sons William and John Payne Collier, James Murray, and John and Charles Ross as reporters; and Henry Crabb Robinson as correspondent for the north of Europe and later as occasional editor. After his father's death he hired Peter Lovett Fraser, who acted as managing editor in Walter's absence; Edward Sterling; John Stoddart, who held the formal title of editor for three disastrous years; and Thomas Barnes, the first in a series of long-serving, influential editors, who took over from Stoddart in 1817 and served until his death in 1841. And he paid his staff well: John Dyer Collier received $200 p.a. to report the court of king's bench from 1804 to 1808; John Payne Collier earned up to 210 guineas p.a. as parliamentary reporter; while his brother William Collier began as a reporter at 3 guineas a week. Walter's first formal editor, John Stoddart, received $1400 annually, plus an additional $100 for an insurance premium. In fact, he was known to have 'treated his staff so liberally, that in the days of the Regency, a position on the staff of 'The Times' was regarded as one of the 'plums' of the journalistic profession' (Bowman, 'The Story of 'The Times'', 111). The core of that staff -- Crabb Robinson, Walter, Peter Fraser, and Thomas Barnes -- were professional colleagues and personal friends, and remained so for almost forty years. 
In 1814 Walter appointed Stoddart as editor so that he might pursue some personal interests, not least of which was a love affair with the daughter of Dr George Gregory, vicar of West Ham. Unfortunately, Miss Gregory's brothers, who were negotiating the marriage settlement on her behalf, apparently could not agree with Walter on several of the articles, and in later 1814, to Walter's distress, the marriage appeared to be off. Adding to his personal distress, he acquired a new home for his bride-to-be and himself in Brompton Row, London, and was devoting a considerable amount of time and money preparing it. Walter finally settled his issues with the Gregory family and the marriage took place on 6 May 1815; sadly, the new Mrs Walter almost immediately 'fell into a consumption' ('History of 'The Times'', 1.159) and died later in the year. Walter gave up the house in Brompton Row and returned to his old apartments at Printing House Square. He also threw himself back into the management of the newspaper, which had declined somewhat under Stoddart. Eventually, in 1817, he removed Stoddart from the editor's chair and replaced him with the more whiggish Thomas Barnes. 
With Barnes's appointment, Walter could turn his attention to another private pursuit: the construction of a country estate. Bear Wood, near Reading, took over three years and thousands of pounds to build -- and thousands of pounds to maintain. Walter remarried in January 1818, and he and his new wife, Mary Smithe, daughter of Henry Smithe of Eastling, Kent, were finally settled in the new estate in 1822, where they lived off and on for the rest of his life. He enjoyed the role of country gentleman, keeping a rather large staff and entertaining lavishly. He also kept a house in town, first in Brompton Row, later at Charing Cross, and continued to lease the apartments at Printing House Square, all at considerable cost. His first son, also John Walter, was born in 1818. 
In 1819 Walter determined to sell off most of his interest in 'The Times', although he would continue in his position as chief proprietor until his death. He apparently was motivated in part by the need for money to maintain his several homes. He had also decided on a parliamentary career, and he knew that the editor of a newspaper, even one as respectable as 'The Times', would not be an acceptable MP. By 1831 he had retired completely from all responsibilities for the newspaper, and was elected on a reforming ticket for Berkshire in 1832. It should be noted, however, that although Walter refrained from any direct management of the newspaper, he still owned a one-thirty-second share; he still owned the premises and, more importantly, the printing business at Printing House Square; and he still received rent from the newspaper for the space that it occupied at the square. In 1827, for example, his total annual income from the various pieces of the business amounted to over $13,000. 
Although Walter represented Berkshire as a whig, he continued the political independence that he had established at 'The Times'. His parliamentary career was not particularly distinguished. He was not an effective public speaker, and the only cause he took leadership in was the opposition to the 'Poor Law Bill' of 1834. However, his constituents appear to have felt that he was a conscientious representative, and he worked tirelessly for them, especially in projects for poor relief. Despite his independence, he worked well with his colleagues in parliament; his only enemy was Daniel O'Connell, a favourite target of 'Times' leading articles. As the whig party factionalized in the 1830s, Walter broke away to join Peel's nascent Conservatives, and resigned his Berkshire constituency in 1837. He stood unsuccessfully for Southwark in 1840, and was finally returned for Nottingham as a Conservative at a by-election on 27 April 1841. He lost the seat at the general election in June the same year, but won the seat back at another by-election in August 1842, only to lose it again on petition. Still, he maintained his political independence: his Nottingham supporters comprised both Conservatives and Chartists, and he opposed Peel's poor-law policies. Walter believed that Peel was ultimately responsible for the loss of his Nottingham seat, and as a result Peel never again received support from Walter or 'The Times'. 
Walter never returned to parliament. Barnes died shortly before Walter lost his Nottingham seat, and the paper once again claimed his attention. He appointed the 23-year-old J. T. Delane as editor, but took back much of the authority of managing the paper. During his last six years he took on the increasingly powerful railroad speculators, and his investigations into fraud and conspiracy resulted in the erection of commemorative tablets in his name by the lord mayor of London. He also insisted that the newspaper maintain an independent, if somewhat conservative, establishment-oriented political position. 
Walter had hoped that his eldest son, John Walter (1818-1894), would succeed him as sole proprietor, but young Walter showed little inclination to become involved in either the paper or the printing business. In addition, Walter was an old-line evangelical, and his son's involvement with the Oxford Tractarians very nearly caused the two to break off relations in 1845. However, they reconciled in 1846 and Walter jun. took a position at 'The Times' in the business office. Later that year, Walter sen. began suffering from what later would be diagnosed as throat cancer. Feeling his mortality, and knowing how important to the future of the newspaper a clear line of succession would be, he appointed his eldest son joint manager on 5 November 1846. 
The last six months of his life were difficult for Walter and those around him. As the cancer grew, he became understandably more temperamental toward his family and his staff. He lived at Printing House Square, which put him in the closest possible contact with the business. He insisted on actively directing the business affairs and even the editorial policies of 'The Times'. He had undertaken a bitter battle with his old friend and partner William Delane, father of the current editor, over the future control of the paper. He grew querulous, and at times was completely unreasonable. Although it was clear to him and those around him that his cancer was terminal, in January 1847 he met with representatives from Reading to discuss his candidacy for parliament in the next election. However, he finally accepted the inevitability of his imminent death and announced his retirement from politics in February. The uncertainty over the future direction of the paper and J. T. Delane's part in it caused serious dissension among the staff. Finally, on 1 July John Walter jun. was appointed sole manager. On 20 July an agreement was reached between the elder Delane and Walter on the disputed proprietorship, leaving John Walter jun. in complete control of 'The Times'. J. T. Delane was to continue as editor. Walter jun. would, like his father, enter parliament as member for Nottingham and assume the role of businessman, politician, head of a family, and country gentleman. 
Walter died on 28 July 1847 in the apartments at Printing House Square. He was survived by his wife and three sons, John, to whom he left his entire interest in 'The Times', Henry, and Edward Walter. He was once described by Crabb Robinson as 'slow at conversation, caring only for 'real things', a man great in reserve' ('History of 'The Times'', 1.80). Although he entertained on a large scale, he was said to be somewhat quiet, indeed 'bashful'. He was an ardent fisherman and landscape gardener. 'He enjoyed the country. He rode well. He wrote a supremely good letter; he had a remarkably good head for figures' (ibid., 1.8). He was a loyal friend and, obviously, a sound businessman. His establishment of 'The Times' as one of the most influential newspapers in the world makes him one of the genuinely remarkable men of the nineteenth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 28638


Walter, John (1818-1894), newspaper proprietor and politician, was born on 8 October 1818 at Printing House Square, London, the eldest son of John Walter (1776-1847) of Printing House Square and his second wife, Mary, 'nee' Smithe, of Eastling, Kent. Sir Edward Walter was his brother. He was educated at Eton College and at Exeter College, Oxford, where he graduated in 1840 with second-class honours in classics. After taking his MA in 1843 he became a member of Lincoln's Inn, and was called to the bar in 1847, by which time he had become actively connected with 'The Times'. He served first as manager in the difficult circumstances which attended the end of the Delane-Alsager joint managership in 1846. He continued in this capacity until he became chief proprietor on the death of his father in July 1847. 
It was noted later that Walter had been 'trained from birth to exercise a potent and controlling influence in the counsels of a newspaper which his father had raised to the first place in the world' ('The Times', 5 Nov 1894). His stately progress to this position, however, was not entirely untroubled. The Puseyite sympathies which he had acquired at Oxford led to a disagreement with his father over the editorial line pursued by 'The Times' on church issues. This rift was sufficiently serious to prompt his temporary withdrawal from managerial duties, but appears to have been short-lived. After he returned 'The Times' adopted a more open attitude to the Tractarians, though his earnest Anglicanism, growing more robust as he aged, precluded any danger of a drift to Rome. 'Popery', in his view, was 'not a fit religion for an Englishman' ('History of The Times', 2.46). But he retained throughout his life a high regard for J. H. Newman, whose brother-in-law, Thomas Mozley, was a valued contributor and the 'Times' correspondent at the First Vatican Council. 
Walter's parliamentary career began at the same time as his proprietorship of 'The Times'. He was returned, along with Feargus O'Connor, the Chartist agitator, as member for Nottingham on 28 July 1847, the day of his father's death. Though he was not unknown to the electors, having sought their favour unsuccessfully in 1843, his victory was remarkable in that it was achieved without the benefit of a personal appearance prior to the polls. A triumphant visit to his constituency after the result had been declared prompted the remark, attributed by Walter to Tyas, a 'Times' reporter, that he had achieved 'more than Caesar... for he 'came, saw and conquered' whilst I never came, nor saw, yet conquered!' (Walter to Delane, 29 July 1847; Delane-Dasent Correspondence, 2/77). He continued to represent Nottingham until 1859, adopting a 'Liberal-Conservative' label and sitting with the Liberals at Westminster. He retired from Nottingham undefeated to seek the Liberal nomination in Berkshire, his home county, which he represented in parliament from 1859 to 1865, and again from 1868 to his retirement in 1885. Over this period he remained attached to free trade and moderate parliamentary reform while retaining a conservative instinct which, at an earlier juncture, would have allowed him to sit comfortably among the Portland whigs. 'I am one of those', he confided, 'who are old-fashioned enough to think that the Devil was let loose at the French Revolution... and that Waterloo was a great act of retributive justice, which was richly deserved' (Walter to Delane, 6 Dec 1859; Walter MSS, 383). 

'The Times', under Walter's aegis, retained and developed its unique influence. With an average daily circulation of 38,141 in 1850, more than double the combined total of its five metropolitan rivals, it was 'unequalled in the breadth and depth of its reporting, the gravity of its tone, the grandeur of its pretensions and its sheer physical bulk' (Morley, 11). Walter's contribution to its success should not be underestimated, for -- the influence of its editors and contributors notwithstanding -- he was 'in the last resort a deciding voice in the policy and conduct of this journal' ('The Times', 5 Nov 1894). His editors, notably John Delane, who served from 1847 to 1877, exercised a relatively free hand, but within well-understood parameters reinforced by Walter's close scrutiny of the paper's content and style. For Walter an independent 'fourth estate' was a benign and restraining influence in politics and society. Mediating directly between the government and the governed 'The Times', in his view, was helping to supply any deficiencies in the representative system and was 'therefore more conservative in its effects than any machinery that constitution-mongers can devise' (Walter to Dasent, 6 Oct 1858; Delane-Dasent correspondence, 9/64). 
For most of the half-century in which 'The Times' was under Walter's control its political influence was underpinned by solid prosperity, and his contribution was especially important in ensuring that this was the case. Innovations in printing technology, in which he took a particular interest, kept 'The Times' ahead of the field, allowing him to reduce the cover price to 3died in 1869, increasing average daily circulation by 20,000 at a stroke. The famous Walter press, installed at 'The Times' in 1866, was the outcome of years of patient experimentation begun under Walter's father. From 1848 'The Times' was printed on a vertical cylinder press devised by Augustus Applegarth, the chief printer, to meet the demand for a machine that would print 10,000 sheets an hour, but by 1856 Walter had become convinced of the advantages of horizontal cylinders and introduced American-designed Hoe presses at Printing House Square. His correspondence with John Cameron MacDonald, the printing office manager, testifies to Walter's keen interest in this aspect of the business. The most important breakthrough, however, occurred when James Dellagana, an Italian typefounder brought to 'The Times' by Walter, cast metal stereotypes into papier mache moulds. This development, combined with a continuous feeding mechanism, made the press 'the wonder of its day', for it allowed a continuous roll of paper to be printed on both sides from curved stereos as it passed through a series of rotating horizontal cylinders. It was possible, using this revolutionary process, to print 12,000 eight-page papers in an hour. Even so, 'The Times' from the mid-1860s was eclipsed in circulation by the 'Daily Telegraph'. 
The pre-eminence of 'The Times' among newspapers and the elevated political status which it gained as a consequence attracted significant criticism. In these circumstances Walter sought to establish a distinction between his dual roles as chief proprietor of 'The Times' and member of parliament. When confronted in 1860 by Edward Horsman, the member for Stroud, who had been offended by published comments about the venality of certain MPs, Walter protested that his connection with 'The Times' was strictly proprietorial, denying 'any responsibility on my part for any opinion or statement which it contained' ('Hansard 3', 158, 1860, col. 761). This was less than convincing, and the question of Walter's potentially conflicting interests surfaced again in 1864 when he supplied information to Lord Robert Cecil which was then used to harass Robert Lowe from office. Although Walter claimed that he had acted, in this instance, solely in his capacity as member for Berkshire, his subsequent private apology to Lowe suggests an uneasy conscience (Winter, 193). On such occasions his capacity for delicate judgement on matters relating to the interests of 'The Times' was tested. As he aged, his touch became less certain in this respect. This was most evident in the decision to purchase and then publish letters, subsequently proved to have been forged, which appeared to link Charles Stewart Parnell, the Irish nationalist leader, with the Phoenix Park murders. The notorious 'Parnellism and crime' articles, published in 1887, proved an expensive embarrassment for 'The Times', which had to meet the full cost ($200,000) of the ensuing judicial commission. As a result the healthy financial position which had been established over the years since 1847 was much weakened. As chief proprietor Walter could not escape censure for the fateful decision, though in mitigation it might be noted that the most recent account of this episode is more critical of the editor, George Buckle, and the manager, John Cameron MacDonald (Woods and Bishop, 157). 
John Walter was married twice, first, on 27 September 1842, to Emily Frances Court of Castlemans, Berkshire, with whom he had six sons and one daughter. Widowed in 1858, Walter married again on 1 January 1861; his second wife was Flora MacNabb of Highfield Park, Hampshire, with whom he had a further three sons. 'The Griff', as Walter was known at 'The Times' since, like a griffin, he was considered both grim and vigilant, retreated to his palatial home on the family estate at Bear Wood, near Wokingham, where he died after a short illness, diagnosed as purpura, on 3 November 1894. He was buried at St Catherine's, Bear Wood. On his death he was succeeded as chief proprietor of 'The Times' by Arthur Fraser Walter (1846-1910), second son of his first marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 28639


Walter, Lucy (1630?-1658), mother of James, duke of Monmouth, was the daughter of William Walter (died 1650) of Roch Castle, near Haverfordwest, Pembrokeshire, and Elizabeth Prothero (died 1652), daughter of John Prothero and niece of John Vaughan, first earl of Carbery. For about a year in 1648-9 Lucy was the mistress of the heir to the throne, Prince Charles, subsequently Charles II, and Charles was the acknowledged father of the boy born to Lucy on 9 April 1649. Christened James ['see 'Scott, James], the child was the first of Charles II's many bastards, and was created duke of Monmouth in 1663. He became important politically in the 1670s and 1680s because of suggestions not only that he was the son of Charles II, but that he was also the legitimate son. During the exclusion crisis of 1679-82, and during the rebellion which Monmouth subsequently led against James II in 1685, a central political question was whether or not his mother had gone through a form of marriage with his father, Charles, in the course of their relationship in 1648-9. While most of the political nation was rightly sceptical (and Charles himself maintained absolutely that there had been no marriage), Lucy was by then dead, and there was just sufficient confusion over exactly what had taken place over thirty years earlier, and sufficient people with an interest in asserting that Monmouth was legitimate, for the story of a marriage to enjoy a scrap of credibility. The supposed marriage was critical, because if it had taken place, Monmouth was legitimate and thus, as the king's eldest son, was the heir to the throne. During the exclusion crisis this offered the whigs the easiest way of excluding the duke of York from the throne, while in 1685 it legitimized those who took up arms for Monmouth against James II. For these reasons Lucy Walter's short life is important as it explains why most of the political nation considered that a marriage between her and Charles was highly unlikely, but shows too that there were some straws available for the pro-marriage party to make use of. 
Lucy Walter was born at Roch Castle, Pembrokeshire. Her parents were middling Welsh gentry (her mother brought a dowry of $600 to her marriage), and though formally uneducated Lucy received the social manners which enabled her to mix with good society. This became important when, in 1640, her parents separated, her father remaining at Roch Castle while Lucy went with her mother to grow up in the cosmopolitan society of civil war London. At the end of the war she was briefly the mistress of the parliamentarian officer Algernon Sidney (1623-1683), who, according to James II, bought her services for 40 gold pieces. When, however, he was ordered away with his regiment, Lucy decided to seek a new lover where young aristocrats were thickest to be found, and took ship to join the exiled royalist camp in the Netherlands. Here she made herself known to the younger and royalist brother of her former lover, Robert Sidney (1626-1668). His time with her was brief, however, for in May 1648 part of the parliamentarian fleet mutinied and sailed to the royalists in Holland. This brought Prince Charles hurrying from France to inspect his new prize, and in a hectic week Lucy used her connections to meet, charm, and seduce the heir to the throne. Both were then just eighteen. She remained with him until September 1649, when he left for Jersey and thence to Scotland the following year. During this time John Evelyn remembered her as a 'browne, beautiful bold but insipid creature' (Evelyn, 2.561-2), and even James II conceded that she was 'very handsome, [though] of little wit, and some cunning' (MacPherson, 1.76). 
While Charles pursued his expedition to Scotland and England in 1650-1, Lucy Walter supported herself and her young son in the only way she could, taking as her protector Theobald, second Viscount Taafe, with whom she had a daughter, Mary ('b'. 1651). When Charles returned to exile in 1652, he made it clear that their relationship was finished, but Lucy refused to accept this, and for the next four years created so many scandalous scenes that in 1656 she was given some money and a pearl necklace and shipped with her children back to England. Incapable of living quietly, she soon attracted the attention of the government, and was imprisoned in the Tower. Deciding that not even the royalists could be using her as a spy, the republic sent her back to Flanders, while its propaganda sheet made capital out of this woman 'who passed for Charles Stuart's wife' ('Mercurius Politicus'). Back in Brussels Lucy resumed her stormy ways, now using her growing son as a means of leverage against Charles and his advisers. After an attempt to kidnap the boy had resulted in a public fiasco, she was persuaded in March 1658 to give him up to a tutor named by Charles. By then she had contracted venereal disease, and after making a general confession to John Cosin (later bishop of Durham), she died in Paris towards the end of 1658 at the age of twenty-eight and was buried there. 
Although the details of Lucy Walter's short relationship with Charles in 1648-9, together with the whole tenor of her life, made the notion of a marriage between the two highly implausible, Lucy's general confession of her life to Cosin became the basis for the most circumstantial of the marriage stories. It was suggested that, in this confession, Lucy not only swore that a marriage had taken place, but entrusted Cosin with documentary proof, which was kept in a 'black box'. Cosin's death in 1671 then left no direct witnesses when, in the 1670s, the enemies of James, duke of York, resurrected the Cosin story, and began a fruitless search for the 'black box'. Supporting evidence they uncovered amounted to nothing more than memories that in the 1650s Lucy had insisted that she was no mere mistress but a wife. The political nation remained unconvinced of Monmouth's legitimacy, although in 1679 Charles went to the length of formally denying, at the privy council, that he had ever been married to Lucy Walter. Lucy Walter's name is sometimes misspelt as Mrs Walters or Waters and during her life abroad she adopted the alias of Mrs Barlow or Barlo. 


@@@@@


doc= 28640


Walter, Richard (1717-1785), Church of England clergyman and naval chaplain, was born on 21 October 1717 in the parish of St Martin Ludgate, London, and was baptized on 29 October there. He was the son of Arthur Walter, silk mercer and resident of St Martin, and his wife, Mary. Richard went to Okenham school, in Berkshire. He is mentioned in the records of the Fishmongers' Company as having applied to the company for a scholarship. He was admitted pensioner of Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, on 3 July 1735, matriculated in 1736, and graduated BA in 1739. He was elected to a fellowship in 1740. 
Walter was ordained deacon by the bishop of Norwich in June 1740 and in that year was appointed chaplain of the 'Centurion' (60 guns), then fitting out for her voyage against the Spanish under the command of Commodore George Anson (afterwards Baron Anson of Soberton). The 'Centurion' sailed on 18 September 1740 with a crew which included both pensioners and raw recruits so that though 'a puny, weakly, and sickly man, pale, and of a low stature' (Walter and Robins, xxiii), Walter often had to help with the actual working of the ship, until her arrival in Macao in November 1742. In December he obtained Anson's permission to return to England in one of the East India Company's ships. 
Back in England, Walter graduated MA in 1744 and in March 1745 was appointed chaplain of Portsmouth Dockyard. On 5 May 1748 he married, in Gray's Inn Chapel, Jane Sabbarton of St Margaret's, Lothbury: they had four surviving children: Sophie, Arthur, Mary, and Jane. Jane married Isaac Prescott and their son was Henry Prescott (1783-1874). In 1748 Walter published 'A Voyage Round the World in the Years MDCCXL, I, II, III, IV by George Anson'. The book had been eagerly awaited. The main result of Anson's voyage was the capture in June 1743 of a treasure-laden galleon sailing from Acapulco to Manila. Anson had arrived home with treasure worth more than $400,000, and the event had captured public imagination and excitement. 
The book became something of a best-seller, running through numerous editions in its full or abridged form and being translated into several European languages. Walter's authorship of the work was, however, disputed in 1761: James Wilson, who edited the 'Mathematical Tracts' of Benjamin Robins, claimed that Robins was the real author of the book, Walter having simply supplied notes. Walter did not contest this account at the time, perhaps because by then he was seriously ill, but after his death his widow wrote to John Walter, printer and proprietor of 'The Times' and a relation of Richard Walter, rebutting the suggestion that Walter had simply supplied the raw material for publication. According to her account he had been actively engaged at all stages of editing. 
The matter was largely resolved by G. Williams in his 'Documents Relating to Anson's Voyage' (1967), in which documents 141-59 concern the authorship of the work. It seems clear that the initiative for publishing an authorized account of the voyage was taken by Walter, but that he was unable, unwilling, or both to bring the project to fruition and Robins was called upon to complete the task. Walter does seem to have had a hand in publishing, as distinct from editing, the work. He gathered names of subscribers and profited handsomely therefrom. It is also clear that Anson himself took a very close interest in the work, which is as a result very complimentary of his actions but provides an interesting insight into his thinking. Walter's and Robins's contributions to the work can probably never be completely disentangled, but this should not obscure its continued popularity (a full electronic edition was published in 2001 and there has been a steady stream of paper editions since its publication). It provided the inspiration and the basis for Patrick O'Brian's popular novel 'The Golden Ocean' (1956), his first sea novel. 
Walter remained chaplain to the Portsmouth Dockyard until his death on 10 March 1785. He was buried at Great Staughton, Huntingdonshire, where he owned some property, though it seems that he never lived there. 


@@@@@


doc= 28641


Walter, William (fl. c.1525-1533), poet and translator, is a man about whose life little is known. He describes himself on the title-page of 'Tytus and Gesyppus' ('c'.1525) as 'somtyme servaunte to syr Henry Marney knyght chaunceler of the duchy of Lancastre'. The title-pages of 'Guystarde and Sygysmonde' (1532) and 'The Spectacle of Lovers' (1533?) repeat this claim. All of Walter's known writings postdate Marney's death in 1523. 

'Tytus and Gesyppus' (812 lines) is a narrative of two friends who were 'confederate in amyte' (456) to the extent that Gesyppus ceded his wife to Titus; subsequently both take the blame for a murder neither committed but of which each suspected the other to be guilty. The narrative's conclusion leaves the two in 'love & parfyte amyte' (805). 

'Guystarde and Sygysmonde' (642 lines) recounts the murder of Guystarde by Tancred, the father of his love Sygysmonde, whose heart he subsequently gives to his grieving daughter 'in a cuppe of golde' (477), whereupon she dies. The relative brevity of the narrative is expanded in various interpolations ascribed to Wynkyn de Worde's associate, Robert Copland, who provides a prologue, envoy, and several interjections amounting to about a fifth of the entire work (lines 1-28, 239-59, 442-62, 505-25, 610-44). 
Both of these narratives are based on parts of Boccaccio's 'Decameron' and are the earliest printed English translations of parts of that work. They do not, however, appear to be direct translations but to be based on Latin versions by Leonardo Bruni and Philip Beroaldo respectively. Both are in rhyme-royal stanzas. 
Walter's other surviving work, 'The Spectacle of Lovers', again is in rhyme royal. It is subtitled 'a lytell contravers dyalogue bytwene love and councell', a characterization that gives some indication of its anti-feminist cast. After a 'chanson d'aventure' opening it consists of a dialogue between Consultator (the narrator) and Amator (a complaining lover) in which the former rebuts the arguments in favour of love advanced by the latter. The following passage is representative: '
Ye lovers delyte in slouthe and sadnesse 

In stede of myrthe ye syghe contynually 

Despare dothe ofte encrese your hevynesse 

Ye be also troubled by Jalousy 

By such meanes ye be brought in fransy. 
('Spectacle of Lovers', Biii)' Copland again provides an envoy. 
All of Walter's works survive only in editions by Wynkyn de Worde, who valued the Boccaccio translations sufficiently to commission woodcuts specifically for them. Some stanzas from the 'Spectacle of Lovers' also appear in the Bodleian Library's MS Rawlinson C. 813, possibly copied from a printed edition. 


@@@@@


doc= 28642


Walters, Edward (1808-1872), architect, was born in December 1808 at 11 Fenchurch Buildings, London, the residence and office of his father, John Walters (1782-1821), architect. His mother was a sister of the architect Edward I'Anson the elder (with whom John Walters had studied under Daniel Alexander). Walters was educated at Brighton, and shortly after his father's early death in 1821 he entered, without articles, the office of Isaac Clarke, one of his father's pupils. Three years' training with Clarke was followed successively by engagements under the renowned builder Thomas Cubitt, the architect Lewis Vulliamy (with whom Owen Jones was a student at the time), the surveyor and architect John Wallen, and finally the civil engineer Sir John Rennie. 
In March 1832 Walters was sent by Rennie to Constantinople to superintend construction of a small-arms factory and other works for the Turkish government. While there he made the acquaintance of W. H. Barlow, engineer to the Midland Railway, with whom he subsequently collaborated in various works in England. In Turkey Walters made plans for a palace for the sultan (unbuilt) and at the same time became a friend of Richard Cobden, who was then staying in Constantinople. 
Walters left Turkey in 1837, and made a journey through Italy, Sicily, and France with Barlow, before returning to England in January 1838. In 1839, on Cobden's advice, he established an architectural practice at 20 (later 24) Cooper Street in Manchester. One of his earliest works was a warehouse for Cobden at 16 Mosley Street. Other early works included schools, suburban residences, and chapels in a modest Gothic style, for example, in 1842, Granby Row Church. He gained attention with Oakwood Hall, near Stockport, a Tudor-style mansion, for Ormerod Heyworth, and St Andrew's Free Church at the corner of Grosvenor Square and Oxford Street in 1840. In 1851 Walters was brought prominence by his design for the warehouse at the angle of Aytoun Street and Portland Street for Messrs Brown & Co., which initiated the fashion of building Manchester warehouses in the style of the Italian Renaissance. 'The Builder' considered the palazzo style appropriate as warehouses were not merely store-places for heavy goods but also commodity 'emporia' ('The Builder', 16, 1858, 97). Until 1860 he was the pre-eminent architect of the town, with a prolific practice that included warehouses, residences, banks, and chapels (listed in 'The Builder', 30, 1872 201). 
Walters's most renowned works were the Free Trade Hall (1853-6) and the Manchester and Salford Bank in Mosley Street (1860). His design for the Free Trade Hall was chosen in a limited competition, and is a fine example of the palazzo type, much praised and illustrated at the time (see 'The Builder', 14, 1856, 526; and 71, 1896, 380). Its cost ($25,000) was raised by subscription, and the contemporary author T. R. Smith praised its acoustic properties in 'A Rudimentary Treatise on the Acoustics of Public Buildings' (1861). It was partly reconstructed by L. C. Howitt (1896-1964) in 1950-51, following war damage but suffered more damage by an IRA bomb in 1996. 
In 1860 Walters unsuccessfully submitted a design in the Manchester assize courts competition, and between 1860 and 1865 he reduced his practice. In the 1860s he joined Barlow in laying out the railway between Ambergate and Manchester, and designed many of the stations, the most successful being those at Bakewell and Miller's Dale; he also worked with his former pupils Barker and Ellis, by whom his practice was continued after his retirement in 1865. 
Though Walters worked in Gothic at the opening of his career, his most successful works were in a Renaissance style. Contemporaries and later commentators (Pevsner, 'Lancashire', 282) praised his original and careful adaptation of the Renaissance palazzo to large-scale buildings and the dull Manchester climate. 'The Builder' praised his buildings for 'the grouping of principal and subordinate features, for the manner of overcoming difficulties of numerous stories and closely set windows,... for the... mouldings, and the invention in details' ('The Builder', 16, 1858, 97). 
After Walters's retirement in 1865 he travelled in England and Italy. He died at 11 Oriental Place, Brighton, on 22 January 1872. He was remembered as 'a singularly modest' man 'with social qualities of the highest order' ('The Builder', 30, 1872, 200). He never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 28643


John Walters (1760-1789), Church of England clergyman and scholar, was born on 11 June 1760 at Llandough parsonage, Glamorgan. He was educated at Cowbridge School, where he later became headmaster (1783), and at Jesus College, Oxford, which he entered on 17 December 1777. He served for a time as sub-librarian in the Bodleian Library, and proceeded BA on 21 June 1781 and MA on 10 July 1784. He became headmaster of Ruthin School in 1784, and subsequently rector of Efenechdid, Denbighshire. He married Jane Davies ('b'. 1766) on 23 February 1785. 


@@@@@


doc= 28644


Walters, John (bap. 1721, d. 1797), Church of England clergyman and lexicographer, was baptized on 22 August 1721 in Llanedi, Carmarthenshire, the son of John Walters (died 'c'.1734), timber merchant. Local tradition claims that he was born in a small house in the hamlet of Fforest, near Llanedi (Rowlands, 528). His parents died during his adolescence. He kept a school in Basaleg, Monmouthshire, and then went to Cowbridge School to improve his Greek and Latin. This enabled him to obtain a post as a schoolmaster at Margam, Glamorgan, and there he won the support of the Mansel Talbot family. He was ordained priest in 1750, obtained the curacy of Baglan, Glamorgan, and was appointed perpetual curate in Michaelston, Glamorgan, in 1754. 
Walters married Hannah Clark, housekeeper to the Talbot family, on 14 September 1758, and they had five sons: John (1760-1789), Daniel (1762-1787), Henry (1766-1829), William (1770-1789), Lewis (1772-1844). The Welsh bard Edward Williams 
(Iolo Morganwg; 1747-1826)
admired Walters's scholarship but described him as being 'a severe Father' and claimed that he 'kept his Children at too great a distance'. He was 'fastidious, Extremely formal, punctilious, squeamish rather than [having] fine Taste, had an eye more microscopic than Telescopic, very much afraid of going to law' (Williams, 146). 
On 1 March 1759 Walters obtained the rectory of Llandough and on 10 August the same year the vicarage of St Hilary, near Cowbridge, Glamorgan. He also served in the adjacent parish of St Mary, was made chaplain to the high sheriff of Glamorgan in 1783 and prebendary to Llandaff Cathedral in 1795, and served as domestic chaplain to the Mansel family ('Archaeologia Cambrensis', 238). 
Walters's earliest literary work appears to be the unpublished 'The history of the noble family of the Mansels' (1752), now in the National Library of Wales. His 'Dissertation on the Welsh language', first published in 1771, was appended to each edition of his dictionary. He was also the author of 'Dwy bregeth ar Ezec. xxxiii. - 11, etc.' ('Two sermons on Ezek. xxxiii. - 11, etc.') (1772) and 'An Ode to Humanity', which was appended to 'An Ode on the Immortality of the Soul' (1786) by his eldest son, John Walters ['see below']. 
Walters's most important work was 'An English-Welsh Dictionary', which was published in fifteen parts between 1770 and 1794. From 1770 to 1776 the parts came out regularly, but by 1776 progress had slowed down owing to financial difficulties. Walters complained that many of the subscribers (who included Samuel Johnson, William Seward, and Mrs Thrale) did not pay for the parts as they were published. Moreover Rhys Thomas, the printer, who had moved from Llandovery to print the dictionary and thereby establish the first printing press in Glamorgan, was also in deep financial trouble. Only four parts were published between 1778 and 1783, and the final parts were published in London in 1794 by Owen Jones 
(Owain Myfyr; 1741-1814)
. 
Walters had obtained the manuscript of William Gambold's unpublished English-Welsh dictionary and used it in compiling his own work. Walters's dictionary, like Gambold's, not only gives translations for individual words but also translates English idioms. Its aim was to enable Welsh writers to discuss all branches of knowledge and the arts in Welsh, and Walters accomplished this by drawing on the resources of the literary language and the spoken language, as well as coining many new words, many of which gained currency and are still used today. Two other editions of the dictionary were published, one in 1815 and the other by Walters's granddaughter Hannah, in 1828. Walters died on 1 June 1797 at Cowbridge, leaving a widow and two sons, and was buried at Llandough on 4 June 1797. 
His eldest son, 
The younger John Walters is chiefly remembered as a poet, and in his day was regarded as a promising young scholar. He published his volume of poems, 'Poems with Notes' (1780), while at Jesus College and a volume of metrical translations of old Welsh poems, 'Translated Specimens of Welsh Poetry' (1782). His edition of Llywarch Hen's poems with a literal English translation were included in the Revd W. Warrington's 'The History of Wales' (1788) and he also supplied notes for Edward Jones's 'Musical and Poetical Relicks of the Welsh Bards' (1784). He published several other works, including a reprint of Roger Ascham's 'Toxophilus' (1778), as well as a number of sermons. Walters died on 28 June 1789 in Ruthin, possibly of tuberculosis, leaving a widow and two daughters. He was buried on 1 July at Efenechdid, where a monument, with a long Latin inscription by his father, was erected to his memory. 


@@@@@


doc= 28645


Waltham, John (d. 1395), administrator and bishop of Salisbury, was born at Waltham near Grimsby, Lincolnshire, where his parents, John (an esquire) and Margaret, owned the principal manor. He was a younger son. Among many identifiable kin (for he was born into a tight clan) were two uncles, Richard Ravenser (d. 1386) and John Ravenser, both prominent clerks in the royal chancery, while John Thoresby (d. 1373), archbishop of York (1352-73), was a great-uncle. A favourite nephew and namesake was still alive in 1416. 
Waltham's career was predetermined by his family and he is said to have served in the royal chancery from boyhood, where his uncles were not his only kinsmen. He had his first preferment, by gift of the crown, in 1371 and was a clerk by 28 June 1375 when appointed to take custody of Welhowe Abbey near Grimsby, which was deep in debt. Likewise, on 28 November 1375 he was one of those appointed to amend the state of the important St Leonard's Hospital, York. He advanced to inclusion as a professional administrator in high-ranking embassies: to investigate breaches of the truce with Scotland (1 January 1378); to treat with France (22 October 1378); to receive money owed to the crown by the king of Scots (28 May 1380). 
On 8 September 1381 Waltham was appointed keeper of the rolls of chancery, the senior position in the chancellor's department. As a corollary he acted as a receiver of petitions for England in every parliament between November 1381 and November 1386, and was frequently appointed as proctor there by many ecclesiastical corporations and absent prelates. He received attorneys in Ireland for principals staying in England on 24 June and 1 September 1382, and had custody of the great seal from 10 to 13 March 1383 after the discredited Bishop Reginald Braybrooke's abrupt resignation. He was included in several major commissions: to investigate Walsingham Priory (1 March 1384); to inspect, under John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, and a galaxy of great names, the Foss Dyke from the Trent to Lincoln (15 July 1384); to hear, with another battery of leading magnates, an unpleasant, long-running case in the court of chivalry between William Montagu, earl of Salisbury, and his brother John (12 February 1385). It is probable, of course, that his specialist contribution to all of these tasks was made among his rolls in Chancery Lane, rather than, for example, by conversing knowledgeably on site about the fauna of ditches or the finer points of drainage. Closer to home, on 28 March 1385 he was asked to act as deputy for the chancellor to inspect the king's hospital of St Giles beyond Holborn. He was given custody of the temporalities of the see of Bath and Wells before their restitution to the new bishop, Walter Skirlawe, on 3 November 1386; there is no evidence that he himself had been a candidate. He had, none the less, enjoyed a very profitable accretion of ecclesiastical preferment, as senior chancery clerks always did, and with his great-uncle helping too, culminating in his obtaining the powerful and lucrative archdeaconry of Richmond, in the York diocese, by exchange on 29 December 1384. He took a period of official leave from the chancery at once, no doubt to establish himself there. 
Waltham's career had not been political, but his reputation as an impeccable senior member of what would today be termed the civil service now led him into dangerous waters. On 24 October 1386 he was promoted to be keeper of the privy seal. This was not in itself an unusual progression, but his predecessor, Bishop Skirlawe, resigned on the same day that the chancellor, the earl of Suffolk, was dismissed to face impeachment, and the treasurer, Bishop John Fordham of Durham, went out of office too. Whatever veneer was attempted, this was all done as a direct assault on the personal authority of the king, who even had to face a threat to his own position. Waltham's promotion was certainly intended by the king's opponents to indicate a serious and mature policy towards the government of the realm, and he was, of course, placed on the broad-based commission to 'advise' the king's reordering of his rule. Waltham may be credited with an important and contentious extension of the use of the writ, 'sub poena'. His uncle, John Thoresby, had developed this while chancellor (1349-56) as issued under the great seal and returnable to answer suits in chancery; Waltham deployed it under the privy seal to bring cases before the council. The king took himself off to the midlands in 1387 to organize legal and military opposition to this restraint. Waltham remained in Westminster at his desk. On 14 November 1387 he was at Waltham Cross, north of London, to witness formally the appeal of the lords appellant against the king's adherents. 
When the crisis came to a head in 1388, Alexander Neville, archbishop of York, a detested associate of the king, lost his see and a complicated sequence of translations followed. Waltham was papally provided to the bishopric of Salisbury on 3 April 1388, received his temporalities on 13 September, and was consecrated at Barnwell, Cambridgeshire, on 20 September (during the time of a parliament at Cambridge). He was enthroned at Salisbury on 8 December. On 4 May 1389 Waltham left office as keeper of the privy seal, as did the chancellor, Archbishop Thomas Arundel, and the treasurer, Bishop John Gilbert. Richard II had declared his resumption of personal authority the previous day and, as a matter of principle, could not work with the three chief officers imposed on him so unwelcomely thirty months before. 
An important perspective on that defining crisis of 1386-8 comes from the relationship of Waltham and the king hereafter. The bishop naturally took to his diocese, but he attended a meeting of the king's council on 28 April 1390, and was then appointed as a supervisor of the recent parliamentary subsidy, and this duty, or perhaps a generally renewed involvement with the government, kept him in London over the following business year. On 2 May 1391 he was recalled to high office by Richard as treasurer, in succession, indeed, to Gilbert, whom the king had reappointed after the briefest of symbolic intervals and who even now remained on the council. Arundel was to return as chancellor on 27 September. This might indeed suggest that the king, now firmly in control, was willing to do anything to disarm, confuse, or divide his many recent critics. In Waltham's case, however, the king was to show a warmth that it is difficult to reduce to posturing. Obviously, Richard's use of a riot in London involving the bishop's servants as reason to estrange himself from the city and attack its privileges in 1392-3 was opportunistic. On the other hand, his intervention on the bishop's death to apprehend the body from its destined tomb in Salisbury and have it buried not simply in Westminster Abbey, but in Edward the Confessor's chapel itself, which the king was building up for his personal mausoleum, was a very personal sign, given to only a few royal servants. The bishop reciprocated their special relationship in his will. 
Before then, Waltham had supervised the exchequer with excellent apolitical competence, which was entirely what the king wanted. Richard placed the utmost priority in these years on securing domestic respect alongside financial stability through a peaceful foreign policy, as the premise for why his opponents had been able to bring him low in the past, and the platform for wreaking violent justice on them in the future. As early as July 1389 Waltham had ordered his own diocesan clergy to lead their parishioners in twice-weekly processions in praise of recent peace agreements and in hopes of better weather, fewer earthquakes, better harvests, no more internal dissension, and the repentance of heretics and schismatics. It was a newsletter on English and world affairs that the king could have written himself. As even Henry IV had to admit, Richard's choice of administrators, as opposed to intimates, in his last decade was flawless. Waltham in these years also headed the attorneys for Henry Bolingbroke when he went on crusade to eastern Europe in 1393, and -- a diocesan gesture -- was supervisor of the will of Sir John Golafre in January 1393. 
Waltham returned each summer to his diocese and moved about it actively. He took up the bitter long-standing dispute with the cathedral chapter about episcopal authority over them, locally, nationally, and in Rome. In 1392, largely through Richard II's unqualified support, a hand-picked committee of arbitration came down entirely in the bishop's favour. Waltham used the victory generously to turn the chapter into allies, and it became the most distinguished in the land under his successors, Richard Medford and Robert Hallum. Like other bishops, he opposed the attempt by Archbishop William Courtenay to conduct a vigorous programme of archiepiscopal visitations, indeed to the point of appealing to Rome and obliging the king himself to warn both parties against violence between their men. He was by career a conservative in principle but a constructive pragmatist. He freely tolerated exchanges of benefices by his clergy, a practice against which Courtenay promoted the other great campaign of his rule as archbishop. Likewise, he fully supported the value of indulgences in support of good causes. He dealt firmly with the several early Lollards brought to his notice, but also responded supportively to those parishioners who brought suits against their clergy for failing to fulfil their liturgical roles. He was, indeed, notably severe in punishing priests who fell short in any way. His triennial visitations of his diocese in 1391 and 1394 were demanding, and brought the authority of a bishop home to the least parishioner. Predictably, he brought old northern friends with him as his household familiars. 
Waltham did not see death coming. It has been suggested, reasonably, that he was still not much over fifty. He had been travelling and working as hard as ever, and was in London in mid-August 1395. But he then made a long and detailed will at Sonning, Berkshire, an episcopal manor, on 2 September 1395, declaring the Blessed Virgin and both St Johns as his special patrons. There are many signs that, unlike most other senior churchmen, he had not prepared a draft. He requested burial in Salisbury Cathedral in 'a fitting and convenient place' which his executors should agree with the chapter; evidently he had not made the usual prearrangements, and likewise he had to leave it to his executors to decide his funeral rites. The cathedral was left a miscellany of vestments and artefacts, to pray for him and, interestingly, for Sir William Scrope, perhaps already Richard II's most detested adviser. The king was to have 1000 marks and some richly jewelled ornaments. Archbishops William Courtenay and Arundel were to have some valuable artefacts too. Indicative of the haste of it all, his executors were to use his manors for a major scheme of memorial to the king and himself which he sketched out only roughly. A torrent of bequests to his former benefices, to monasteries and friaries, to his servants, and to many other people and places followed, often backtracking and supplementing. Late on, 'If my father's bones can be found, they are to be taken to join my mother's bones, with a marble stone' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/1/5). Why had he never done this before? There is enormous and anxious detail in the will, but no structure. William Scrope headed the executors. It is fascinating as a study of deathbed religion, but most uncharacteristic of the testator's own professional life. Perhaps it sheds more light on his private personality. In the event, Waltham lingered on at Sonning until 18 September. As has been said, he was buried at the king's behest in the chapel of St Edward the Confessor in Westminster Abbey, where a perpetual anniversary came to be observed. The monks' initial dismay was assuaged by Richard's magnificent gift of a vestment worth 1000 marks -- but, as has also been said, the bishop had left him enough money to buy it. 


@@@@@


doc= 28646


Waltheof, earl of Northumbria (c.1050-1076), magnate, was the second son of the Danish interloper Siward, earl of Northumbria (d. 1055), and his first wife, AElfflaed, daughter of Earl Ealdred, son of Earl Uhtred. His mother was a member of the house of Bamburgh, which had ruled Northumbria until Cnut's reign. 
Waltheof may have been born about 1050, and it was later believed that Siward intended him to rule north of the Tees. The death in battle in 1054 of a much older brother, Osbearn, made Waltheof his father's heir, but too young to succeed as earl of Northumbria when Siward himself died in 1055. King Edward instead appointed an outsider, Tostig. 
The next ten years are a blank in Waltheof's life. Given his parentage it is likely that he spent part of his childhood at court, and he may have received some of the estates in southern England which he was holding by 1066. Later traditions recorded only that he learned the psalms by heart, which was perhaps normal for a boy of his rank. The earliest opportunity which the king had to promote him came when he was perhaps fourteen or fifteen, after the Northumbrian revolt against Tostig in 1065. Waltheof again failed to gain preferment in the north, but his father had also been earl in the south-east midlands, and there is indirect evidence that Waltheof was made earl over the shires of Huntingdon and Northampton, and possibly others (though the title 'earl of Huntingdon' accorded him by many historians is an anachronism). 
By 1066 Waltheof owned manors in eight counties, mostly in the east midlands (Huntingdonshire, Northamptonshire, Leicestershire, Rutland, and Lincolnshire), but also two big manors near London (Tottenham and Walthamstow) and the large soke of Hallamshire in the West Riding of Yorkshire. It was a modest estate, but many smaller landowners throughout the east midlands had already put themselves under his protection. His influence thus extended into Buckinghamshire and Bedfordshire and was most striking in Cambridgeshire, where, however, Waltheof had no manors of his own. 
Waltheof's appointment as earl inaugurated an eventful public career. He submitted peacefully to William the Conqueror in 1066, and was among the young English aristocrats whom the new king kept at court in Normandy and England throughout 1067 and until Whitsun 1068 or later. Afterwards, however, he left court for rebellion in the north, and in the company of other Northumbrian leaders joined forces with an invading Danish fleet in 1069 to attack the king's castles in York. When William arrived in late 1069, Waltheof and his cousin Gospatric, earl of Northumbria, retreated from York, and in early 1070 submitted to the king on the banks of the Tees. Both were pardoned, and Waltheof not only resumed authority in his southern earldom, but married the king's niece Judith. 
The marriage was intended to cement Waltheof into the new ruling group around William. Judith was the daughter of the king's sister Adelaide and the second of her three husbands, Count Lambert of Lens, who died in 1054, at about the time Judith was born. She had probably been brought up partly in her mother's dower county of Aumale, partly at the Norman court. She and Waltheof had two daughters, Maud and Alice (also known as Judith). Long after their father's death, Maud married first Simon (I) de Senlis, earl of Northampton and of Huntingdon, and then David, later king of Scots; Alice's husband was Ralph de Tosny. 
Waltheof continued to acquire lands in the south of England under William I, for instance manors which the rebel Thorkell of Harringworth forfeited probably in 1069. At their full extent they may have corresponded closely to the estate which Judith still owned in 1086: some 200 rural manors mainly scattered between Lincoln, Leicester, Northampton, Bedford, and Cambridge, with houses in several east midland towns. Even so, Waltheof was nothing like as rich as the dozen or so most powerful Norman barons in England. 
Waltheof's dealings with the great Benedictine monasteries of the fens were double-edged. Ely, Thorney, and especially Crowland all remembered him as a brother, but he bargained or stole manors from both Thorney and Peterborough, while Crowland's tradition that when Abbot Wulfketel was rebuilding the abbey church Waltheof donated the vill of Barnack, which included quarries of fine building stone, appears to have been wishful thinking. Waltheof was more generous to churches outside his immediate area of influence, especially the new cathedral church of Lincoln, on which he bestowed the valuable Huntingdonshire manor of Leighton Bromswold some time about 1072. Another beneficiary was Bury St Edmunds. 
Waltheof also apparently played an active part in the affairs of London, demonstrated by his involvement in the transfer of the Surrey manor of Tooting from its pre-conquest owners to Westminster Abbey. The family concerned was that of Swein and his nephew AEthelnoth, rich Londoners. Swein gave the manor to Waltheof; Waltheof mortgaged it to AEthelnoth; AEthelnoth donated it to the abbey when he became a monk, along with three houses in London and a small estate adjoining Waltheof's at Walthamstow. 
The earl's power and standing were immeasurably enhanced in 1072, when William I expelled Gospatric from the earldom of Northumbria and gave it to Waltheof, probably by then in his early twenties. The earldom came with very large estates both north of the Tees and in Yorkshire, but was almost ungovernable in the aftermath of the king's brutality in 1069-70. Waltheof had many enemies in Northumbria, not least other members of the house of Bamburgh excluded from power, and he certainly involved himself in the darker side of the region's politics, notably in a bold move in 1074 against a Yorkshire family of four brothers, the sons of Karl, which had long been the enemy of his own. Over two generations the brothers' grandfather and father had killed Waltheof's maternal great-grandfather and grandfather. Waltheof now sent his retainers to ambush them, and succeeded in murdering the two oldest brothers. The raid has long been seen as the final act in a long feud, but even at the time it must have been difficult to distinguish notions of family honour from the violence of ordinary politics. It might equally be claimed that Waltheof was acting for King William in destroying enemies who had refused to come to terms. 
A year later, in 1075, Waltheof himself was broken over his part in the revolt of earls Ralph of East Anglia and Roger of Hereford. His motives, even his actions, were uncertain at the time and have been contentious ever since. Waltheof certainly did not rebel openly. It may have been simply (as one later version had it) that he knew about a conspiracy against the king and was slow in reporting it, or (following another account) that he went along with the plot when it was first put to him, only to have immediate reservations and throw himself on the king's mercy, using Archbishop Lanfranc as an intermediary. Whatever the truth of the matter, the king regarded him as deeply implicated. After a trial whose decision was repeatedly postponed, and almost a year under confinement, Waltheof was hurriedly executed by beheading on St Giles's Hill outside Winchester on 31 May 1076. 
Why the king ordered Waltheof's death is unclear. The modern view has been that he was applying to an Englishman the English penalty for treason, but that ignores the lifetime imprisonment served on Earl Morcar a few years earlier. Perhaps the king drew the line at Waltheof's second rebellion, or had simply had enough of Englishmen whose obedience was not absolute and unquestioning. Waltheof's body was thrown in a ditch, but a fortnight later, at his widow's request, Abbot Wulfketel of Crowland retrieved it for more honourable burial in the chapter house of his monastery. 
Waltheof's dramatic end made a deep and unexpected impact upon the popular imagination. The earl was said to have spent his months of captivity as a penitent in prayer and fasting, his innocence supported by Archbishop Lanfranc. He was executed almost in secret, and the few people present evidently believed that when the sword fell during Waltheof's recitation of the Lord's prayer, his severed head voiced the final 'but deliver us from evil, Amen'. His guilt must have been vigorously debated in the months before, with English and Normans taking opposite sides, and a widespread expectation that he would be spared. The event itself was a potent brew of treason and piety, involving an angry king, summary justice, and the frightening beheading -- itself unprecedented since 1066 -- of one of the foremost living Englishmen. 
The febrile atmosphere in Winchester nourished the idea that Waltheof was a martyr, even a saint. Such views were cultivated especially at Crowland, which had a financial stake in his reputation. After a disastrous fire Abbot Ingulf moved the body in 1092 from the ruined chapter house to a prominent place in the abbey church. On opening the coffin the corpse was found intact, the head rejoined to the trunk with only a fine crimson line showing where it had been cut off. The miracle was publicized by Crowland and began to draw pilgrims to the tomb. 
Elsewhere a second centre of interest in Waltheof was apparently developing at a shrine in the nunnery of Romsey in Hampshire, not far from Winchester. Popular support there for the idea that Waltheof was a saint was stirred up by the mysterious presence in the village of a man claiming to be his son. The cult had the tacit approval of the nuns, but no consent from the bishop of Winchester. It may, for one thing, have had an unwelcome anti-Norman flavour, since in the 1090s Romsey still had close ties with the remnants of the English nobility. In 1102, having tried persuasion and failed, Archbishop Anselm of Canterbury threatened the nuns with an interdict, and sent an archdeacon to suppress the cult and drive away Waltheof's 'son'. No more was heard of it or him. 
The field was thus clear for Crowland to shape its own sanitized version of the cult of St Waltheof. Healing miracles began around 1111, but they were confined to the abbey precinct and largely to pilgrims from the abbey's own manors, suggesting that interest was not widespread. The author of the Hyde chronicle, writing about 1130, knew something of the story of a man whom he termed Waltheof the Gentle, still working miracles at a tomb which the chronicler could not locate. Many of the cures which Crowland recorded took place at dawn, the time of Waltheof's execution, and three-quarters of them involved the restoration of sight. The Crowland cult may at first have had undercurrents similar to those at Romsey: a visiting Norman monk denigrated Waltheof as a traitor, and was immediately struck down with an illness that proved fatal. Probably by then, however, the cult was being depoliticized by abbots anxious to play down any element of hostility to Norman rule. One sign of Waltheof's rehabilitation among the Normans is that about 1105 it was possible for his daughter Maud to give his name to her second child, whose father was a Norman baron, Simon de Senlis, and indeed whose cousin was Henry I. 
Crowland's documentation of the cult was taken a step further perhaps in 1119, when Abbot Geoffrey, once a monk at St Evroult in Normandy, invited its historian Orderic Vitalis to come and improve the written record of the abbey's traditions. Orderic spent five weeks at Crowland and wrote an account of Waltheof and the 1075 rebellion which he later elaborated in his ecclesiastical history and which became the basis at Crowland for a thirteenth-century life and passion of Waltheof. Orderic clearly tried to make sense of Crowland's traditions about Waltheof in the light of what he already knew about the early years of Norman rule in England. As a historian and a monk with deep-rooted English sympathies, he was much taken by Waltheof's story and the monks' devotion to his memory. In his hands the 1075 rebellion took on a moral dimension, as an illustration of how earthly glory fades, albeit one interwoven with some of Orderic's characteristic prejudices. There were legitimate objections (he thought) to William I's violent and arbitrary rule, but a stronger case for fidelity to a king. Orderic gave the former side of the argument to earls Roger and Ralph, and the latter to Waltheof, whom he presented as faultless except in taking a foolish oath not to reveal the conspiracy. He pointedly contrasted a brave and contrite Waltheof with his Norman enemies and faithless wife, who between them brought about his condemnation. 
Other historians of the early twelfth century fashioned their own versions of the fall of Earl Waltheof. Henry of Huntingdon and John of Worcester added only snippets to the bare account which they found in the 'Anglo-Saxon Chronicle', but William of Malmesbury went to the trouble of consulting the prior of Crowland, and finally decided that he agreed with the English who thought Waltheof innocent. In both his and Orderic's accounts, however, it is difficult to separate eleventh-century fact from Crowland tradition, or indeed from their own personal views. Significantly, other near-contemporaries without direct access to the Crowland tradition were much less clear about Waltheof. The Hyde chronicler's treatment of the rebellion was vague and strewn with errors, while the Norman genealogist Robert de Torigni, often precise with details of families, was badly confused about Waltheof's. Clearly by the 1130s authentic independent information about Waltheof was difficult to come by. Nor did the Crowland tradition penetrate Northumbria. Durham historians of the early twelfth century took little interest in him. 
Meanwhile quite different stories of Waltheof's deeds, in a wholly different genre, were circulating as skaldic poetry. A single verse about Waltheof's heroic exploits during the attack on York in 1069 was known at Crowland in the twelfth century, and three more surfaced in the thirteenth in the Icelander Snorri Sturluson's masterpiece, 'Heimskringla'. Since, however, the tendency in skaldic verse was for the poet to praise famous men irrespective of the facts, they cannot necessarily be regarded as containing authentic details. In any case Snorri's account of Waltheof was utterly unhistorical, making him a brother of Earl Harold, and successively leader of the English army at Gate Fulford in 1066 and hero of an improbable episode on the evening of the battle of Hastings. 
Neither the warrior hero of the skaldic tradition nor the saint of Crowland's cult can be read as an accurate representation of the young earl who was active in politics during the decade 1065-75. From an early date Waltheof's life-story was made to carry the weight of different and widely divergent views on the course of late Anglo-Saxon history. A century later he passed into fiction proper when his name was selected by an educated East Anglian poet of about 1200 for the hero of the Anglo-Norman 'Roman de Waldef'. Meanwhile the greatest importance of the real Waltheof, so often seen by historians as archetypally English, was perhaps that he was the ancestor, through his daughters, of three notable 'Norman' families: the Senlis, the Tosnys, and the kings of Scots descended from David I. 


@@@@@


doc= 28647


Waldef (c.1095-1159), abbot of Melrose, was the second son of Maud, also called Matilda (d. 1131) ['see under 'David I], eldest daughter of Waltheof (d. 1076), and her first husband, Simon (I) de Senlis, earl of Northampton and Huntingdon (d. 1111x13). Maud's second marriage, to David, earl of Huntingdon, the future David I, king of Scots, produced one child, Henry (d. 1152). The outlines of Waldef's career are clear, if imprecise. At their father's death, Waldef, his elder brother, Simon (II) de Senlis, and his sister Matilda were not yet of marriageable age. His mother's second marriage brought Waldef into David's comital and then royal household, together with the much younger Ailred of Rievaulx (died 1167) and Henry, but there were differences: Henry was witnessing charters by the age of six ('c'.1120) and Ailred early achieved household office. Waldef, however, was still simply 'the son of the queen' 'c'.1126-1131, and witnessed only once in David's reign. About 1128-1131 Waldef entered the remote Yorkshire house of Augustinian canons at Nostell (founded between 1113 and 1122) to escape, it was said, David's plan to make him a bishop. He quickly achieved minor office there, and then was made prior of Augustinian Kirkham, founded 'c'.1122 by Walter Espec. On the death of Archbishop Thurstan of York in 1140, Waldef was the first to be proposed as his successor. Rejected by Stephen because of his relationship to David, Waldef figures prominently among those opposing the election of William Fitzherbert (died 1154). In 1143, however, he abandoned his allies, house, and office to join the Cistercians at Rievaulx. In 1148 he was appointed abbot of Melrose (founded 1136), daughter house of Rievaulx. He died there on 3 August 1159, having refused, it is said, episcopal preferment. 
Waldef's burial at Melrose was followed by miracles, a popular cult, demonstrations of incorruption at the opening of his tomb in 1170 and 1206, and a campaign for his canonization. Jocelin of Furness's life ('Acta sanctorum', Aug, 1) is virtually the only source. It was commissioned by Patrick, tenth abbot of Melrose (1206-7), and completed by 1214. There had been an earlier, lapsed process for canonization, and an earlier, now lost, life by Everard, Waldef's companion at Kirkham and Melrose. Jocelin, who never knew Waldef, used Everard as his principal source to demonstrate the abbot's sanctity: the Bollandists later accepted Waldef's miracles and cult, but rejected his canonization (he has never been officially canonized). Jocelin's apologetic life is inevitably misleading. While Waldef associated with the great figures in the northern regular revival, he cannot be ranked with them. His spirituality was homely and his advancement was the consequence of his connections. The flight to Nostell was a fiction. David had early, strong, and continuing connections with Nostell; he was the associate of Thurstan and of Espec, who founded Kirkham and Rievaulx, and himself founded Melrose. Clearly the partner in Thurstan's policies, David had his own objectives in church and state as well, and Waldef's career is indicative here. So too, perhaps, is that of Ailred, like Waldef sent to Yorkshire, to become another apparently unexpected recruit to an Espec foundation. In life, Waldef was, according to Jocelin, an approachable and familiar spiritual father, but he was also the instrument of his stepfather's ambitions. 


@@@@@


doc= 28648


Walton, Brian (1600-1661), bishop of Chester and biblicist, was born in the district of Cleveland in the North Riding of Yorkshire, either at Hilton or the adjoining parish of Seamer or Seymour; he had at least one brother, William, who survived him. He matriculated sizar from Magdalene College, Cambridge, in 1616. Two years later, on 4 December 1618, aged eighteen, he migrated to Peterhouse, from where he graduated BA in 1620 and proceeded MA in 1623. 
Following his ordination that year Walton exercised a clerical and teaching ministry in Suffolk. Here he met his first wife, Anne Claxton (died 1640), whose family name occurs at Chedeston and Livermere. Shortly after his marriage he went to London, where some time before 1 April 1625 he became assistant to Richard Stock, the puritan rector of All Hallows, Bread Street. It is not clear what Walton's position was in the months following Stock's death in April 1626. On 1 October 1628 he was presented by the dean and chapter of St Paul's to the rectory of St Martin Orgar, Cannon Street. 
Walton was an active and controversial clerical figure during the 1630s, clashing with civic leaders as well as with his own parishioners, among whom puritanism was strong. He organized much of the campaign by London clergy to address the perceived problem of significant underpayment of tithes by many citizens, who could not then be prosecuted in the ecclesiastical courts. Following the failure of earlier efforts to achieve legislative redress, in 1634 Walton and others presented a petition on the subject to Charles I. By December referral to a committee for arbitration had failed to resolve the issue and the king took it up himself. Walton delivered to him a lengthy work on the history of tithes and a valuation of all the livings in the capital that he had laboriously compiled, eventually published first as 'An Abstract of a Treatise' [1641] and then in full as 'A Treatise Concerning the Payment of Tythes and Obligations in London' in Samuel Brewster's 'Collectanea ecclesiastica' (1752). Surviving manuscripts in Lambeth Palace Library written by, or annotated by, Walton demonstrate the lengths to which he went to compose this work. Since some of the documents he consulted were destroyed in the great fire of London it remains a valuable source for clerical perspectives and parish finances before the civil war, but immediate impact was limited. After an ineffectual order that meetings of arrangement should be held in each parish, towards the end of 1638 Charles gave leave to the clergy to sue individually in the ecclesiastical courts. 
Meanwhile Walton, having gained notice, was presented by the king on 15 January 1636 to the two livings of St Giles-in-the-Fields and Sandon, Essex, the former of which he swiftly resigned. He is said to have served as a royal chaplain, although there is no independent evidence for this. In 1639 he proceeded DD. On 25 May 1640 his wife died and was buried at Sandon. 
Walton's enthusiastic support for the policies of Archbishop William Laud and staunch opposition to puritanism had led in the 1630s to a protracted feud with a number of his puritan parishioners at St Martin Orgar, played out in the court of high commission. In 1641 a section of his parishioners took advantage of favourable political conditions to present a petition to parliament seeking the deprivation of their minister. In the same year they published it as 'The articles and charges prov'd in parliament against Dr Walton, minister of St Martin's Orgars in Cannon Street'. Walton was accused of being disruptive, appropriating to his own use church income intended for other purposes, maliciously seeking to excommunicate parishioners, and refusing to preach on Sunday afternoons or allow members of the parish to hire a preacher. In response he claimed that a malicious minority had instigated the petition, and most of these had been persuaded or pressured into signing up to the charges. He depicted his opponents as unrepresentative of the general opinion in the parish, of lowly position, and pursuing a hidden agenda, but whatever the motives of the parishioners many were of considerable standing and wealth: five had served on the vestry during the 1630s and two were among the wealthiest in the parish. 
In January 1642 the House of Commons referred the petition to committee and the following December Walton was summoned as a delinquent. By 20 June 1643 he had been sequestrated from his benefices. At some point he went to the royalist headquarters at Oxford, where he was appointed to wait on the duke of York and where, in 1645, he was incorporated DD. Following the surrender of the city in June 1646, on 17 October he petitioned to compound on the Oxford articles for the 'remainder of his estate, his library and other goods to the value of $1,000 having been sold' ('DNB'). This was granted on 7 January 1647, and he was fined a tenth of his estate, some $35 10's'., but by July he was in trouble for encouraging his former parishioners at Sandon not to pay tithes to the minister who had replaced him. On 27 September the committee for plundered ministers ordered that he be sent for in custody; according to John Walker he suffered at the hands of the soldiers at Sandon. Subsequently he moved to London, where he lodged with the ejected rector of St Giles Cripplegate, William Fuller (1579/80-1659), who had also been in the royalist garrison at Oxford. Some time before 28 October 1657, when his son Bryan was baptized, Walton married Fuller's daughter Jane. 
In Oxford oriental studies had been flourishing at least since the time of Laud's ascendancy. Here Walton had taken the opportunity of enforced leisure to acquire some knowledge of the ancient biblical languages, and had developed the project of producing a polyglot 'Bible'. Three such Bibles had been produced at Alcala, Antwerp, and Paris between 1500 and 1650, all massive works compiled over some time by consortia of scholars at considerable expense. Walton acknowledged that the prohibitive cost of the Paris version, published a few years earlier, had resulted in very poor sales, but argued that the advanced state of oriental learning in England rendered an improved edition possible within the terms of his scheme. 
On 11 July 1652 the council of state passed a resolution to inform Walton that they found the project worthy, but thought it more suitable for the consideration of parliament. He possessed no influence with the regime and it is possible that John Milton was responsible for the positive reception of a work already being spoken of with great expectation. The council lent Walton books which had come into its possession to facilitate his work, but neither it nor the protectorate government gave the editor any pecuniary support beyond allowing him to import paper duty free. However, on a work the size of the polyglot 'Bible', this represented a considerable financial saving. Walton thanked Oliver Cromwell in the preface of early editions, but after the Restoration a reprinted preface was substituted alluding to an endeavour on Cromwell's part to suppress the work unless it was dedicated to him and asserting, on the other hand, that the king, consulted in exile, had expressed himself willing to bear its costs were it not for his banishment. 
Walton's project received the approbation of Archbishop James Ussher and the distinguished parliamentarian, jurist, and oriental scholar John Selden. The services of many eminent scholars at both universities were retained. Most of those who made their services available were royalists, though a few had conformed to the change of regime. Expertise, rather than political or religious allegiance, was the key criterion for involvement. 'A Brief Description of an Edition of the Bible' (1653) and 'Propositions Concerning the Printing of the Bible' (1653) contained a number of errors and the quality of printing was poor. Critics, including Arnold Boate, were quick to express their criticisms. Walton, however, promised that these defects would be remedied. A committee of reputable persons was formed to receive the subscriptions that were solicited in the prospectus, with the promise of a complete copy of the work for every $10 subscribed. A strategic campaign to encourage subscribers was highly successful, bringing in, from abroad as well as at home, some $8000 in just a few months. Colleges of both universities made sacrifices to support the work. This enabled Walton to commission the founding of new types to significantly improve the print quality of the publication. 
The printing of the work began in 1653, two presses being kept employed, and between 1654 and 1657 all six volumes appeared. Volumes 1-4 contained the 'Old Testament' and 'Apocrypha', volume 5 the 'New Testament', and volume 6 various critical appendices. Nine languages are represented in the work, although no single book of the 'Bible' appears in more than eight versions. The correcting committee consisted of David Stokes, Abraham Wheelocke, Herbert Thorndike, Edward Pococke, Thomas Greaves, John Vicars, and Thomas Smith; on the death of Wheelocke in 1653 Thomas Hyde was substituted for him. Much of the work was done by Edmund Castell, whose 'Heptaglot Lexicon' afterwards formed a valuable supplement to the polyglot 'Bible'. Castell had a fractious relationship with Walton and later complained that his services had been inadequately recognized. Many other scholars contributed, but Walton claimed responsibility for the whole, and provided it with prolegomena giving a critical history of the texts and some account of the languages that they represented. The prolegomena were reprinted in Germany in 1777, and England in 1828, testament to the lasting importance of Walton's scholarly expositions. Walton also published in 1655 a brief 'Introductio in lectionem linguarum orientalium', containing the alphabets and grammatical paradigms of all the languages printed in the polyglot 'Bible' as well as of some others. Intended as an advertisement, it also provided those interested in studying the polyglot 'Bible' with the necessary apparatus to develop the required linguistic skills. The work demonstrates the breadth of Walton's knowledge of ancient languages. 
The polyglot 'Bible' was regarded at the time of its appearance as a monument to the intellectual capacity of an English nation previously eclipsed by some of its European brethren. It was also a successful commercial speculation. Though not the first book printed by subscription in England it was one of the earliest and most ambitious. The work commanded a high price on the continent; in a letter to John Buxtorf the younger, at Basel, Walton puts the price at $50. In the latter half of the seventeenth century secondhand copies in England invariably fetched in excess of $10. The London polyglot 'Bible' often constituted the single most expensive item in the libraries of scholars and gentlemen. 
The polyglot 'Bible' was put on the 'Index librorum prohibitorum' at Rome, and in England was attacked by John Owen in 'Of the Divine Original of Scripture'. He rejected a number of academic positions postulated by Walton in the prolegomena to the polyglot 'Bible', but his chief fear was that the publication would provide ammunition to those who wished to undermine the status of scripture. Walton responded immediately in a work called 'The Considerator Considered' (1659), which never mentioned Owen by name, but dismissed his arguments out of hand and defended the validity and necessity of responsible biblical scholarship. 
In 1657 Walton was consulted by members of the grand committee of religion appointed to consider the desirability of a revision of the English 'Bible'. In 1658 Walton contributed to a work by the Laudian propagandist Thomas Pierce, ''Heauton timoroumenos', or, The Self-Revenger Exemplified', which sought to claim that Archbishop James Ussher had abandoned Calvinism and embraced the Arminian creed shortly before his death. Walton testified to conversations he had held with the primate in which Ussher had espoused such beliefs. However, Ussher's former chaplain, Nicholas Bernard, and others rejected the claims, and since Ussher was ever willing to mediate between protestant factions, the likelihood that he abandoned a lifelong commitment to Calvinism is remote. 
At the Restoration, Walton was reinstated in his benefices and made chaplain-in-ordinary to the king. On 14 August 1660 he received the prebend of Wenlakesbarn in St Paul's Cathedral. Later that year he was made bishop of Chester and was consecrated in Westminster Abbey on 2 December. In March 1661 he became a member of the Savoy conference. He also petitioned for and received other livings to hold 'in commendam' with his bishopric. He visited his diocese in September 1661 and was well received, but after returning to London he died in his house in Aldersgate Street on 29 November. On 5 December he was buried at St Paul's, following a public funeral. In his will, dated 2 August 1658, he had declared his firm adherence to the liturgy of the Church of England, 'as itt was constituted before this Rebellion of the Puritanes'. He was, he declared, 'in Communion with the Catholique Church of Christ, both for doctrine, discipline, government and publique worshipp, rejecting as schismaticks, heretiques, and sacralegious persons marked in these latter ages under the vizerr of Protestants and Reformers'. Since presbyterians, Independents, and sectaries had 'broken the Communion of the Church, no fellowshipp in worshipp or discipline cann bee lawfully maintained with them' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/306, sig. 207). The principal portion of his estate was divided between his son Bryan and wife, Jane, the former receiving $500, the latter $1000. He left a copy of the great 'Bible', in imperial paper, to Bryan to pass on through the family. Twenty clergymen who 'have suffered in these tymes for theire loyaltie and constancy in the Truth' (ibid.) were each to receive $5. In 1683 Walton's library was auctioned by the London bookseller Samuel Carr. The sale comprised 1840 lots. Latin books included bibles, patristic publications, and works on early church history. There were fifty-three manuscripts, including Hebrew, Arabic, Persian, and Syriac texts. English works included a large number of pamphlets from the civil war and Commonwealth times. 
The London polyglot 'Bible' represented the apogee of Renaissance biblical productions. The work was highly regarded in Europe in intellectual theological circles throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Walton's pivotal role in its production was recognized and praised by his contemporaries, while his learned prolegomena to the work drew compliments into the nineteenth century. The 'Dictionary of National Biography' regarded him as having only a tolerable knowledge of biblical and oriental languages. It would be more accurate to describe him as a considerable scholar wise enough to draw on the very considerable expertise of his contemporaries. 


@@@@@


doc= 28649


Walton, Christopher (1809-1877), collector of theosophical works, was born in June 1809 at Worsley, Lancashire, the son of John Walton ('c'.1781-1844) and his wife, Hannah (died 1855). He was educated by the Revd Jonathan Crowther (1794-1856), and while at school joined the Methodist Society at Frodsham in March 1823. His father and grandfather were fervent supporters of Methodism. After serving an apprenticeship in a Manchester warehouse Walton spent some time on the continent. In July 1829, while in Paris, he advertised English lessons after the Hamiltonian system ['see 'Hamilton, James (1769-1829)]. He came to London in 1830, and to the alarm of his father, because 'the Rent & Expenses in London are so terrible' (DWL, MS 189.6 (23) J. W., 12 Oct 1831), began business first as a silk-mercer and then as a goldsmith on Ludgate Hill, a business in which he remained until 1875. He made a fortune as a jeweller and goldsmith, enabling him to pursue his interest in theosophy. He became particularly interested in the mystical works of William Law. 
Walton was introduced to the writings of Law by Wesley's 'Extracts from the Rev. Mr Law's Later Works' (1768), and through Law he discovered the early seventeenth-century Silesian mystic Jakob Boehme. As a result he became an indefatigable collector of the works of Law and Boehme. Walton devoted 'time, means, and untiring energy to the collection, elucidation, and, as far as possible, the geometrical demonstration of the system' contained in Boehme's writings ('Christian Life', 535), believing he had discovered the key to Boehme in the diagrams of Dionysius Andrew Freher. About 1845 he advertised for an assistant to help prepare a biography of Law, for which he acquired a great collection of antiquarian works in addition to his existing library. He began to print an 'Outline of the Qualifications... for the Biography of... Law' in November 1847, finally completing it at Christmas 1853, but he circulated copies of the incomplete text before it was finished. To the completed work he added 'To the Christianity, the philosophy, the erudition, science and noble intelligence of the age. Notes and materials for... biography of... Law. Comprising an elucidation of... the writings of... Bohme, and of his great commentator... Freher; with a notice of the mystical divinity... of all ages of the world' (1854). The 700-page work is disorderly beyond description, 'a chaotic mixture of the relevant and the irrelevant' (Hobhouse, 196), yet it contains much bibliographical and biographical information of value. He also printed 'Introduction to Theosophy, or, The Science of the 'Mystery of Christ'' (1854), projected to be completed in 30 volumes, but only fragmentary pieces by Law gathered by Walton were issued in a second volume. Walton donated copies to every major public library in the world. Some other anonymous works relating to theosophy were probably written at Walton's suggestion and printed at his expense. He kept his 'Theosophian Library' at 8 Ludgate Hill, and made it freely available to those who shared his interests. In August 1876, at the suggestion of his friend Keningale Cook, Walton offered the books he had collected to Dr Williams's Library, stipulating that they should be kept apart as the 'Walton Theosophical Library', and always be available to those interested in the subject. His manuscripts relating to Law were included in the gift. Alexander Gordon was paid $20 to catalogue the books. The Walton collection now forms the best collection of books on seventeenth- and eighteenth-century mysticism in Britain. 
Walton's interest in Law, Boehme, and Freher was religious, and, though he could criticize Wesley, his lifelong attachment to Methodism was the expression of a deep personal conviction. On his settlement in London in 1830 he joined the City Road Chapel. From 1839 he was one of the secretaries to the Strangers' Friend Society, and about 1843 he wrote its history. The new Methodist chapel built at Benfleet, Essex, in 1877 was a gift of Walton. He married twice. With his first wife, Anna Maria Pickford, whom he had married on 1 January 1841, he had two sons and three daughters; she died on 29 December 1863 after a lengthy illness. On 2 October 1876 he married Sarah Ann Tyler; they had one daughter. 
Walton died on 11 October 1877 at 16 Cambridge Terrace, Southend-on-Sea, Essex, and was buried in Highgate cemetery on 15 October. His second wife survived him. Alexander Gordon, a personal acquaintance, described him as physically 'of large build and in character sententious but kindly, and absolutely destitute of humour' ('DNB'). From family correspondence it is clear that he quarrelled bitterly with some of the closest members of his family. A demanding husband and parent, he spent long periods estranged from his elder son, John, who in 1868 had him committed to Newgate for libel. They were eventually reconciled, but Walton's sister and his daughter Mary Elizabeth also began actions against him for libel. On the death of his son Christopher he adopted a boy (said to be his natural son), to whom he gave his own name. 


@@@@@


doc= 28650


Walton, Elijah (1832-1880), landscape painter, was born on 22 November 1832 in Birmingham, the son of Elijah Samuel Walton and his wife, Mary Ann Lees. Walton's father was a tailor and his mother a straw bonnet maker, and money was scarce. However, he showed an early talent for art, and, aided most probably by a local benefactress, he studied at the School of Art in Birmingham. In 1851 he exhibited his first picture, a study of fruit, at the Royal Academy, and in July 1855 he became a student at the Royal Academy Schools. Although he exhibited genre paintings at the academy until 1859, he became interested in mountain scenery through copying pictures. About 1856 he went to Australia, where his elder brother had settled at Geelong, and he exhibited six works at the Mechanics' Institute there in 1857. 
On 13 July 1860 Walton married Mary, the daughter of John Neale; their honeymoon was spent in Switzerland and Egypt, where Mary died. Walton travelled and painted in the Middle East until returning to London in spring 1862. Later in 1862 William Mathews, of Edgbaston, the founder of the Alpine Club, offered Walton a commission to travel to the Tarentaise Alps, and for the next five years he journeyed and painted in the Alps or in Egypt. In 1864 he exhibited at the Royal Academy 'The Pyramids' and in 1865 'Tombs of the Sultans Near Cairo -- Sunset', a huge oil painting now at the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge. Walton also exhibited at the British Institution and the Suffolk Street Galleries. The Victoria and Albert Museum has a collection of his watercolours of the Middle East, and the British Museum has six watercolours of mountain views. In some of these alpine watercolours there is a sharpness of outline delineating mountain peaks combined with a brilliancy of colour which has great vitality and freshness. 
On 20 June 1867 Walton married Fanny Heyes Phipson, the daughter of John Phipson, a manufacturer. Walton's sketching tours became less frequent, although he visited Norway (with T. G. Bonney) in 1869, and continued to travel to the Alps. In 1870 he visited Greece. Like many Victorian artists, he became passionately interested in the nature he painted and how it was formed. He became a fellow of the Geological Society in March 1867 and of the Royal Historical Society in November 1872. In 1874 Walton exhibited at the Burlington Gallery, Piccadilly, London. He wrote and illustrated three books: 'The Camel: its Anatomy, Proportion and Paces' (1865), 'Clouds: their Forms and Combinations' (1868), and 'Peaks in Pen and Pencil for Students of Alpine Scenery' (1872). The thoroughness of Walton's observation of the camel could, perhaps, compare with George Stubbs's on the horse in the previous century; his line drawings of the camel are in the Victoria and Albert Museum and Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery. He also illustrated seven books by his friend T. G. Bonney, including 'The Peaks and Valleys of the Alps' (1867), 'The Coast of Norway' (1871), and 'Welsh Scenery' (1875). 
From 1856 to 1865 Walton lived at various addresses in London, and after his second marriage he lived at Staines and then Bromsgrove. He was said to have 'affected peculiar dress and ways, wearing his hair in little curls all over his head and a tunic of black velvet, with the sleeves slashed at the shoulders with some very bright colour' (Howard, 20). Fanny died on 7 December 1872 and Elijah Walton's health declined; he died at his home, Beacon Farm, Lickey, Bromsgrove, on 25 August 1880, leaving three sons. He was buried at Bromsgrove cemetery. Further collections of his watercolours are at Smith Art Gallery, Stirling, the Alpine Club, London, the Birmingham Museums and Art Gallery, and the Frenchay Museum, Bristol. 


@@@@@


doc= 28651


Walton, Sir George (1664/5-1739), naval officer, was born into a family from Little Burstead, Essex, although details of his parentage and early life are unknown. He was commissioned lieutenant on 22 February 1690 and assigned to the 'Anne' (Captain John Tyrell). In May the ship was dismasted in the battle of Beachy Head. Unable to sail under a jury rig she was run ashore to the west of Rye, and burnt to the waterline to prevent her capture. Following Tyrell to his new command, Walton moved to the 'Ossory', in which he saw action at the battle of Barfleur. In 1693 he became first lieutenant of the 'Devonshire' (Captain Henry Haughton), serving in the channel, and in 1696 he moved to the 'Restoration' (Captain Thomas Fowlis) with the main fleet. On 19 January 1697 he was promoted captain and ordered to command the 'Seaford' (24 guns). He was in command of her when the French captured and burnt the vessel off the Isles of Scilly. After returning to England he was assigned to the 'Seahorse', which he commanded for the following two years, seeing service in the North Sea and off the coast of Holland, before joining Vice-Admiral Matthew Aylmer in the Mediterranean in 1699. For ten months between 1701 and 1702 he commanded the 'Carcass'; he went in her to the West Indies, with the squadron under Vice-Admiral John Benbow, by whom, in March 1702, he was appointed to the 'Ruby' (48 guns), one of the squadron with Benbow in the actions with Admiral Jean-Baptiste Du Casse on 19-24 August 1702 off Cape Santa Marta on the coast of what was later Colombia. Of all those engaged Walton was the only captain whose conduct was above reproach; the 'Ruby' closely supported the flag until disabled and ordered to make her way to Port Royal, Jamaica, with a prize. In June 1703 Walton was moved to the 'Canterbury' by Vice-Admiral John Graydon with whom he returned to England in the following October. Continuing in the 'Canterbury' for a total of six years and nine months, he was employed in the Mediterranean during 1705 and 1706. In 1707 he accompanied Sir Thomas Hardy in the voyage to Lisbon; at the subsequent court martial Walton gave evidence strongly in favour of Hardy, whose conduct was called in question. In September 1710 he took command of the 'Montagu', one of the fleet sent to attack Quebec under Sir Hovenden Walker; Walton captured two prizes during the passage. On his return in December 1712 he was ordered to act as commander-in-chief at Portsmouth. 
Early in January 1718 he was appointed to the 'Defiance', and shortly afterwards he moved to the 'Canterbury'; in her he went out to the Mediterranean with Sir George Byng (afterwards Viscount Torrington), and had a singular share in the action off Cape Passaro on 31 July 1718, having been sent in command of a detached five-ship squadron in pursuit of a division of the Spanish fleet. Walton took six ships and destroyed a further six in the Strait of Messina. His letter of 5 August informing Byng of his success was, according to 'Gentleman's Magazine', 'remarkable for naval Eloquence': 'Sir, we have taken and destroyed all the Spanish ships which were upon the coast: the number as per margin' ('GM', 606). Walton's laconic style was the source of some humour. Thomas Corbett pronounced him fitter to achieve a 'gallant action' than to describe one, although in fact the extract from 'Gentleman's Magazine' forms only the final section of Walton's letter. 
In 1720 Walton was appointed to the guardship 'Nassau' at Sheerness and on 15 January 1721 he was knighted for his exploits off the coast of Sicily in 1718. On 16 February 1723 he was promoted rear-admiral of the blue, and in 1726 he was second in command of the fleet in the Baltic under Sir Charles Wager, wearing his flag in the 'Cumberland'. Recalled from that service, he was again under Wager off Cadiz and Gibraltar in late 1726. In April 1727 he returned to the Baltic approaches with his flag in the 'Captain', second in command to Admiral Sir John Norris, and in the following year he was promoted vice-admiral of the white. In 1729 he was again with Wager in the channel and in the Mediterranean, flying his flag in the 'Princess Amelia'. Commander-in-chief at Spithead in 1731, and vice-admiral of the red in January 1732, he was promoted admiral of the blue on 26 February 1734. In 1734-5 he was commander-in-chief at the Nore, with his flag in the 'Revenge' and then the 'Newark'. In 1736 Walton retired on a pension of $600 a year. He died, apparently unmarried, on 21 November 1739, aged seventy-four, and was buried at the parish church of St Mary the Virgin in Little Burstead, Essex, where his ancestors were also interred. Among the total of $9600 he left in specific legacies, Walton gave $3000 to his niece, Pooley Onslow, wife of Richard Onslow (who was his executor and to whom he also left the residue of his estate); $2000 to their son; $2000 to Charles Duran, the son of his natural daughter, Sarah, the wife of Jonas Duran, a Middlesex pewterer; and $500 to his god-daughter, Anne, the youngest daughter of Sir John Tyrell, bt. 


@@@@@


doc= 28652


Izaak Walton (1651-1719), who became a Church of England clergyman, born in Clerkenwell on 7 September 1651. Later that year Walton left London briefly for the one adventure of his life -- to fetch the garter jewel, the 'lesser George' lost at the battle of Worcester (3 September), and deliver it to Colonel Thomas Blagge, imprisoned in the City of London. The Waltons are likely to have lived in Clerkenwell until about 1655. 


@@@@@


doc= 28653


Walton, Izaak (1593-1683), author and biographer, was born in September 1593 and baptized on 21 September at St Mary's Church, Stafford, the only surviving son of Gervase Walton (died 1597) of Yoxall, Staffordshire, and his wife, Anne ('c'.1554-1623), probably a daughter of Peter Griffin and his wife, Anne, 'nee' Leigh. His father was a tippler (he kept an inn but provided neither meals nor rooms) and had moved to Stafford in 1591 after at least fifteen years of marriage. Izaak's elder brother Ambrose was buried in the town on 3 March 1596; there may have been other siblings, but only Izaak and his sister Anne survived to adulthood. Their father died on 11 February 1597, and on 8 August 1598 their mother married Humphrey Burne, baker and inn-holder. She continued to live in Stafford until her death, and was buried at St Mary's on 23 May 1623. Burne was buried on 16 March 1639. 
Izaak Walton was educated at the Edward VI Grammar School, Stafford, then situated in St Bertelin's Church at the west end of St Mary's parish and likely to have been run by a single schoolmaster. This was all the formal education he received: once he became known as an author, friendly and unfriendly critics alike were inclined to note that he was rather literate than learned. It is true that, as a non-university figure who spent much of his adult life with poets and divines, he was vulnerable to patronizing judgements. But while books he is known to have owned later in life are almost all written in English, they demonstrate breadth and some intellectual curiosity, as well as a bias towards sacramentalist devotional literature. Anthony Wood, for example, remarked of his biographies that they were 'well done, considering the education of the author' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.698), in a very similar spirit to the one in which Leslie Stephen, over two centuries later, was to call him a 'worthy tradesman' (Beeching, 60). 
About 1608, his fifteenth year, Walton left school and followed his sister Anne's new husband, Thomas Grinsell, a well-to-do linen draper, to the parish of St Dunstan-in-the-West, London, and in 1611 became his apprentice. In London, some time between 1608 and 1613, he discovered poets and poetry. Curiosity, and perhaps the 'genius for friendship' (Keynes, 614) which served him so well throughout his life, helped Walton to find his way in his late teens into a literary circle which included Ben Jonson (he later wrote an uncharacteristically concise -- not to say sharp -- character sketch of Jonson, in 1680, in a letter to John Aubrey, intended for the latter's 'Brief Lives'). His initial introduction may have been through Samuel Page, vicar of St Nicholas, Deptford, who contributed prefatory verses to Thomas Coryat's 'Crudities' (1611), a volume which included work by such writers as Michael Drayton, John Donne, and Thomas Campion. In 1613 Page brought out his book 'The Loves of Amos and Laura': printed by Grinsell's neighbour Richard Hawkins, the volume is dedicated to the twenty-year-old 'Iz[aak] Wa[lton]'. On 12 November 1618 Walton, recommended by Grinsell, became a freeman of the Ironmongers' Company, the guild under which his own trade fell. He was a linen draper and sempster (that is, he sold cloth and made it up into garments, probably including hats), and by then he owned 'half a shop' in Chancery Lane. His rise to prominence in the guild was marked in November 1629, when he was made a 'batchelor in foins': the honour conferred was signified by an official fur-trimmed costume. 
In spring 1624 John Donne became vicar of Walton's parish of St Dunstan-in-the-West. Walton was impressed by Donne, describing himself as his 'convert', and his friendship was returned. Through Donne, Walton met and grew friendly with a number of his circle, including Sir Henry Wotton and the poet Henry King, later bishop of Chichester. On 27 December 1626 Walton married Rachel, daughter of William Floud and his wife, Susannah Cranmer, niece of Archbishop Thomas Cranmer; Walton had the following verse inscribed on his marriage-chest: '
We once were two, we two made one 

We no more two, through life bee one. 
('Selected Writings of Izaak Walton', ed. J. Martin, 1997, 158)' Their first child, Izaak, was born on 19 December 1627; a second son, John, followed on 23 July 1629. John died some time that year, the first of the infant deaths which punctuated his parents' marriage: in 1631 Thomas, born on 21 January, died at six weeks on 6 March; and three-year-old Izaak was dead too by 28 March. Henry, born on 12 October 1632, lived only five days; a namesake born on 21 March 1634 lived only until 4 December 1634; and their last son, William, died in August 1637. A daughter, Anne (1640-1642), was born on 10 July 1640, but Rachel herself then died on 22 August. 
By the end of March 1631 John Donne had also died. Walton's later account in his 'Life of Donne' (1640) strongly implies that he was present for Donne's last sermon on 25 February 1631; if so, then Donne 'preach[ed]... mortality by a decayed body and dying face' ('Lives', ed. Saintsbury, 75) to a father whose three children were dead or dying. Perhaps Walton was at Donne's deathbed, three days after the death of small Izaak, witnessing at first hand the extraordinary self-possession of Donne's last performance all the way to his final breath when he 'closed his own eyes; and then disposed his hands and body into such a posture as required not the least alteration by those that came to shroud him' (ibid., 82). Walton's presence is suggested, if rather tentatively, in Henry King's letter to Walton, printed with the revisions of the 'Life of Donne' after 1670 and first published with the 'Life of Hooker' of 1665. Walton's intimacy with Donne is definitely, though problematically, implied in his involvement with the posthumous sorting and publication of Donne's work. The issue was complicated by growing difficulties between Donne's son John and his initial literary executor, Henry King, over who had authority to publish Donne's texts; but in the publications of the 1630s the employment of Walton's friend John Marriot as publisher is a reasonably stable indication of Walton's closeness to the early projects. In 'Poems, by JD' (1633), one of the appended elegies, rough but attractive, is by Walton himself; in the 1635 edition further verses by Walton appear to accompany an engraving of Donne by William Marshall, and look towards the publication of the sermons. After 1637 the right of John Marriot and his son Richard to the copyrights of Donne's works was disputed by Donne the younger. Since Walton continued to use the Marriots as publishers for his own works it may be assumed that he on the whole distanced himself from the editorial claims of Donne's son, siding instead with King and the Marriots. 
Walton was made junior warden of the yeomanry in 1637, and in 1638 was promoted to senior warden, an administrative post: he collected fines and advised members of coming meetings. That year also saw the publication of his complimentary verses before Lewis Roberts's 'Merchants Mappe of Commerce'. In February 1640 Walton became verger at St Dunstan-in-the-West. The final year of the decade also saw the preparation and publication of Walton's first, and perhaps most considerable, biography: that of Donne. It initially appeared as a preface to Donne's 'LXXX Sermons' (1640), though it was revised and expanded three times more in Walton's lifetime, in 1658, 1670, and 1675. Marriot was the printer; but some inconclusive evidence suggests that Walton may have tried to deal with both sides of the now hopelessly fractured editorial team: an ambiguous allusion in one of King's letters refers to Walton as the 'Messenger' who had 'lost both to me and your self' the collected manuscripts to Donne's son ('Lives', ed. Saintsbury, 15). Walton's own version, given in his introduction, of his involvement in the production of the 1640 volume was that he had researched a life projected by Sir Henry Wotton, but that Wotton's death and the spectre of a volume 'publisht without the Authors Life' (Walton, 'Life and Death of Dr Donne', A3) had galvanized Walton, albeit unworthily, into authorship. 
Whatever the accuracy of this modest account of its inception (Wotton's death, in December 1639, would have left little time for Walton to write his 'Life of Donne' from scratch), the result was remarkable. As a layman, Walton had a real problem of authorial voice in constructing a preface to a clerical biography, where an exemplary intention would have gained firepower from clerical authorship. Whence came Walton's power to edify? Walton adopted a modest position, stressing the condescension involved in Donne's intimacy with him (a condescension implicit also to a lesser degree on the part of other clerical members of his coterie) and promising a life which was necessarily honest in lacking 'skill to deceive' ('Lives', ed. Saintsbury, 21). The emphasis on author-subject intimacy not only formed a pattern for Walton's later biographies, but also influenced the modern stress on particularity and intimacy in the genre. Walton also made so extensive a use of Donne's own written work that it is hardly an exaggeration to describe the 'Life' as a patchwork sewn almost entirely from Donne's words, artfully juxtaposed and paraphrased to highlight the side of Donne most apparent after his ordination in 1615. This selectivity reflected both the context of religious controversy in which the 1640 volume was conceived and Walton's sense of the clerical Donne's exemplary importance; the slant this gave to his portrait took insufficient account of his early career and was unfair to Donne's secular interests. Yet the Donne that Walton paints is both passionate and changeable, figured in the prominent use of St Augustine in its typology; the portrait is of a performer in pulpit and deathbed, given to mood swings which Walton's creative editing of his letters rather deepens than smoothes. The 'Character' with which Walton concludes the 'Life' is perhaps his finest piece of writing; and made finer in its sensitive counterpoint with sources in Donne's own work. 
Walton's sympathy for the Laudian ecclesiastical programme was translated from 1642 into support for the king; he proved an unwavering royalist. He was one of several linen drapers, and several parishioners of St Dunstan-in-the-West, who signed the London petitions for peace of 14 and 22 December 1642. Since his last child, Anne, had died on 11 May 1642, his house in Chancery Lane was empty and he probably left in 1643, though he may not at this point have left London altogether. Wood thinks he spent the 1640s and 1650s travelling, staying with 'eminent Clergymen' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.264-5), but Walton's own attestation in his 'Life of Sanderson' (1678) is that he was at least part of the time in London, and he says that he was there for Laud's execution in January 1645. Other evidence bears this out. Walton is likely to have written the preface for Francis Quarles's 'Shepheards Oracles' (1646), signed by John Marriot on 9 November 1645 and issued by the Marriots from their shop in St Dunstan's churchyard. It was at St James's, Clerkenwell, that on 23 April 1647 Walton married, second, Anne (1610-1662), daughter of Thomas Ken (died 1651), an attorney of Furnivall's Inn, London, and half-sister of Thomas Ken (1637-1711), who lived with the couple after Thomas senior's death. Izaak and Anne had three children: Anne, born on 11 March 1648; Izaak, born on 10 February 1650, who died in infancy; and another 
Walton's complimentary verses prefaced another Marriot publication, Edward Sparke's 'Scintillula altaris', in 1652, and, in spite of the handicap which his political sympathies might have been expected to impose upon his publications, his writing career was beginning, in his sixties, to take off. In 1651 the second of his biographies, 'The Life of Sir Henry Wotton', appeared, again as a preface, this time to 'Reliquiae Wottonianae' (though the entry of the 'Reliquiae' in the Stationers' register in 1648 suggests that it was written some years earlier). This is a genial memorial which stresses their shared love for Donne and for angling; more secular in its subject than any of Walton's other biographies, it nevertheless uses Wotton's ordination as deacon (on becoming provost of Eton College) as a conversion point not unlike Donne's ordination, and depicts an orderly life whose 'Circumference' was 'closed up' by a serene and exemplary death ('Lives', ed. Saintsbury, 150-51). Four more editions of his 'Life of Sir Henry Wotton' appeared in Walton's lifetime: in 1654, 1670, 1672, and 1675; as was Walton's invariable practice, it too was considerably expanded and revised in the process of reissue. 
Walton's lives of Wotton and of Donne were rather differently refracted in his third and most enduring (though not, in his lifetime, his most esteemed) work: 'The Compleat Angler' (1653). The fishing manual, which has gone through more than 400 editions since its publication in that difficult year, is suggestively but not sufficiently characterized by its epigraph from 'I Thessalonians': 'Study to be quiet.' Like the pastoral tradition of which it was a part, Walton's 'Angler' reflected on a fractured world by celebrating (and recommending) an order characterized as both 'natural' and vulnerable. In a manner reminiscent of other poets of the Commonwealth, such as Robert Herrick in his 'Hesperides' (1648) or Andrew Marvell in his 'Upon Appleton House' of the early 1650s, the disorder of the present times received muted comment in the work's scenes of harmony. Similarly, Donne's love of church music was to receive, in Walton's revised 'Life of Donne' in 1658, the gloss (dated 1656) 'but now, O Lord, how is that place become desolate'; and Wotton's 'surplice', in 1651 a forbidden item, was in Walton's 'Life of Wotton' offered as a potent sign of holy employments. The abolition in 1649 of regular Wednesday fast-days, on which one might eat exclusively fish and 'sallets', is deplored in the 'Angler' as bad for the health both of soul and body (though they were replaced by frequent occasional fast-days). Walton used an abundance of sources, ancient and modern, for the 'facts' of fish and fishing, from Pliny and Gesner to Topsel and Bacon; and he quoted from George Herbert, Donne, and Michael Drayton, who all died in the early 1630s but might have been expected to support his political views, and from Herbert's imitator Christopher Harvey, still very much alive, who did. 

'The Compleat Angler' was conceived as dialogue between men travelling on foot who each represented a different recreation. In the first edition there were two, Piscator (fisherman) and Viator (traveller); in the second and much expanded edition of 1655 the two had become three: Viator was now Venator (hunter), and Auceps (falconer) was added. By this means the art of fishing was introduced, defended, and expounded: its strong precedent in the fishermen apostles of the 'New Testament' was established, the detail of baiting for, catching, and cooking different kinds of fish was catalogued, and the whole was accompanied by aphorisms which would show the reader what it might mean to live well. Walton's conservative message was not lost on one reader, Richard Franck, who in his own book 'Northern Memoirs' (1694) attacked Walton for historical and technical inaccuracy. Franck fished for Scottish salmon, not Staffordshire trout, and had served under Cromwell, so it is hardly surprising that in their only meeting Walton 'huffed away' (Franck, 1821, 10.175). Walton revised the 'Compleat Angler' four times in his lifetime: in 1655, 1661 (with a second issue in 1664), 1668, and 1676. Its last edition was so much expanded from the first as to constitute almost a different text. 
Alongside his larger projects, Walton also wrote smaller pieces. From this period comes his manuscript commemorative couplet for the puritan conformist preacher Richard Sibbes, written in the 1650 edition of the latter's 'Returning Backslider', and his preface for 'Heroe of Lorenzo' (1652), Sir John Skeffington's translation of Baltasar Gracian y Morales's exemplary study of aristocratic (and monarchical) virtue. As well as this, Walton's 'Life of Donne' (1658) was published alone (perhaps only because he no longer had access to the copyrights of the sermons) and was revised accordingly. At the same time he began to take notes for a projected life of Richard Hooker at the back of his copy of Eusebius. 
Walton celebrated the Restoration (and his own return to London) with a celebratory eclogue, 'Daman and Dorus', a conventional pastoral dialogue in praise of Charles II, printed in Alexander Brome's 'Songs and Other Poems' (1661). In the same year he provided verses for Christopher Harvey's 'The Synagogue' and joined, belatedly, the flurry of elegists for the conservative William Cartwright (died 1643). Much later, in 1676, he wrote dedicatory verses for Cartwright's nephew Jeremiah Rich, promoter of Cartwright's shorthand system. 
Walton received a Restoration reward of his own, indirectly, through the translation of his friend George Morley, then bishop of Worcester, to the see of Winchester in 1661. Walton seems to have had some connection (how much is not clear) with several former members of the Great Tew circle, and most intimately with Morley, who made Walton his steward. Walton accordingly moved with Morley. His wife, Anne, died in Worcester on 17 April 1662; she was buried in Worcester Cathedral and was touchingly commemorated by her husband ('Selected Writings of Izaak Walton', ed. J. Martin, 1997, 163-4). In 1665 their daughter, Anne, married one of the cathedral prebendaries, William Hawkins, also rector of Droxford in Hampshire. The same year Thomas Ken moved to Winchester as Morley's chaplain. Morley, together with the then bishop of London, Gilbert Sheldon, was also the instigator of Walton's next project. This was his 'Life of Mr. R. Hooker', which appeared first alone in 1665, and then in 1666 as a biographical preface to Hooker's 'Works'. Morley and Sheldon more or less commissioned Walton, as a known loyalist, to provide a suitably conservative biographical gloss on Hooker's work which would undo the damage (as they saw it) done by the Restoration edition of Hooker prefaced by the moderate bishop of Exeter, John Gauden. Gauden had edited a copy of Hooker's 'Works' in 1661/2 which issued all eight books of the latter's 'Lawes of Ecclesiastical Politie': that is to say, it added books 6 and 8 (first published in 1648 by James Ussher) and book 7, which had never yet been published. These last three were unrevised and contentious texts, and book 8 put the cat firmly among the pigeons by discussing the rights of the monarch in terms which were by no means exclusively predicated on divine right. To make things worse, Gauden's prolix biography (which also, incidentally, made Hooker sound extraordinarily dreary) had made his own moderate views rather too plain. Walton's brief was to discredit Gauden's version and the provenance of the disputed Hookerian books; he was offered the lease of a house in Paternoster Row at the same time. 
Walton had an indirect connection with Hooker through his first wife. George Cranmer, Rachel Walton's maternal uncle, had been Hooker's friend, and her maternal aunt Dorothy Cranmer married Hooker's executor, John Spenser, president of Corpus Christi College, Oxford. Walton took on the task (and the lease) as offered, and wrote a biography which characterized Hooker as a figure like John the Baptist who prophesied the 'unity' of the Restoration from his vantage point in the 1590s. Walton chose not to 'engage' himself in the episcopal squabbles directly and put all his evidence about the 'doubtfull Books' into appendices signed by senior clergymen ('Lives', ed. Saintsbury, 236). The backdrop against which this was drawn was a highly biased parallel picture of the squabbles of the 1580s and 1590s, seen through a filter defined by the civil wars, and characterized by the debates on conformity between Archbishop John Whitgift and Thomas Cartwright. Notwithstanding, in writing on Hooker, whom he had never known, Walton reached for authoritative narration by making extensive use of his family connection with the Cranmers, which forced him to treat the oral information he received from them somewhat trustingly. In the circumstances this was a pity, not least for the memory of Mistress Hooker; the estate was in litigation, and the information Walton received, and famously recorded, on Joan Hooker's shrewishness was given by witnesses who had every reason for prejudice. However, it formed an essential part of another pastoral scene, where Hooker read Horace's 'Odes' while he minded the sheep in his benefice or was forced to 'rock the Cradle' of his firstborn. This, and the picture Walton drew of Hooker's obscure and peaceable round of pastoral duty while writing the 'Lawes of Ecclesiastical Politie' in his last parish of Bishopsborne, drew for the first time the 'heat-pimpled' face of the Church of England rural parson in what was to become a highly recognizable clerical mixture of personal asceticism, distrust for emotional extremes, a love of hierarchical order, and passionless masculinity. In this book one critic claims Walton 'invented Anglicanism' (Lake, 229-30); certainly it did more than any of Hooker's own works to establish Hooker as the primary representative of the 'Anglican' 'via media'. 
This commissioned biography by Walton was followed in 1670 by a 'free-will offering' ('Lives', ed. Saintsbury, 6), the 'Life of Mr George Herbert'. It appeared first as a flyer, not for an edition of Herbert's works but for a collected edition in the same year of the four lives Walton had so far written, which sufficiently indicates, perhaps, not only the extent to which Walton had become established as a biographer but also the new dignity which was being accorded to the genre. His life of Herbert again dealt with someone Walton had not known but 'only seen' (ibid., 259), but their mutual intimacy with Wotton and Donne, and Walton's readiness to 'know' his subjects through their writings, made him less troubled by the task than he had been in his life of Hooker. The 'Life of Herbert', too, is a tissue of paraphrase and quotation, more Herbert than Walton -- except that every word is deployed to insist upon the essential nobility of the priesthood (particularly the country priesthood) as a vocation, and the events are transformed and marked by edifices (the churches Herbert is narrated as restoring, for example) which underscore Walton's belief in the beauty of holiness and transform Herbert's own book of precept, 'The Country Parson', into 'factual' example, and his poetry into an untroubled version of a spiritual autobiography. 
Walton's 'Lives' -- of Donne, Wotton, Hooker, and Herbert -- was reissued in 1675 with further revisions and expansions: Donne's vision of the death of his wife, for instance, was added at this time. In 1676 Walton published his fifth and final edition of the 'Angler', under the title 'The Universal Angler'. This included a section by Charles Cotton on trout fishing which paid touching tribute to their relationship: 'he gives me leave', wrote Cotton, 'to call him Father, and I hope is not yet ashamed to own me for his adopted Son' (I. Walton, 'Universal Angler', pt 2, [x]). Walton also made some notes for a life of John Hales, another of the Great Tew circle -- not, apparently, intending to write them up himself (he was, after all, over eighty by this time) but collecting them for another writer; and he produced an anonymous piece of polemic, 'Love and Truth' (1680), which in its anxious insistence on lay obedience echoed with some precision the concerns of his life of Hooker. 
Finally, somewhat against his will, Walton was persuaded by Morley into his last considerable work, 'The Life of Dr Sanderson'. A fascinating figure, Robert Sanderson was a stern Calvinist yet an eminent casuist. He had been chaplain to Charles I, yet was also in 1627 the last preacher on predestination at Paul's Cross before the subject was proscribed, and had been invited to join the Westminster assembly (an honour he declined). He was made bishop of Lincoln at the Restoration, in the first flurry of moderate appointments; yet he found it extraordinarily difficult to come to terms with the predominantly Arminian temper of his Restoration colleagues. Walton had known Sanderson personally, and this 'Life' is the only one in which Walton appears in the narrative. However, the Sanderson presented by Walton shows no trace of Sanderson's distinguishing Calvinism; instead Walton concentrates on the preservation of ceremonies and liturgy, to which the bishop was also committed. As 'Hooker' prefigured the 'unity' of 1660, so arguably 'Sanderson', which narrated the events of the civil wars and Commonwealth, was intended as a warning against potential religious and political dissent. The most involved of the biographies, and showing some small signs of age (for instance, Walton began to get his scriptural allusions a little muddled), it nevertheless made particularly sensitive and ingenious use of its subject's prose. It appeared in 1678, the year that the exclusion crisis erupted and that Walton's son Izaak (who had matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, in 1668, graduated BA in 1672, and proceeded MA in 1676) was made domestic chaplain to the bishop of Salisbury, Seth Ward. Walton's biography supposedly prefaced works by Sanderson; but in fact the main 'work' it headed was a digest of different fragments, and the 'Life' emerged as the central point of the edition. A revised version was published in 1681 (one of Walton's last pieces of work), prefacing the 'eighth edition' of Sanderson's 'Thirty Five Sermons'. 
By this time Walton was probably living with his daughter and son-in-law in Droxford. Approaching ninety, he was still writing. His letter to John Aubrey on Ben Jonson was composed in 1680, and in 1683, the year of his death, he wrote the preface to a verse pastoral, 'Thealma and Clearchus', attributed to John Chalkhill. His will, a humane and readable document, is dated 9 August of that year, but it was on 24 October that Walton signed and sealed it with the bloodstone seal left to him by John Donne. Walton died in Winchester, on 15 December 1683, when the weather was exceptionally cold, and was buried in the cathedral's Silkstede Chapel. He was survived by his daughter, who died in 1715, and son Izaak, who after a successful clerical career in the diocese of Salisbury died unmarried in London on 29 December 1719 and was buried in Salisbury Cathedral. 
In the course of his long life (he was born, after all, before Shakespeare had really got into his stride) Walton produced a work -- 'The Compleat Angler' -- which has commanded huge popularity: it has been reprinted almost as many times as 'A Pilgrim's Progress'. Yet for biography, arguably, he performed a yet greater service. His unique combination of intimacy and edification formed a model highly influential on James Boswell and Samuel Johnson; and this makes him, perhaps, modern biography's father. Though he has been censured for his inaccuracy (and he was inaccurate) and for his bias (for which Dr Johnson's own judgement of him as a 'great panegyrist' is perhaps a fairer characterization), and though he was regarded by many as a naive and thus, in a sense, accidentally effective writer, nevertheless his skill is at last receiving the recognition it deserves. 


@@@@@


doc= 28654


Walton, James (1802/3-1883), card clothing manufacturer and innovator, was born at Stubbin, Sowerby, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, the son of Isaac Walton, a merchant. On 27 July 1830 he married Ann Kenworthy, of Millbank, Sowerby, at St John's Church, Halifax. As a young man he was in business as a cloth dresser, or friezer, and developed a new method of friezing petersham, a type of heavy woollen cloth. He then turned his attention to the manufacture of card clothing, a brush-like material consisting of wire staples set in a flexible backing which is used to cover the rollers on carding and cloth finishing machines. Employing a mechanic from January 1834 to help in his experiments, Walton first produced a synthetic backing for his card clothing which combined india rubber with a woven fabric. Patented in March 1834, it was to prove the effective substitute for leather for which the card-making trade had long been searching. Walton's next achievement was to build an improved card-setting machine, patented in 1838, which set 300 teeth per minute, five times the rate of earlier machines. His task had been considerably eased by the adoption of his rubberized material, which proved much easier than leather to work in a machine. The machine was first shown in public at an industrial exhibition organized by the Sowerby Bridge Mechanics' Institute, of which Walton was chairman, in 1839. It revolutionized the trade, quickly replacing thousands of hand-setters previously employed around Halifax. 
In order to profit from his innovations, Walton left Yorkshire, for the patented machine worked best with the rubber backing which was not then suitable for carding wool. He joined the existing partnership of Curtis and Parr, card makers, in Store Street, Manchester, about 1839. Curtis and Parr were also machine makers, having succeeded to the business of Joseph Chessborough Dyer, whose machine had provided the basis for Walton's improvements. Walton seems to have become sole proprietor of the firm by about 1846, when he built a large new factory in Chapel Street, Ancoats. This was followed by a move in 1853 to yet larger premises at Haughton Dale, Denton, near Manchester, where he worked in partnership with his two surviving sons, William ('b'. 1831) and Frederick Edward Walton, the inventor of linoleum. His sons received some of the credit for later innovations, including the 'endless sheet machine', which made card setting a continuous process, and developments in wire-drawing. Walton's machine-made card clothing was of a superior quality to handmade cards, at about a third of the price. 
Although Walton did not formally retire until he was in his late seventies, he spent increasing periods away at his various country estates, at Compstall in Derbyshire, at Cwmllygodig in Merioneth, and then at Dolforgan Hall, Ceri, near Newtown, Montgomeryshire, an estate of 4250 acres which he had bought for $5000 in 1870. He served as sheriff of that county in 1877. Walton maintained an interest in social and moral issues, and built a school for his child employees. He founded and endowed the church of St Mary the Virgin in Haughton in 1876, at a cost of $4000, and also gave generously to an ancient church near his estate in Kerry. He died at Dolforgan Hall on 5 November 1883, at the age of eighty. He had survived an operation for cancer two years earlier, but died of the disease after a short illness. 


@@@@@


doc= 28655


Walton, John (fl. 1410), translator and Augustinian canon, of Osney Abbey, Oxford, translated the 'De consolatione philosophiae' of Boethius into English verse. Very little is known of his life (he was previously confused with John Walton, abbot of Osney (died 'c'.1490), and John Waltham, subdean of York). He is presumably the John Walton, Augustinian canon of Osney, who was given the dignity of papal chaplain on 1 April 1399, and who, on 13 April of the same year, was granted papal dispensation to hold his canonry with another benefice. A number of the manuscripts of the work call him capellanus ('chaplain') and 'canon of Osney', or 'formerly canon of Osney'. Several give the date 1410. The translator's preface makes it clear that Walton is translating the book at the request of a patron, whose name is given, in the final prayer which appears in the printed edition, as Elizabeth Berkeley (died 1422), probably the daughter of Thomas, Lord Berkeley (died 1417), who subsequently became the wife of Richard Beauchamp, earl of Warwick. Walton may also have translated the 'De re militari' of Vegetius (into prose) for Sir Thomas Berkeley in 1408. The translation of Boethius was evidently popular: it survives in over twenty manuscripts as well as in the printed edition ('The Boke of Comfort called in Laten Boetius De Consolatione Philosophiae', 1523) by T. Rychard in the monastery at Tavistock. Walton's choice of verse for his translation is not surprising in this period, when verse was a common vehicle for didactic and instructional writing. He does not imitate Boethius's alternation of prose and verse: '
in prose and metre enterchaungyngly 

Wip wordes set in colour wonder wele 

Of rethoryk endited craftily. 
(bk 1, prologue, stanza 20)' Nor, indeed, did Chaucer, whose prose translation Walton uses. He writes the first three books in eight-line stanzas, the last two in rhyme-royal. The whole poem is preceded by a 'Preface of the translator', in which he apologetically draws attention to the difficulty of his task, and speaks admiringly of Chaucer and Gower. The prologue to the 'Boke' gives an account of Boethius and his death, and of the terrible punishment of the emperor Theodoric. Books 4 and 5 are also preceded by a 'Preface of the translator'. In the form of a prayer he dedicates the 'labour' to God, 'pe welle of sapience', the mysteries of whose wisdom are inscrutable. No earthly creature can comprehend divine providence. The preface signals the importance of this subject in the final books, and it may be that Walton shifted to the rhyme-royal stanza because he thought it might be a better vehicle for high philosophical matter. His translation is in general workmanlike, clear, and readable, and his versions of some of the lyrics have a genuine eloquence. 


@@@@@


doc= 28656


Walton, John (b. before 1415, d. 1489?), archbishop of Dublin, was born before 1415 in the diocese of Lincoln. He was educated at Oxford, being dispensed in connection with qualifications for a doctorate on 6 June 1450, and was made a BCnL before 1472, probably long before that date. He was a canon of the Augustinian abbey of Osney, near Oxford, by 1433 and was ordained deacon in Worcester Cathedral on 20 February 1434. In 1452 he became abbot of Osney; the temporalities were restored on 1 November 1452. After twenty years as abbot, during which the 'English Register' of the abbey was compiled, he was promoted by Edward IV to the archbishopric of Dublin in 1472. On 19 March 1472 he was granted custody of temporalities of the see; the papal provision was dated 4 May 1472 and he was consecrated archbishop in England by August of that year. Subsequently he was enthroned in Holy Trinity Cathedral in Dublin. 
Within his diocese Walton was active in pastoral and diocesan affairs if not in politics. He defended the rights of his see; he controversially attempted to exercise his jurisdiction over the dean and chapter of St Patrick's Cathedral; he asserted his rights of visitation of religious houses. In 1478 he procured from the Irish parliament the restitution of several manors alienated by his predecessors earlier in the century. A letter was addressed to him by the University of Oxford about its 'degenerate alumni' preaching heresy in his diocese in 1483. He retained connections with Osney Abbey and clearly travelled between Ireland and England since letters of protection were granted to him crossing to England on business in 1474 and 1477. On 14 June 1484, being then blind and infirm, Walton resigned the archbishopric and retired to his manor of Swords with an annual pension of $100 drawn from the revenues of the archiespiscopal mensa of Dublin. The manor of Swords was also reserved to him for his maintenance for life, the possession of which was assured to him by an act of parliament in the following year. According to the antiquarian James Ware, the register of Swords commented favourably on Walton's generous hospitality and cheerful, innocent disposition. 
Despite his infirmity Walton continued to preach on occasion. On St Patrick's day (17 March) 1489 he preached a sermon before the lord deputy and nobility in St Patrick's Cathedral in Dublin. He died soon afterwards. His will is undated but was made, before his resignation as archbishop, on an occasion when he was about to cross from Ireland to England. In it he requested that should he die in England his body should be buried among the abbots in Osney Abbey. He wished his copy of John de Burgh's 'Pupilla oculi' to be restored to the abbey, along with numerous vestments and mass requisites and other books. It is unknown, however, where and when he died or where he was buried; but it is most probable that he died at his castle of Swords and that he was buried in the vicinity. 


@@@@@


doc= 28657


Waweton, Sir Thomas (d. in or after 1450), landowner and speaker of the House of Commons, was the son of John Waweton of Great Staughton, Huntingdonshire, who was ten times knight of the shire for Huntingdonshire, and whose influence probably lay behind Thomas's being first elected to the Commons for Huntingdonshire in 1397, and becoming a JP in that county in 1402. During the next thirty years Thomas Waweton regularly returned to the Commons, representing Bedfordshire in 1413, 1414, 1419, 1425, and 1432, and Huntingdonshire in 1397, 1401, 1402, 1414, 1420, and 1422. By 1419 he had been knighted. That he was elected speaker in 1425 was a reflection both of his long experience in the lower house, and also of his growing social eminence, in both Huntingdonshire and Bedfordshire. A retainer of Edmund (V) Mortimer, earl of March, until the latter's death in 1425, he was a friend and associate of Sir John (later Lord) Tiptoft (died 1443) and Reynold Grey, Lord Grey of Ruthin (died 1440), and perhaps of Archbishop Henry Chichele (died 1443). Waweton's fortunes changed in 1429, however, when he twice attempted illegally to influence the outcome of parliamentary elections. In Huntingdonshire he forced the sheriff to return candidates of his choice, while as sheriff of Buckinghamshire he abused his position by substituting the names of two individuals selected by himself for those returned by the electors. The ensuing scandal turned local opinion permanently against him, and effectively ended his career in the Commons -- he was never elected again for Huntingdonshire, and only once more for Bedfordshire, in 1432. A gap between 1429 and 1435 in his appointments as JP in Bedfordshire may also have resulted from this 'faux pas'. 
Despite this setback Waweton remained a figure of considerable standing, and was still influential in Bedfordshire, where he was sheriff again between 1432 and 1435. This may have been in part due to his marriage (his third) 'c'.1431 to Alana, daughter and coheir of the wealthy Sir Simon Felbrigg, formerly standard-bearer to Richard II. (Few details are known of his first two wives, Elizabeth, who had died by 1422, and Maud, who had died by 1431.) In the late 1430s Waweton became involved in the contest between Lord Grey and John Cornwall, Lord Fanhope (died 1443), for supremacy in Bedfordshire. Ostensibly a supporter of Grey, Waweton played an important part in the struggle, above all in 1439, when a quarrel over precedence between him and Fanhope at the peace sessions held at Bedford on 12 January led to a crush in which eighteen people died. Waweton was closely questioned before the king's council in the following month, and though he received a pardon on 30 May, he once more lost his place on the Bedfordshire peace commission, and did not regain it until 1443. After Lord Grey's death in 1440 the rest of Waweton's life was uneventful. In 1450 he was appointed a collector of taxes for Bedfordshire, and although the date of his death is unknown, it probably occurred soon afterwards. He was survived by his third wife, Alana (died 1458), his son and heir, Thomas, and three other children. 


@@@@@


doc= 28658


Walton, Valentine (1593/4-1661), parliamentarian army officer and regicide, was the son of Nicholas Walton. His father, a member of a younger branch of an old gentry family in Huntingdonshire, died when he was young, certainly by 1606 when Valentine at the age of twelve inherited the manor of Great Staughton in that county from his grandfather's cousin. His inheritance, estimated in 1640 as about $400 per annum, did not go uncontested: a kinsman unsuccessfully challenged it in 1624 before both the privy council and the House of Commons and by illegally occupying the manor house of Great Staughton. Walton was for a time a ward of Sir Oliver Cromwell of Hinchinbrook, the leading figure in the county until the 1620s. On 20 June 1617 Walton married Sir Oliver's niece, Margaret Cromwell ('bap'. 1601), daughter of Robert Cromwell of Huntingdon and sister of Oliver Cromwell, the future lord protector. They had at least four sons and at least one daughter. Margaret had evidently died by July 1644, when her brother wrote a letter to Walton which did not mention her among the kin he asked to be remembered to. Walton's second wife, the daughter of one Pym of Brill, Buckinghamshire, and widow of one Austen of the same place, died on 14 November 1662 and was buried in St Mary's Church, Oxford. 
During the 1630s Walton consistently opposed attempts to levy non-parliamentary taxation, though he appears to have met demands for knighthood and ship money at least half-way. He was imprisoned for defaulting 2's'. 6died on payment of the latter, for example. However, his stance evidently won him a sufficient number of admirers for him to be returned MP for Huntingdonshire in the election to the Long Parliament in October 1640. Despite his own relatively modest place within the ranks of county society (an observer described him as 'a private obscure gentleman') he was able to overcome the nominee of the powerful Henry Cromwell, the son of his former guardian (Keeler, 'Long Parliament', 379). In parliament he sat on a number of important committees. His puritan commitment is indicated by his inclusion on a subcommittee of the grand committee on religion and on another committee to consider 'An Act for the Abolishing of Superstition and Idolatry and for the Better Advancing of the True Worship and Service of God' -- on both committees alongside his brother-in-law. In 1642 he helped Cromwell prevent Cambridge University sending its plate to the king at Nottingham, raised a troop of horse to serve under the earl of Essex, and was taken prisoner by the royalists at the battle of Edgehill. During his confinement he was treated kindly by Thomas Laurence, the master of Balliol College and the Lady Margaret professor of divinity. Walton later reciprocated this generosity in obtaining for Laurence the chapelry of Colne in the parish of Somersham, Huntingdonshire, endowing the living with its tithes before installing Laurence after his ejection from Oxford. 
In July 1643 Walton was exchanged for Sir Thomas Lunsford and became colonel of a regiment of foot in the army of the eastern association and governor of King's Lynn. Under his government Lynn, which had recently been seized and briefly held by the royalists, was strongly fortified and, according to the gossip of the royalists, reserved as a city of refuge for the Independents should the need arise. By May 1644 he was commanding a regiment of dragoons. In July his second but eldest surviving son, Valentine, was killed at Marston Moor. Cromwell's letter to Walton combined condolence -- 'a precious young man, fit for God' -- with exultation in the victory; young Valentine had died in a state of spiritual comfort, regretting only 'that God had not suffered him to be no more the executioner of His enemies' ('Writings and Speeches', 1.288). Although he had a hand in his brother-in-law's quarrel with the earl of Manchester Walton was ruled out from military command with the passage subsequently of the self-denying ordinance. He held no commission in the New Model Army. 
In 1649 Walton was appointed one of the king's judges, in which capacity he attended most of the sittings of the court, and signed the warrant for the execution of Charles I ['see also 'Regicides]. Under the Commonwealth he was a member of all the five councils of state appointed by parliament and acted as an admiralty commissioner, but he did not sit either in the parliaments or councils of the protectorate. When Richard Cromwell became protector and called a parliament, Walton, who thought of being a candidate, was obliged to vindicate himself from the charge of being opposed to the government. Nevertheless he was not elected; but when Richard Cromwell was overthrown he returned to his seat in the Long Parliament, and was elected by it a member of the council of state and one of the commissioners of the navy. On 12 October 1659, when the parliament annulled Charles Fleetwood's commission as commander-in-chief, Walton was one of the seven persons in whom the control of the army was vested. Acting in that capacity, Walton, aided by Sir Arthur Hesilrige, occupied Portsmouth, declared against the army leaders, and entered into communication with George Monck. When the troops in London restored the Long Parliament for the second time, Walton was given command of the regiment lately Colonel Disbrowe's, and he was continued as one of the commissioners for the government of the army until 21 February 1660, when Monck was appointed commander-in-chief. His temporary importance then ended, and he was deprived of his regiment by Monck, who gave it to Colonel Charles Howard. 
At the Restoration Walton was excepted from the 'Act of Indemnity', and lost Somersham, Huntingdonshire, and other estates forming part of the dowry of Queen Henrietta Maria, which he had purchased during the period of republic. He escaped to Germany, and became a burgess of Hanau in order to obtain the protection of that town. His later history is uncertain. According to Anthony Wood he lived for some time in Flanders or the Low Countries, under a borrowed name, maintaining himself as a gardener, and died there soon after the Restoration. Mark Noble, the eighteenth-century historian of the Cromwell family, states that he died in 1661. Lavinia Walton ('bur'. 22 Jan 1667) and Elizabeth Walton ('bur'. 12 Oct 1669), who lived in the household of John Wilkins, warden of Wadham College, Oxford, may have been daughters of Walton, as Wilkins was married to Robina Cromwell, sister of Walton's first wife. Walton is said to have written a history of the civil wars, containing many original letters of Cromwell, the manuscript of which was still extant in 1733. 


@@@@@


doc= 28659


Walton, William (1783/4-1857), writer on Spain, was the son of William Walton, the consul for Spain in Liverpool. At an early age he was sent to Spain and Portugal to learn the languages and to fit himself for a commercial career before going to South America. He acted as a junior secretary to the British expedition which captured the town of Santo Domingo from the French in 1802, and remained there as British agent. In 1809 he returned to England, living in Bristol before moving to London, where he devoted himself to political journalism, writing pamphlets against current ministerial policies towards Spain and Portugal, including open letters to the marquess of Lansdowne, Viscount Palmerston, and Earl Grey. 
Walton contemplated compiling a history of the Spanish colonies, and in spite of losing the material he had collected, he wrote 'The Present State of the Spanish Colonies' (1810) and 'An Expose on the Dissentions of Spanish America' (1814). In 1811 appeared 'An Historical and Descriptive Account of the Peruvian Sheep' (vicuna), in which he recommended their naturalization in Britain, a project which interested him and which he reverted to in 'The Alpaca' (1844). He also promoted the importation of guano, to be used as a fertilizer, although the idea originally met with incredulity on the part of British merchants. 
Walton translated several works from the Spanish, including Antonio Puigblanch's 'The Inquisition Unmasked' (1816) and Tomas de Comyn's 'State of the Philippine Islands' (1821). Among his longer journalistic publications, on subjects of concern to his contemporaries, but which have proved to be of slight permanent value, were 'Spain! or, Who is the Lawful Successor to the Throne?' (1834), 'A Reply to the Anglo-Christino Pamphlet Entitled 'The Policy of England towards Spain'' (by the earl of Carnarvon), and 'The Revolutions of Spain, from 1808 to the End of 1836' (both 1837). He died at his home in Longwall, Oxford, on 5 May 1857. 


@@@@@


doc= 28660


Walworth, Sir William (d. 1386?), merchant and mayor of London, was one of twin sons, possibly of the William Walworth who was granted land in 1314 in Darlington, co. Durham. Evidently both boys were well educated, possibly at Durham: Thomas gained a master's degree and became a canon of York, while William himself acquired numerous books of theology, devotion, and law, which he carefully distributed in his will. Among his bequests was one remitting a debt of 100 marks owed to him by the monastery at Durham, where his arms were displayed in the cloisters. They were borne also by the family that succeeded him in the manor of Middleton St George, near Darlington. His will, though, does not mention either parent, and his bequests for masses and the foundation of a chantry were for the soul of his former master, the rich fishmonger and four-times mayor of London, John Lovekyn, who was the founder of his fortune. 
Lovekyn's will of 1368, which appointed Walworth as one of his executors, refers to him still as his servant. Walworth's social origins and education were not uncommon among apprentices in the greater livery companies, which offered prospects of wealth in the wool trade. Fishmongers were prominent in the trade because they owned ships, and Lovekyn was one of London's biggest wool exporters in the 1360s. Walworth also dealt in corn as well as fish. In 1369 he was licensed to send $200 to Sweden to buy herring, and similarly to buy 1000 quarters of wheat and malt in the ports between Newcastle and Orwell to ship to London. His bequests for the repair of the highway between Southwark and Newenton, and to local churches, as well as his property at Walworth, suggest that this area was important in his business. 
Before Lovekyn's death Walworth must have been acting as his partner because he succeeded him as alderman of the fishmongers' ward of Bridge, and he quickly became prominent in London's politics. In 1369 he was one of the four Londoners experienced in naval and mercantile matters who were elected to advise the king after the war against France was renewed in that year. He was one of the merchants who complained in 1370 that the ships they had loaded at Sluys had been plundered at Calais. He was also one of the foremost defenders of the overseas wool staple, which was the principal means by which the English merchants defeated alien competition in the export trade. 
Walworth was elected mayor of the Westminster staple in 1369. This position, which he held to his death, meant that he acquired an expert knowledge of the credit operations of the London wool merchants, and also of the chief money market of the kingdom. His financial abilities and legal interests equipped him well for this and for later appointments of a judicial or financial nature. In 1370 he was chosen to hear cases of usury in London. He also had extensive financial resources of his own. In 1370 he was the third highest contributor to the city's loan to the king, and he continued thereafter, with other leading London merchants, to be a crucial source of loans for the crown. 
Walworth's election as sheriff in 1370 came at a time when the renewal of the French war had inaugurated a period of exceptional strain in the political life of the kingdom and also within the city of London. The war necessitated repeated taxation, which culminated in the levying of the unpopular poll taxes. The export of coin, and its shortage at home, brought about depression and unemployment in the towns. Merchant ships were impressed to carry troops, and suffered losses from naval warfare. Royal policy, which favoured alien merchants for financial reasons, threatened not only the London wool merchants but also importers and craftsmen. They sought to protect their businesses by recovering the old commercial privileges of the city, which had allowed them to exclude aliens and non-citizens from its retail and distributive trade. In 1370 the draper John Northampton, a skilled agitator, and some disaffected mercers began to stir up protests and disorder in the streets of London. 
The chief anxiety of Walworth and his fellow staplers was the crown's policy, begun in 1371, of raising money by selling licences for wool exporters to evade the Calais staple. His election as an MP for London that year, and then as mayor for the first time in 1374-5, undoubtedly reflected the staplers' hopes that he would defend their interests against those aldermen who were profiting from the sale of the licences and from raising expensive loans for the crown. Walworth failed in his attempt to outbid them by offering cheaper loans in return for the enforcement of the overseas staple. 
The discontents of the kingdom at large were vented against the royal government in the Good Parliament of 1376. The London staplers made common cause with Northampton's rebellious group to elect Walworth and one of Northampton's supporters as MPs. But whereas the staplers were successful in their demands, Northampton failed to win the restoration of London's commercial privileges and undoubtedly believed he had been betrayed by the staplers. Under the threat of creating disorders which would invite the crown's intervention, Northampton forced the staplers to agree to constitutional changes that he hoped would increase the power of his following in London. These included the annual election of aldermen, and of common councillors by the mysteries instead of the wards. Walworth was one of the two aldermen chosen to assure the king that these changes would ensure the good government of the city. 
One reason for the choice of Walworth was that he was friendly with influential courtiers, probably through lending them money. He first acted as a feoffee that year for William Wykeham, bishop of Winchester and chancellor of England. Their friendship proved to be lasting. They shared a love of books and art, something that once led Walworth to take as security from a Flemish merchant not the usual plate but a book of romance and a tapestry of Arras work. Wykeham later chose Walworth to assist in the endowment of his college at Winchester and Walworth bequeathed money to Wykeham and two of his books to the bishop's foundation of New College, Oxford. They also both experienced the enmity of John of Gaunt, duke of Lancaster, who in 1377 secured the disgrace of Wykeham, while at the same time threatening the independence of the city. 
Walworth was again elected an MP for London in October 1377, and was chosen by the Commons as one of two treasurers to receive and disburse the taxes granted for the war to ensure that they were spent only for that purpose. Lancaster caused both treasurers to be removed at the parliament held in 1378 at Gloucester, but Walworth testified to the stout opposition put up by the city's representatives against the court's attacks on them. The same year he was appointed with three other staplers to attend a royal council to advise on protection at sea. Once Lancaster's influence had waned, Walworth was appointed to other royal inquiries, for instance that of March 1380 into the destitution of the people. Another testimony to his judgement and his fairness was his election in January 1381 by the German merchants resident in London as their alderman to represent their interests. 
By then Walworth was serving as mayor for a second time. Disturbances in November 1380 indicated that many Londoners shared the discontents of the kingdom for which the poll tax of 1381 provided the spark of revolt. Londoners may have helped to co-ordinate the marches on the city of the rebel peasants from Kent and Essex. Indeed, two aldermen-fishmongers, John Sibyl and Walter Horn, were later alleged to have opened the gates to admit the rebels. These accusations originated among enemies of Walworth's, and should probably be discounted -- the opening of the gates may simply have been the result of the prevailing confusion. But there are grounds for believing that Horn, who was sent by Walworth to negotiate with the peasants at Blackheath, gave them some encouragement. Whether Walworth connived with him it is impossible to say; certainly he had reason to doubt whether he could count on the city's militia to defeat the rebels. But after the murder of royal ministers only the city's government stood between the kingdom and revolution. The militia was obviously in readiness, but within the city, when the king met the rebels at Smithfield on 15 June. Probably Walworth did not plan to kill Wat Tyler. However, in previous personal confrontations he had shown an impetuous streak, and Tyler's insolence roused him to lunge at him with his sword, either killing him outright or inflicting a mortal wound, before he rode off to fetch the militia. Walworth was knighted by Richard II with three other aldermen on the field, and he subsequently helped to restore order in London, Kent, and Middlesex. 
Walworth's successor as mayor in October 1381 was John Northampton, who seems to have been chosen by the aldermen to appease his powerful patron, Lancaster. When the staplers refused to raise loans for Lancaster's military plans, Northampton brought pressure on them by attacking the fishmongers who held six aldermanries. In a succession of measures he deprived them of their trade and of all political offices. Uncharacteristically, it seems that Walworth did nothing to defend his mystery. A fellow fishmonger claimed that Northampton was attacking them to avenge his arrest by Walworth when he was sheriff in 1371, and after what had happened to Northampton's other prominent victims Walworth may have feared for his own safety. However, in March 1383 he did stand surety for the four former aldermen whom Northampton had imprisoned in the Tower of London. When Sir Nicholas Brembre defeated Northampton in that year's mayoral election, the statutes against the fishmongers were repealed. Subsequently Walworth tried without success to conciliate Northampton, and to persuade him to end his violent pursuit of power. 
Walworth acquired extensive property in London which he bequeathed for her lifetime to his wife, Margaret. They had no surviving children, and she died in 1394. He was obviously close to his brother, Thomas, to whom he bequeathed most of his books, plate, and other personal possessions. Walworth died, probably in January 1386, at his house in Thames Street; his will, dated 20 December 1385, was enrolled on 13 January 1386. He was buried in St Michael, Crooked Lane, which he had greatly enlarged by adding a new choir and chapel, and where he had established a small college of chantry chaplains. His sister, Cecilia, predeceased him, leaving five daughters, and his sister, Agnes, was married to a London chandler. He bequeathed $20 to each of his two apprentices, one of whom, William Askham, succeeded him as the occupier of his house in Thames Street, where Lovekyn had once lived. It was to become the site of the Fishmongers' Hall where a larger than life, and still surviving, wooden statute of Walworth was set up in 1685. 


@@@@@


doc= 28661


Walwyn, William (bap. 1600, d. 1681), Leveller and medical practitioner, was baptized on 17 August 1600 at Newland, Worcestershire. He was the second son of Robert Walwyn (died in or before 1616) of Newland, a landed gentleman, and his second wife, Elizabeth (died in or before 1659), daughter of Herbert Westphaling, bishop of Hereford, and Anne, daughter of William Barlow, bishop of Chichester. Robert Walwyn was a man of 'Repute in his Country, and of between three and four hundred pounds Annual Estate' (H. Brooke, 'Charity of Church-Men', 1649, 10). 
William's formal education was entrusted to tutors of whom he had a poor opinion. He knew no language other than English and declared that he would have learned Latin 'but for the tediousnesse, and impertinancy of my teachers' (W. Walwyn, 'Walwyns Just Defence', 1649, 9). Although Walwyn regretted his lack of Latin he deplored learning 'which puffeth up, and makes men scornfull pedants' (ibid., 9). For his own moral breeding Walwyn honoured his parents, 'to whose exemplary virtue I owe more, then for my being' (W. Walwyn, 'Fountain of Slaunder', 1649, 1). 
In 1619 Walwyn was bound apprentice to a London silk merchant. For seven years he lived with his master in Paternoster Row, during which he was trained as a weaver. Released from his articles, on 17 April 1627 he married Anne, daughter of William Gundell, a chandler in the London parish of St James Garlickhythe. The Walwyns lived in the parish until 1643, remaining in the Thames Street house of Anne's father for at least six years. The parish register records many baptisms and burials of sons and daughters. In separated and revealing statements Walwyn wrote: 'I have been married 21 years and have had almost 20 Children'; nine pages later he states that in all the years he and his wife have lived together, 'I cannot say she enjoyed a week together in good health' (W. Walwyn, 'Fountain of Slaunder', 2, 11). The parish register records that soon after his marriage Walwyn became a master weaver, that he was a vestryman in the church, and that by August 1632 he was a merchant and member of the Merchant Adventurers' Company. In 1643 the Walwyns moved to Moorfields, north of the City wall, where Walwyn maintained his family 'in a middle and moderate but contentful condition' (Brooke, 'Charity of Church-Men', 11). Humphrey Brooke, Walwyn's son-in-law, who lived with the family for eight years, wrote with admiration of Walwyn's gentle kindness, describing a loving marriage and family. 'The most of my recreation', said Walwyn, 'being a good Book, or an honest and discoursing Friend' (Walwyn, 'Fountain of Slaunder', 22). 
Wide reading enlarged Walwyn's concerns and convictions. He studied theologians, classical works, and humane writers, particularly Montaigne, whose inclusive tolerance enduringly attracted Walwyn. He considered the 'Bible' 'the Book of Books' (Brooke, 'Charity of Church-Men', 5), and his principal guide was the 'New Testament'. Walwyn acknowledged that his critical judgement developed slowly. In his first signed tract he recalled his long inability to judge without the approbation of authors and teachers he admired. The scriptures, 'taken in singly, and void of glosse' came to his assistance (W. Walwyn, 'Whisper in the Eare', 1646, 3), and liberated by 'that pearle in the field, free justification by Christ alone; I became master of what I heard, or read' (Walwyn, 'Walwyns Just Defence', 10). 
Walwyn's conversion from the predestinarian doctrine of Calvinism to belief in free grace, accepting love, and inner peace led to his commitment to unlimited religious freedom. He observed the beliefs and practices of various sectaries and concluded that religious diversity was inevitable: as long as knowledge was imperfect, 'men must differ' (W. Walwyn, 'A Parable', 1646, 4). 
Religious conviction, Walwyn believed, was reached in two ways: reason and divine revelation. Jesus and his apostles used 'no meanes but argument and perswasion to alter or controle' the views of the Sadducees (W. Walwyn, 'Good Counsell to All', 1644, 86). At the same time Walwyn recognized the limits of reason. That there was a God or that the scriptures were the word of God, 'I have not believed them so to be, by force of any argument I have either heard or read' (W. Walwyn, 'A Still and Soft Voice', 1647, 12). These truths were disclosed by God's revelation. Whether attained by revelation or reason, religious convictions were to be respected and accepted. It was the greatest of sins, Walwyn contended, to compel a man to profess beliefs of which he was not persuaded: to 'beleive as the Synod would have us... [is to] become, as said an honest man, not the Disciples of Christ, but of the Synod' (W. Walwyn, 'The Compassionate Samaritane', 2nd edn, 1644, 42-3). 
Walwyn's advocacy of religious liberty was rooted in his belief that it was the way of Jesus. No injunction was ever 'given by Christ or his Apostles for the extirpation of the Romans or any others that denyed our God' (W. Walwyn, 'A Demurre to the Bill', 1646, 4). Between 1641 and January 1646 Walwyn published seven anonymous tracts that contended for inclusive liberty of conscience and particularly urged toleration of sectaries. The tracts indicate that the writer was not a sectary but spoke on behalf of 'harmlesse people' whose proponent he became 'after much inquiry and examination of their Tenets, and practice' (W. Walwyn, 'The Compassionate Samaritane', 2nd edn, 64-5). No bounds could be set to toleration, not even to one 'whose mind is so mis-informed as to deny a Deity' (W. Walwyn, 'Toleration Justified', 1646, 9). Walwyn's early appeals for unrestricted toleration were 'very hazardable' (Brooke, 'Charity of Church-Men', 11), provoking widespread fear and opposition. It is understandable that they were published anonymously. 
Walwyn's political convictions, like his commitment to religious liberty, were inspired by his belief that love was the heart of true religion and that it was possible to serve God only by loving and serving our neighbours. 'I am one', he wrote, 'that do truly and heartily love all mankind... it is from this disposition in me, that I have engaged my self in publick affairs, and from no other' (Walwyn, 'Whisper in the Eare', 2, 3). With the outbreak of civil war Walwyn found his political cause. In November 1642, three months after the war began, he was appointed the Vintry ward member of a committee to collect assessments to support the war. His second tract, published the same month, carried a political message as well as a plea for toleration. Avowedly written to expose 'cunning adversaries' who wished to divide good men religiously, with equal vigour the tract assailed those who would 'take away our courages and dull our resolutions by commending peace' which was of no value if unaccompanied by 'liberty which we may now if we will our selves obtaine' (W. Walwyn, 'Some Considerations', 1642, 4, 13-14). 
Throughout the first civil war Walwyn was involved with sectaries and political radicals at Salters' Hall, in London, and he encountered John Lilburne on 19 July 1645 when Walwyn and a deputation came from the hall to accuse Speaker Lenthall of correspondence with royalists and the king. Lilburne, as often, was at Westminster to answer charges about illicit tracts. He promptly joined Walwyn's group and was taken into custody the same day. Walwyn came to Lilburne's defence in a tract which conjoined the biblical roots of his political beliefs with his understanding of natural law: 'the common Law of equitie and justice' (W. Walwyn, 'Englands Lamentable Slaverie', 1645, 5). Addressing Lilburne, Walwyn stated that the difference between them in religion (Lilburne was a separatist and Calvinist) in no way diminished Walwyn's respect for Lilburne's 'undaunted resolution' in defence of liberty, but he chided Lilburne for his reliance on 'Magna Carta'. 'Magna Carta' wrested abusive laws 'out of the pawes' of kings, but 'that messe of pottage' should not be extolled as the birthright of the people. The liberty that Lilburne claimed was 'as due you as the ayre you breathe'; it was as unnatural for a man to testify against himself 'as to urge a man to kill himselfe' (ibid., 1, 4, 5). Walwyn's concepts were more advanced than Lilburne's and his intellect was more profound, but he was captivated by the younger man's purpose and courage, and with Richard Overton they led those who would be called Levellers. 
Religious freedom was a cornerstone of the birthrights that became the heart of the Leveller programme. Walwyn's 'Toleration Justified' was the first of many tracts that he published during the religious controversy that flooded the presses in 1646. Walwyn recalled the year as a time when, while parliament's army was victorious, 'there brake forth here about London a spirit of persecution; whereby private meetings were molested, & divers pastors of congregations imprisoned, & all threatned; Mr. Edwards, and others, fell foule upon them, with his Gangreen after Gangreen, slander upon slander. (Walwyn, 'Walwyns Just Defence', 2)' Walwyn's five replies to Thomas Edwards are among his most attractive pamphlets. Edwards's relentless censure of proponents of toleration -- which included direct attacks on Walwyn as 'a desperate dangerous man, a Seeker and Libertine' (T. Edwards, 'The Second Part of Gangraena', 1646, 26) -- were countered by Walwyn's steady appeals to reason, flashes of wit and irony, and ultimate reliance on love. The first reply, with the softly subtle title 'A Whisper in the Eare of Mr. Thomas Edwards', is the first tract that Walwyn published over his own name. 
The Levellers were the only proponents of representative democracy in revolutionary England and until 1647 they invariably appealed to the House of Commons for implementation of their proposals. In February 1645, replying to William Prynne's proposal for a national religion, Walwyn wrote that liberty of conscience was beyond the regulation of any elected body: 'the people of a Nation in chusing of a Parliament cannot confer more than that power which was justly in themselves... therefore no man can refer matters of Religion to any others regulation' (W. Walwyn, 'A Helpe to the Right Understanding' 1645, 4). In October 'England's Lamentable Slaverie''s defence of birthrights added secular rights beyond the power of parliament. Seven months later, in May 1646, 'A Word in Season' praised parliament as the guardian of the people's interests and in June 'The Just Man in Bonds' reiterated faith in the Commons as Walwyn urged them to free Lilburne from his imprisonment by the Lords. Lilburne was not released, and in the first week of July, Overton, with some assistance from Walwyn, released a wider appeal: 'A Remonstrance of Many Thousand Citizens'. 

'A Remonstrance' was the first of the great Leveller petitions -- and the first comprehensive statement of Leveller goals. Addressed 'to their owne House of Commons', the manifesto reminds members that they hold their trust as representatives of the sovereign people. Amid harsh denunciations of kingship and the Lords, demands emerge: absolute religious freedom; a press free to all; an end to monopolies and discriminatory taxes; unjust laws reformed in 'agreement with common equity, and right reason'; kings -- 'the continuall Oppressours of the Nation' -- and the House of Lords abolished (R. Overton and W. Walwyn, 'A Remonstrance', 1646, title, 5, 15). 

'A Remonstrance' fractured an alliance between the Levellers and Independents. In May, John Goodwin's congregation had contributed 50's'. toward the second printing of Walwyn's 'Word in Season', which Lilburne distributed in Westminster Hall. After 'A Remonstrance' was published, two petitions were suppressed because 'Goodwins people, and some other of the Independent Churches' contended that it was 'against the season'. At the same time a 'most shamefull aspertion' was dispersed about Walwyn, who believed that a committee of Goodwin's people was formed to discover 'whatsoever I had said, that might tend to my disparagement' (Walwyn, 'Walwyns Just Defence', 2-3). Independents concluded that the most dangerous Leveller was 'Mr William Walwyn, who (as the Serpent that deceived our first Parents was more subtle then any beast of the field which the Lord God made) is much more crafty then the rest of his brethren' (J. Price, 'Walwins Wiles', 2nd edn, 1649, 2). 
From August 1646 until November 1647 Walwyn played the leading role in the co-ordination of the Levellers as a distinct party with a programme and an organization to advance it. Overton had been arrested five weeks after the publication of 'A Remonstrance'; like Lilburne he remained in custody until autumn of 1647. Neither Lilburne nor Overton was silenced while in gaol, but the organization and promotion of petitions were the work of Walwyn. The petitions were primarily manifestos designed to publicize demands and bring dissidents together. Walwyn later denied 'that I, or any that I ever knew, petitioned for such things as we did hope the Parliament would not grant', although he conceded that 'we had cause to doubt' that the parliament would agree (Walwyn, 'Walwyns Just Defence', 5). 
Between March and early June 1647 Walwyn advanced four petitions addressed to the Commons. The first, the 'large petition' (W. Walwyn, 'Gold Tried in the Fire', 1647, A1), which Walwyn subsequently implied was his work, was a response to rising harassment by high presbyterians in the city. Walwyn's principal allies were General Baptists who gave a lead to other sectaries who provided steady support for the four appeals. The large petition (March 1647) presented a programme for the reforms demanded in the 1646 'Remonstrance': an end to any negative voice for the Commons; comprehensive law reform published in English; speedy justice and humane treatment of prisoners; dissolution of all monopolies; unlimited religious freedom, and abolition of tithes. Printed copies of the petition were circulated and on 15 March two advocates of the appeal were imprisoned. On the 20th a second petition was presented that asserted the right of petition and demanded that the prisoners be released and the first petition received. On 20 May a third petition again protested the arbitrary arrests and again asked for the right to present the large petition. The house ordered the three petitions burnt. 
Meetings with Oliver Cromwell and City Independents alarmed by the growing power of the high presbyterians were followed by a fourth petition 'of many thousands' (Walwyn, 'Gold Tried in the Fire', 11) -- 'the last and most sharp of any' (Walwyn, 'Walwyns Just Defence', 5) -- that conjoined grievances of Levellers, Independents, and opponents of summary disbandment of the New Model Army. On 2 June the petition was laid aside by the Commons. Within a fortnight Walwyn reprinted all the petitions with a preface that recounted their history and concluded that there was no good 'at all to be expected from those that burn such Petitions as these' (Walwyn, 'Gold Tried in the Fire', A2'v'). 
The final petition included a demand for a response 'unto all the just and reasonable desires of your Commanders, Officers, & Souldiers' (Walwyn, 'Gold Tried in the Fire', 12), and the publication of 'Gold Tried in the Fire' exposed Walwyn's disillusionment with parliament and his move toward the army as the rising political power. Walwyn subsequently wrote that he 'perswaded' Cromwell to join the regiments at Newmarket in early June and that when army headquarters moved to Reading a month later he 'was by very eminent persons of the Army, sent for to Reading, to be advised withall touching the good of the people' (Walwyn, 'Walwyns Just Defence', 6). In addition to 'eminent persons' (ibid.) it is probable that Walwyn met with regimental agitators who, on 6 July, presented Lord-General Fairfax with a paper protesting the imprisonments of Lilburne and Overton. Walwyn's influence was also discernible when the army's general council assembled on 16 July. Agitators immediately submitted a 'Representation' that called for a march on London unless parliament responded to demands that included the release and indemnification of all 'illegally committed' prisoners (Firth, 1.171). 
Walwyn's accord with senior officers and Independents collapsed in August. The army entered London and Walwyn and his allies journeyed to headquarters to urge Fairfax to put the Tower, City, and borough under the control of citizens rather than regiments. Fairfax decided otherwise, siding with the City Independents. Harsh attacks on Walwyn again circulated and the 'great falling out amongst our Friends and theirs in London' (Walwyn, 'Walwyns Just Defence', 7) extended to grandee officers who, 'notwithstanding their glorious March through London', had utterly neglected 'the prerogative Prisoners in the Tower, New-gate, and elsewhere' (J. Lilburne and others, 'The Second Part of Englands New-Chaines', 1649, 4). 
The concurrence of Levellers and army radicals that was indicated at Reading played a major role in the general council that began at Putney on 28 October. The meeting was prompted by 'The Case of the Army Truly Stated', which was presented to Fairfax on 18 October. It is unlikely that Walwyn had any part in the drafting of the patchy text, but shortly after the general council convened Walwyn's hand can be detected in the 'Agreement of the People' that all but replaced the prolix 'Case' during the debates. Under 1000 words overall, the substance of the 'Agreement' was common to all Leveller penmen but the lucid phrasing of four concise articles and the eloquence of the preamble and conclusion leave little doubt that the final draft was Walwyn's work. Inflammatory demands were avoided and the first three articles concerned the redistribution of parliamentary seats, dissolution of the present parliament, and biennial elections. The heart of the Leveller programme was the final article, which enumerated five rights beyond the power of parliament: freedom of religion; freedom from conscription; freedom from questions about conduct during the war unless excepted by parliament; equality before the law; just laws, not destructive to the people's well-being. 'These things', stated the conclusion, 'we declare to be our native Rights, and therefore are agreed and resolved to maintain them' ('An Agreement of the People', 1647, 5). 
Walwyn took no part in the debates at Putney and no known part in the failed November mutiny to establish 'An Agreement' by force. It is probable, however, that he participated in the November campaign to secure signatures in support of 'An Agreement', which became a propaganda device. After the turn of the year the party structure evinced during his petitioning campaign the previous spring was revealed, but Walwyn escaped notice in contemporary accounts of Leveller activities and he apparently published nothing during the first seven months of 1648. 
The violence of the second civil war roused Walwyn to ill-considered anger against parliament and senior officers. 'The Bloody Project' of August 1648 advanced from the (unfair) premise that the war was the 'causelesse' design of 'Grandee Factions' to a denunciation of the deaths of thousands who had never been told the goals for which they were fighting. How Walwyn would have dealt with royalist forces that initiated the war to defeat parliament and its army was not revealed. Walwyn's desire for an exposition of purpose was not unreasonable, and his harsh criticism of erstwhile allies was followed by reiteration of the Leveller programme. In the postscript Walwyn's appeal for reconciliation advanced sensible compromises including one solution that would be instituted in 1689: 'If the Peace of the Nation cannot be secured without the Restauration of the King, let it be done... and provide against his mis-government for the future; let his power be declared and limited by Law' (W. P. Gent [W. Walwyn], 'The Bloody Project', 1648, title-page, 16). 
With the return of peace the Levellers led the way for a new settlement. In November, Walwyn was one of four Levellers on the committee of sixteen established to draw up a constitution. At Windsor the Levellers and Henry Marten prepared a working draft while the army marched to London to 'breake up the Parliament' -- which, wrote Lilburne, 'was very much opposed by M. Walwyn, and many reasons he gave against their march to London at all' (J. Lilburne, 'The Legall Fundamentall Liberties', 1649, 34). The 'many reasons' (ibid.) may have included fear of further violence; there is no indication of how Walwyn would have managed a parliamentary majority poised to surrender to the king. In London, the committee of sixteen completed a draft agreement that prescribed biennial parliaments and a council of state, extended the franchise and reapportioned house seats. Eight explicit rights were reserved to the people, including equal justice under law and the free practice of religion for anyone professing Christianity. The text was presented to the council of officers at Whitehall on 11 December. 
Walwyn and John Wildman attended at least one council debate after Lilburne withdrew and published his version of the second 'Agreement', and their absence from Leveller activities thereafter suggests a division within the Leveller leadership. Walwyn's withdrawal is explicable. With the end of the second war his innate optimism reappeared as he worked for an acceptable settlement. In April he concluded that the officers' 'Agreement': 'although in many things short... of what is necessary for the good of the Commonwealth,... yet, had it been put in execution, we should scarcely have interrupted the proceedings thereof, since therein is contained many things of great and important concernment to the Common-wealth. (W. Walwyn, 'A Manifestation', 1649, 7)' The Levellers were silent during the trial and execution of the king and the establishment of the republican Commonwealth, but on 28 March, four days after the appearance of 'The Second Part of Englands New-Chaines Discovered', the new government arrested Lilburne, Overton, Thomas Prince, and Walwyn. Lilburne was astonished that Walwyn was included, 'he having for some moneths by past... never bin at any of our meetings, where such things were managed' (J. Lilburne and others, 'The Picture of the Councel of State', 1649, 2). Walwyn ultimately concluded that his arrest had been incited by adversaries in John Goodwin's congregation. Less than three weeks before his seizure Walwyn had published harsh attacks on the Independents, questioning their lack of 'true piety or reall Christian vertue' (W. Walwyn, 'The Vanitie of the Present Churches', 1649, 23). Three weeks after he was imprisoned a vicious attack, principally if not solely authored by John Price, a lay preacher in Goodwin's church, described Walwyn as skilled in 'deluding, cozening and deceiving a plain and honest generation', a man of 'Atheisticall and blasphemous opprobries' who contended that 'it would never be well untill all things were common' (J. Price, 'Walwins Wiles', 1649, 3, 9, 13). 
Walwyn's decency and charity belie the monster described in 'Walwins Wiles'. At the same time Walwyn's portrayal of himself as an artless innocent is unsupported by his writings or activities. He was, as he contended, a believer in absolute religious freedom and the power of reason. He was, as his son-in-law Brooke stated, a good and gentle man who treasured his quiet family life yet felt compelled to work for the liberties of all men. He was also a shrewd politician. Independents were right about his skilful use of petitions. Conclusions about his economic beliefs are risky. Walwyn insisted that 'turning the world upside down' was 'not a work I ever intended' (Walwyn, 'Walwyns Just Defence', 24), but he never denied that his ideal state included economic as well as political and legal justice. As early as 1643 Walwyn praised the sharing practices of early Christians when 'the multitude of beleevers had all things common' (W. Walwyn, 'The Power of Love', 1643, A4'v'). In 1649 he drafted 'A Manifestation', which, even as it denies any intent of 'equalling mens estates', adds that it would be injurious 'unlesse there did precede an universall assent thereunto' (W. Walwyn, 'A Manifestation', 1649, 4). Walwyn did not, like Lilburne, repudiate the communism of Gerrard Winstanley and his 'true Levellers' (J. Lilburne, 'Legall Fundamentall Liberties', 1649, 75), but there is no evidence that he supported Winstanley and in 1652 Walwyn delineated the essence of capitalism in contending for competition in a free market. He may have assisted a communal plan projected by Peter Cornelius Plockhoy in 1659, but the evidence is tenuous, and Walwyn made no known statement about economic equality after 1649. 
By the time the four Leveller prisoners were released on 8 November 1649 the party they had created was shattered. Walwyn took the engagement of loyalty to the Commonwealth the day he left the Tower and resumed his quiet life in Moorfields. Nothing suggests that he again associated with dissidents and the only political pamphlet that he published includes an expression of confidence in the Commonwealth. 'Juries Justified' was provoked by Henry Robinson's proposal to replace juries in small jurisdictions with judges named by parliament. The plan was contrary to the Leveller belief in judgment 'by twelve sworn men of the Neighbor-hood' (J. Lilburne, and others, 'An Agreement of the People of England', 1649, art. 25). In a masterful defence of a 'fundamental essential liberty' Walwyn refuted Robinson point by point as he upheld the willingness of freeborn Englishmen to serve and their ability to judge fairly, concluding that his defence probably is not necessary 'for certainly Juries cannot in time of Parliament be in any danger' (Walwyn, 'Juries Justified', 1651, 1, 14). 
Five months later Walwyn presented the council of state's committee for trade and foreign affairs with a paper supporting free-traders in dispute with the Levant Company. Free trade was a basic Leveller tenet and despite his years of prosperity as a member of the Merchant Adventurers' Company, Walwyn had denounced 'the oppressive Monopoly of Merchant-adventurers' in the large petition of March 1647 (Walwyn, 'Gold Tried in the Fire', 2). His 1652 argument began with a characteristic equation of 'a publique good' with 'Common Right' -- which had 'ever proved to include what hath been most proper and commodious for the Common-wealth'. From 'the ancient and continuall Claime of Right unto a generall freedome of Trade' Walwyn proceeded to an enumeration of the practical economic benefits of competition. Free trade might not immediately 'produce so many wealthy men, as have been in the same time by Companies,... yet it will produce Thousands more of able men to beare publique Charges or what other publique occasions they may be called unto'. Trade should not, 'Conceptions' concluded, be restricted to companies that secured monopolies by 'a Purchase from prerogative,... the Common Enemy', but returned to the people, whose claim 'hath its foundation in Common Right' ('Writings', 447, 451-2). Reasonable and clearly stated, Walwyn's plea did not prevail. 
The summer of 1653 was filled with reports of conspiracies, and on 29 August the council of state issued an order to commit Walwyn to the Tower. No record has been found of his imprisonment or release and it is unlikely that the order was executed. There is no hint that Walwyn had any subsequent brush with officials. His name is last known in a political context during the chaos that preceded the Restoration. A Leveller tract by William Bray included Walwyn among those listed as champions of free parliaments bound to comply with 'the Fundamental Lawes and Liberties of the Nation' (W. Bray, 'A Plea for the Peoples Fundamental Liberties', 1660, 9). 
Some years before the Restoration, Walwyn became a medical practitioner. Precisely when this occurred is not known, but he was dispensing medications by 1654 when he wrote that he had been studying things appertaining to health for many years. Abandonment of trade as a merchant may not have been Walwyn's decision. He had broken his oath of loyalty to the Merchant Adventurers in 1647 and it is unlikely that the company would have overlooked the attack. Whatever the reason for his move Walwyn continued to prosper and his first medical treatise stated that 'next the things of everlasting concernment' nothing had given him 'so much satisfaction in minde' as the practice of medicine (W. W. [W. Walwyn], 'Spirits Moderated', 1654, 25-6). 
Walwyn was singularly qualified for the profession of lay physician. His medical judgement was grounded in his philosophy of love and his natural humanity assisted the thoughtful intelligence with which he considered the needs of the sick. Nothing, he wrote, should be given to the sick that might not safely and profitably be taken by those in health, and such 'molesters of the sick' as bleeding, purging, vomiting, sweating, and blistering ought to be 'laid asleep for ever' (W. W. Healths Student [W. Walwyn], 'Physick for Families', 1669, 6, 20). The sick should at all times be treated with kindness, quietness, and hopefulness, and be protected from 'busie talkers' and 'dejected visitants' (ibid., 1674 edn, 11). Case histories and testimonials recorded from 'Healths New Store-House Opened' (1661) through four editions of 'Physick for Families' suggest that Walwyn's 'Milde and pleasant' potions (Walwyn, 'Spirits Moderated', 14) were harmless and consequently achieved the customary success that follows inert treatment. 
Walwyn did not immediately disparage professional physicians. His medicines were first dispensed from the Aldgate house of his physician son-in-law, Dr Humphrey Brooke, who doubtless gave Walwyn some guidance. Both men were concerned with prevention as well as cure, and Walwyn advises a sensible diet and recourse 'to the judicious and conscionable Physitian, in times of Sickess' (Walwyn, 'Spirits Moderated', 4). Fifteen years later, before vivid descriptions of 'molesters of the sick', Walwyn questioned 'the Worth or Ability of Physitians' compared with 'the Reality and Excellency of Medicines'. One practice he most harshly condemned was repeated bleeding, 'a hazard of a strange nature for Patients... upon which Death so often follows' (W. W. Healths Student, 'Physick for Families', 9-10). The title page of Walwyn's second medical tract describes him as 'Health's Student' ('Healths New Store-House Opened', 1661, title-page), and the two editions of 'Physick for Families' published in his lifetime are by 'W. W. Healths Student' (1669, A3'v'; 1674 edn, title-page). There is no known evidence that Walwyn used a different title for any publications. 
By 1661 Walwyn's medicines were being sold at The Star in Postern Street joining Little Moorfields, the area where Walwyn had lived since 1643. Presumably the potions continued to be available at The Star through Walwyn's lifetime, including during the plague of 1665 when Walwyn moved his family to Surrey but took care that his preparations were obtainable while he was away. The 1681 posthumous edition of 'Physick for Families', 'By William Walwyn Physician', advertised the medicines for sale at the house of Richard Halford, Walwyn's son-in-law, of Finsbury, Little Moorfields, who stated that he had assisted Walwyn 'for many years' and possessed 'all his Secrets and Receipts' ('Physick for Families', 1681 edn, title-page, last page verso of unpaged index). 
Walwyn died in January 1681 and was buried on the 16th of that month at St Giles Cripplegate, London. Halford was executor of his will, which indicated that Walwyn outlived his wife and all his children. The will named two sons-in-law and four grandchildren, and bequests of $200 each to a son-in-law and three granddaughters suggest that Walwyn had no financial difficulties. The will also revealed Walwyn's inherent optimism and joyous expectation that bodily death would be followed by a life of the spirit in the presence of a loving God. 
Walwyn is an attractive revolutionary. Principled and perceptive, he was a clear thinker, a talented writer, and a respected adversary. Opponents who considered him the ablest of the Leveller leaders were openly dismayed by his proficiency in framing and managing petitions promoting the Leveller programme. More enduring than his work with petitions are Walwyn's many pamphlets. Love of mankind was the source of his commitment to the rights of all people and his bold proposals were unsurpassed. Unqualified freedom of religion; equal justice; representative governments elected by the sovereign people; an end to harsh and futile treatments for the sick -- all these Walwyn advocated in readable prose distinguished by the probity of the writing as well as the humanity of the proposals. Walwyn believed everything he wrote, which gives his works an integrity illuminated by his ability to present radical solutions with civility and conviction. 
Walwyn's writings are as revealing of his character as of his intellectual depth and literary skill. Sometimes subtle, often optimistic, and always purposeful, he was as concerned with the individuals whose rights he defended as with their abstract liberties. The gentle goodness and loving family life described by his son-in-law are compatible with Walwyn's avoidance of public notice, rejection of destructive tactics of any kind, and belief that men should follow the golden rule -- 'whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, that do you unto them' -- the 'rule of reason and pure nature' (W. Walwyn, 'Toleration Justified', 1646, 14). As long as men were imperfect, contended Walwyn, they would differ, and all differences should be considered by rules of reason: 'There being nothing that maintaines love, unity and friendship in families, Societies, Citties, Countries, Authorities, Nations; so much as a condescention to the giving, and hearing, and debating of reason' (Walwyn, 'Fountain of Slaunder', 18). 


@@@@@


doc= 28662


Wandesford, Christopher (1592-1640), politician and administrator, was born at Bishop Burton, near Beverley, Yorkshire, on 24 September 1592 and baptized there on 18 October. He was the son of Sir George Wandesford (1573-1612), landowner, of Kirklington, Yorkshire, and Catherine, daughter of Ralph Hansby of Gray's Inn. He attended school at Well, together with his kinsman Thomas Wentworth, later earl of Strafford, and matriculated from Clare College, Cambridge, in Michaelmas 1610. He was admitted to Gray's Inn on 1 November 1612, but the death of his father that year forced him to attend to an estate much of which was leased out at uneconomic rents and burdened with debts. Prudent management of his financial resources enabled him to free the estate from wardship, provide for his brothers and sisters, and, by 1630, to spend at least $1600 in improvements to his seat at Kirklington. Wandesford is said by Lodge to have married, as his first wife, a daughter of William Ramsden of Byrom, Yorkshire, but this seems highly unlikely. On 22 September 1614 he married Alice (1592-1659), only daughter of Sir Hewett Osborne. She was sister to Sir Edward Osborne, vice-president, under Wentworth, of the council of the north. They had seven children, five of whom survived to adulthood, including Alice ['see 'Thornton, Alice], whose autobiography presents the marriage as a very happy one. 
Wandesford sat for Aldborough, Yorkshire, in the parliaments of 1621 and 1624, and probably gained a seat at Richmond in 1625 and 1626 through his friendship with Wentworth; in 1626 he appears to have considered challenging Sir John Savile and his son Thomas for a county seat. In July 1625 he was placed on the commission of the peace for the North Riding. Wandesford was particularly active in the 1626 parliament, taking a leading role in the Commons' attack on the duke of Buckingham, handling the especially dangerous charge of administering medicine to James I. In consequence he was removed from the commission of the peace and issued with a privy seal loan demand of $100. He remarked to Wentworth that 'when the privy seals cum, I think itt will be the proportion only that shall trouble me' (Strafford papers, 16/242), but his willingness to accept that the king might be entitled to some form of non-parliamentary revenue did not extend to the forced loan. His refusal to pay did not result in imprisonment, in contrast to his kinsmen Wentworth and Sir George Radcliffe, although he kept them company in London for part of the summer of 1627. By the autumn he was anticipating the calling of another parliament, making preparations to keep Wentworth's 'syde warme by the bar agayne' (Strafford papers, 20/262), and asking his friend to use his influence with Coryton and Seymour to secure him a west country seat in case he should fail in his native county. His letters to Wentworth from the autumn and winter of 1627-8 reveal his hopes for a more moderate stance by the Commons: 'if the howse doe mete, I pray God send them the discrete mixture of patience and curradge to apply the proper cure to thess bleeding wounds'. What was needed was a more circumspect approach: 'The miseryes, or injuryes (call them as you please) fallen upon perticuler persons will not possess them so totally as to make them neglect the prosecution of the whole; save the ship first and then punish the neglect of thoss mariners that brought her into hazard.(Strafford papers, 16/261; 20/262)' Wandesford sat for Thirsk in 1628, through Wentworth's influence with the Bellasis family. On 5 June, following the king's demand that the Commons avoid any business that might lay scandal upon the state, he supported the remonstrance with the complaint that 'we are taxed with puritanism, faction, popularity' (Johnson, Keeler, and others, 4.124). Throughout the session he played a less prominent role than in 1626, when Wentworth had been absent, but Wentworth's removal to the Lords before the next session placed Wandesford once again in an important position. On 2 March 1629 he spoke against Holles's proposal that no merchant be permitted to pay tonnage and poundage, having argued, together with John Pym, for a more moderate approach to the problem. 
Wentworth's appointment as president of the council of the north brought benefits for Wandesford, the first being his restoration to the commission of the peace in December 1628. The following year he was added to the commission of the peace for the West Riding and the northern commission for compounding with recusants, and he was successful in his efforts to replace Sir Thomas Hoby as chief seneschal of the manor of Ripon. In 1630 he was granted further northern offices, including the posts of deputy bailiff of Richmondshire and deputy constable of Richmond and Middleham castles. He was rumoured to have been offered the ambassadorship to Spain in 1630, and to be a candidate for the post of master of the wardrobe in March 1632, but he took up office in Ireland in 1633 following Wentworth's appointment as lord deputy. Wandesford explained why he had rejected the 'private and countrey life' which he recommended to his son: 'my Affection to the Person of my Lord Deputy, purposing to attend upon his Lordship as near as I could in all Fortunes, carryed me along with him whithersoever he went... no Hopes, no Promises, indeed, no Assurance of a greater Fortune, could have tempted me from the security of my own Retiredness, but the Comfort I took in his Friendship and Conversation. (Wandesford, 62-3)' 

Wandesford had assisted Wentworth with his personal and political affairs since at least 1620. While living in London during the early 1620s, Wandesford had acted as Wentworth's 'ambassadour' (Wentworth to Wandesford, 30 July 1623, Strafford papers, 2.105), sending him court news and handling his business with Sir Arthur Ingram. Their surviving correspondence reveals the closeness of their friendship: during Wentworth's imprisonment in 1627 they maintained a 'wekely discourse' (Wandesford to Wentworth, 9 Sept 1627, ibid., 16.261) in which they shared their views on political developments. Wandesford was prepared to offer Wentworth frank advice and in July 1628 he informed Wentworth of the generally unfavourable response in the West Riding to his elevation to the peerage. By the early 1630s he regularly conveyed messages to Wentworth from the lord treasurer, Weston, and waited on Wentworth's other political contacts at court. Wandesford and Radcliffe formed the core of the team that Wentworth assembled in Dublin, and their devoted and capable service was emphasized by Wentworth in his reports to his political allies and colleagues. 
Wandesford was sworn of the Irish privy council on 25 July 1633. He had already been granted the mastership of the rolls in Ireland on 17 May, initially for the duration of Wentworth's deputyship, a restriction that might suggest that the king initially harboured doubts about a man who had been instrumental in the attempted impeachment of Buckingham. In March 1634, however, the post was granted to him for life. Also in 1634 Wandesford was appointed to a small committee established to examine alleged exactions by Irish office-holders, and his seat on the court of castle chamber assisted Wentworth in his efforts to control all organs of government. In the 1634-5 parliament Wandesford was MP for Kildare, after Richard Boyle, earl of Cork, declined to secure him one of the seats that he controlled. Wandesford accompanied Wentworth to Connaught in 1635 during the lord deputy's preparations for plantation, and he served as one of the lords justices during Wentworth's two visits to England: in 1636, with Viscount Loftus, and in 1639, with Lord Dillon. He assisted the earl of Ormond in his land dispute with Sir Thomas Butler, and enjoyed good relations with John Bramhall, bishop of Derry, whose living of Elvington lay close to Kirklington. His letters to Bramhall of the late 1630s show him to have become apprehensive about the growing crisis in Scotland and its impact on the other Stuart kingdoms. 
It would seem likely that Wandesford, as well as Radcliffe, was offered a knighthood in 1633, and his refusal might, as Comber suggested, have been prompted by consideration of his financial situation. Unlike Radcliffe, he did not buy into the Irish customs farm, and he seems to have relied on the profitable mastership of the rolls to purchase and invest an Irish estate. Following his death, the king issued instructions that fees payable to Irish officers be reduced and the mastership was given particular emphasis. In 1635 Wandesford bought an estate in the Naas, co. Kildare, where, during the autumn of 1636, he completed his 'Book of Instructions' for his son, not published until 1777. In 1637, having sold the land to Wentworth, Wandesford acquired Castlecomer and 20,000 acres of largely undeveloped land in Idough, co. Kilkenny, known as 'Brennan's country', where he rebuilt the house, built a market town, planted woods, and founded collieries and a forge. The expulsion of the Brennans appears to have troubled Wandesford, as his will included an offer of compensation. Their claim was, however, quashed by decree in 1695 following their support for the Jacobite cause. 
Wandesford was elected MP for Kildare again in 1640. He was then appointed lord deputy on 1 April 1640, following Wentworth's elevation to the lieutenancy in January and an apparently successful parliamentary session in March during which four subsidies were voted. According to Comber, Wandesford was granted the titles Baron Mowbray and Musters and Viscount Castlecomer on his appointment as lord deputy, a mark of honour that he rejected with the remark 'Is it a fit Time for a faithful Subject to appear higher than usual when the King, the Fountain of Honours, is likely to be reduced lower than ever?' (Comber, 121-2). Wandesford's term in office was short and unpleasant. Parliament reassembled in June and he was forced to allow writs to be sent to the seven boroughs deprived of representation by Wentworth in 1635, leading to increased Old English representation in the Commons. His attempts to secure legislation confirming the plantation of Connaught failed when the bill was apparently dropped. On 13 June he was not able to prevent the Commons from rejecting the new method by which the subsidies were to be levied. In these actions Old English representatives evidently received a measure of support from protestant members. Wandesford's letter to Radcliffe, dated 12 June, expressed his anxiety at the combination of 'the Irish' with 'those of our owne partye (as we call them)' (Whitaker, 'Life', 249-50): the willingness of protestant members to entrust matters to committees on which Catholics were in the majority suggests a degree of co-operation against the administration. The lord deputy could not count on the assistance of the whole council: the absence of some on military duties was not helpful, but the remaining councillors failed to support the government wholeheartedly. Wandesford could find few to praise in his report to Radcliffe. 
Parliament reassembled on 1 October and proved no less difficult to manage than it had been in June. Wandesford's need to finance the Irish army left him with little choice but to hold parliament. He attempted to recover some of the ground lost in June in his refusal to send writs to the disputed boroughs, but the Commons put in place a new method of assessment for the three subsidies yet to be collected that would reduce their yield from an anticipated $45,000 to about $12,000 each. The orders of 20 October and 11 November on this matter were torn out of the Commons' journal by the lord deputy on the instructions of the king. Wandesford failed to prevent the house from passing the petition of remonstrance against Wentworth's administration and naming a committee to present it to the king. He prorogued parliament on 12 November and ordered the committee to remain in Ireland, but the privy council's removal of travel restrictions between the two countries enabled the committee to take the remonstrance to England. Wandesford appears to have had a very pleasant personality, lacking the abrasive, intimidatory characteristics possessed by Wentworth. In November 1640 Wentworth thought it necessary to insist, through Radcliffe, that Wandesford's 'old rule of moderate counsells will not serve his turne in cases of this extreamity; to be a fine, well-natured gentleman will not doe it' (Whitaker, 'Life', 221). The same month Wandesford learned of Wentworth's imprisonment, and before the end of November he was seriously ill of a fever. He died at Dublin on 3 December 1640 and was buried there, in Christ Church, seven days later. His funeral sermon was preached by Bramhall, one of the executors of his will. According to his daughter, the Irish 'did sett up their lamentable hone, as they call it, for him in the church, which was never knowne before for any Englishman don' ('Autobiography of Mrs Alice Thornton', 26). 
Wandesford was survived by his wife who died on 10 December 1659. Their third son, Christopher ('b'. 1628), was created a baronet on 5 August 1662. He married Eleanor, daughter of Sir John Lowther, and was father of Christopher (1656-1707), politician, the second baronet, later created Viscount Castlecomer, who married Elizabeth (died 1731), daughter of the Hon. George Montagu of Horton, Northamptonshire. 
Their eldest son, 


@@@@@


doc= 28663


Christopher Wandesford, second Viscount Castlecomer (bap. 1684, d. 1719), politician and government official, was baptized at St Margaret's, Westminster, on 2 March 1684. He was MP for St Canice in the Irish parliament in 1707 before succeeding to the peerage on the death of his father on 15 September 1707. He was appointed an Irish privy councillor in 1710 but then pursued a political career in England, sitting for Morpeth as a whig in 1710-13, and for Ripon from 1715 until his death. In 1713, with his brother-in-law Lord Newcastle and others, he founded the Hanover Club, and in May that year he spoke in parliament against a commercial clause of the treaty of Utrecht. In October 1714 George I appointed him a privy councillor and gave him the governorship of Kilkenny in September 1715. On 31 May 1715 he married the Hon. Frances, daughter of Thomas Pelham, first Baron Pelham, and their only child, Christopher, third Viscount Castlecomer, was born in 1717. He died at Newport Street, London, on 23 June 1719. His wife survived him, dying on 27 June 1756. 


@@@@@


doc= 28664


Wanley, Humfrey (1672-1726), Old English scholar and librarian, was born on 21 March 1672 at the Vicarage House adjoining Jesus Hall, Coventry, the youngest of five children of Nathaniel Wanley (1632/3-1680), vicar of Holy Trinity, Coventry (1662), and his wife, Ellen Burton (1632-1719), daughter of Humfrey Burton, clerk to Coventry council (1636-85). He was educated at Coventry Free School and, on leaving school, was bound apprentice to a Coventry linen draper. The life of a provincial draper did not suit Wanley and did not detain him long. At least as early as June 1691 he was transcribing local Warwick records; later the same year he made for himself a copy of the Old English grammar from G. Hickes's 'Institutiones grammaticae Anglo-Saxonicae' (1689) and of the catalogue of Anglo-Saxon manuscripts in the Bodleian Library from the same work. 
By October 1694, a draper no more, Wanley was employed seeking out collections of manuscripts for inclusion in the 'Catalogi librorum manuscriptorum Angliae et Hiberniae', commonly known as 'Bernard's Catalogue', then being compiled at Oxford. 'Bernard's Catalogue' was published in 1697 and Wanley was author of four catalogues in it. But by then he had long been established at Oxford. The traditional account, which there seems no reason to disbelieve, is that Wanley moved to Oxford in 1695 under the patronage of William Lloyd, bishop of Coventry and Lichfield since 1692. His official subscription and oath taken on his admission to the university is dated 7 May 1695. He was briefly in residence at St Edmund Hall before moving to University College at the invitation of the master, Arthur Charlett. 
Wanley arrived at Oxford with the interests that were the foundation of his later achievements already fixed. Oxford was to transform a young man's appetite for copying old manuscripts and for northern languages into the mature scholar's mastery of palaeography and of Old English, and the letters of these years present a striking picture of Wanley's rapidly developing and formidable talents -- the growth of his knowledge, the refining of his skills, and the maturing of his judgement. The evidence for Old English is to be found in Wanley's great catalogue of Anglo-Saxon manuscripts, 'Librorum veterum septentrionalium, qui in Angliae bibliothecis extant... catalogus historico-criticus', largely completed in Oxford between 1695 and 1701 but not published until 1705 -- as volume 2 of George Hickes's 'Linguarum veterum septentrionalium thesaurus'. It is in his letters of the 1690s to Hickes, Thomas Smith, and others that the discipline of palaeography can be seen being formulated for English scholarship and from English materials. 
Wanley's appointment as assistant at the Bodleian Library in November 1695, six months after his arrival in Oxford, gave him the freedom of the greatest treasure house of manuscripts in public or private hands in England. As his experience was enriched by daily contact with the Bodleian collections, he was defining for himself the whole range of questions that exercise palaeographers, and turning his powerful mind and methodical genius to their explanation and, as often as not, their solution. Hickes was his only competitor, and Hickes, as he himself confessed, was Wanley's pupil: 'I have learnt more from you', he wrote in 1698, 'than ever I did from any other man' ('Letters', xv, n. 8). At the time of writing Hickes was fifty-five, Wanley twenty-five -- and not four years out of the draper's shop. 
Throughout the Oxford years Wanley was full of plans for great enterprises. As early as 1695 he urged the collecting of all fragments of scripture remaining in Old English. In 1698 he proposed to undertake what is in effect a comprehensive work on English diplomatic. Probably in 1698 he submitted to the curators of the Bodleian a request to be allowed to remove all manuscript leaves used as pastedowns in printed books in the library, so that they could be arranged to illustrate the development of handwriting. In the summer of 1700 he put forward the grandest scheme of all, proposing to visit the libraries of France, Germany, and Italy to examine manuscripts, collate important texts, take specimens of handwriting, and search for works bearing on English history. These are ambitiously conceived schemes and they are a young man's schemes; most were never begun, none was completed. There is no doubt Wanley would have been wiser to attempt something more manageable. But for Wanley modest ambitions held only moderate attractions. 
It is important to remember how far ahead of their time were Wanley's proposals. Anglo-Saxon biblical pieces were first collected by A. S. Cooke in 1898. The comprehensive study of early English charters had to wait for Kemble and Earle in the nineteenth century and Sawyer and others in the twentieth. Bodleian pastedowns remained unlisted until N. R. Ker's 'Pastedowns in Oxford Bindings' (1954). Of schemes subsequently put forward by Wanley during his early years in Harley's service, the publication of the acts of the privy council was undertaken by Sir Nicholas Harris Nicholas (1834-7), while the plan to publish the original sources of English history, taken up by Thomas Hearne, is really the forerunner of that monumental Victorian enterprise, the 'Rolls Series'. The only major work Wanley carried to completion, his catalogue of Anglo-Saxon manuscripts, held the field until N. R. Ker published his 'Catalogue of Manuscripts Containing Anglo-Saxon' in 1957. 
In December 1700, amid much rancour and bitterness, Wanley left Oxford for good and moved to London. The precise occasion of his departure is not known. Institutional indifference, social prejudice, and the ill will of those less talented than himself -- Hearne, alluding to the favour shown Wanley by Arthur Charlett, called him 'the Master's pimp' ('Remarks', 1.212) -- all played their part in persuading Wanley that his advancement at Oxford was blocked and that he would do well to seek a future elsewhere. 
There followed years of drudgery for Wanley in London, as assistant secretary (later secretary) of the recently founded SPCK, where in the course of duty he published J. F. Ostervald's 'The Grounds and Principles of the Christian Religion' (1704), in an English translation from the French, and as assistant to Hans Sloane, secretary of the Royal Society. Wanley was elected FRS in 1706. They are also years of ill health and unhappiness, and of desperate attempts to find a post more congenial to his interests and his talents than the SPCK or the Royal Society afforded, and a post sufficiently well paid to enable him to support a wife and family. On 1 May 1705 he married his landlady, Ann Berenclow (died 1722), daughter of Thomas Bourchier of Newcastle upon Tyne, and widow of Bernard Martin Berenclow, whose family Wanley had lodged with at 3 Duke Street, York Buildings, Westminster, since 1704. Already the mother of several children by Berenclow, she and Wanley had three children, none of whom survived infancy. 
The settled station in life that Wanley so earnestly sought was long delayed. His formal introduction to Robert Harley, then speaker of the House of Commons, which was the encounter that decided the course of Wanley's subsequent career, took place in April 1701. Already in the preface to his catalogue of Anglo-Saxon manuscripts, signed off in August 1704, he extols Harley as his Maecenas. Harley employed him regularly, though not consistently, until Wanley's resignation from the secretaryship of the SPCK in June 1708. Thereafter his future lay in the service of the Harleys, as library-keeper to Robert Harley and to his son Edward Harley. 
From 1708 the tale of Wanley's life is largely the story of the Harleian Library and of his official relationship with his employers, chiefly from 1711 with Edward Harley. That story is, in a single word, the story of accumulation. The Harleys, especially Edward, bought books and manuscripts on a scale that challenges understanding, and Wanley's diary is the stolid record of Wanley's brilliance as the agent of an appetite that, after Wanley's death, brought Edward Harley to despair and to financial ruin. Wanley's diary, buttressed by the catalogue of the Harleys' manuscript collections, completed by Wanley as far as the middle of Harley MS 2408 at the time of his death, and by the evidence of the sale catalogue of the Harley printed books sold off after Edward Harley's death in 1741, allows those who assert Wanley's pre-eminence as a librarian to rest their case. 
There is no doubt that Wanley's career can be seen as a happy variation of Stubbs's principle that if you put the worst man in the best place you have all the good ones striving to show how much better they are, and so benefiting the world. He had hopes, more or less well founded, of becoming, at different times, Bodley's librarian, a fellow of Worcester College, Oxford, keeper of the Cotton Library, commissioner of Hackney coaches, and historiographer royal. He also had thoughts, not nearly so well founded -- though he prosecuted his candidacy no less vigorously for that -- of becoming library-keeper to the lord chancellor, and of succeeding Richard Bentley as keeper of the royal libraries, William Petyt as keeper of the records in the Tower, and John Chamberlayne in his post at the state paper office. In all these he failed, and he was obliged to squander his energies on developing the talents that made him the greatest Anglo-Saxonist of his generation, and one of the greatest palaeographers and librarians of his age. 
Wanley's years in the service of the Harleys were satisfying and secure; in his later years he seems to have achieved a moderate prosperity, owning in 1719 a parcel of land valued at $400 and a second parcel at Leicester. He had from the first the confidence of Edward Harley and the freedom of his houses in Westminster and at Wimpole, near Cambridge. He had the respect of scholars and, through Harley, the amused affection of poets. Alexander Pope consulted him about the purchase of port wine. John Gay assigned him a stanza, beginning '
O Wanley, whence com'st thou with shortned hair 

And visage from thy Shelves with dust besprent? 

' in his poem 'Mr Popes Welcome from Greece' ('Poetry and Prose', 1.259). Matthew Prior, tongue in cheek, places him in the exalted company of Socrates and Cicero in his 'Alma, or, The Progress of the Mind' ('Literary Works', 1.516). There are four portraits of him from these years, three by Thomas Hill, and the fourth showing a countenance, says Dibdin, 'absolutely peppered with variolous indentations' (Dibdin, 346), evidence of the smallpox that afflicted him in childhood. 
The Harley years were, Wanley's indefatigable prosecution of library business apart, unremarkable. In 1717 he was active in the refounding of the Society of Antiquaries, which he had originally helped found in 1707. His wife, Ann, died on 3 January 1722 and was buried at St Paul's, Covent Garden, on 5 January. In 1726 he married again (his second wife was also called Ann) shortly before his death of dropsy at Clarges Street, Hanover Square, Piccadilly, London, on 6 July 1726. He was buried at St Marylebone Church. He died intestate; letters of administration granted to his widow are dated 3 November 1726. 


@@@@@


doc= 28665


Wanley, Nathaniel (1632/3-1680), Church of England clergyman and poet, was baptized on 27 March 1633 in St Martin's parish, Leicester, second of the five children of Samuel Wanley (1605-1658), mercer and briefly mayor of Leicester, and his wife, Elizabeth ('b'. 1610), daughter of Richard Benskin of Wanlip and his wife, Mary. Samuel died suddenly in November 1658, shortly after his appointment as mayor of Leicester. He had earlier apprenticed all four of his sons as mercers, and it fell to Nathaniel to pay off the principal for his own apprenticeship and that of his elder brother, Samuel, a debt that afflicted him 'above twenty years after' (Nichols, 4, pt 2.1048). 
During his childhood Wanley attended the sermons of moderate godly preachers such as John Angell, town lecturer at St Martin's from 1628 to 1651. On Angell's death in 1655 Wanley wrote that the preacher had overcome the divisiveness of the times and drawn 'crowds from all sides' with his 'sweet becoming gravitye' ('Poems', 77-8). Another such figure was John Bryan, vicar of Holy Trinity, Coventry, from 1644 to 1662 and afterwards a gifted trainer of nonconformist ministers. His house in St Martin's was leased to the church for the use of its vicar from about 1648. Wanley was later to describe Bryan, probably his closest friend, as 'a Person of such Real Worth, as is as hard almost to express as imitate' (N. Wanley, 'Peace and Rest for the Upright', 1681, 27). 
Unlike his brothers, Wanley did not follow the family trade but matriculated at Peterhouse, Cambridge, as a pensioner on 21 December 1649. His entry to the college, like that of John Bryan's four sons, was no doubt assisted by the connection between Bryan and the then master of Peterhouse, Lazarus Seaman. The two men had been contemporaries at Emmanuel in the 1620s, and together attended Francis Higginson's godly seminary at Leicester after graduating. On 27 January 1652 Wanley moved to Trinity College, Cambridge, possibly as a result of internal disputes between Seaman and the Peterhouse fellowship. He graduated BA in 1653 and MA in 1657. On 24 July 1655 he was married by John Bryan to Ellenor Burton (1632-1719), daughter of Humphrey, the long-standing coroner and town clerk of Coventry. Of their five children four survived infancy: Ellen, Nathaniel, Elizabeth, and the future librarian and palaeographer Humfrey Wanley. In his will Wanley asked to be buried alongside the first-born child, Samuel, who died in 1665. 
Wanley's first publication, 'Vox Dei' (1658), is dedicated to Dorothy Spencer, countess of Sunderland, who in 1657 preferred Wanley to the living of Beby, near Leicester. Most of his extant poetry was written by about 1660 or shortly afterwards. His 'Scintillulae sacrae', an accomplished body of about forty devotional lyrics, shows the uncommon influence of Henry Vaughan's 'Silex scintillans' (1650; 2nd edn 1655) as well as that of Herbert, Donne, and Quarles. Like his poetry, Wanley's extant prose (which includes letters from 1667-74) blends the homiletic with the delightful, often citing morally improving passages from Vaughan, Suckling, or Donne. Wanley's advice on spiritual perseverance in 'Vox Dei', for instance, is illustrated by what is clearly a moralized paraphrase of lines 7-10 of Donne's 'Loves Alchymie' (46). Also surviving are two narrative poems, 'Lazarus' and 'The Witch of Endor' (the latter written in the early 1660s), and an Englishing of Latin verses by John Bryan's friend Thomas Dugard, vicar of Barford in Warwickshire. 
Before the Restoration, Wanley seems to have been one of the large number of ministers Richard Baxter called 'dis-engaged faithful men': moderate puritans without particular sect or party ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', 148). In 'Vox Dei' Wanley places Archbishop James Ussher first in a list of recently dead 'lights of the church', following him with such moderate presbyterians as Richard Vines and Thomas Hill (master of Trinity until his death in 1653). Wanley's list strongly suggests that in 1658 his religious views were far closer to those of John Bryan and Richard Baxter (both shortly to dissent) than the Restoration terminology of 'conformist' and 'dissenter' might suggest. 
In March 1661 Wanley petitioned Charles II for the living of Lutterworth, Leicestershire, then held by the elderly poet and royalist Thomas Pestell, 'whose desire is it that your petitioner should succeed him' (TNA: PRO, SP 29/33/71). Wanley signed the subscription book as curate at Lutterworth in September 1662, but on 20 October of that year became vicar of Holy Trinity, Coventry, after John Bryan found he could not, in conscience, remain within the church. Wanley seems to have conformed without difficulty, despite an enduring sympathy with presbyterians. His petition for the Lutterworth rectory describes him as 'a true Sonne of the Church of England both to the Discipline and Doctrine of it', and he was similarly styled in 'An Ingenious Contention' (1668), a rhymed broadside debate conducted with the dissenting minister and poet Robert Wilde, in which Wanley does his best to encourage Wilde to conform (TNA: PRO, SP 29/33/71). 
A love of religious harmony, nostalgically expressed in his elegy on John Angell ('c'.1655), was no doubt nurtured in Wanley by his college tutors, James Clarke (Peterhouse) and John Templer (Trinity), both associates of Cambridge Platonists Henry More and Ralph Cudworth. Liberal and adaptable religious views were far from unusual in those educated during the civil war and Commonwealth. The second wave of latitudinarians, including John Tillotson ('b'. 1630), Edward Fowler ('b'. 1632), and Isaac Barrow ('b'. 1630), belonged to Wanley's generation; coinciding with Wanley's time there, Barrow was a fellow of Trinity from 1649 and Fowler during 1653-5. Wanley's religious temper is nicely characterized by his donation to Coventry grammar school (it is not known when) of a manuscript of 'The Imitation of Christ': the choice of gift reflects not only Wanley's antiquarian interests and the enduring popularity of the 'Imitation', but also the moral emphasis of the Restoration church to which Wanley became a 'true Sonne'. 
A great deal of Wanley's time at Coventry went into restoring the fabric of Holy Trinity. As well as replacing the old font and eagle lectern removed during Bryan's incumbency, he organized a campaign of fund-raising and church repairs, intensifying efforts after lightning destroyed the steeple in January 1666. Contributors to further repairs in 1673 included Basil Fielding, earl of Denbigh, whose family history Wanley wrote in the early 1670s (printed by Nichols, 4, pt 1). A love of the ministerial calling and its duties emerges in several of Wanley's poems, including verses from the 1660s written 'Upon his forced absence from the church, and sight of others going thither' and an earlier poem, 'Sunday', in which a minister imagines angels 'bear[ing] a part' in his congregation's 'Harmonie' ('Poems', 50, 25). 
Despite such job satisfactions, it is clear from his letters that Wanley found Coventry rather dull, and clear from his publications that he found consolation in omnivorous reading. The fruits of his frustration include a translation from Lipsius, 'A Discourse of Constancy' (1670; repr., 1672) and his work best known to posterity, 'The Wonders of the Little World, or, A General History of Man' (1678), an exhaustive and carefully documented compendium of human prodigies, which ran to at least six editions in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. In an agreement with his publisher Bassett, Wanley received thirteen copies of the book: six plain bound, six in marble, and one with a blank leaf bound between each printed one to create space for further entries. He died two years later, aged forty-seven, and was buried in Holy Trinity churchyard on 2 December 1680. In his will he endowed an annual Christmas sermon at Trinity, with a fee of 10 's'. charged on a house in Bishop Street. 'Peace and Rest for the Upright', his funeral sermon for John Bryan, was published posthumously in Coventry in 1681. 


@@@@@


doc= 28666


Nicolas Wanostrocht (1745-1812), uncle of Vincent, was appointed tutor to the children of Henry Bathurst, second Earl Bathurst, at Cirencester Park. By 1795 he was financially able to found a school known as the Alfred House Academy in Camberwell, a location, according to the prospectus, 'very convenient on account of the coaches going to and from London every hour'. He wrote a number of textbooks on French language, grammar, and syntax, mostly for children's use. With his wife, Sarah (died 1820), he compiled 'Le livre des enfans' (4th edn, 1808). The school itself was ahead of its time in encouraging the teaching of French rather than the classics and in its civilized approach to both discipline and leisure. Nicolas Wanostrocht, who printed the letters LLD after his name, died, probably at Alfred House, on 19 November 1812, aged sixty-three. He was buried at St Giles, Camberwell. After his death the school was continued by his nephew Vincent Wanostrocht, who as a child in 1789 had been allowed to leave France for England because of a pass signed by Robespierre. Besides revising his uncle's editions of the French classics, Vincent published in 1823 'The British Constitution, or, An Epitome of Blackstone's Commentaries on the Laws of England', which, although intended for school use, ran to 845 pages. Vincent Wanostrocht died in Camberwell on 25 January 1824. 


@@@@@


doc= 28667


Wanostrocht, Nicholas (1804-1876), cricketer and schoolmaster, was born on 5 October 1804 at Alfred House Academy, Peckham Road, Camberwell, the eldest son of Vincent Wanostrocht (1783-1824). He was educated ('c'.1809- 'c'.1820) at the academy, which had been founded by his great-uncle. 
The family, of Flemish origin, had come to England in the 1770s, when 
Although only nineteen, Nicholas succeeded his father as headmaster of Alfred House. He was 'facetious, jostling, merry, lively and amusing', a character far removed from the notion of a schoolmaster of the time. This perhaps explains why 'the notch-making Felix' played his cricket under a happy pseudonym with which he concealed his cricketing activities from the parents of his pupils. He gradually developed into a brilliant left-handed bat, with an effective cut to the off side from the shoulder. His slow 'lobs' were described as fatal to batsmen. His first match at Lord's was suitably marked by the fact that he, a classical scholar, and one Pontifex took thirteen wickets between them. In 1831 he first played for the Gentlemen against the Players, and he continued to appear spasmodically in that fixture down to 1851. In 1832 Wanostrocht moved his school to Blackheath in Kent, and between 1831 and 1852 he made fifty-five appearances for the county, for which Alfred Mynn also played. The two 'chimed in together' in friendship, although twice, in 1846, Mynn defeated Felix in single-wicket matches. In June 1846 he received the first benefit ever awarded to an amateur in a game 'in his honour' at Lord's. Although he was not a member, the MCC initiated the game in the knowledge that he had not made much money as a schoolmaster but had given much pleasure as a player. Before 'an immense assemblage' ('Bell's Life', 7 June 1846), including the prince consort, twenty-two of the best players available played a match hailed for its brilliance, although no record survives of how much money Felix received. His own eleven lost to that of Fuller Pilch, who admired Wanostrocht's left-handed batting as 'a beautiful thing to see'. 
The grace and fluency of Felix's batting were mirrored in his skill as an artist. Of some 200 works in pencil, pastel, or watercolour, many show his cricketing contemporaries, while his group portraiture created a harmonic unity in which each individual was allowed to be a solo performer in his own right. Thus the 'All-England Eleven' of 1847 shows the elegance and authority of Mynn and Pilch, as pillars on either side of the picture, with Felix himself modestly in the second row. He also commissioned the rising young artist George Frederick Watts, who attended evening classes at his school, to produce a series of lithographs to illustrate batting techniques. Felix himself was the model and knew that, as a left-hander, the printed image in reverse would be particularly useful in instruction. They are the finest examples of cricketing art in the age before photography. 
In 1845 Wanostrocht published 'Felix on the bat; being a scientific enquiry into the use of the cricket bat, together with the history and use of the Catapulta', which forms one of the classics of cricket. Although not the first instructional book, it was the first to give practical and illustrated advice. Felix's sense of humour was expressed in drawings showing what to do and what 'not' to do. The lithographs illustrating particular strokes are attributed to Watts but it would be more correct to say that they are in his style and based on the work that he had done for Felix eight years earlier. It seems probable that those used in 1845 were modelled on drawings by Felix himself and John Gilbert. The Catapulta was the first bowling machine ever devised. The original idea for such a machine was Felix's, and once it had been developed a demonstration took place at Gravesend in 1845, with Pilch participating. It was intended both for practice and for coaching: Harrow School and the newly formed Surrey county club were the first purchasers. Felix was also responsible for some other important cricketing innovations. To protect batsmen in a time of uncertainty in bowling actions, as well as roughness in pitches, he designed batting gloves and leg-guards placed inside a player's trousers. He also devised a cap that was more suitable than the conventional top hat. None of his inventions, however, brought him much money as he was content to sell his patents modestly to others. 
Wanostrocht began to suffer from rheumatism in the 1850s and gave up his school in 1854. He moved to Brighton and subsequently, in 1871, to Wimborne in Dorset. His first wife, Elizabeth Heale ('b'. 1806), whom he had married in 1825, died in 1863 and in the same year he married a widow, Catherine Bolls (1816-1900). The last years of his life were marred by ill health, but consoled by a happy marriage, encouraged by occasional painting commissions, and supported by an annuity of $50 from a capital sum raised through the endeavours of the Revd James Pycroft and Frederick Lillywhite. Wanostrocht died at his home, 1 Julian Villas, Wimborne, on 3 September 1876 and was buried in Wimborne parish church cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 28668


Wansey, Henry (1751-1827), woollen manufacturer and traveller, was born on 10 August 1751 at Warminster, Wiltshire, the sixth son among at least ten children of George Wansey (1713-1762), clothier, and his wife, Esther Greene (1713-1795). For two years he attended the Lord Weymouth Grammar School in Church Street, Warminster, simultaneously learning writing from an independent Warminster schoolmaster. Then from the age of eight until the age of fifteen he, like his three surviving elder brothers, was sent to the boarding-school at Frenchay, near Bristol, kept by the Revd Joshua Griffith, minister of the Presbyterian chapel there. He was prevented by his father's death in 1762 from attending one of the dissenting academies whose rationalist theology attracted both his father and later himself. 
Wansey served a traditional clothier's apprenticeship, possibly in Salisbury, where he was an established clothier by 1773. He remained in Salisbury for over thirty years, becoming a prosperous and influential, if at times contentious, gentleman capitalist. Controversially, he was associated with the introduction of the spinning jenny into the city, apparently in 1791. He shared the woollen lobby's protectionist views and vigorously defended the old prohibition on the export of wool in his 'Wool Encouraged without Exportation' (1791). Towards the end of his career and in retirement he joined the Bath and West of England Society and advocated various means of improving the quality of British wools: urging free- and wide-range shepherding techniques and campaigning for the improved Ryeland breed of sheep. As a Salisbury householder he joined the chorus of complaints against the rising costs of poor relief, publishing 'Thoughts on Poor Houses' (1801). 
On 14 June 1779 Wansey married Alice Abigail Gwynn (died 1793), third child and second daughter of Captain Richard Gwynn RN (died 1766), and his first wife, Elizabeth, of Upham, Hampshire. They had one daughter, Jane (1781-1805). Beyond work and family, Wansey vented his convictions and passions in three directions: travel, the defence of religious liberty, and antiquarianism. 
Wansey began indulging his taste for long-distance travel in 1794, the year after his wife died. He travelled to America in order to survey the American market for textiles and to discover the state of woollen manufacturing in the newly independent nation, possibly with a view to setting up a business himself. A prudent investment in American land likewise motivated him. He therefore bought two shares in the English settlement established on the Loyalsoc in western Pennsylvania by his co-religionist the Unitarian and scientist Dr Joseph Priestley. At the same time he purchased 1200 acres at Chest Creek on the west branch of the Susquehanna. In the new fashion of the day, he published an account of his American experiences, 'The Journal of an Excursion to the United States of North America in the Summer of 1794' (1796), which was published in a German translation in 1797. 
As an English Presbyterian, Wansey followed the denomination's dominant theological shifts, from Arianism to Socinianism. Privately he believed that a new translation of the 'Bible' would resolve denominational differences. Although a Unitarian, he sprang to the defence of orthodox, and therefore Trinitarian, dissenters during the 1790s. His 'Letter to the Bishop of Salisbury' (1798) stoutly upheld the right of dissenters to preach in the villages and, more widely, defended a universal right to freedom of private religious belief. In the 1820s he was embroiled in a controversy among Unitarians about missionary preaching. 
After retiring to Warminster about 1805, Wansey's summers were spent either on his travels or riding over the Wiltshire downs on antiquarian pursuits, and his winters were passed in the pleasant society of Bath. In 1806 he made a tour of the eastern counties, indulging his passion for family and local history. In 1814 he travelled to Paris with his nephew George Wansey to see and record the condition of France after Napoleon's confinement to Elba, of which he published an account, 'A Visit to Paris in June 1814' (1814). 
From early adulthood Wansey was interested in medieval and Roman remains, particularly Farleigh Hungerford Castle. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1789, having made drawings of monuments in Salisbury Cathedral which were either rearranged or demolished during the restoration scheme of Bishop Shute Barrington and the architect James Wyatt. He also publicly speculated on the origins of Stonehenge. In retirement he joined the circle of antiquaries who helped Sir Richard Colt Hoare at Stourhead in compiling a history of Wiltshire. His contribution was posthumously published, jointly with Hoare, as 'The Hundred of Warminister' in volume 3 (1831) of 'The History of Modern Wiltshire' (1822-44), edited by Sir Colt Hoare. 
Wansey died of a paralytic seizure at his home, Byne House, Church Street, Warminster, on 19 July 1827 and was buried in the town's Boreham Road nonconformist cemetery, a burial-ground which he had largely financed. He left an estate which included liquid assets of over $10,000. 


@@@@@


doc= 28669


Warbeck, Perkin (c.1474-1499), impostor and claimant to the English throne, was, according to the confession he made in 1497, born at Tournai in France, the son of John Osbek, comptroller of the town of Tournai, and Kataryn de Faro. His parents can be identified as Jehan de Werbecque and Nicaise Farou, members of Tournai's prosperous class of leading artisans, small merchants, and civic officials. Warbeck's early experiences were cosmopolitan. In 1484-7 he was in Antwerp, Bergen op Zoom, and Middelburg, completing his education by learning Flemish and working for merchants, probably in the cloth trade. In April-May 1487 he moved on to the Portuguese court in the company of Lady Margaret Beaumont, wife of the Anglo-Portuguese Jewish convert courtier and international trader Sir Edward Brampton. At Lisbon he took service with the royal councillor and explorer Pero Vaz de Cunha, then in 1488 with a Breton merchant, Pregent Meno. With Meno he sailed to Cork in December 1491 to sell silks. There he was prevailed upon by Yorkists, led by the former mayor John Atwater and the English exile John Taylor, to impersonate Richard, duke of York, second son of Edward IV, who had disappeared in 1483 together with his elder brother, Edward V. 
Warbeck's promoters, seeking patrons for their pretender, rapidly gained the support of the earl of Desmond; but it was Charles VIII, king of France ('r'. 1483-98), the man who had funded Taylor's trip to Ireland in the hope of distracting Henry VII from the defence of Brittany against French annexation, whose fleet brought Warbeck from Cork to Harfleur in March 1492, and so firmly onto the European stage. Charles's use for him ended when he made peace with Henry in November, but Warbeck and his adherents escaped to Mechelen. There he was welcomed by Margaret of York, dowager duchess of Burgundy, as her miraculously preserved nephew. Early in 1493, if trial evidence is to be believed, senior figures at the English court began to be drawn into plotting on Warbeck's behalf: John, Lord Fitzwalter, Sir Robert Clifford, William Worsley, dean of St Paul's, and even the chamberlain of the king's household, Sir William Stanley. Old loyalties to the house of York in general, and to young Duke Richard in particular, sustained the conspiracy across a wide geographical and social range. A long and earnest struggle of espionage and counter-espionage, propaganda and counter-propaganda began in the summer. Ireland was temporarily pacified, some plotters captured and others driven into sanctuary, and the invasion planned by the growing circle of exiles in the Netherlands failed to come to fruition. Yet Henry's attempt to force the Netherlanders to disown Warbeck by suspending English trade proved counter-productive, and Warbeck was sent on to Vienna to meet Maximilian, king of the Romans ('r'. 1493-1519), and secure his support. 
Maximilian was won over, and Warbeck accompanied him as an honoured guest on his return to the Low Countries in August 1494 for the ceremonial reception of his son Philip the Fair as ruler of the various Netherlandish principalities. At the turn of the year, however, the conspiracy suffered a blow as Clifford defected from Mechelen, taking Henry clear evidence of the treason of Stanley, Fitzwalter, and others. Arrests, trials, and executions followed. Yet Warbeck's partisans managed to co-ordinate renewed rebellion in Ireland with an attempted invasion of England, backed by Maximilian with ships and experienced soldiers. A landing at Deal on 3 July misfired: while Warbeck and most of his force were still on their ships, an advance party was overwhelmed by local levies, with 163 men captured and perhaps 150 killed. Warbeck's flotilla sailed on to Youghall and Waterford, joining Desmond in his siege of the city. The siege failed, but Warbeck soon found yet another patron in James IV of Scots. On 20 November he was welcomed to Stirling Castle. 
Not all Scots were convinced by Warbeck's claims, but James demonstrated his commitment to the pretender in a number of ways. On or about 13 January 1496 he married him to Lady Katherine Gordon, daughter of George, earl of Huntly, and a distant royal relative by marriage. Soon afterwards he provided Falkland Palace as a base for Warbeck's 1400 adherents, whom he was supporting at considerable expense, and began to plan an invasion of England. On 21 September James and Warbeck, who had promised him Berwick as reward for his help, crossed the border. Warbeck almost immediately withdrew, discouraged by the failure of his manifesto denouncing Henry's misgovernment to elicit any visible English support for his cause. James was left to demolish a few towers and follow the pretender home. His involvement with Warbeck soon threatened to cost him more than this frustration, as Henry prepared a huge army to invade Scotland. 
Suddenly events turned in Warbeck's favour. In May 1497 Henry's heavy taxation sparked rebellion in Cornwall. Disaffection soon spread to Somerset and beyond, and as the rebels prepared to march on London they apparently called on Warbeck to lead them. Henry's victory at Blackheath on 17 June drove the remnants of the rebel army back to Cornwall, but there they were able to welcome Warbeck, who had come from Scotland by way of Ireland to land at Whitesand Bay on 7 September. In Ireland he had found little support, thanks to Henry's pacification of the country under the government of the earl of Kildare. In Cornwall, by contrast, his force of 300 or so companions multiplied rapidly; by the time they laid siege to Exeter on 17 September they were reportedly 8000 strong. Yet the earl of Devon and his garrison bloodily rebuffed their attacks, and they withdrew to Taunton, arriving there on 19 September. There, as Henry's armies marched towards them, the rebels began to melt away until, in the early hours of 21 September, the pretender and his closest followers made their escape. 
John Taylor, one of Warbeck's first promoters, escaped to France, others to sanctuary in London. Warbeck and three companions took sanctuary at Beaulieu Abbey, Hampshire, but were recognized and surrendered on promise of pardon. Brought before Henry and his nobles at Taunton Castle on 5 October, Warbeck confessed his imposture. His wife, whom he had left in sanctuary at St Buryan, was entrusted to the care of Queen Elizabeth. Meanwhile Warbeck was repeatedly paraded through the city on Henry's return to London, and then accompanied the king on his progresses until 9 June 1498, when he escaped, perhaps with the king's connivance. He was soon found, in the Charterhouse at Sheen, twice displayed in the stocks atop a scaffold of empty wine barrels, and on 18 June locked up in shackles in the Tower of London for life. There, in the summer of 1499, he became entangled in his last plot, an attempt by sympathizers in London to free his fellow prisoner Edward, earl of Warwick, and himself, and to place one of them on the throne. Exactly what part he played in the conspiracy, and in its betrayal to the king on 3 August, is hard to establish, but Henry and his council resolved to punish all the principal participants. Warbeck was tried on 16 November in the White Hall of the Palace of Westminster together with Taylor and Atwater, who had been recovered from France and Ireland; all were condemned. On 23 November 1499, after one final confession that he was no Plantagenet, Warbeck was hanged at Tyburn. The king and queen treated his widow generously and she remarried three times in the following reign; she died late in 1537 and was buried in the church at Fyfield, Berkshire. Warbeck's career was portrayed, not unsympathetically, in John Ford's play 'Perkin Warbeck', published in 1634. 


@@@@@


doc= 28670


Warburton, Bartholomew Elliott George (1810-1852), writer, eldest son of George Warburton of Aughrim, co. Galway, formerly inspector-general of constabulary in Ireland, who married, on 6 July 1806, Anna, daughter of Thomas Acton of Westaston, co. Wicklow, was born near Tullamore, King's county. After being educated by a private tutor at Wakefield, Yorkshire, he was admitted pensioner at Queens' College, Cambridge, on 8 December 1828, but migrated to Trinity College on 23 February 1830. He graduated BA on 22 May 1834 and proceeded MA in 1837. He was admitted to the Inner Temple in 1832 and to the King's Inn, Dublin, in 1833, and was called to the Irish bar in 1837, but abandoned the law to superintend his Irish estates, travel, and write, always under the name Eliot Warburton. 
In 1843 Warburton made an extended tour through Syria, Palestine, and Egypt, describing his travels in the 'Dublin University Magazine' (1843 and 1844) and in 'The Crescent and the Cross, or, Romance and Realities of Eastern Travel' (2 vols., 1845), which reached seventeen editions. He married at St James's, Piccadilly, London, on 11 January 1848, Matilda Jane (1819/20-1861), second daughter of the late Edward Grove of Shenstone Park, Staffordshire. The Warburtons led a roving life. Their eldest son was born on 20 October 1848, when they were at Lynmouth, Devon. In January 1849 Warburton was dwelling at a chateau in Switzerland. The summer of 1851 was passed on the Tweed and Yarrow. He was popular and enjoyed adventure. 
After publishing 'Zoe: an Episode in the Greek War' (1847), Warburton produced the 'Memoirs of Prince Rupert and the Cavaliers' (3 vols., 1849; French trans., 1851), which was sympathetically treated, and a lifeless novel, 'Reginald Hastings' (1850). In 1851 he edited the 'Memoirs of Horace Walpole and his Contemporaries', a compilation by Robert Folkestone Williams, and in 1852 published 'Darien, or, The Merchant Prince' (3 vols.). Warburton could find no publisher and so abandoned a projected 'impartial' history of Ireland. He collected the materials for a 'History of the poor', and his last visit to Ireland was to examine poverty in Dublin. 
At the close of 1851 Warburton was deputed by the Atlantic and Pacific Junction Company to negotiate with the Indian peoples on the Isthmus of Darien on the northern coast of South America, and he embarked from Southampton on 2 January 1852, on board the West India mail steamer 'Amazon', with that object, and with the intention of exploring the district. The ship caught fire and Warburton was among those that perished off Land's End on 4 January. A window was erected to his memory in Iffley church, near Oxford. His widow in 1855 chiefly lived with her two little boys at Oxford or at Iffley. She married, on 6 August 1857, Henry Salusbury Milman, fellow of All Souls College, Oxford, and barrister, and died at Bevere Firs, near Worcester, on 23 October 1861, aged forty-one, having had three daughters with her second husband. Warburton's eldest sister, Sidney, was author of 'Letters to my Unknown Friends' (1846). She died at Clifton, Bristol, on 18 June 1858. 
One brother was George Drought Warburton. Another brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 28671


Warburton, George Drought (1816-1857), army officer and writer on Canada, the third son of George Warburton, of Aughrim, Galway, formerly inspector-general of constabulary in Ireland, and his wife, Anna, the daughter of Thomas Acton of Westaston, co. Wicklow, was born at Wicklow on 2 June 1816. He was educated at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, and served in the Royal Artillery from June 1833. From 1837 to 1838 he was with a detachment of the Royal Artillery serving in the Carlist War in Spain, where he was badly wounded in action. For his services he was made knight of the first class of San Fernando. In July 1844 he was sent to Canada, where he was stationed at Montreal. His anonymous description of the country under the title 'Hochelaga, or, England in the New World' (2 vols., 1846) was published as 'edited by Eliot Warburton', that is, his elder brother Bartholomew Elliott George Warburton, who had already established himself as a travel writer. George Drought's work quickly ran to several editions in England and the USA and soon became staple reading for travellers. 
Warburton returned from Canada in 1846 and was in 1848 promoted captain and served briefly in Corfu; he returned to Woolwich in 1849. The success of his first book encouraged him to write another anonymous work, 'The Conquest of Canada' (2 vols., 1849), which like the first passed through several editions and was widely read for its mixture of careful research, exotic descriptions, and lively style. In 1850 he was stationed at Harwich, from where he made frequent visits to London and joined Lady Morgan's literary circle with his brother Eliot. 
On 1 June 1853 Warburton married at St George's, Hanover Square, Elizabeth Augusta Bateman-Hanbury, the third daughter of the first Lord Bateman (1780-1845) and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1882), the daughter of Lord Spencer Stanley Chichester. Their only daughter married Lord Edward Spencer-Churchill. For his next book Warburton followed his brother by turning to biography in his 'Memoir of Charles Mordaunt' (2 vols., 1853). He retired from the army as a major on full pay in November 1854 to live at Henley House, Frant, Sussex. On 28 March 1857 he became independent Liberal MP for Harwich, having unsuccessfully contested the seat in 1852. He was in favour of extending the franchise, but opposed to the endowment of Maynooth. 
Warburton was subject to severe attacks of what has been described as 'indigestion' and, gripped by one such attack, shot himself through the head at Henley House on 23 October 1857. He was buried at Iffley, near Oxford, where his brother Thomas Acton was vicar and where there is a monument to his brother Eliot, who also died prematurely in tragic circumstances. Although his work is overshadowed by that of his brother, it was much read in its time. 
On 15 April 1869 Warburton's widow married George Rushout, third Lord Northwick, and in 1886 they received the Dunmow Flitch, a side of bacon presented each year at Dunmow, Essex, to a married couple who had lived in harmony for a year and a day. 


@@@@@


doc= 28672


Warburton, Henry (1784-1858), politician, was born at Lambeth, Surrey, on 12 November 1784, the son of John Warburton of Eltham, Kent, a timber merchant, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Abel Aldridge. His baptism was recorded in the register of nonconformists at Dr Williams's Library. He was educated at Eton College (he was in the fifth form, upper division, in 1799) and at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was admitted on 24 June 1802. He was in the first class of the college examinations as freshman in 1803, and as junior soph in 1804. He was admitted scholar on 13 April 1804, graduated BA (being twelfth wrangler and placed next to Ralph Bernal) in 1806, and proceeded MA in 1812. George Pryme knew him in his undergraduate days, and both Bernal and Pryme were later his colleagues in political action. While at Cambridge he obtained distinction as a 'scholar and man of science' (Grote, 76). 
For some years after leaving the university Warburton was engaged in the timber trade at Lambeth. He took over his father's business in 1808 and gained great experience of the Baltic timber trade, but his interest in science and politics ultimately led to his abandoning commercial life, and in 1831 he ceased trading. He led a long and eventually successful campaign against the timber duties. He was elected FRS on 16 February 1809. Dr William Hyde Wollaston was his closest friend, and in the autumn of 1818 they made a tour together on the continent. When Michael Faraday desired to become FRS, Warburton had objections to his election, on the ground that Faraday had on one occasion treated Wollaston unfairly. Correspondence ensued, and these objections were dispelled (H. B. Jones, 'The Life and Letters of Faraday', 2 vols., 1870, 1.347-53). Warburton was also a member of the Political Economy Club from its foundation in 1821 to his death, and introduced its discussion on tithes, rents, and profits on 13 January 1823. He became a close friend of David Ricardo, who often mentions him in his 'Letters to Malthus'. 'Philosopher Warburton', as he was nicknamed, was one of the leading supporters of Brougham in founding London University, and was a member of its first council in 1827. 
At the general election of 1826 Warburton was returned to parliament for the borough of Bridport in Dorset as a radical. He made his first long speech on 30 November, on foreign goods, and was re-elected in 1830, 1831, 1833, 1835, 1837, and 1841, all of the elections after the 'Reform Bill' of 1832 being severely contested. Even after the 1832 act, Bridport only had 500 voters; it was notoriously corrupt, as well as being dominated by the naval interest. Here Warburton's lumber experience assisted him and he topped the poll. On 8 September 1841 Warburton resigned his seat on the ground that a petition would have 'proved gross bribery against his colleague [John Romilly]' in which his own agent would have been implicated (Grote, 144). It subsequently came out that before the passing of the 'Reform Bill' he himself had paid large sums of money improperly to certain of the electors. A select committee was appointed to inquire into 'corrupt compromises' alleged to have been made in certain constituencies, so as to avoid investigation into past transactions, and the question whether bribery had been practised at Bridport was referred to the same committee, but nothing resulted from its investigations. Warburton was out of the Commons until 9 November 1843, when he was elected for Kendal. At the dissolution of 1847 he retired from political life, letting it be known that the reforms which he had at heart had been effected. 
Warburton's constituency difficulties were similar to those of a number of radicals in the 1830s: they were reformers returned by what were really pre-reform constituencies. Warburton was in some respects an 'avowed Benthamite' (Richardson, 108), but he did not always act with the philosophic radical group, and indeed in 1837 was the subject of severe personal ridicule from Sir William Molesworth in the Commons (Thomas, 239). He was, however, more associated with the group around Molesworth, George Grote, and Charles Buller than any other. In January 1835 Warburton, who was already in contact with Daniel O'Connell on electoral matters, developed a plan for three 'brigades' to enable a progressive government to gain a majority in the Commons. He secured O'Connell's support for a united opposition front to Peel's tory government. Warburton himself sent off individual circulars summoning the Irish MPs to the important meeting in Lichfield House on 18 February 1836, which produced the Lichfield House compact, described as 'one of the most decisive events in British political history between 1832 and 1847' (Macintyre, 144). It would be wrong to say that Warburton made the compact, but it would be fair to say that he enabled it. 
Warburton was an indefatigable MP, who often spent twelve hours a day in the house. He was active in a variety of causes, such as bankruptcy, the repeal of the stamp duty on newspapers, the Anti-Corn Law League, and the introduction of penny postage (he was secretary of the select committee on postal reform). He was also noted for his success in achieving the reduction and then abolition of the timber duties; he was a member of the select committee on them in 1835-6. In the course of this he was in March 1836 the subject of a censure motion by G. F. Young, who claimed that Warburton had fiddled his evidence to the committee to suit his case (Young withdrew his motion when Warburton gained whiggish support). 
It was, however, as the spokesman in the Commons for the medical reformers that Warburton's chief impact was made. Following an exchange with Peel in 1827 and the lectures given by George Birkbeck that year, Warburton persuaded the Commons to establish the select committee on anatomy in 1828 (dealing with the supply of corpses for dissection and 'bodysnatching'), wrote its report, and played a central role in the passing of the 'Anatomy Act' (after several attempts) in 1832. Warburton hoped the measure would deal not only with corpses but also with the domestic conditions of the poor. His intention was 'to bring science to the poor man's door' (Richardson, chap. 8) but in this wider hope he was largely disappointed (ibid., 210-15). Warburton's reform acted as a focus for medical reformers generally and for the Benthamites, and sometimes took a curious direction: Richard Carlile gave a gross speech in 1829 announcing that his corpse would be left for dissection, with his skin to be used to cover an armchair for Warburton (ibid., 168). Warburton was later attacked by William Roberts for being himself a shareholder in the London University anatomy school and for applying the act 'to advance the pecuniary interests of himself and his friends... by a traffic in the bodies of the poor' (ibid., 248). The accusation rested on the failure of the act to prohibit the sale of corpses; despite the serious character of the charges, Warburton did not sue for libel though he attacked Roberts in the Commons. He tried to improve the act by a commission in 1840, which failed to report. In 1834 Warburton was chairman of a select committee on the medical profession and in 1840 he, Thomas Wakley (with whom he had disagreed on the anatomy question), and Benjamin Hawes introduced a bill to register medical practitioners and establish a college of medicine, a proposal which the vested interests of the medical profession quickly saw off. 
Warburton, who was unmarried, died at his home, 45 Cadogan Place, Chelsea, London, on 16 September 1858 and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. He frequently sailed near the wind, and sometimes almost capsized; but his significance in early Victorian parliamentary radicalism was considerable. 


@@@@@


doc= 28673


Warburton, John (1682-1759), herald and antiquary, was born on 26 February 1682 at Bury, Lancashire, the eldest of four sons and eight children, apart from an unnamed infant burial, of Benjamin Warburton (1653-1710) of Elton, in the parish of Bury, and his wife, Mary (died in or before 1732), daughter of Michael Buxton of Manchester, woollen draper. His father was a yeoman and tenant of Lord Derby, on whose recommendation Warburton was admitted as a recruit to the excise on 8 February 1706. In August 1708, while an excise officer at Ravenglass, Cumberland, he effected an exchange to Cockermouth. Three weeks later he was reduced to the grade of assistant and sent to Newcastle upon Tyne for entering in his diaries details of surveys that he had not made. In November 1708 he was appointed officer of Darlington Ride Station; he was at Hartlepool when he married, on 1 October 1710 at Whitbeck, Cumberland, Dorothy ('b'. 1664), daughter of Andrew Hudleston of Hutton John, and his wife, Katherine, daughter of Sir Wilfred Lawson, baronet. She was twice widowed; her former husbands were John Parke (died 1699), of Whitbeck Hall, with whom she had at least one child, and Edmund Gibson (died 1708/9) of Townend, Whitbeck. 
In 1712 Warburton was promoted supervisor at Hexham, where he acted as a government informer during the Jacobite rising of 1715 and afterwards assisted the commissioners appointed to inquire into forfeited estates, for which he was advanced to the rank of collector at Richmond, Yorkshire, in 1716. In the same year he separated from his wife and published a map of Northumberland. He remained at Richmond until August 1718, when he was reduced, for drunkenness, to the position of supervisor at Wakefield. Shortly afterwards he resigned from the excise and began work on a map of Yorkshire, published about 1720, undertaking two journeys through Yorkshire, in 1718 and 1719, for which the journals survive (BL, Lansdowne MS 911, fols. 346-351b, and 378-99). While at Leeds he stayed with the antiquary Ralph Thoresby. He was admitted a fellow of the Royal Society in March 1719 and of the Society of Antiquaries on 13 January 1720 but was eventually ejected from both bodies, the former in 1757 and the latter before 1752. By 1720 he was already of note as a collector of manuscripts and antiquities. The diary of Humfrey Wanley, Lord Oxford's librarian, reveals, on 6 July 1720, Warburton's 'resolution to part with his Roman Altars' and that on 13 July he sold manuscripts for 100 guineas to Lord Oxford, many of which came from the library of Lord William Howard (1563-1640) at Naworth, Cumberland (pp. 56-7). 
Warburton was appointed Somerset herald by patent dated 18 June 1720 because, according to Stephen Martin Leake, Garter king of arms, he had 'made himself serviceable to the government in convicting some of the rebels' (Coll. Arms, MS SML 65, 252). From the time of his appointment his relations with the other heralds were bad, initially because he sought subscribers to his maps in return for publishing their arms in the margins without establishing their entitlement to arms. He denied knowledge of the advertisements that appeared in three newspapers in December 1722 stating that the contest between him and the provincial kings of arms about this matter had been determined in his favour. A map of Middlesex, Essex, and Hertfordshire, engraved by Samuel Parker on the scale of two-thirds of an inch to the mile, was published about 1724 under the names of Warburton, Joseph Bland, and Paylor Smyth. Warburton regularly failed to attend chapter meetings at the college, and at the coronation of George II, on 11 October 1727, though he was senior herald by length of appointment the deputy earl marshal ordered that he should officiate as junior herald, and Edward Stibbs, Chester herald, became acting senior herald and proclaimed the challenge. 
Warburton's second wife was Mary (1697/8-1778), widow of William Bury of Blankney, Lincolnshire, and daughter of Robert Morrison of London, a merchant. They married at some time between 15 April 1731, when Mary's first husband made his will, which was proved in June 1731, and 3 August 1732, when their son, John, was born. From her first marriage Mary had eight children, and with Warburton she had two; John married Anne Catherine, sister of the antiquary Edward Rowe Mores, and Amelia (1735-1786) became the wife of John Elphinston, a captain in the Royal Navy. 
In 1749 Warburton published a map of London and Middlesex engraved by Nathaniel Hill. His colleagues complained that it contained false arms. Warburton justified the arms in 'London and Middlesex Illustrated' (1749). He attempted to sell his office for $500 but failed. His 'Vallum Romanum' (1753) is largely a reprint of extracts from the 'Britannia Romana' of John Horsley (1685-1732); in the preface he stated not only that he suggested in 1715 that the Roman road from Newcastle upon Tyne to Carlisle should be repaired -- which after the 1745 Jacobite rising resulted in the 1751 act of parliament for making the road -- but also made the unfounded claim of his having been instrumental in the revival of Roman learning and the foundation of the Society of Antiquaries in 1717 by publication of his 1716 map of Northumberland. 
Warburton bore a marked physical resemblance to George II, who was one year his junior, as can be seen in the portrait of him in a tabard by Vandergucht, engraved in mezzotint by Andrew Miller in 1740. Contemporaries did not speak well of him; Thomas Pennant, the eminent traveller, wrote: 'I knew Warburton well. He was the most illiterate man I ever met with. Ignorant not only of the learned and foreign languages, but even of his own. As to drawing he had not the humblest rudiments of it. Nor was his knowledge greater in surveying... And yet this man had the Art or rather Cunning to pass through life with credit and to be spoken of after his death as a man of learning and ingenuity. ('N&Q', 149, 292)' According to Francis Grose 'All the publications under his name both books and maps were done by others hired by him' (Grose, 158). 
Stephen Martin Leake states that Warburton remained for many years a prisoner for debt in the Fleet prison. Latterly he lived in the College of Arms, where he died on 11 May 1759; he was survived by his wife, who died, aged eighty, in 1778. He was buried on 17 May at St Benet Paul's Wharf, following his testamentary wish to lie 'as near as possible to the remains of my old friend Gregory King, Esq. York Herald in the parish church of St. Benet's Paul's Wharf'. King, who was Lancaster (not York) herald, had died in 1712, eight years before Warburton became Somerset herald. A codicil, dated 25 April 1759, to Warburton's undated will, proved on 18 May 1759, refers to his being very feeble in his legs and hips. He is said to have made over $2000 by the sale of his maps, but spent more, partly on forming the magnificent manuscript and other collections that were largely dispersed at his death and are his most lasting monument. His collection of Elizabethan and Jacobean plays, several of which were unique, was destroyed through his own carelessness and the ignorance of Betsy Baker, his cook, by whom they were 'unluckily burnd or put under pye bottoms' ('DNB'). A list of the fifty-five plays destroyed is in the British Library (BL, Lansdowne MS 807). Warburton's library of printed books and manuscripts was sold at auction in 764 lots by Samuel Paterson at Essex House, Strand, in six evening sales commencing on Monday 19 November 1759. Edward Howard, ninth duke of Norfolk, purchased sixty-three lots and presented them to the College of Arms, where they form the EDN collection. The three-volume 'Baronagium genealogicum', for which the sale catalogue states that Warburton had been offered $500 by the late earl of Oxford, was purchased by Joseph Edmondson, who based his 1764 six-volume peerage of the same name on it. There was a subsequent sale on 7 and 8 March 1766. Thirty-eight volumes of Warburton's manuscript collections are in the Lansdowne collection in the British Library, of which twenty-one relate to Yorkshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 28674


Warburton, Sir Peter (c.1540-1621), judge, was the elder son of Thomas Warburton, of Nantwich, Cheshire, and his wife, Anne, daughter of Richard Maisterson of Nantwich, 'a gentlewoman of good discent' (BL, Lansdowne MS 85, fol. 118). After attending Staple Inn, Warburton entered Lincoln's Inn on 2 May 1562, and was called to the bar in February 1572, together with Thomas Egerton. Two years later a former fellow student jokingly lamented his abandonment of bachelorhood to marry (on 4 October 1574) Margaret Barlow, of Dransfield, Derbyshire, with whom he would have two daughters. Promoted bencher in 1582, he delivered the Lent reading of 1584 on the statute 21 Henry VIII c. 15 (falsifying recoveries). 
Already JP for the county and legal counsel to the town of Chester, where he had possibly owned a house since 1579, Warburton was recommended by the earl of Leicester, chamberlain of the palatinate of Chester, for one of the borough's seats in the parliament of 1584. Rebuffed on this occasion, he was still returned for Newcastle under Lyme, thanks to his own duchy of Lancaster connections. Warburton became an alderman of Chester in 1585 (as proposed the previous year by both Leicester and the earl of Derby), and represented the city in the parliaments of 1586, 1589, and 1597, declining nomination in 1593 on grounds of pressure of work. He had been appointed queen's attorney in the palatine courts of Chester and Lancaster in 1592, and vice-chamberlain of Chester the following year, when he also received a serjeant's writ. At the creation ceremony in Easter term 1594 Warburton invoked the names of two noble 'patrons' (the earl of Derby and Lord Dudley), linking them with three common lawyers, the late master of the rolls, Sir Gilbert Gerard, his successor, Thomas Egerton, and another Lincoln's Inn man, the judge Thomas Walmsley. 
Whether brought in to advise a fellow Lancaster lawyer on a complex conveyance, or earning 'credit and countenance' ('Salisbury MSS', 4.522) from a jury not initially predisposed in his favour, Warburton's abilities and legal learning gained respect from both laymen and professional colleagues. Several surviving copies of his reports of cases in the court of common pleas run from the year of his serjeantcy. Warburton was raised to the common pleas bench on 24 November 1600. The displeasure of the formidable Dowager Lady Russell, whom he had the misfortune to cross shortly afterwards, did not damage his relationship with her nephew Robert Cecil. Confirmed as judge following James I's accession, when he was also knighted, Warburton served on a succession of important state trials, besides following the Oxford, midland, and Norfolk assize circuits. He also continued to accumulate property in and around Chester, including the manor of Grafton where he built an elaborate red brick house. Such conspicuous worldly success doubtless helped assuage anxieties underlying his ultimately successful claims to a version of the heraldic arms of the Warburtons of Arley, into which family he married after the death of his second wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Thomas Butler of Warrington, Lancashire. Alice Warburton also predeceased him. 
Warburton died at Grafton Hall, Tilston, on 7 September 1621, and was buried in Tilston church, 'an ancient, reverend and learned judge... [who] made a good end of this life' ('Diary of Sir Richard Hutton', 40). After an orthodox Calvinist preamble his holograph will left his surviving daughter, Elizabeth Stanley, to supervise cash bequests totalling nearly $1800, and gifts of books by Bellarmine, Calvin, Camden, Foxe, Luther, and Speed, plus 'all my manuscripts and written bookes of the Lawes of England' (Ches. & Chester ALSS, MF 164/2). 


@@@@@


doc= 28675


Warburton, Peter (1588-1666), lawyer, was born on 27 March 1588, the eldest son of Peter Warburton of Hefferston Grange, Cheshire, and Magdalen, daughter of Robert Moulton of St Alban, Wood Street, London, auditor of the exchequer during the reign of Elizabeth I. He matriculated at Brasenose College, Oxford, on 11 May 1604 and graduated BA on 22 November 1606. He entered Lincoln's Inn on 27 January 1607, possibly after a period at Staple Inn, and was called to the bar in 1612. At an unknown date he married Alice, daughter of John Gardener of Worcester. This may not have been his only marriage: his will of 1664 implies that not all his children were the offspring of his then wife. 
On 1 February 1641, Warburton was part of a commission in Cheshire for the levying of the first of the Long Parliament's two subsidies. In June 1649 the Rump created him serjeant and raised him to the bench of the common pleas as part of a larger move to replace the seven of the fifteen common-law judges who had declined to continue under the Commonwealth. He was a member of the commission that tried the Leveller leader John Lilburne at the London Guildhall in October 1649. Over the course of the interregnum Warburton served on all circuits. He was 'a strong adherent of the Rump' and Oliver Cromwell did not renew his appointment upon his accession as lord protector at the end of 1653 (Black, 'Coram protectore', 59). He seems to have played little role in public life over the next two years although it appears that he served on the militia commission for Cheshire on 14 March 1655 along with Sir George Booth and Sir William Brereton. Warburton re-emerged from obscurity with Cromwell's raising of him to the upper bench in February 1656, and on 9 February the next year he presided with Lord Chief Justice Glynne at the trial of Miles Sindercombe. On succeeding as protector, Richard Cromwell re-appointed Warburton on 29 September 1658 but in May 1660 the Convention Parliament declined to continue his appointment. Although Warburton was pardoned at the Restoration, Charles II did not confirm him as serjeant. By the time Warburton came to draw up his will in February 1664 he was living in Wood Street, London. He bequeathed land in Staffordshire, Middlesex, and London to his son Peter, and other legacies to his son Robert, daughters Esther, Lady Goodricke, Elizabeth, Anne, and Abigail, and to his wife and her daughters, Sara and Anne. He died on either 26 or (more probably) 28 February 1666, and was buried at Fetcham church, Surrey. 


@@@@@


doc= 28676


Warburton, Peter Egerton (1813-1889), explorer in Australia, was the fourth son of the Revd Rowland Egerton Warburton (1778-1846) of Arley Hall, Northwich, Cheshire, and his wife, Emma (1782-1881), the daughter of John Croxton and the granddaughter and sole heir of Sir Peter Warburton of Warburton and Arley, Cheshire. Peter was the younger brother of Rowland Eyles Egerton Warburton and was born at Arley Hall on 16 August 1813. After being educated at Orleans and Paris, he enlisted in the navy in 1825. Having served over three years, he entered the Royal Indian Military College, Addiscombe, in 1829; he became an ensign in the 13th native infantry battalion of the Bombay army on 9 June 1831, and after service in India was promoted lieutenant on 18 July 1837. On 8 October 1838 he married Alicia (died 1892), the daughter of Henry Mant of Bath. They had three sons and three daughters. One of their sons was his second in command in his later journey of exploration. Warburton was promoted captain on 24 January 1845 and served as deputy adjutant-general for some time. In 1853 he retired with the brevet rank of major, intending to settle in New Zealand. Ultimately he chose South Australia instead, and arrived in Adelaide in September of that year. Almost at once he was appointed commissioner of police for South Australia. This office gave him the opportunity to explore little-known districts in the arid centre of South Australia and lakes Eyre and Torrens. In 1866 he discovered a large river, since named after him, which he traced from Lake Eyre north to near the Queensland border. In 1867, after a secret court of inquiry, the government suggested Warburton resign his position. When he refused he was dismissed. A later board could find no justification for his dismissal, but he was not reinstated despite its recommendation, and had to be content with the less well paid post of chief staff officer and the rank of colonel of the volunteer force of South Australia, which he accepted in 1869. 
In 1872 Warburton was selected by the government of South Australia to command an expedition to open up overland communication between that colony and Western Australia. When the project was abandoned by the government and taken up by two colonists, Thomas Elder and Walter Hughes, Warburton remained in command. He left Adelaide on 21 September 1872, and Beltana station on the 26th, travelling northward with sixteen camels and supplies. After he arrived at Alice Springs on 21 December 1872 he found the country suffering from drought, and decided to wait there for the rains; but he was disappointed. He started westward for the serious work of his expedition on 15 April 1873, but was in trouble for want of water on the 20th, which, with the extreme heat, caused constant anxiety. Making for the rivers Hugh and Finke in the direction of their supposed courses, he found that they were wrongly mapped. He reached Central Mount Wedge on 8 May, and soon afterwards Table Mountain. About 20 August he had attained Augustus Gregory's farthest point. The expedition continued across the arid terrain, short of food and water, losing their camels, until on 11 December they struck the Oakover River, about 200 miles from the Western Australian coast. On 30 December they were relieved by settlers from Roeborne, which they reached on 26 January 1874. They were the first explorers to cross the continent from the centre to the west and to survive a crossing of the Great Sandy Desert and nearly 1000 miles of country hitherto unknown to Europeans. On their return to Adelaide they were entertained at a public banquet, at which Warburton, who had lost the sight of one eye, attributed his survival to his Aborigine companion Charlie. The legislative assembly voted him $1000, and the Royal Geographical Society awarded him their gold medal for 1874. 
In 1875 Warburton was created CMG, elected a fellow of the Royal Geographical Society, and published his 'Journey across the Western Interior of Australia' (with introduction and additions by C. M. Eden and edited by H. W. Bates). He retired from the post of colonel commandant of volunteers in 1877 and took charge of the imperial pensions establishment. He lived at Norley Bank, Beaumont, near Adelaide, where he died on 5 November 1889, survived by his widow and two sons and a daughter. He was buried in the churchyard of St Matthew's, Kensington. 


@@@@@


doc= 28677


Warburton, Sir Robert (1842-1899), army officer, born in a Ghilzai fort between Jagdalak and Gandamak on 11 July 1842, was the only son of Robert Warburton (died 10 Nov 1864), lieutenant-colonel in the Royal Artillery, and his wife, Shah Jahan Begum (died in or after 1866), a noble Afghan lady, niece of the Amir Dost Muhammad. His half-brother was John Paul Warburton (1840-1919). At the time of his birth his mother was fleeing from the troops of Sardar Muhammad Akbar Khan, who pursued her for months after the massacre of the British at Kabul on 1 November 1841. She was sheltered by her relatives, and rejoined her husband on 20 September 1842. At the close of the First Anglo-Afghan War Robert and his mother accompanied his father's battery to Sipri, and then to Morar in Gwalior. In 1850 he was placed at school at Mussooree under Robert North Maddock, where he remained until 1 December 1856. He was then sent to England, and was placed at Kensington grammar school under the Revd George Frost. Thence he obtained a military cadetship, and after one term at Addiscombe College and two at the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich he was commissioned into the Royal Artillery on 18 December 1861. 
In 1862 Warburton was sent to India and stationed with the 1st battery of the 24th brigade at Fort Govindghar, the fortress of Amritsar. In August 1864 he exchanged into F battery of the 18th brigade and was stationed at Mian Mir. In 1866 the failure of the Agra and Masterman's Bank left him with only his pay to support himself and his mother. To increase his resources he exchanged into the 21st Punjab infantry. They were under orders for Abyssinia, and disembarked at Zoula on 1 February 1868. While serving with the transport train he showed great tact in conciliating local feeling, and he received the thanks of Sir Robert Napier. When he was invalided to England Napier wrote to the lieutenant-governor of the Punjab recommending Warburton for employment on the frontier. In 1868 Warburton married Mary, eldest daughter of William Cecil of Dyffryn, Monmouthshire. On his return to India in April 1869 he was attached to the 15th Ludhiana Sikhs, and in July 1870 he was appointed to the Punjab commission as an assistant commissioner to the Peshawar division. At the end of September 1872 he was removed temporarily to the sub-district of Yusufzai and stationed at Hoti-mardan, and in February 1876 he was permanently appointed to the post. Under Sir Pierre Louis Napoleon Cavagnari he took part in several campaigns against the hill peoples who raided British territory, particularly against the Utman Khel in 1878, and was repeatedly complimented by the government of the Punjab and by the secretary of state for India. In 1879, during the Afghan campaign, Cavagnari made repeated applications for Warburton's services, but the Punjab government refused to spare him. In July, however, he was appointed political officer of the Khyber, a post he held for eighteen years. 
On the news of the murder of Cavagnari at Kabul, Warburton was nominated chief political officer with General Sir R. O. Bright, commanding the Jalalabad field force. He joined the force on 10 October 1879 and proceeded to Jalalabad to ascertain the revenues of the district. In April 1880 he was invalided to England, and he did not return to the Khyber until 16 February 1882. From that time he remained on the frontier almost continuously until his retirement. Stern and implacable when necessary, he acquired a remarkable influence over the hill peoples, due in part to his Afghan ancestry. He raised the Khyber Rifles from among these peoples, and for many years kept the pass tranquil. His camp became the rendezvous of mutually hostile tribesmen. He was accustomed to travel with no weapon but a walking-stick, and everywhere met with demonstrations of affection. Able to converse fluently with the learned in Persian and with the common folk in the vernacular Pashto, he succeeded, by his acquaintance with tribal life and character, in gaining an unequalled influence over the border Afghans. 
In 1881 Warburton was promoted major, and in 1887 lieutenant-colonel. On 1 January 1890 he was created CSI. In 1893 he was promoted brevet colonel. He resigned his post on 11 July 1897 and received the thanks of the Punjab government. He had frequently requested the government to appoint an assistant who might continue his policy and succeed to his post after his retirement. This request was never granted, and the appointment of a successor without local experience was immediately followed by unrest. On the outbreak of unrest among the Afridis in August 1897 Warburton was asked by the Indian government on 13 August whether he would resume his service in connection with the Khyber Pass and the Afridis. He declared himself willing, but on 23 August, before definite orders had been given, open hostilities broke out. He served with the Tirah expedition of 1897-8, and in May 1898 he was created KCIE. The hardships of the rapid campaign wore out his constitution, and the loss of the Khyber posts caused him great heart-ache. He returned to England in poor health. He died at his home, 3 Russell Road, Kensington, on 22 April 1899, and was buried at Brompton cemetery on 27 April. Warburton's reminiscences were published posthumously as 'Eighteen Years in the Khyber' (1900). 


