@@@@@


doc= 28678


Warburton, Rowland Eyles Egerton (1804-1891), fox-hunter and poet, was born on 14 September 1804 at Norley Bank, Cheshire, the eldest son of the Revd Rowland Egerton (1778-1846), who added the name Warburton by royal licence on 10 August 1813, and his wife, Emma (1782-1881), daughter of John Croxton of Norley Bank, Cheshire, and his wife, Emma ('nee' Warburton). Rowland Egerton Warburton's mother was heir to the estates of Sir Peter Warburton, fifth baronet, and on the baronet's death in 1813 Rowland succeeded to the Arley and Warburton estates. His younger brother Peter Egerton Warburton was an explorer in Australia. 
Rowland Egerton Warburton was educated at Eton College and was admitted to Corpus Christi College, Oxford, in February 1823, though there is no evidence that he proceeded to a degree. On leaving Oxford he did the grand tour, returning to an active life as squire of Arley Hall, which he substantially rebuilt at a cost exceeding $10,000. Egerton Warburton was born into a county steeped in hunting lore and tradition and rode to hounds from an early age, riding with the oldest surviving hunt club in England, the Tarporley Hunt Club (founded 1762), of which he was elected a member in 1825 and president in 1838. He also hunted with the Cheshire hounds. On retiring from active fox-hunting in 1873 he was elected an honorary member of the Tarporley Club, an honour of which he was most proud. 
As squire of Arley, Egerton Warburton was very active in local life, being an ardent high-churchman and tory. Throughout his life he attended choral matins in the chapel at Arley Hall, wearing his hunting red on hunt days. He was, to quote his friend Samuel Wilberforce (1805-1873), bishop of Oxford and later Winchester, equally at home in the hunting field and the parish church. His politics were passive, though his long friendship with his neighbour W. E. Gladstone nearly foundered on the latter's disestablishment of the Irish church in 1869. He served as a JP and as high sheriff of Cheshire in 1833. 
On 7 May 1831 Egerton Warburton married Mary Brooke (1810?-1881), eldest daughter of Sir Richard Brooke, sixth baronet, of Norton Priory. The marriage produced three children, a son and heir, Piers (1839-1914), and two daughters, Mary Alice (died 1901) and Mary (died 1923). After the death of his wife in 1881, his younger daughter, Mary, and her family lived with him. Egerton Warburton's social background and education provided the perfect basis for his reputation as a poet of the hunting field, and he was known as the poet laureate of the Tarporley Hunt Club. He wrote verses for pleasure and for the enjoyment of his fellow huntsmen, and his 'Hunting Songs', first published in 1834, ran to eight editions in his lifetime. His style was humorous and jolly, reflecting the close social companionship of the hunt. Titles such as 'A Good Merry Gallop for Me!', 'Hard-riding Dick', 'Tarporley Hunting Song, 1870', and 'Farmer Dobbin' give an idea as to subject matter. His 'Quaesitum meritis', a nine-stanza poem, encapsulates the hunting man and his calling and shows Egerton Warburton at his best. His poetical output was not extensive, however, and was limited to hunting and archery. Apart from his verse he published documents on the cattle plague of 1747-9. 
Egerton Warburton suffered from glaucoma in 1874 and within a year was blind. This was a severe blow to a man of the countryside, but he still walked, being led by his gardener Peter Burgess on a leather strap. This was not enough, so he had a Furlong Walk constructed from wire along the terrace at Arley. From 1888 his health failed and he died on 6 December 1891. He was buried in the family vault at St Mary and All Saints Church, Great Budworth, Cheshire, on 10 December 1891. 


@@@@@


doc= 28679


Thomas Acton Warburton (c.1813-1894), Church of England clergyman and writer, was educated at Trinity College, Dublin (BA 1835, LLB and LLD 1852), and was called to the bar in 1840. He was ordained deacon in 1851 and priest in 1852. He was curate of Horspath, Oxford (1851-3), and vicar of Iffley (1853-76) and of St John the Evangelist, East Dulwich (1876-88). His chief works were the poorly reviewed 'Rollo and his Race, or, Footsteps of the Normans' (2 vols., 1848) and 'The Equity Pleader's Manual' (1850). He died at Hastings Lodge, Dulwich Wood Park, Dulwich, London, on 22 August 1894, and was buried in Iffley churchyard. He left a widow, Emily Alicia. 


@@@@@


doc= 28680


Warburton, William (1698-1779), bishop of Gloucester and religious controversialist, was born in Newark, Nottinghamshire, on 24 December 1698, the second and only surviving son of George Warburton (died 1706), attorney and town clerk of Newark, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1749), daughter of William Holman, an alderman of the town. The Warburton family originated in Cheshire, and Warburton's grandfather had been involved in Booth's attempted royalist rising at Chester in 1659. He himself wrote out some biographical and genealogical memoranda, which can be found in the British Library (Add. MS 4320, fols. 206-9). He attended school at Newark; one of his masters there was later rather surprised by the appearance of Warburton's major work, 'The Divine Legation of Moses', because 'when at school, he had always considered young Warburton to be the dullest of all dull scholars' ('GM', 1st ser., 50, 1780, 474). He briefly moved to Oakham School before returning to Newark, where he was taught by a cousin, also named William Warburton. His father died in 1706, so it was important that the young Warburton, who was responsible for his sisters and his mother (to whom he was devoted), should secure a career relatively early in life, and he was therefore articled for five years to an attorney, John Kirke, at East Markham, Nottinghamshire, on 23 April 1714. On completion of his articles he practised law in Newark from 1719 to 1723. 
Warburton had a pronounced appetite for reading, in which he was encouraged by his schoolmaster cousin, and it was this literary bent that led him to consider a change in vocation: he decided to take orders in the church. He was ordained deacon on 23 December 1723 by Archbishop William Dawes, of York. In that year his first publication appeared: 'Miscellaneous Translations in Prose and Verse', a small volume which he addressed to his patron, Sir Robert Sutton, MP for Nottinghamshire, who in 1727 presented him to his first small living, Greaseley, in Nottinghamshire. He was ordained priest by Edmund Gibson, bishop of London, at St Paul's on 1 March 1727, and in June 1728 Sutton presented him to the rich living of Brant Broughton, in Lincolnshire, which he continued to hold until 1746. In taking the living of Brant Broughton he resigned Greaseley, but in 1730 he was given the additional living of Firsby, in Leicestershire, by the duke of Newcastle (with whom he corresponded), which he held as a non-resident, with Steeping Magna, until 1756. 
Warburton became close to William Stukeley, the antiquary, who lived nearby at Stamford, and from 1722 until the eve of Stukeley's death in 1765 they exchanged letters, many of which were published in the second volume of J. Nichols's 'Illustrations of the Literary History of the Eighteenth Century'. Francis Peck and John Towne, both antiquaries, were also close to Warburton at this time, as was the philosopher David Hartley, then practising as a physician at Newark. Warburton was granted an MA at Cambridge, at the recommendation of Sutton, on the occasion of the king's visit in 1728. His literary ambitions had been further encouraged by a meeting in London at Christmas 1726 with Lewis Theobald, which had been organized by Matthew Concanen. Theobald used some of his new acquaintance's notes in his edition of Shakespeare; he corresponded with Warburton, chiefly about variant readings, for seven years. Warburton concurred with Concanen and Theobald in their severe criticisms of Pope, remarking in a letter to Concanen of 2 January 1727 that 'Dryden borrowed for want of leisure, and Pope for want of genius' (Nichols, 'Illustrations', 2.195). It was fortunate for Warburton that Pope remained unaware of this letter, which was first published by Mark Akenside in a note to his 'Ode to Thomas Edwards' in 1751. 
Concanen also arranged the publication of Warburton's first substantial work, 'A critical and philosophical enquiry into the causes of prodigies and miracles, as related by historians' (1727), in which the fledgeling author attacked, 'inter alia', Hobbes, Shaftesbury, and Mandeville (for their antipathy to religion), as well as a whole mass of ancient and medieval historians and chroniclers (for their credulousness). Aside from Ralegh and Clarendon, Warburton was equally critical of modern historians as supposedly lacking any real knowledge of human nature, and he was especially censorious when condemning the antiquarian tastes promoted by the followers of Stow and Holinshed, which he denounced as 'a deprav'd Appetite for 'Trash' and 'Cinders'' (W. Warburton, 'A Critical and Philosophical Enquiry', 65). He was concerned to demonstrate the role of providence in human affairs, particularly as evinced through the miracles of the 'Old and New testaments', in contradistinction to a superstitious reverence for portents and signs, which he associated with heathenism. The assured tone of this work would prove typical of his later writings, although this was a text that he quickly decided to suppress. When his disciple Richard Hurd came to edit Warburton's works he too chose not to republish it. Though the work appeared anonymously Warburton sent out presentation copies. He also published a less contentious work in 1727, 'The Legal Judicature in Chancery Stated', which drew on his legal training in stating the relationship between the chancery and the rolls court. This was an early instance of his marked interest in the law and the English constitution, subjects which retained his attention for the rest of his career. He would also long prove all too happy either to praise or defame prominent characters in print, and an early instance of this occurred just before he himself acquired a public reputation in the 1730s. Sir Robert Sutton was expelled from the House of Commons in 1732 as a result of corruption relating to the Charitable Corporation for the Relief of the Industrious Poor, of which he was a director; the following year Warburton provided 'An Apology for Sir Robert Sutton', in which he absolved him of the charges laid against him, concluding that his patron was a victim of malice, cavil, and hearsay. He later requested that Pope remove slighting references to Sutton in this connection from both 'Of the Use of Riches' and his 'Epilogue to the Satires'. 
Warburton's years at Brant Broughton were productive ones, and he spent a great deal of his time there in retired study. As Hurd wrote in his introduction to his edition of Warburton's works: 'living by himself, and not having the fashionable opinions of a great society to bias his own, he might acquire an enlarged turn of mind, and strike out for himself, as he clearly did, an original cast both of thought and composition. (Hurd, 'Discourse', 6)' The first major result of this independence of mind was his controversial defence of the established church and the 'Test Acts', 'The Alliance between Church and State' (1736). Warburton argued that religion alone can supply the rewards necessary to ensure that individual virtue continues to underpin the proper function of civil government. The magistrate was to oversee the government of the body, the church that of the soul. Fundamental to the alliance so formed was the influence that the church could give to the service of the state, and the support and protection that the state could in turn give to the church. Above all the church was to oversee that popular measure of the early and mid-eighteenth-century Church of England, the 'reformation of manners'. Warburton argued that an established denomination provided moral security for the state, and that it should therefore be composed by the majority confession of the nation, thereby standing clear of any multiplication and fragmentation into sectarianism. Sectarianism he identified as the source of contention and internal wars. Reflection on the legacy of the civil war, a subject on which he had planned to write a history, comprised a major part of his thinking on such matters. He read most of the political pamphlets produced between 1640 and 1660, and his very full annotations to Clarendon's 'History' were finally published by the Clarendon Press in 1826. While he argued that the civil magistrate could not coerce opinions he also declared that such opinions should always give way to civil peace. Utility was absolutely central to his argument, but it was a utility that led to knowledge of divine truth through the proper, tolerant practice of Christianity as a revealed religion. Hobbes and Roman Catholicism represented the two extremes to be avoided; Hooker and Locke were lauded as the defenders of a tolerant church. Neither high- nor low-church apologists were ready to accept what seemed to many to be an overly legalistic and compromisingly Erastian understanding of the church. Warburton's Erastianism was decidedly atypical of established apologetic in the eighteenth century, as was his explicit appeal to Lockean contract theory. None the less the work won him the admiration of Bishop Francis Hare of Chichester, who had been more critical of an edition of Velleius Paterculus that Warburton had addressed to him and which he published in the 'Bibliotheque Britannique' in 1736. Hare recommended Warburton, on the altogether securer strength of the 'Alliance', to the theologically sophisticated Queen Caroline, long noted for taking a close personal interest in church affairs. Unfortunately for Warburton the queen died in November 1737, and the preferment that he might otherwise have expected did not come his way. 
Bishop Hare died in 1740, leaving Warburton without an important supporter, but a friendship which was to prove extremely beneficial to him began in the same year. Although he had attacked Pope when a member of the Theobald circle, even contributing anonymous articles against him in the 'Daily Journal' in March and April 1728, he defended the theology of Pope's 'Essay on Man' in a series of letters in 'The History of the Works of the Learned' in December 1738. These letters were a reply to a work by a Swiss divine, Jean Pierre de Crousaz, who, in his 'Examen de l'essai de Monsieur Pope sur l'homme' (1737), had identified the argument of the poem with Leibnizianism; Warburton's able, if suitably combative, defence appeared as 'Vindication', in 1740. As a result of this unexpected defence, in which Pope's essay was read as an exercise in Newtonian natural theology, Warburton spent a week with him at Twickenham in 1740, having been introduced to him through the good offices of William Murray, later Lord Mansfield. Pope thus gained an increasingly influential theologian as his philosophical apologist, and Warburton gained the friendship of an extremely well-connected writer. Warburton seems to have brought Pope back to Christian orthodoxy, gradually supplanting the religiously suspect Bolingbroke in his affections. Pope attributed to Warburton the creation of the fourth book of the 'Dunciad', in its 1743 version; Warburton's notes to the poem are as concerned with theology as they are with literary questions, as are his detailed and expansive annotations to the 'Essay on Criticism' and the 'Essay on Man'. Such was the close nature of the friendship that when in 1741 an offer of an Oxford DD was made to Warburton, only to be rapidly withdrawn, Pope declined the simultaneous offer of an LLD that the university had made to him. At the poet's death Warburton became his executor, from which position he made rather a lot of money, and an interesting exchange of letters between him and his publisher Knapton on this and allied matters has been published as 'Pope's Literary Legacy'. 
It was through Pope that Warburton met Ralph Allen, the postal entrepreneur and Bath philanthropist, who had invited both men to his home, Prior Park, in November 1741. This was to prove Warburton's fortune, since he married Allen's favourite niece, Gertrude Tucker (died 1796), on 5 September 1745. When Allen died in 1764 Warburton was the beneficiary of a generous bequest, and it had also been arranged that Mrs Warburton was to be left Prior Park at the death of her uncle's widow. Warburton spent the greater part of the year at Prior Park from the date of his marriage, and it was largely for this reason that he resigned the living of Brant Broughton in 1746, the year in which Murray, as solicitor-general, secured him the lucrative and influential preachership at Lincoln's Inn. His lectures on religion at Lincoln's Inn were published in two volumes in 1753 as 'The Principles of Natural and Revealed Religion Occasionally Opened and Explained'. His links with Lincoln's Inn were affirmed in 1769, when he founded the Warburtonian lectures on the proof of Christianity through prophecies (a favoured proof in eighteenth-century Christian apologetics). 
Warburton had long been deeply interested in literature, and his friendship with Pope consolidated this interest. He was also close to Samuel Richardson, for whom he wrote a preface to 'Clarissa', and he likewise provided a dissertation on chivalry for Thomas Jarvis's translation of 'Don Quixote' (1742). Henry Fielding knew him through a mutual friendship with Allen, and a mock encomium to his learning is to be found in 'Tom Jones' (bk 3, chap. 1). Laurence Sterne, whom he met through a friendship with David Garrick, had offered to make him Tristram's tutor in 'The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman' but Warburton allegedly prevented this by presenting Sterne with a small present of a bag of gold. Warburton had long been fascinated by Shakespeare, contributing much to Sir Thomas Hanmer's edition of the works. The question of how much he actually contributed to this edition later provoked a furious quarrel, as can be seen in Philip Nichols's pamphlet 'The Castrated Letter of Sir T. Hanmer' (1763). Warburton had produced his own edition of Shakespeare in 1747. This quickly proved controversial, not least as many of his emendations are nothing if not absurd, and he was attacked by Thomas Edwards of Lincoln's Inn (where Warburton was the recently installed preacher) in his 'Canons of Criticism' (1748). Edwards's criticisms were reaffirmed by John Upton in 'Critical Observations on Shakespeare' (1748) and by Benjamin Heath in 'Revisal of Shakespeare's Text' (1766). Warburton's contributions to the developing art of the editor were, however, considerable, if markedly uneven in quality. Much attention to these matters is apparent in Warburton's lengthy correspondence with Thomas Birch, to whom he had declared on 24 November 1737 that 'the most agreeable subject in the world... is literary history' (BL, Add. MS 4320, fol. 119'r'). In a much later letter to Birch, of 25 October 1763, Warburton characteristically emphasized an allied commitment in a manner otherwise surprising in a bishop: 'You must know I am a great Antiquarian, tho' I make no word of it; as half-ashamed of my taste; like a man who has taken an odd fancy to an ugly mistress' (ibid., fol. 199'r'). It was this union of assumed piety and frank worldliness that gave Warburton so ambiguous a contemporary reputation. This applied to all his public dealings, and especially in regard to his literary labours, where he acquired a reputation for graceless irascibility. Edwards's well-received, deeply humorous critique of Warburton's Shakespeare edition had delighted Akenside, a declared enemy of Warburton, who similarly lampooned Warburton's work on editions of Milton and of Pope's poetry in his 'Ode to Thomas Edwards' (1751), declaring that no poet required the assistance of 'such a militant divine': '
[a] sophist vain, 

Who durst approach his hallow'd strain 

With unwash'd hands and lips profane. 
(ll. 40-42)' Nevertheless whatever their actual opinions of Warburton all writers owed him a debt for his work on literary property. His 'Letter from an Author to a Member of Parliament Concerning Literary Property' (1747) was the first theoretical examination of the subject, a treatment not unrelated to his own interest in his role as Pope's literary executor. His edition of Pope's works appeared in 1751; he wrote a large part of the life of Pope -- attributed to Owen Ruffhead -- that appeared in the 1769 edition of the works. 
Pope had been concerned to introduce his new friend to his old confidant Bolingbroke. He wrote to Allen on 6 March 1744 how he wished to introduce Warburton to 'the One Great Man in Europe, who knows as much as He' ('Correspondence of Alexander Pope', 4.504-5). The introduction heralded a poisonous rivalry, and Warburton responded testily, in 'A Letter to the Lord Viscount B -- ' (1749), to Bolingbroke's equivocal remarks concerning Pope in his 'Idea of a Patriot King', which led to a war of words in which Bolingbroke made some telling points in his 'Familiar Letter to the most Impudent Man Living' (1749). This was an encounter which led to the most tedious and unnecessary of Warburton's writings, 'A View of Lord Bolingbroke's Philosophy' (1754-5), a work which Montesquieu admired. Pope himself had seen a dark side of Warburton's character, which he noted in a letter of August 1743 to Martha Blount, who had felt slighted by Warburton and the Allens: 'W. is a sneaking Parson, & I told him he flattered' ('Correspondence of Alexander Pope', 4.463-4). 
Warburton's friendship with Pope had begun in the short interval between the appearance of the first and second volumes of his major work, 'The Divine Legation of Moses Demonstrated' (1738-41), an audacious demonstration of sometimes prodigious and always combative learning that guaranteed him his reputation as the would-be literary dictator of mid-eighteenth-century England, a role which his work as Pope's executor only served to emphasize. Pope's reading of the first volume left him rhapsodic, as he wrote to Warburton on 24 June 1740: 'I am not really Learned enough to be a judge in Works of the nature & Depth of yours, but I travel thro your book, as thro an Amazing Scene of ancient Egypt or Greece, struck with Veneration & Wonder, but at every step wanting an Instructor to tell me all I wish to know. Such you prove to me in the Walks of Antiquity & such you will prove to all Mankind. ('Correspondence of Alexander Pope', 4.251)' Hurd's comparable praise for the work is not without foundation, especially his claim that 'in the whole compass of modern or antient theology, there is nothing equal or similar to this extraordinary performance' (Hurd, 'Discourse', 36). The central argument of this work is built on a daring paradox, the pivotal need for which is apparent in the subtitle to the 'Divine Legation', in which the truth of Christianity is to be shown on the principles of a 'religious deist'. Deists had dismissed all priestly religions as providing false comfort to humanity through the fallacious doctrines of a future life, which were merely an 'engine' of 'priestcraft' by which the clergy gained false authority and illegitimate status in society. According to Warburton, however, Moses did not even mention such a doctrine, thereby proving that his was the true revealed faith, since God chose not to reveal such a doctrine immediately but hid it until the time was right for its proper promulgation. In defence of this paradox Warburton argued that God had intervened directly in the ancient world of the Hebrews through extraordinary providences, and there was thus no need for comforting doctrines of futurity; not one of the characters in the 'Old Testament' acted according to the doctrine of a future state, living only with respect to the present life. This proved a contentious proposition, and it was one which Warburton had quickly to defend from a host of critics, both freethinkers and Christians. Replies to the central paradox of the work appeared in rapid succession throughout the 1740s and 1750s; enmity to Warburton's ideas frequently united otherwise disparate groups of clergy. His arguments were challenged by Cambridge Newtonians such as Arthur Ashley Sykes and John Jackson, in 1744 and 1745 respectively; by Hutchinsonians such as Julius Bate, in a tract of 1741; by William Law, the nonjuror and mystical Behmenist, as late as 1756; and, very effectively, by the ultra-latitudinarian Francis Blackburne, in 1757. It is a tribute to the polemical ire of Warburton's writings that opposition to them could encompass such an unprecedentedly wide arc of clerical opinion. Benjamin Newton, writing in 1758, suggested that the work actually provided ammunition for the very freethinkers that it was designed to refute, while John Tillard, in a tract published in 1742, defended the ancient religions against Warburton's criticisms. Bishop Potter of London, who distrusted Warburton, encouraged the clergy of his diocese to publish critiques of 'The Divine Legation'. Most controversially Warburton subsequently became embroiled in a very public dispute in 1756 over the nature of the book of 'Job' with Robert Lowth, professor of Hebrew at Oxford, an encounter in which he came out much worse than the learned Lowth, who had originally been offended by a slighting remark that Warburton had made regarding his father (Warburton was both envious and suspicious of clerical dynasties). As a result of this encounter Warburton once more argued, in a 1765 addition to the work, that Job had had no knowledge of futurity and that the work was a political allegory; Lowth again contested this, in 'Letter to the Author of 'The Divine Legation'', and he was not above pointing to Warburton's poor command of Hebrew in making his case. 
Quite aside from its paradoxical kernel 'The Divine Legation' proved controversial because, in Hurd's words, it 'took in all that was most curious in Gentile, Jewish, and Christian antiquity' (Hurd, 'Discourse', 20). His theories regarding the origins of writing were to prove particularly influential: Condillac translated sections of the work on the nature of hieroglyphs, guaranteeing Warburton a high status in linguistic speculation throughout late eighteenth-century Europe. This standing was questioned by others in France: Voltaire wrote a short refutation of the bishop's work, 'A Warburton', and Rousseau criticized his notions of church and state relations in his 'Contrat Social'. A German translation of 'The Divine Legation' was produced at Leipzig and Frankfurt between 1751 and 1753; it was to influence a number of German theologians and classical scholars. Praise for the work was also received from Virginia, where the book was much discussed. Warburton's readings of classical sources were, however, often as unhappily received as were his readings of sacred literature. A long-standing friendship with Conyers Middleton, with whom he shared marked hatreds of more consciously orthodox divines, was brought to an abrupt end when Middleton, the biographer of Cicero, questioned Warburton's interpretation of Cicero's religion in the fifth edition of his 'Letter from Rome' (1742). Warburton distanced himself from Middleton when writing against other critics of his work; his notes to later editions of 'The Divine Legation' further allowed him to finish off his critics in a brutal manner, a characteristic that his contemporaries found increasingly distasteful. Nevertheless this public distancing from an erstwhile friend also served to reinforce Warburton's otherwise contentious reputation for orthodoxy, as Middleton's reputation for heterodoxy had grown markedly over the preceding decade and a half. Similarly Warburton's friendship with John Jortin, who, like Middleton, was a Cambridge divine of advanced theological opinions, ended when Jortin mildly censured his reading of the sixth book of the 'Aeneid' in 'Six Dissertations' (1755). Jortin was savagely attacked by Richard Hurd, Warburton's young acolyte, who was to prove a long-standing epistolary confidant, in a vituperative pamphlet, 'The Delicacy of Friendship'. Edward Gibbon's first venture into print in English, 'Critical Observations on the Sixth Book of the Aeneid' (1770), was also largely concerned with Warburton's alleged misreading of the text, and his engagements with Warburton were of great significance for him at the outset of his intellectual life, as is clear in his account in the 'Autobiographies'. 
Middleton had produced a critique of the miracles of the early church which appeared in 1749; it initiated a major debate among churchmen and other interested parties. Warburton seized the opportunity to affirm his orthodoxy by arguing for the truth of what was one of the latest possible miracles, according to the standards of protestantism: that which faced the emperor Julian at the rebuilding of the temple at Jerusalem. His 'Julian' (1751) proved a controversial work; Montesquieu greatly admired it, while Voltaire loathed it. The nonconformist divine Philip Doddridge, a friend and frequent correspondent of Warburton, was also impressed by the work. The Doddridge-Warburton correspondence -- eighteen letters from Warburton are reproduced in G. F. Nuttall's 'Calendar' of Doddridge's correspondence (1979) -- reveals Warburton's more professedly pious commitments; he was also a great admirer of Doddridge's expositions of the 'New Testament' and a manifest follower of his recommendations for family prayer and devotions. Doddridge was interested too in Warburton's feelings on being attacked by John Byrom in 'Enthusiasm: a Poetical Essay'. Warburton's relations with 'enthusiasm' were not happy. His dislike of Methodism was deep, and he condemned both the soteriology and the practical enthusiasm of John Wesley and George Whitefield in 'The Doctrine of Grace' (1763), a work which drew hurt replies from both men. Both Wesley and Whitefield believed that his notion of grace revealed Warburton to be less than orthodox, leading Whitefield to expostulate, 'Alas! What could a Middleton say more?' (G. Whitefield, 'Observations on some Fatal Mistakes, in a Book Lately Published, and Intitled, 'The Doctrine of Grace'', 1764, 7). The work also drew eloquent criticisms from John Andrews, a clergyman of Warburton's diocese, and Thomas Leland, of Trinity College, Dublin, both of whom felt it too vituperative a work and one which potentially exposed the Church of England to doctrinal assault concerning the nature of grace from more orthodox protestants. Thomas Hartley condemned Warburton's views in an appendix to his 'Paradise Restored' (1764). Samuel Chandler defended Warburton against Wesley but there was otherwise little support for 'The Doctrine of Grace'. Warburton's work on the doctrine of the sacraments, 'A Rational Account of the Nature and End of the Lord's Supper' (1761), was, surprisingly perhaps, quietly received. The 1760s proved the zenith of Warburton's controversial career, climaxing in the quarrel with Lowth, and this was at least as much a consequence of his political as of his theological opinions. Lowth's words in his 1765 'Letter' to Warburton had done their work: 'I am a staunch Republican and a zealous Protestant in Literature, nor will ever bear with a Perpetual Dictator, or an Infallible Pope, whose Decrees are to be submitted to without appeal, and to be received with implicit assent' (p. 133). 
Warburton had always profited from his strict adherence to the interests of the whig party. His dedication of the second volume of 'The Divine Legation' to Lord Chesterfield had resulted in the offer of an Irish chaplaincy in 1745, when Chesterfield was made lord lieutenant, an offer which subsequently fell through when family duties made it impossible for Warburton to leave England, a decision which Chesterfield much respected. A new edition of 'The Alliance' was also dedicated to Chesterfield, in 1747. Warburton was, however, no mere place-seeker: he was a staunchly loyal whig and he published two strongly anti-Jacobite sermons when Charles Edward Stuart's forces were in England. The politico-theology of these sermons was challenged as extreme by Henry Stebbing, a critic of 'The Divine Legation', and Warburton replied to him in equally strong terms in 'An Apologetical Dedication to the Reverend Dr Henry Stebbing' (1746), virtually accusing him of crypto-Jacobitism. Warburton's dual standing as Pope's editor and whig churchman was satirized in an anonymous work, 'Proposals for printing, by subscription, in one volume in quarto, a commentary critical and theological upon the learned Mr William Warburton's apologetical dedication to the Reverend Dr Henry Stebbing' (1746), the tone of which reveals just how unpopular Warburton had become with many of his critics. This is also apparent in William Dodd's satire, 'A New Dunciad'. Warburton's denunciations of freethinkers also gained him enemies in the sceptical camp, most notably David Hume. Warburton had originally thought Hume too low a specimen of the sceptical breed to notice but he felt obliged to respond to Hume's 'Natural History of Religion' with 'Remarks' (1757). Even then he felt it proper to publish the 'Remarks' anonymously, completing the work with Hurd's assistance. Hume was unimpressed by the performance. In a letter to William Strahan of 25 June 1771 he made an observation that would have been shared by many other writers: 'It is petulance, and Insolence and abuse, that distinguish the Warburtonian School, even above all other Parsons and Theologians... I remember Lord Mansfield said to me that Warburton was a very opposite man in company to what he was in his Books; then, replyd I, he must be the most agreeable Companion in Europe, for surely he is the most odious Writer. ('Letters', 2.244)' A consistent whig in his politics, Warburton had been notably loyal to Newcastle and then to Lord Chancellor Hardwicke, who rewarded him with a prebend at Gloucester in 1754. Warburton profitably exchanged this for one at Durham, in whose chapter library he read widely. It was at Durham that he critically annotated a copy of Daniel Neal's 'History of the Puritans' in preparation for his assault on Methodism, an early manuscript preparation of which, 'The true Methodist, or, Christian in earnest', revised in July 1755, is in the John Rylands Library at Manchester (MS 253 AB). In 1754 he became a chaplain to the king and was granted a Canterbury DD by Archbishop Herring. He regularly exchanged letters with Charles Yorke, the future attorney-general, a correspondence (published in 1812) in which his wife occasionally joined in successfully seeking a naval command for her brother (BL, Egerton 1952, fols. 223-4, 226, 228, 230). In 1757 Warburton was made dean of Bristol, and through the local interest of Allen and of William Pitt, an admirer and frequent correspondent, he was made bishop of Gloucester in 1760 (holding his Durham prebend 'in commendam'). This did not win universal approval and Horace Walpole later observed that Pitt had promoted him 'to the opposition of the whole episcopal bench', as Warburton's 'doubtful Christianity... writings and turbulent arrogance made him generally obnoxious' (Walpole, 85). Warburton's principled whiggery was expressed in his sermon to the House of Lords on 31 January 1760 and in a sermon condemning slavery which he delivered in 1766 to the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts. 
Warburton's political associations, combined with his monopoly on Pope's writings, served to expose him to the ire of John Wilkes, who grotesquely parodied the bishop's minute and pugnacious style of annotation in the notes to his notorious 'Essay on Woman' (1763), a clandestine work that Warburton, the earl of Sandwich, and Lord Mansfield sought out and suppressed. The notes, attributed to Warburton, were as obscene as the poem itself. This attack on Wilkes, widely perceived as a 'patriot', gained Warburton further notoriety, and he was condemned for it at some length by the clerical poet Charles Churchill, in 'The Duellist' (1764) and in the dedication to his posthumously published 'Sermons' (1765). In 'The Duellist' Warburton's pride, meanness, ambition, gracelessness, and hypocrisy were blended with allusions to his writings, leading Churchill to a curt dismissal with which many contemporaries would have concurred: '
A great Divine, as Lords agree, 

Without the least Divinity; 

To crown all, in a declining age, 

Enflam'd with Church and Party-rage, 

Behold him, full and perfect quite, 

A false Saint, and true Hypocrite. 
(bk 3, ll. 806-10)' Churchill also libelled Warburton and his wife in this poem, claiming that their only child (who was to predecease both) was not Warburton's at all; he was rumoured by some to be the son of his chaplain, and by others to be the son of the wit Thomas Potter (1673/4-1747). His widow subsequently married another chaplain, Martin Stafford Smith, in 1781. Walpole greatly enjoyed Warburton's apparent discomfiture during the Lords' debate on Wilkes in 1763, and he claimed that Warburton had subsequently used his connections to try to gain the bishopric of London for himself as a recompense for the abuse that he had suffered from Wilkes and his allies. Warburton certainly believed that he deserved better than the see of Gloucester, and his letters to Hurd reveal the suspicions and envies of a disappointed man. 
Warburton fell into a rapid decline in the wake of the controversies of the 1760s. He left Prior Park to reside in Gloucester in 1769, where he had a serious fall in his library in 1770, from the effects of which he never recovered. The loss of his young son ('b'. 1756) in 1775 exacerbated his illness, and he fell into senility, dying in the bishop's palace at Gloucester on 7 June 1779. He was buried in the cathedral, where his widow erected a monument to him bearing an inscription by Hurd. Hurd continued to correspond with her after she remarried, especially regarding the edition of Warburton's works, about which Hurd was very careful. He wrote to her on 23 March 1784, noting: 'We have reduced the expense as low as possible by printing only 200 copies, & by agreeing for a Head to be engraved from the picture at Gloucester at 20$, & for examining the Greek & Latin quotations, which must be done with care, 20$ more. (BL, Egerton 1958, fol. 98'v')' Hurd and Mrs Stafford Smith were Warburton's closest posthumous allies. The Warburtonian party had never been large, encompassing John Towne, Thomas Balguy, Jonathan Toup, and (though they later fell out) John Brown, whose 'Estimate' Warburton had much enjoyed. He especially favoured Brown's critique of Shaftesbury's moral doctrine in his 'Essays on the Characteristics'; Warburton had always detested Shaftesbury and frequently bemoaned his influence on what he derided as fashionable opinion. Warburton had written a preface to Catharine Cockburn's 'Remarks', on Thomas Rutherforth, in 1747 but otherwise wrote sparingly on moral theory. He had neither the aptitude nor the inclination to write in a philosophical manner, devoting himself instead to historical and literary defences of Christianity. His reputation in the mid-eighteenth century was high but the changing nature of apologetic, which would favour such divines as Joseph Butler, meant that it fell into obsolescence with remarkable speed. 
As early as 1785 John Disney observed that 'Few learned theological books have been more universally read in their day, than Mr. Warburton's 'Divine legation', and still fewer of those which have been so much noticed, have been so soon neglected, disregarded and forgotten' (Disney, 269). Disney believed that the engagement with Lowth had proved decisive in Warburton's decline. When in conversation with 'three very learned and respectable dignitaries of the established church' Disney noted that all wondered whether Warburton's writings had better served the cause of infidelity than they had Christianity (ibid., 270). The seven-volume edition of his works financed by his widow under the editorship of Hurd, which appeared in 1788, signally failed to make an impact; it contained some hitherto unpublished material, notably parts of the uncompleted ninth book of 'The Divine Legation', 'Directions for the Study of Theology', and Warburton's notes on Neal's 'History of the Puritans'. His reputation was further harmed when Samuel Parr, an opponent of what he identified as the small Warburtonian party in the church, published the long-disowned 'Enquiry into the Causes of Prodigies and Miracles' in 'Tracts by Warburton and a Warburtonian' (1789). Not all of his readers were so dismissive, however: George Grote, in making manuscript notes from his writings, had been convinced by the argument of Warburton's 'Julian' (BL, Add. MS 29524, fols. 80-86), an admiration in which the secular historian had been unpredictably joined by Joseph Milner, the pre-eminent evangelical church historian. The publication in 1809 of the letters between Hurd and Warburton added to this sense of a re-evaluation of the bishop and his works. In 1828 a prominent evangelical, James Garbett, published an Oxford fellowship dissertation, 'An Essay on Warburton's 'Divine Legation'' (1828), which contained judicious praise as well as a level of predictable censure. Gladstone strongly condemned the teaching of the 'Alliance' in 'The State in its Relations with the Church' (1838), although Macaulay was a little more accommodating of the Warburtonian thesis in his 'Edinburgh Review' account of Gladstone's book. Francis Kilvert published an edition of the previously unpublished papers in 1841 and John Selby Watson produced a notably unsympathetic biography in 1863. Mark Pattison wrote excellently about Warburton, both as a subject in himself and as an editor of Pope's poetry, while essays concerning him by both Leslie and James Fitzjames Stephen appeared in the 1870s; he is also interestingly examined in Leslie Stephen's 'History of English Thought in the Eighteenth Century' (1878). A. W. Evans produced a well-balanced and sympathetic biography in 1932. Warburton's significance has been increasingly recognized by literary historians and by such intellectual historians as J. G. A. Pocock, as well as by Jacques Derrida, in 'Of Grammatology', an instance of his continuing relevance to European, as much as to British, intellectual history. 


@@@@@


doc= 28681


Ward, Sir Edward (1638-1714), lawyer and judge, was born in Northamptonshire, the second son of William Ward of Preston, Rutland. He was educated under Francis Meres at the free school at Uppingham, Leicestershire. Ward then studied at Clifford's Inn and in June 1664 entered the Inner Temple. He was called to the bar on 27 November 1670. On 30 March 1676 he married Elizabeth (1658-1723), daughter of Thomas Papillon MP, a London merchant. They had four sons and five daughters. Ward soon gained an extensive practice, particularly in the exchequer, where he was the leading pleader on the equity side of the court in 1680. 
In July 1683 Ward was counsel for Lord William Russell during his trial for treason. In November 1684 he was counsel for his father-in-law in the action for false imprisonment brought against him by Sir William Pritchard. Also in November 1684 Ward appeared for the earl of Macclesfield in the action of 'scandalum magnatum' brought against John Starkey, a member of the Cheshire grand jury which had presented the peer as disaffected. From these cases it can be discerned that Ward's political sympathies lay with the whigs. 
On 20 November 1687 Ward was called to the bench of the Inner Temple. Following the revolution of 1688 Ward was chosen by William III in April 1689 as a judge, but he was allowed to refuse the place probably because of the financial penalties involved in giving up his lucrative practice. In July 1689 Ward was assigned as counsel to Dr Elliott and others accused of dispersing James II's declaration. In April it was rumoured that Ward would be made a serjeant-at-law, but he did not receive a writ. In March 1693 he was sounded out about the possibility of becoming solicitor-general by the new lord keeper, Sir John Somers. In the event, on 30 March Ward kissed the king's hand for the post of attorney-general, his patent being dated 4 April 1693. William III had been influenced by some of his tory ministers to appoint Ward to the higher office, much to the chagrin of the solicitor-general, Sir Thomas Trevor, who was the junto whig candidate for the post. Ward was knighted on 30 October 1693. In November 1694 it was reported that Ward would be made lord chief baron of the exchequer, but that the appointment would be delayed to allow Ward to be made a serjeant-at-law. He was informed by the king of his impending appointment to the bench on 5 May 1695, and he was made a serjeant on the morning of 8 June, his patrons being lords Godolphin and Somers; in the afternoon he was sworn in as lord chief baron. It appears that the king offered him $500 p.a. as compensation for quitting his practice (but this remained unpaid until 1700, when it was raised to $600 p.a. and paid). After sitting as a judge on the home circuit, on 29 July 1695 Ward received a summons as an assistant to the House of Lords. This was a necessary step in view of the fact that he had a commission to sit as speaker of the Lords on the following day, when parliament was prorogued. He acted as speaker at two further prorogations before parliament was dissolved in October 1695. In March 1696 he tried Robert Charnock and his associates for treason. In January 1700 he excused himself from giving an opinion on the bankers' case. Following the dismissal of Somers from the lord chancellorship, in May 1700 Ward was named a commissioner of the great seal. In May 1701 he presided over the trials of Captain Kidd for murder and piracy. Ward was reappointed lord chief baron following the accession of Queen Anne in 1702. 
Ward was taken ill just before going on circuit in July 1714, and died on 16 July at his house in Essex Street on the Strand. He was buried at Stoke Doyle, Northamptonshire, which he had purchased in the mid-1690s. He was survived by his wife, four sons, including his heir, Edward, another lawyer, and five daughters, only one of whom had married when Ward's will was drawn up in 1712. As one newsletter writer put it, 'the world will miss him, not only for his great ability in the law, but for his politeness in politics' ('Portland MSS', 5.472). This was certainly an improvement on the earl of Ailesbury's assessment when Ward was attorney-general that he and the recorder of London were 'the two greatest blockheads of the robe' (Bruce, 1.305). Ward also had the distinction of being the only law officer between 1680 and 1819 never to have sat in the House of Commons. Ward left five case notebooks (1673-97), nine volumes of exchequer cases (1696-1713), and twenty-one volumes of causes (1674-1714), all now in Lincoln's Inn library, London. His eldest son, Edward, rebuilt Stoke Doyle church and erected in it a monument to his father. 


@@@@@


doc= 28682


Ward, Edward (1667-1731), satirist, was born of unknown parentage, probably in the English midlands. According to Shiels, he was 'of low extraction and irregular education' (Cibber, 4.293), but Ward himself spoke of his ancestors in Leicestershire as men of property (dedicatory epistle, 'Nuptial Dialogues and Debates'), and his writings display some knowledge of Latin and French. In 1706 he expressed his 'indissoluble Obligations' to some unspecified noble family 'for the best and greatest share' of his youthful education (dedicatory epistle, 'Writings'). 
Ward was in London by 1691, the date of his first traced publication, 'The Poet's Ramble after Riches', in which he laments his poverty in Hudibrastic verse. It is likely that he wrote a good deal more in the next seven years, but the only identifiable works of his are the prose satires 'Female Policy Detected, or, The Arts of a Designing Woman Laid Open' (1695) and 'A Trip to Jamaica' (1698). The latter tells how Ward sailed for Jamaica in January 1697 to seek his fortune, but returned disappointed to London before the end of the year: it may well be based on first-hand experience, unlike its sequel, 'A Trip to New-England' (1699). He now adapted the 'trip' format to a satirical portrait of London. 'The London Spy' (its title doubtless modelled on the French work translated as 'The Turkish Spy', 1687-94) was published in eighteen monthly parts, beginning in November 1698. In lively prose, with occasional songs and verses, it graphically described the seamy side of London life, with racy anecdotes and character sketches, and established Ward's name and style. It was followed by over 100 identifiable satires in prose and verse, many of them reissued singly, sometimes in revised form, as well as appearing in at least a dozen partial collections of Ward's writings between 1700 and 1718. 'The London Spy' itself was reprinted complete five times in Ward's lifetime. 
Ward's typical targets included cheating vintners and ale house keepers in 'Sot's Paradise' (1698), astrologers in 'The World Bewitched' (1699), and dissenting ministers, apothecaries, physicians, lawyers, parish poor officers, pirate booksellers, and cheating vintners again in 'A Journey to Hell' (3 parts, 1700-05). In 1699 and 1700 he extended the 'trip' formula to Islington, Sadler's Wells, Bath, and 'Stir-Bitch' (Stourbridge) fair near Cambridge. He expanded some satires into periodicals, such as 'The Weekly Comedy, as it is Dayly Acted at most Coffee-Houses in London' (10 numbers, May to July 1699), rehashed as 'The Humours of a Coffee-House' (7 numbers, June to August 1707), after which Ward relinquished it to William Oldisworth, perhaps because, from July 1707, Ward was simultaneously producing two other short-lived satirical periodicals: 'The Diverting Muse' (6 numbers) and 'The London Terraefilius' (6 numbers). In 'Honesty in Distress but Relieved by No Party' (1705) he tried his hand at a droll of the type presented at Bartholomew fair, but there is no record of its being performed. (All the other dramas attributed to Ward in 'Biographia dramatica' are either not dramas or probably not by Ward.) 
Ward developed seventeenth-century 'character writing' in prose and verse by placing character in locale and bringing it to life through dialogue. Each of his fifty-four 'Nuptial Dialogues and Debates' (1710), for instance, dramatizes a conflict between some prickly pair, such as 'a nice affected gentleman and his careless slatternly wife', and concludes with 'moral reflexions' of a paternalist kind. Other characters are humorously displayed in their professional or social groupings: for instance the two armed services in 'The Wooden World Dissected' (1706) and 'Mars Stript of his Armour' (1708), or the thirty-two societies in 'The Secret History of Clubs' (1709). Most clubs satirized in this collection were fictitious, but one exception was the Kit-Cat, the resort of whig statesmen and men of letters. Ward probably also had a hand in 'The Secret History of the Calves-Head Club, or, The Republicans Unmask'd', first issued in January 1703 and reissued, with revisions and additions, annually for ten years. The club, whether real or legendary, was alleged to be a profane whig society which met on 30 January to honour regicides and deride Charles I. 
Ward was a high-church tory who involved himself in political controversy from at least as early as 1698 with 'Ecclesia et factio', the first of his several attacks on low-church moderation and occasional conformity. That attack was broadened in 'The Dissenting Hypocrite' (1704) to include dissenters in general and the leading whig journalists Tutchin and Defoe. Both those works were in Hudibrastic verse, as was Ward's best-known political publication, 'Hudibras Redivivus', issued in twenty-four monthly parts between August 1705 and June 1707. This open-ended burlesque at first drew topical material, month by month, from the political struggle, but became less controversial after Ward was taken into custody in February and again in June 1706, charged with seditious libel. He had accused the queen of being faint-hearted in failing to support the tories in parliament ('Hudibras Redivivus', pt 5); he pleaded guilty, and on 14 November 1706, was fined 40 marks ($26 13's'. 4died) and condemned to stand twice for one hour in the pillory. He was not silenced, for, in the closing numbers of 'Hudibras Redivivus', he hit on a safe, indirect vehicle of political satire by versifying passages from Clarendon's 'History of the Grand Rebellion'. He returned to outspoken politics with 'Vulgus Britannicus, or, The British Hudibras' (5 parts, 1710), which described in verse the riots accompanying the Sacheverell trial. Soon afterwards the newly triumphant tories passed their act to outlaw occasional conformity and Ward's outpouring of political satire slackened a little. He now completed versifications of 'Don Quixote' (2 vols., 1711-12) and Clarendon's 'History' (3 vols., 1713-15). Each work ran to 900 pages; the Clarendon also had eighty-five plates and cost $500 to print: Ward lost money by it. 
From 1702 or earlier Ward had lived in Gray's Inn, but in the autumn of 1712 he made a career move and opened an ale house near Clerkenwell Green. He had published over 100 separate works in fourteen years and achieved popular success but was perhaps aware that writing provided only precarious subsistence. In 'The Hudibrastick Brewer' (1714), a mild satire against himself, he wrote that it is better 'To 'live' by 'Malt', than 'starve' by 'Meter''. Between 1714 and 1717 he fired a few parting shots against the whigs in satires on Marlborough, Wharton, and bishops Burnet and Hoadly, but under George I his pen was far less active than under Anne. From about 1717 to about 1730 Ward kept the Bacchus tavern in Moorfields, where 'with his Wit, Humour, and good Liquor [he] has afforded his Guests a pleasurable Entertainment; especially the High-Church Party, which is compos'd of Men of his Principles, and to whom he is very much oblig'd for their constant Resort' (Jacob, 2.295). His scattering of new Hudibrastic poems in this period included 'The Delights of the Bottle' (1720), describing the amenities and customers of his tavern, 'The Merry Travellers' (1721), about a trip from Moorfields to Bromley, and 'The Parish Guttlers' (1722), a biting satire on his local parish vestry. Reprints of his most popular earlier works sold well not only at home but in America: so much so that Cotton Mather in 1726 warned his readers against 'such Pestilences, and indeed all those worse than Egyptian Toads (the Spawns of a Butler, and a Brown, and a Ward...)' (Troyer, 227-8). 
Moorfields was geographically only a step away from Grub Street and Ward was a popular author whose subjects and readership were vulgar, so he was a natural target for Pope, though it seems that his only personal offence was to print Pope's epigram about the lady who pissed at a performance of Addison's 'Cato' in his periodical the 'Poetical Entertainer' in February 1714, when Pope was trying to interest Addison in his Homer translation. Whatever the cause, Pope attacked Ward twice in 1728. In 'Peri Bathous' Ward is one of the frogs who 'live generally in the bottom of a ditch, and make a great noise whenever they thrust their heads above water' (Pope, 'Prose Works', 2.197), and there are two more contemptuous references to him in 'The Dunciad', one of which (l. 200) is a sneer at Ward's popularity in America. In the following year Ward responded with a weak verse satire 'Durgen' (that is, 'dwarf'); Pope responded in the apparatus to 'The Dunciad Variorum', where, among other charges, he repeatedly called Ward an ale house keeper; and Ward replied in his scurrilous 'Apollo's Maggot in his Cups', in verse with a prose postscript refuting Pope's falsehoods. Stung by the ale house taunt, Ward insisted that he sold no malt liquor at the Bacchus, which was a tavern, not a public house, and that Pope himself had drunk wine there. Ward was evidently more sensitive about his social than his literary rank. 
At some time between August 1729 and October 1730 Ward gave up the Bacchus tavern and established himself in the British Coffee House in Fullwood's Rents near Gray's Inn. He died there on 20 June 1731 and was buried on 27 June in St Pancras churchyard, Middlesex, with one mourning coach for his wife and daughter, as he had directed in his poetical will, dated 24 June 1725 and printed in 'Appleby's Journal' on 28 September 1731. The names of his wife and children and the date of his marriage have not been traced. Ward's writings remained popular to the end of his life but sank without trace soon afterwards, except for 'The London Spy', which was serialized in several London and provincial newspapers in the 1730s. Later it was quarried by historians from Macaulay to the present day, even though Macaulay ungratefully called it 'nauseous balderdash' (Macaulay, 1.340n). 


@@@@@


doc= 28683


Ward, Edward Matthew (1816-1879), historical genre painter, was born on 14 July 1816 in Belgrave Place, Pimlico, London, the younger son of Charles James Ward (1781-1858), an employee of Coutts's Bank in London, and his wife, Mary Ford, sister-in-law of the novelist Horace Smith. Ward won a silver medal from the Society of Arts in 1830 for a drawing, and he studied painting for a year in the studio of John Cawse in Henrietta Street, Covent Garden. On the advice of Francis Chantrey and with the sponsorship of David Wilkie, he entered the Royal Academy Schools in 1834. He had already exhibited that year at the Royal Academy a portrait of O. Smith in the role of Don Quixote. His painting 'The Dead Ass', from Laurence Sterne's 'Sentimental Journey', was accepted but not hung at the Royal Academy in 1835, and he left London in July 1836 to study in Rome. After visiting Paris and Venice, he stayed in Rome two and a half years, studying with Filippo Agricola at the Accademia di San Luca, and in 1838 won a silver medal for historical composition from the academy. 
Ward returned to London in 1839 after learning fresco technique in Munich from Peter von Cornelius, a prominent Nazarene painter in Germany and Rome. That year he exhibited at the Royal Academy 'Cimabue and Giotto', which had been painted in Rome. In the 1840s he became a renowned painter of English and French history and the lives of writers. He exhibited in London every year from 1839 to 1877 and showed works at the Paris Universal Exhibition in 1855 and the Manchester Art Treasures Exhibition in 1857. He was elected an ARA in 1846 and an RA in 1855. 'Napoleon in the Prison of Nice', exhibited at the British Institution in 1841 and bought by the duke of Wellington, is one of many scenes of prisons, trials, arrests, and executions produced throughout his career. His first such picture was 'Reminiscences of a Scene in the Prisoner's Lock of the Tribunal of Naples in 1838' (exh. RA, 1840). He also exhibited 'Cornet Joyce Seizes the King at Holmby, 1647' (exh. 1841) and 'The Disgrace of Lord Clarendon' (exh. 1846) at the Royal Academy, and established himself as a painter of seventeenth-century political history. 
Ward also succeeded with eighteenth-century subjects such as 'Dr Johnson Perusing the Manuscript of 'The Vicar of Wakefield'' (exh. RA, 1843) and 'Dr Johnson in Lord Chesterfield's Ante-Room in 1748' (exh. RA, 1845; Tate collection). These two paintings depict drawbacks of private patronage and the difficulty of making a living in the arts, themes which also appear in 'The Early Life of Oliver Goldsmith' (exh. RA, 1844) and 'Daniel Defoe with the Manuscript of 'Robinson Crusoe'' (exh. RA, 1849). Such issues were widely discussed in the 1840s, especially in regard to painters, when the British government began to commission artists to decorate the new houses of parliament with frescos. Ward entered the first parliament fresco competition in 1843, but his cartoon of Boudicca did not win any prize. In 1851, nevertheless, he was commissioned to execute eight pictures in the corridor of the House of Commons: 'The Execution of Montrose', 'The Last Sleep of Argyll', 'Alice Lisle Concealing Fugitives', 'Monk Declaring for a Free Parliament', 'The Escape of Charles II with Jane Lane', 'The Landing of Charles II', 'The Acquittal of the Seven Bishops', and 'William and Mary Receiving the Lords and Commons'. He visited Scotland in 1853 to gather material for 'Montrose', and completed and exhibited it at the Royal Academy that year; this and 'Argyll', which was completed and exhibited in 1854, were painted in oil. The lighting of the corridor made the canvases virtually impossible to see, and he was commissioned to repaint these first two subjects and execute the remaining subjects in fresco on framed sheets of slate, a task which was completed in the later 1860s. Ward painted oil replicas of the parliament frescoes and exhibited them individually at the Royal Academy over many years until 1875. The frescoes, like his oils, present a sweetened seventeenth-century style based on the popular art of David Wilkie; his smaller oils sometimes exhibit bolder brushwork and brighter colours. Despite his links to Cornelius, he did not embrace the medievalizing style of the German Nazarenes, who influenced other of the parliament artists; he remained a conservative figure, in contrast to the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood at mid-century. 
On 4 May 1848 Ward married Henrietta Mary Ada Ward (1832-1924), daughter of George Raphael Ward ['see under 'Ward, James (1769-1859)] and Mary Webb Ward. She was the granddaughter of the artist James Ward and became herself a noted painter, producing -- within a narrower range -- many works similar to those of her husband. She and Ward had eight children: Alice, Leslie, Eva, Flora, Wriothesley, Beatrice, Enid, and Stanhope. By 1852 the family had settled at 11 Upton Park Villas, Slough, and then at 3 Queens Villas, Windsor. For several years Ward also retained a studio in London at 1 Kent Villas, Lansdowne Road, Notting Hill. 
Ward's successes in the 1850s included 'James II Receiving News of the Landing of the Prince of Orange' (exh. RA, 1850; Tate collection) and 'The Royal Family of France in the Prison of the Temple' (exh. RA, 1851; Harris Museum and Art Gallery, Preston). Queen Victoria commissioned him to paint 'Napoleon III Receiving the Order of the Garter' and 'The Visit of Queen Victoria to the Tomb of Napoleon' (both exh. RA, 1858; Royal Collection). He also produced literary paintings: 'Byron's Early Love: a Dream of Annesley Hall' (exh. RA, 1856; Manchester City Galleries) and 'John Gilpin Delayed by his Customers' (exh. RA, 1851). 
Ward's style and subjects remained largely unchanged in the 1860s and 1870s. He painted 'The Death of Charles II' (exh. RA, 1861), 'Hogarth in his Studio' (exh. RA, 1863; York City Art Gallery), 'Amy Robsart and Leicester' (exh. RA, 1866), 'The Eve of St Bartholomew' (exh. RA, 1873), and 'William III at Windsor' (exh. RA, 1877), and numerous canvases memorializing Marie Antoinette and other figures of the 'ancien regime'. About 1875, however, he visited Brittany and Normandy and enlarged his range by painting French street scenes and a modern historical genre painting, 'A Year after the Battle: the Memento Scene at Dinan' (exh. RA, 1876; Forbes Magazine collection, New York). 
Ward was a large man, with black hair, reportedly rough in manner and appearance. On 10 January 1879 he was found raving on the floor of his dressing-room, his throat cut with a razor; he was shouting, 'I was mad when I did it; the devil prompted me' ('The Times', 18 Jan 1879, 11). Medical help arrived, but he died on 15 January at his home, 3 Queens Villas, in Windsor. The inquest in Windsor on 17 January found that he committed suicide while temporarily insane. Ward was buried at Upton Old Church on 21 January and the contents of his studio were sold at Christies, London, on 29 March. Of his children, Leslie Ward (1851-1922) was Spy, the caricaturist for 'Vanity Fair', and Eva and Flora were miniature painters. 


@@@@@


doc= 28684


George Raphael Ward (1799-1878) became a painter and engraver. He was born on 17 July 1799 and was baptized on 8 November that year at St Mary's, St Marylebone Road. After studying under his father in 1822 he entered the Royal Academy Schools, when his age was given as twenty-one. The following year he won a silver medal at the Society of Arts and continued to exhibit, particularly at the Royal Academy and New Water Colour Society until 1864. On 30 December 1827 he married Mary Webb, with whom he had a daughter, Henrietta Mary Ada Ward (1832-1924), also an artist, who became the wife of Edward Matthew Ward (1816-1879), historical genre painter. George Ward became a miniaturist and engraver, and made copies in miniature after portraits by Sir Thomas Lawrence. He signed these G. R. Ward and on some gave his address as 7 Newman Street, Oxford Street. Foskett commented of that 'at its best [his work] is good', his 'colours pleasant with blue-grey shadows'; some works, she noted, were executed 'in a continental style of painting' (Foskett, 671). Walter Armstrong noted that Ward was 'better known, however, by his engraved portraits, which show considerable skill' ('DNB'). Examples of his mezzotint engravings are in the National Portrait Gallery's collection. George Ward died on 18 December 1878. 


@@@@@


doc= 28685


Ward, Sir Henry George (1797-1860), politician and colonial governor, was born on 27 February 1797 in London, the only son of Robert Plumer Ward (1765-1846), novelist and politician, afterwards of Gilston Park, Hertfordshire, and his first wife, Catherine Julia (1772-1821), daughter of Christopher Thompson Maling of West Herrington, co. Durham. Educated at Harrow School and sent abroad to learn languages, Ward entered the diplomatic service in 1816 as attache in Sweden. Transferred to The Hague in 1818 and to Spain in 1819, he was joint commissioner in Mexico, 1823-4, and charge d'affairs, 1825-7. He resigned in 1827 and returned to England with his wife, Emily Elizabeth (1798-1882), second daughter of Sir John Swinburne, bt (1762-1860), of Capheaton, whom he had married in 1824. In 1828 he published 'Mexico in 1827', a vivid and acutely observed account of the country. 
Ward entered parliament as an advanced Liberal in January 1833, sitting first for the notoriously corrupt borough of St Albans and then from July 1837 until 1849 for Sheffield. After an unpromising beginning (cf. 'The Times', 30 March, 3 and 5 April 1833), he became one of the acknowledged radical leaders. An able speaker, with a terse, vigorous style, he first came to notice by his motion, the first of many, on appropriating the surplus revenues of the Irish church ('Speech of H. G. Ward, esq., M.P. on moving certain resolutions respecting the Irish Church in the House of Commons... May 27, 1834', published in 1834), which resulted, whether intentionally, as was widely assumed, or not, in completing the breach in the reform ministry. He was also prominent in such issues as free trade, the ballot, and franchise extension, and the establishment of the Reform Club and the Central Reform Association, using the 'Weekly Chronicle', of which he became political editor early in 1836 and proprietor in November 1838, to promote his views and combat Chartism. Keenly interested in colonial questions, he was a founder member of the Colonial Society of 1837, was active in the affairs of the South Australia Association and the New Zealand Company, and assiduous in promoting the colonization methods associated with Edward Gibbon Wakefield as a means for relieving social distress (as shown in 'The debate of Mr. Ward's resolutions on colonization in the House of Commons, June 27, 1839, containing the speeches of H. G. Ward... Sir W. Molesworth, etc.', 1839). In August 1839 he was offered, and refused, the secretaryship of the Board of Control by Lord Melbourne, although he now joined the ranks of the whig supporters, free trade and the ballot having been left as open questions. He accepted office in June 1846 as secretary to the Admiralty under Lord Auckland, whose defects in debate he ably supplied. 
Ward's pecuniary embarrassments, meantime, exacerbated by feckless extravagance, were coming to an issue. His financial arrangements in Mexico had drawn forth several magisterial rebukes from the Foreign Office; he spent $12,000 on his two elections for St Albans, the interest and insurance on which caused a considerable drain on family resources. His difficulties became the subject of unfavourable comment in the press (among others the 'Sheffield Mercury', 15 April 1843), and serious doubt of his being able to retain his seat. After severe retrenchment in his Hertfordshire estates, the management of which he had had since August 1838, his immediate problems were resolved by December 1843. Nevertheless, ill-judged railway speculation resulted in considerable losses during the panic of 1846, while his growing unpopularity in Sheffield in consequence of his identification with Russell's administration made offers of colonial governorships all the more attractive. His financial distress and the illness of his much loved wife thus obliged him to accept the proffered appointment of lord high commissioner in the Ionian Islands in April 1849. 
Ward arrived at Corfu in June, to find himself in a difficult position. His predecessor, Lord Seaton, had proposed considerable reforms of the hitherto restrictive constitution, which Ward, after modifications, effected. But his suppression with no unsparing hand of an agrarian-nationalist revolt in Cephalonia that autumn earned him the unenviable sobriquet of 'Dead or Alive Ward', and damned his reputation with his erstwhile radical associates, most notably Joseph Hume, who were vociferous in their attacks upon his proceedings. Meanwhile reform had aroused extravagant expectations of further concessions leading to the ultimate union of the islands with Greece. Ward at first tried conciliation and, that failing, governing by prorogations of the assembly and the use of administrative exile for the more intractable government opponents. Beyond this he was a markedly able governor, a considerable personality in the tortuous political and diplomatic affairs of the Levant during the early stages of the Crimean War, and active in checking Greek irredentist designs in Thessaly and Epirus. 
In March 1855 Ward was appointed to the senior governorship of Ceylon, arriving in May. He toured the island extensively and, fortunate that his administration coincided with a period of economic growth, soon made his mark in developing communications, restoring and extending irrigation works, and encouraging the unofficial element in the legislative council. Identifying himself wholly with the interests of the island, he was active in the consolidation of the civil service, the amelioration of the conditions of seasonal migrants, and the abolition of polygamy. In June 1860 he was promoted to the governorship of Madras in succession to Sir Charles Trevelyan. He arrived there in July, succumbed to cholera and died at Government House on 2 August 1860. He was buried in the Anglican church of Fort St George, survived by his wife and ten children. 
A tall, powerful man, with light brown hair, full round face and good-natured countenance, Ward was an expert swordsman and shot, and devoted to hunting. Possessed of considerable administrative talents, firmness of purpose, and a high sense of duty, he was an undeniably able man. As a politician, he earned the respect of men of all parties; and while events in the Ionian Islands afforded him little scope in the exercise of his talents beyond rebuffing the more extreme claims of Hellenic nationalism, his administration of Ceylon was adjudged as highly successful. He was appointed GCMG in June 1849. A statue commemorating his work in Ceylon was erected at Kandy by public subscription. 


@@@@@


doc= 28686


Ward, James (1769-1859), painter and printmaker, was born on 23 October 1769 in Thames Street, London, the middle of five children of James Ward, fruit merchant, and his wife, Rachael (1736/7-1835). He was baptized at All Hallows-the-Great, Upper Thames Street, on 12 November, that same year. 
Ward's father was intemperate in his habits, and, as a result, at the time of James's birth the family's fortunes had declined. Although his elder brother, William Ward, attended school, Ward did not, and in later years he was self-conscious about his lack of formal education. When he was twelve he was apprenticed, like his brother William, to the engraver John Raphael Smith, although Ward subsequently claimed that he had little encouragement from his master, and his apprenticeship was terminated after fewer than two years because of problems between them. He completed his indenture with his brother. It was during his apprenticeship to Smith that James demonstrated his artistic ability, reportedly reproducing from memory a drawing by Henry Fuseli. The few extant drawings from this period attest to his youthful skills. 
From the outset of his career Ward was a successful and highly respected mezzotint engraver of works by other artists. However, engravers were not eligible for election to the Royal Academy, and Ward therefore decided to abandon his lucrative career as an interpreter of the works of others and to dedicate himself to painting. The artists who employed Ward tried to persuade him to remain a printmaker, and he continued to create prints, especially after his own compositions; in the 1820s he also became a very accomplished lithographer. Ward donated a large collection of his prints in various states to the British Museum. In 1794 he was appointed painter and engraver in mezzotint to the prince of Wales. On 4 December he married Mary Ann Ward (died 1819; no relation) at the parish church of St Marylebone, London. 
Of the several children of James and Mary Ann Ward, 
Ward's painting career is traditionally divided into two phases, the first dominated by the influence of George Morland, his brother-in-law, the second by Peter Paul Rubens, the great seventeenth-century Flemish master. However, such a division oversimplifies Ward's artistic development. When the young Ward began painting about 1790 both his subject matter and painting style were indebted to Morland. An early work such as 'Old Grey Horse and Ass' ('c'.1791-3; V&A) demonstrates, in both its rustic subject matter and its style with loose brushwork, soft forms, and limited palette, how strong this influence was. Ward resented being labelled a student of Morland since he claimed that his brother-in-law, fearing competition, had taught him nothing. His so-called Rubensian phase was ushered in by his seeing in 1803 Rubens's 'Chateau de Steen' (National Gallery, London). The picture had recently been acquired by the connoisseur Sir George Beaumont, and was in the studio of Ward's neighbour in Newman Street, Benjamin West, president of the Royal Academy. In response to this work Ward painted 'Bulls Fighting with a View of St Donat's Castle in the Background' (1803; V&A). 
There is no doubt that Ward was much influenced by the loosely painted rustic genre scenes of Morland and the richly colored baroque compositions of Rubens. However, the sources of Ward's mature style were numerous and diverse; they ranged from the Elgin marbles and other classical sculpture to old masters including Titian, Van Dyck, Paulus Potter, and Rembrandt as well as Rubens. He also studied animal and human anatomy and sketched constantly from nature. In the mid-1790s Ward had access to the Orleans collection that had come to England from revolutionary France to be sold; he engraved a number of the works for the art dealer Michael Bryan. Ward subsequently painted Bryan's family group portrait ('c'.1797-8; Laing Art Gallery, Newcastle upon Tyne), which shows the impact of Titian's palette on his early style. He was also familiar with the work of his British predecessors and contemporaries such as George Stubbs and P. J. de Loutherbourg, and occasionally looked to them for compositional and technical ideas. Ward's animal portraits are particularly indebted to Stubbs's compositions in which a horse or a dog is silhouetted against an expansive landscape, while a heightening of his colour reveals an admiration for the dramatic intensity of de Loutherbourg's palette. 
At the turn of the century Ward created a series of paintings for the board of agriculture which set out to record the various breeds of livestock in Britain; the compositions were then engraved by Boydell. This undertaking clearly had nationalistic overtones during a period of ongoing hostilities with France. Championed by Lord Somerville, one of Ward's earliest patrons, the project was never completed. The paintings, for example 'A Durham Bull' ('c'.1802; Nottingham Castle Museum), often incorporated landscape vignettes that are reminiscent of the compositions of Thomas Bewick, and their composition, fluidity of brushwork, rich coloration, and meticulous rendering of detail suggest Ward's many sources. Tireless in his efforts to gather information on British livestock, Ward travelled extensively throughout England. In the process he executed a large body of drawings that he utilized throughout his long life. 
Ward hoped to establish his reputation with 'Bulls Fighting' and 'Liboya Serpent Seizing its Prey' (lost). The latter, painted on a monumental scale, depicted a serpent wrapping itself around an African seated on a white horse. Both these paintings may have had allegorical meanings with the former perhaps alluding to the current struggle between France and England and the latter to the evils of the slave trade. Ward was sympathetic to the anti-slavery movement and counted among his associates some of its leaders. 'Bulls Fighting' is one of the earliest examples of Ward's use of parallel emotions in humans and animals, a common artistic conceit of the time, to underscore the drama taking place. Instead of gaining the approval of the artistic establishment, 'Bulls Fighting' and 'Liboya Serpent' brought on a temporary rupture with the Royal Academy. In part owing to its size, 'Liboya Serpent' was rejected for exhibition and 'Bulls Fighting' was relegated to an undesirable position. In a pique, Ward requested that he be allowed to withdraw the latter, and his petition was reluctantly granted. The rift was soon healed, however, as Ward recognized the importance of the academy to his professional future, and successfully sought amends through the diarist and painter Joseph Farington, as well as through other academicians. Ward was elected an associate of the Royal Academy in 1807, and was made a full academician in 1811. By this time he had established himself as an animal painter of the first order and his accomplishments could not be ignored by the art establishment, although some of his fellow artists found him vulgar. 
Ward's portrait of a celebrated stallion, 'Eagle' (1809; Yale U. CBA) was critical in establishing his reputation. The 'Sporting Magazine''s opinion was that the painting established Ward as 'the first of English animal painters now living' (1811, 265). 'Eagle' exudes the power and force typical of Ward's finest animal portraits and with its anatomical detail and rich colouring also reveals some of the influences that shaped Ward's mature style. Shown in profile, the horse dominates a vast Rubensian landscape that seems to stretch to infinity beneath a brilliant Venetian-coloured sky. 
Works such as 'Eagle' brought Ward numerous patrons from the merchant class, landed gentry, and aristocracy. His one surviving account book, now on deposit at the Royal Academy, covers the period 1804 to 1827, when Ward became one of Britain's greatest animal painters. The majority of the commissions were for horse portraits, but the book also details paintings of other animals as well as landscapes and genre subjects. Ward also produced several major religious and history pictures at this time, such as 'The Waterloo Allegory', 'Pool of Bethesda', and 'Battle near Boston'. The records of both the Royal Academy and the British Institution from these decades also suggest the artist's activity and ambition through the number of works exhibited and the subjects treated. 
Despite receiving recognition as an outstanding animal painter Ward told Farington that he did not 'wish to be admitted to the Academy as a Horse-Painter', which he considered a lower form of art (Farington, 'Diary', 20 June 1811). The painting Ward submitted as his diploma piece, 'A Bacchanalian' (1811; RA), underscores his aspirations. Although such works can be appreciated for their technical facility, they do not today occupy a high place in his 'oeuvre' nor were they generally admired at the time. On the other hand, Ward's animal paintings remain among the finest works he created and justify his being considered a major artist of the early nineteenth century. 
Throughout the 1810s and 1820s Ward remained in great demand as a horse painter. Among the most important of his works are the portraits he made of horses in the early 1820s, especially those related to the combatants of the Napoleonic wars: Napoleon's charger Marengo (1824; priv. coll.); the duke of Wellington's Copenhagen (priv. coll.); and George IV's Nonpareil (Royal Collection). Although portraits of specific animals, the horses and landscapes also symbolized their owners. When exhibited at the Royal Academy in 1826, the landscape in the painting of Marengo (Napoleon's charger) was said to be emblematic of Napoleon's downfall. The setting sun and the horse's agitated appearance as it stares across a dark sea underscore the painting's message. When seen with 'Copenhagen' (1824), it is clear that the two pictures were intended as companion pieces with Napoleon's steed looking to the right with fear across the channel at the horse of the duke of Wellington. 'Copenhagen' is posed in a rolling English landscape, calm but wary, clearly prepared for what might happen. 'Nonpareil' (1824) is placed in a landscape with Windsor in the background. The horse in proud majesty stands sentinel over its domain. These three portraits belong to a series of pictures of celebrated horses published as lithographs by Ackermann in 1823-4. 
In the two decades following his election as academician Ward produced some of his finest works. The subject matter varied enormously. In addition to animal paintings such as 'Eagle' and portraits of men and animals hunting in a landscape, for example 'Theophilus Levett and a Favourite Hunter' (1817; Yale U. CBA), Ward also attempted some of his most ambitious and monumental canvases, including 'Gordale Scar' (1812-14; Tate collection), 'The Waterloo Allegory' (1815-21), for which now only a large finished study exists (1815; Royal Hospital, Chelsea), and 'Group of Cattle' (1822; Tate collection). 
Commissioned by Lord Ribblesdale, whose son, Thomas Lister, studied with Ward, 'Gordale Scar' depicts a dramatic site in Yorkshire. It is Ward's masterpiece. Guarded over by an aboriginal white bull and populated with a host of animals that could not fit within the topographical limitations of the actual scar, the dark and towering scene is a fine example of the sublime in British art. Other landscapes by Ward from the same period reflect the aesthetic ideas of the beautiful ('Tabley Lake and Tower', 1814; Tate collection) and picturesque ('A Cow-Layer: Evening after Rain', also called 'Cattle-Piece? Marylebone Park', 1807; Tate collection) that were also current at the time. 

'The Waterloo Allegory' was commissioned by the British Institution after a competition to commemorate the victory of Wellington over Napoleon at Waterloo. Reportedly cut up when it was returned to Ward's descendants about 1880, it was a gigantic canvas that measured 21 x 35 feet. Its complex iconography, which includes a portrait of the duke of Wellington, representations of Britannia, and the visualizations of abstract concepts such as religion, charity, and envy, was adapted from a variety of sources, and the overall composition is indebted to Rubens's 'The Sacrament Triumphant over Ignorance and Blindness'. The painting's apocalyptic imagery as well as the elaborate explanation reflect to some extent the ideas of the German mystic Jacob Bohme. Exhibited in London with an admission fee at the Egyptian Hall in Piccadilly, 'The Waterloo Allegory' was a failure, financially and critically. Angered by the response, Ward set out to prove his detractors wrong by painting 'Group of Cattle' (1822; Tate collection), a life-size canvas conceived to compete with Paulus Potter's 'Young Bull' (Mauritshuis, The Hague). This monumental painting (1291/2 x 191 inches) was purchased by the National Gallery in 1862; it has not been on view for decades. As in many of Ward's paintings, the animals take on an almost anthropomorphic quality, and in subsequent works such as 'The Deer-Stealer' (1822; Tate collection), 'Day's Sport' (1826; Yale U. CBA), and 'L'amour du cheval' (1827; Tate collection), he explored even further than he had in the past parallel emotions between man and beast. 
When Ward was working on 'The Waterloo Allegory' his wife and two of his children died. With personal tragedy and professional problems, the artist turned increasingly to religion for solace and subjects. However, he still sought and executed animal portraits. In the late 1820s and 1830s he travelled to Newmarket and other parts of East Anglia in search of commissions. Letters and notebooks dealing with these trips are in the Research Library at the Getty Research Institute, Los Angeles. On 27 October 1827 Ward married Charlotte Fritche ('b'. before 1778), a family friend. Three years later the couple retired to Cheshunt, Hertfordshire. 
Prior to the departure for Cheshunt, Ward sold at Christies many works from his studio and rented out his house in Newman Street. Now aged sixty, the artist was clearly putting his life in order. There were many reasons for the move from London, not least of which were his wife's preference for country life and financial problems involving his children. But Ward also had an apocalyptic view of the future, and he expressed these sentiments in letters to friends and in the treatise 'New Trial of the Spirits' (1835), which was a defence of Edward Irving, whose Catholic Apostolic Church was near Ward's house in Newman Street. Convinced that he was one of the elect and with strong millenarian beliefs, Ward saw in contemporary events signs of the second coming and warnings about the approaching end of the world. 
Ward considered painting his religious duty. Although he continued to portray animals and regularly sent works to exhibition, he became increasingly divorced from the art world and his non-commissioned works were often religious. 'Intercession' (1837), which depicted Christ at the last few moments on the cross, was so criticized when it was exhibited at the Royal Academy that Ward was stung into response. The next year eight works, all somehow dealing with this slight, were exhibited. The most pertinent was 'Tickling the Ear' (1838), in which a monkey (critic) sitting on the back of a bull (British public) tickles the animal's ear with a peacock feather (flattery). 'Ignorance, Envy and Jealousy', formerly 'Miranda and Caliban' (1837; Royal Shakespeare Theatre, Stratford upon Avon), dealt with the critic's calumny concerning Ward's religious beliefs; the iconography is indebted to Bohme. 
Not infrequently Ward's exhibition pictures had lengthy explanations or poems, written by the artist, in the catalogue. He also wrote pamphlets that dealt with such things as cruelty to animals in the docking of a horse's tail and a defence of a beard (his was long and white). Even when, about 1840, he painted a series of pictures devoted to the life of the horse, the works had strong moralistic overtones. Although ostensibly about horses, these paintings were actually conceived as a means of exploring man's spiritual and moral state by comparing human and animal conditions, as is evident from the descriptions in the catalogue for the exhibition at Newman Street in 1841. 
For the next twelve years Ward continued to exhibit regularly at both the Royal Academy and the British Institution. Although he still occasionally produced a significant work, both his technical and his mental powers were on the decline. His painting became increasingly mannered and his compositions could be awkward. 'The Council of Horses' (exh. RA, 1848) was one of his last major works to sell to an important collector, Robert Vernon. At the time Ward's financial situation was so bad that he had petitioned the Royal Academy the previous year for a pension of $100 annually, and received the grant. He continued to paint, and two landscapes dealing with the cruelty of deer-hunting, exhibited at the academy in 1852, served as a coda to his long career. A few years later he suffered a stroke and his career was at an end. He died on 16 November 1859 at his home, Round Croft Cottage, Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, and was buried in Kensal Green, London. He was survived by his wife. 
James Ward was considered by his contemporaries to be the greatest animal painter of his generation; however, his 'oeuvre' covered a wide range of subject matter from landscape to portraiture (human as well as animal), from genre to history painting (allegorical, religious, literary, and mythological subjects), and even an occasional still life. Extraordinarily prolific, Ward produced hundreds of paintings and thousands of drawings during his long life. But his output was also extremely uneven. His greatest works were executed in the first quarter of the nineteenth century. The large quantity and varying quality of his work make a balanced evaluation of him as an artist difficult. Nevertheless, he ranks among the leading artists of the British Romantic movement, particularly in his depiction of horses and in his rendering of dramatic landscapes. Examples of his work are held by many public collections, including the Tate collection, Victoria and Albert Museum, and National Portrait Gallery in London, the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool, and the Yale Center for British Art, New Haven, Connecticut. 


@@@@@


doc= 28687


Ward, James (1800-1884), pugilist and artist, was born near Ratcliffe Highway (now the Highway), London, the eldest son of a butcher, later a ballast-heaver, stated as being either Nathaniel or Nicholas Ward. His date of birth has been variously given as 14, 25, or 26 December 1800. From an early age he displayed talent as a boxer and he later recalled his first fight as being against George Robinson when seven months short of sixteen years of age ('Daily Telegraph', 11 Nov 1881). He soon became a leading light in a sparring club at Bromley New Town to which all budding East End of London aspirants to 'milling' fame repaired. At the time he was pursuing the occupation of coal-whipper, 'unloading sea-borne coals in the Pool [of London]', hence his cognomen of the Black Diamond ('Morning Advertiser', 4 April 1884). His formal introduction to the Fives Court, St Martin's Street, then the haunt of the fancy, took place on 22 January 1822 and, in sparring with Joe Spencer, he showed great promise. 
Ward's first appearance in the field was at Moulsey Hurst, Surrey, on 12 June of the same year, when he beat Dick Acton in six rounds. On 10 September following he easily overcame Young Burke of Woolwich and next met Bill Abbott on 22 October. To please his backer, Ward allowed his opponent to win but, having confessed his duplicity, all bets were declared off. On 4 February 1823, at Wimbledon Common, he defeated Ned Baldwin, known as Whiteheaded Bob, in twenty rounds lasting nineteen minutes. During a sparring tour of the provinces he was involved in a further act of dishonesty. At the conclusion of Bath races on 4 July he beat Rickens, a native of the city, who was tricked into the match, being unaware of Ward's true identity. Ward then travelled to Southampton, where, on 20 August, after the races, he comfortably defeated the much inferior Johnson. Back in London he was matched to fight Josh Hudson for $100 a side at Moulsey Hurst on 11 November 1823 but was forced to concede to his resolute opponent. At Colnbrook, near Slough, on 21 June 1824, he conquered the Birmingham Youth, Phil Sampson, in fifty minutes. The two met again at Perry Lodge, 4 miles from Stony Stratford, on 28 December 1824. From the first Sampson never had much chance of victory and was vanquished in twenty-seven rounds. 
Ward was now at the height of his fame and, disputing Tom Cannon's self-elected right to the title of champion of England, accepted the latter's open challenge for $1000 ('Pierce Egan's Life in London', 20 Feb 1825). The encounter took place near Warwick on 19 July 1825 in the presence of an immense number of persons of varying character and class. Cannon fell insensible in the tenth round, his bustling style not being suited to the excessive heat of the day. Ward was proclaimed the winner and on 22 July, at the Fives Court, was presented with a belt bearing the inscription 'British Champion'. He remained without a match until 2 January 1827, when he fought Peter Crawley at Royston Heath, near Cambridge, and was beaten in a manly battle occupying eleven rounds. Crawley retired two days later and Ward immediately laid claim to the title. His next encounter was with Jack Carter, on 27 May 1828, at Shepperton Range, Middlesex. Youth and science triumphed over age and Carter was defeated in thirty-two minutes. 
On 10 March 1829 Ward was due to meet the Irishman Simon Byrne for the championship at Leicester but at the last minute declined to enter the ring. His conduct was greatly condemned, his backers and friends abandoned him, and the Fair Play Club refused to allow him to fight under their jurisdiction. For two years he stayed inactive before meeting Byrne on 12 July 1831 at Willeycott, near Stratford upon Avon. The contest, for $200 a side, lasted one hour and seventeen minutes and, with the defeat of the Irishman, Ward's final battle for the championship of England ended. On the following Thursday he was presented with a second champion's belt at Reuben Marten's Tennis and Fives Court, Peter Street, Soho. When the stake money was given up the next day, Ward offered to make a match with any man in England for a sum from $100 to $500, but the challenge was not accepted. 
In a letter to the editor of 'Bell's Life in London', written on 24 January 1832 (printed on 29 January), Ward stated that he was retiring from the ring and had commenced trading as a publican at The Belt, Whitechapel, Liverpool. On 8 September 1831 he had married Eliza, daughter of former pugilist George Cooper; their only child, Eleanor, was born on 1 September 1832. A pupil of the composer and conductor Sir Julius Benedict, Eleanor Ward subsequently earned public acclaim as an accomplished pianist. Ward himself later carried on business at The Star inn and then the York Hotel, both in Williamson Square, before moving to London in 1853. There he was host of various hostelries including The Rose, 96 Jermyn Street; the Three Tuns (renamed the Champion Stores), 429 Oxford Street; the King's Arms, Whitechapel Road; The George, Ratcliffe Highway; the Sir John Falstaff, Brydges Street (now Catherine Street); and the Harlequin tavern, 69 Drury Lane. 
In conjunction with his profession as a publican, Ward also became an artist, creating numerous landscapes and other pieces of unquestionable merit. His paintings were displayed at more than one of the Liverpool exhibitions and earned praise from the press of the time. Perhaps his best-known work was 'The Sayers and Heenan Fight', a very large picture containing 270 portraits, produced in 1860. He was also a talented musician, playing the violin, flute, flageolet, piano, and guitar, besides being a competent pigeon-shooter and quoits player. His manners were mild and unassuming, and in his fighting prime he was described by a friend as 'a man only in the ring, a child out of it' ('Weekly Dispatch', 4 July 1824). This may account for his occasionally being led astray during his pugilistic career, something that he greatly regretted in later life. 
Ward's interest in painting and music did little to encourage his success as a sporting publican and, at length, after several failures in business, he retired to the Licensed Victuallers' Asylum in the Old Kent Road. There, well past his eightieth birthday, he could still be found actively producing saleable landscapes in both watercolour and oils. He died at the asylum on 2 April 1884 and was buried six days later at Nunhead cemetery in the same grave where already reposed his wife and grandson. 
Nicholas Ward (1813-1850), younger brother of James, also aspired to fistic glory but, despite being a scientific boxer, did not have the commitment required to become a first-rate pugilist. Although he followed in the title-winning footsteps of his more illustrious sibling, his ring performances were generally uninspired. Nicholas Ward's championship victory over Ben Caunt on 2 February 1841 was entirely due to the latter's impetuosity, and three months later, having yielded submissively to the same fighter, he ended his 'milling' career. 


@@@@@


doc= 28688


Ward, James Clifton (1843-1880), geologist, was born at Clapham Common, Surrey, on 13 April 1843, son of James Ward, schoolmaster, and his wife, Mary Ann ('nee' Morris). After schooling at Hastings, Ward entered the Royal School of Mines in 1861 and gained the Edward Forbes medal in 1864. In 1865 he was appointed to the geological survey and worked for three years in the West Riding. In 1869 Ward was transferred to the Lake District where he worked for eight years, notably in the Keswick district. His important 'Geology of the Northern Part of the Lake District' was published in 1876. On 11 January 1877 he married Elizabeth Ann Benson, daughter of Cockermouth solicitor Robert Benson. In 1878 he was ordained, and became assistant curate at St John's, Keswick. 
Ward was one of the first survey geologists to deploy Henry Sorby's method of examining rock sections with a microscope, and applied it to the Lakeland lavas and ash beds. He adopted Andrew Ramsay's views on the glacial origins of lake basins and wrote several papers on glacial theory and glacial phenomena, giving support to the 'glacial submergence' theory. 
Studying the Skiddaw Slates of northern Lakeland, Ward regarded them as rather gently folded with a thickness of about 12,000 feet. He examined the metamorphic aureole round the underlying Skiddaw Granite and figured this prominently in the survey's published sections. He sought to establish the depth and pressure under which the granite had formed, linking the stratigraphic evidence to that provided by microscopic examination of the liquid cavities of the granite's quartz crystals. The Slates were correlated with the Arenig (then regarded as Cambrian) rocks of north Wales, and the slates of the Isle of Man, both places where Ward worked for a time. Considering estimated rates of erosion, he suggested that the time elapsed since the Skiddaw Slates period was about 62 million years, in keeping with estimates of geological time favoured in his day. Ward contemplated the idea that granites might be of metamorphic origin, being associated with water in their formation. 
Ward also worked on the difficult problems and terrain of what are now called the Borrowdale Volcanics, subdividing them into nine units, assigning the lower ones to the 'Cambrian', again by correlation with Welsh formations. He supposed that the central Lakeland massif had existed since the Palaeozoic era. 
Ward was important in Lakeland intellectual life, helping to establish the Cumberland Association for the Advancement of Literature and Science and lecturing in the Keswick district. He collected information on archaeological sites in the region and displayed this, as well as the results of his geological researches, in maps and models in the Keswick Museum. 
By all accounts, Ward was a man of most attractive character, cultured, a nature lover, serious-minded, and deeply religious. His field notes contain poems indicative of his romantic temperament and religious zeal. In 1880 he was appointed perpetual curate at Rydal, Westmorland, but taken ill with a chill he died on 16 April that year, survived by his wife and two daughters. He was only thirty-seven. He was buried in the churchyard of St John's, Keswick, on 20 April 1880. 


@@@@@


doc= 28689


Ward, John (bap. 1590, d. 1638), composer and administrator, was baptized on 15 February 1590 at St Mary Bredman, Canterbury. His parents are not named in the baptismal record, but a visitation pedigree dated 1634 names his father as John Ward of Canterbury, son of William Ward of Yorkshire. His mother was Susan, daughter of Thomas Dunkin of Canterbury (Metcalfe, 518). This document, when checked against local baptismal records, may imply that John Ward senior was a singing man at Canterbury Cathedral, most probably the minor canon of that name who died in 1617. Another theory, however, is that the composer's father was a domestic servant of Elizabeth Smyth of Ashford and Westhanger who married, about 1594, Sir Henry Fanshawe of Ware Park, Hertfordshire, remembrancer of the exchequer and a patron of the arts. According to this theory, two John Wards served the Fanshawes, father (from before about 1594 until his death probably between February and August 1630), and son (the composer, from about 1607 until his death in 1638); but if the composer's father was indeed the cathedral singing man, then all references to the domestic servant must be taken to apply to the composer. 
Ward the composer was a chorister at the cathedral from 1597 to 1604 and a king's scholar at the grammar school in Canterbury from 1604 to 1607. He subsequently joined Sir Henry Fanshawe's flourishing musical establishment; in his 'First Set of English Madrigals' (1613) he addresses Sir Henry as 'my very good Maister' and claims that the contents are 'the primitiae of my Muse, planted in your pleasure, and cherisht by... your favour' (p. xv). 
This work has until recently been the chief foundation of Ward's fame. Its contents proclaim him to be a very important figure among the English school of madrigalists who drew inspiration from contemporaries such as John Wilbye, George Kirbye, and Thomas Weelkes; his six-part works in particular have been praised for their musical quality. Other works of this type, unpublished in his lifetime, include elegies on the deaths of Henry, prince of Wales (1612) and of Fanshawe (1616), while the gap between sacred and secular, and vocal and instrumental music is filled by a small number of attractive consort songs (for voices and viols in parts ranging from three to six) set to colourful sacred texts and intended for domestic use. As a composer with important contacts at court (through his patron) Ward was widely respected by his contemporaries. This is reflected in the number of his works that occur in contemporary manuscripts and prints; these include two short contributions to Sir William Leighton's 'Tears or Lamentations of a Sorrowful Soul' (1614) and an evening service setting and two anthems of outstanding quality included in John Barnard's 'First Book of Selected Church Music' (1641). 
When Fanshawe drew up his will in 1613 it was witnessed by John Ward, probably the composer's father but possibly the composer himself. Following Sir Henry's death in 1616 his son and successor in the remembrancership, Sir Thomas Fanshawe, gave less support to the family's musical establishment and it was probably about this time (and certainly by April 1621) that Ward obtained a modest post in the remembrancer's office. As an attorney or subordinate substitute for Sir Thomas in minor exchequer business he was thereafter desk-bound in London for much of his time. In 1619 Sir Thomas arranged for John Ward, gentleman (more likely the composer's father), to receive a grant from the king of the arrears owing to the crown on a yearly sum of $8 6's'. 8died out of the Fanshawes' manor of Bengeo, Hertfordshire. Two years later a Mr John Ward, 'servant of Sir Thomas Fanshawe', authorized to collect his patron's salary on the latter's behalf (BL, Add. MS 41578, fol. 101'r') was probably the composer. However, the John Ward named as a trustee in a settlement by Elizabeth Fanshawe on 21 May 1629 of her manor of Dengey, Essex, was more likely to have been her servant, Ward senior; her will of 20 February 1630 was witnessed by John Ward, gentleman, referred to as the testatrix's 'auncient servant'. 
Ward the composer married Thomasine, daughter of Thomas Clee of London, 'dwelling nere the Tower dock' ('Visitations of Essex', 518), about 1625 and they at first probably lived in the Fanshawes' Warwick Lane mansion. However, it was at Barking, Essex, that their fifth child, Mary, apparently was baptized in August 1630 and buried on 2 January 1633. This suggests that John Ward senior, who had built up a modest estate at Great Ilford, a village in Barking parish, had recently died and that the composer and his wife had moved their household from Warwick Lane to Ilford. According to the terms of the Dengey trust deed of 1629 the place of each trustee would be taken at his death by his heir, and 'Johannes Ward generous' (presumably the composer) appears as a 'farmer' of the manor in surviving court rolls dated 1632, 1634, and 1636. Ward was still at his post in the remembrancer's office in May 1638 but died that summer; his will, made on 1 April 1634, was proved on 31 August 1638. 


@@@@@


doc= 28690


Ward, John (c.1553-1623?), pirate, was said to have been a fisherman at Faversham, Kent, perhaps (from an informant's estimate of his age as fifty-five in 1608) born about 1553. He was later at Plymouth, where he joined the Royal Navy, and may have been on privateering voyages to the West Indies. Apparently he served as a petty officer on the 'Lion's Whelp', built in 1601. His career of piracy seems to have begun in 1603 with an abortive attempt to seize the considerable wealth a recusant was reported to be carrying over to France. More successfully, he captured a large French ship (renamed the 'Little John'). During 1604 Ward succeeded Edward Fall as leader of this pirate band, and after putting into Cawsand Bay on the coast of Cornwall to recruit more crew, he sailed for the Mediterranean, plundering as he went. 
Arriving off Algiers, Ward received a hostile reception and so continued east, in December taking prizes at the mouth of the Adriatic. In 1605 he was at Sale, a nest of corsairs on Morocco's Atlantic shore, but by mid-1606 he had adopted Tunis as his base, commanding a 28-gun ship and other vessels with crews numbering 500. He was thus one of those European renegades who introduced the Barbary corsairs to the advantages for piracy of the berton or heavily armed square-rigged ship from northern waters. Later in 1606, accompanied by a pinnace of 50 tons, he cruised the eastern Mediterranean in a Flemish flyboat of 200 tons aptly named the 'Gift', manned not only by English, Dutch, and Spanish Christians but also by Turks. On this cruise he made his fortune by the capture of the 'Rubin', a Venetian argosy of 300 tons from Alexandria with a cargo of pepper, indigo, flax, and 3000 pieces of gold. Ward then fitted her out as a man-of-war, used some of his new wealth to redeem and recruit seamen from the prisons of Tunis, and put to sea again. In April 1607 he captured a second Venetian argosy, the 'Reniera e Soderina', ship and cargo being reputedly worth 'one hundred times a thousand pounds' (Ewen, 5-6) and then in June took a third. Ward sold the cargoes to Osman Bey, commander of the janizaries and 'de facto' ruler of Tunis, turned the 'Soderina' into a berton mounting sixty guns, and with a crew of 250 Turks and 150 Englishmen joined at least five other Dutch corsairs. Over-gunned, top-heavy, slow, and with rotting timbers, the 'Soderina' proved impractical as a warship. Ward transferred to a captured prize, leaving the 'Soderina' to founder and her crew to drown off Cerigo early in 1608. Despite other reverses Ward was in both the eastern and western basins of the Mediterranean that year, capturing a Venetian galleon off the Peloponnese in March and bringing prizes into Algiers later in the year. 
A description of Ward at this time records that he was: 'very short, with little hair, and that quite white, bald in front; swarthy face and beard. Speaks little, and almost always swearing. Drunk from morn till night. Most prodigal and plucky. Sleeps a great deal, and often on board when in port. The habits of a thorough 'salt'. A fool and an idiot out of his trade. (Ewen, 8)' Nevertheless about this time he was negotiating to retire to Tuscany with a fortune of 150,000 crowns. 
In 1609 Ward continued his depredations: he was said to be off Sardinia in May with nine bertons, and his subordinate Bishop was off Ireland with ten or eleven ships and 1000 men in August. An English attempt to negotiate Ward's return to England failed, as did an attempt on his life, and despite a joint Spanish and French attack on Tunis which fired some thirty vessels, some apparently Ward's, he was said to be about to leave for Ireland with a squadron of fourteen vessels at the end of the year. By now his reputation in England was such that his exploits were celebrated not only by three ballads but by two pamphlets, neither factually reliable: 'Newes from sea, of two notorious pyrats Ward the Englishman and Danseker the Dutchman, with a true relation of all or the most piraces by them committed unto the sixt of Aprill 1609' and 'A true and certaine report of the beginning, proceedings, overthrowes, and now present estate of Captaine Ward and Dansker, the two late famous pirates; from their first setting foorth to this present time, as also with the death of divers of Wards chiefe captaines'. 
The years 1610-12 repeated the pattern of previous years: during sweeps through the eastern Mediterranean at least two of Ward's vessels were shipwrecked in late 1610 but his fleet still had fifteen vessels and 1500 men; in June 1611 he was said to have left Tunis for either Calabria or the Adriatic; and in March 1612 he captured the 'Valnegrina', bound for Alexandria. In late 1610 he had converted to Islam, his apostasy being made the subject of Robert Daborne's play, 'A Christian Turn'd Turke' (1612), in which the fictionalized Ward met his just deserts by being torn to pieces and his remains thrown into the sea. In the same year both he and Dansiker were named and discussed in Thomas Dekker's 'If this be not a Good Play the Devil is in it'. According to the Venetians he took the name of Issouf Reis; to a Tunisian source of the late seventeenth century, itself a testimony to the longevity of his fame, he was Captain Wardiyya. 
Clearly by 1612 he had given up any idea of leaving Tunis. In or before 1615 the Scottish traveller William Lithgow dined with him in Tunis at his 'faire Palace, beautified with rich Marble and Alabaster stones' (Ewen, 12) and in 1616 reported that Ward in his retirement had taken to rearing chicks by incubating eggs in camel dung. Ward may have gone to sea one last time in 1622. Apparently he died in Tunis during an outbreak of plague in the summer of 1623; his body was thrown into the sea. Besides a wife in England, there was another in Tunis: Jessimina, a Palermitan renegade. 


@@@@@


doc= 28691


Ward, John (1599?-1658?), parliamentarian officer and poet, was a native of Tewkesbury, Gloucestershire. Both his date of birth and parentage are unknown, though the baptism of a John Ward, son of Thomas, at Tewkesbury Abbey on 10 June 1599 may refer to the poet (Glos. RO, bishop's transcripts). Ward was a puritan, and at the outbreak of the civil war he became 'commissary generall of the provisions' to the troops of horse under William Russell, fifth earl of Bedford. On 13 October 1642 Ward printed 'An encouragement to warre, or, Bellum parliamentale, shewing the unlawfulnesse of the late Bellum episcopale', in which he vents his spleen against the moral and theological shortcomings of the cavaliers. The poem was reissued on 4 July 1643 as 'The Christians incouragement earnestly to contend for Christ his gospell & for all our Christian liberties in thrall which who refuseth let him be for aye accursed'. It was printed along with an anonymous tract entitled 'The humble petition of the protestant inhabitants of the counties of Antrim, Downe, Tyrone, &c', first published in 1641. On 12 December 1642 Ward participated in the storming of Winchester and the capture of Lord Grandison under the command of Sir William Waller. He celebrated the event in the poem 'The Taking of Winchester by the Parliaments Forces'. Ward gives a detailed account of the whole skirmish. He laments over Grandison's subsequent escape from captivity, and marshals Gloucestershire and Tewkesbury in particular, to stand against the royalists. Ward may also be the author of the militantly republican poem 'The changes, or, A vicissitude of change of government' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Ashmole 49), written shortly after the dissolution of the Long Parliament on 20 April 1653. He calls upon the people 'to strip away the veils of custom and to see more deeply into the age's political possibilities' (Norbrook, 13.185). 
The remainder of Ward's military career is shrouded in mystery. It is impossible to be certain that the details of two (or three) John Wards are not being conflated, but he may have been the John Ward who was made captain of a troop of foot soldiers in Yorkshire on 10 April 1650. Three and a half years later the treasurers of Ely House, the hospital for soldiers and sailors, granted a pension to one John Ward, 'in respect of his poverty and wounds in the service' (TNA: PRO, SP 25/72, p. 28). According to his widow, Anne, Captain Ward had served from the beginning of the wars, and during the early part of the protectorate he was a member of Cromwell's household guard under Walter Strickland. Thereafter he joined Colonel Henry Lillingston's regiment at Dunkirk and was killed at the battle of the Dunes on 4 June 1658. Ward died intestate. Sir William Lockhart, colonel of the Flanders horse, appealed to John Thurloe in respect of his widow, 'to move something in her behalf, that may be an encouragement to other married officers amongst us' (Thurloe, 7.224). Anne and her two young children were granted a solatium of $100. 


@@@@@


doc= 28692


Ward, John (1678/9-1758), antiquary and biographer, was born in London, one of the fourteen children of John Ward (1635-1717), a Baptist minister originally from Tysoe, Warwickshire, and his wife, Constancy Rayner (died 1697), a lady of acknowledged piety. John and his sister Abigail (died 1745) were their only surviving children. For some years Ward toiled as a clerk in the Navy Office, feeding his appetite for literature by dint of study in his leisure hours with the assistance of John Ker, a physician who kept an academy in Bethnal Green. Ward left the Navy Office in 1710 and opened his own school for the children of his acquaintances, in Tenter Alley, Moorfields, which he kept for many years. Clearly a sociable man, he was throughout his life a member of various societies, both formal and informal; in 1712 he became one of the earliest members of a society composed principally of divines and lawyers who met periodically to discuss notable texts of civil law or politics in classical times. 
Ward's reputation for a knowledge of polite literature, together with some minor publications of his own, led to his appointment in September 1720 as professor of rhetoric in Gresham College. He lived in the college thereafter, possibly with his sister, since she died in his apartments in 1745. Ward was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in November 1723, contributed several articles on aspects of Roman archaeology and numismatics to the society's 'Philosophical Transactions', served on its council, and in 1752 was elected one of its vice-presidents. He was one of several who engaged in published dispute with Conyers Middleton -- in Ward's case on the status of physicians in classical Rome. More profitably he contributed to a range of publications, by checking text, writing introductions, and providing translations. Among these works were J. A. De Thou's 'History of his Own Age' (1728, from the French of 1604-8); Robert Ainsworth's 'Latin Dictionary' (1736 and later editions); the works of the dissenting minister George Benson; and the second edition of Martin Folkes's 'Tables of English Silver and Gold Coins' (1763). He translated into Latin the eighth edition of Richard Mead's 'Discourse of the Plague' (1723), and for the 1732 edition of William Lily's 'A Short Introduction of Latin Grammar' (first published in 1652) he restored the defective text and provided a history of that grammar. He contributed an essay on the Peutinger table, so far as it related to Britain, to John Horsley's 'Britannia Romana' (3 vols., 1732) and his own copy of that work, with manuscript corrections, is in the British Library. Assistance to a member of the University of Edinburgh brought him the degree of LLD in 1751. 
In August 1733 Ward set off on a tour of the Low Countries, Flanders, and France, from which he returned home in October. He assiduously visited the tourist sites and of course the better known bookshops, and called on acquaintances, among them Abraham Gronovius, whom he was assisting with an edition of Aelianus's 'De natura animalium'. In February 1736 he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, of which he became director in January 1747 and vice-president in April 1753. Also in 1736 he joined another society, formed by various gentlemen and noblemen for the encouragement of learning (probably the 'Societas ad literas promovendi', which published 'De natura animalium' in 1744) and he later became a member of the Spalding Gentlemen's Society. 
Ward's major work is undoubtedly his 'Lives of the professors of Gresham College, to which is prefaced the life of the founder, Sir Thomas Gresham' (1740), which dealt with all those who had been appointed since 1597, when the first inaugural lectures were delivered. An interleaved copy with Ward's corrections and additions, now in the British Library, was presumably intended for a second edition. His own lectures were published in two volumes as 'A system of oratory, delivered in a course of lectures publickly read at Gresham College, London' (1759). 
When the British Museum was founded in 1753 Ward was elected one of its trustees. He regularly attended meetings and advised on various aspects of cataloguing until November 1757, when illness kept him at home. He died in his apartments in Gresham College in the early hours of 18 October 1758. He was buried in the dissenters' burial-ground at Bunhill Fields, where his sister had previously been interred, having written his own obituary in 1752, when he gave his age as seventy-three. In his will Ward left his globes, coin collection, and certain early printed books to specific friends, directing his executors to arrange a public sale of his library and other effects. 


@@@@@


doc= 28693


Ward, John (1781-1837), founder of the Shilohites, was born at the Cove of Cork in Ireland on 25 December 1781. Taken by his parents, who were strict Calvinists, to Bristol in July 1790, he was for three years apprenticed to a shipwright and fell into bad company. Following his father to London, where he learned shoemaking with his brother, he then entered the navy, serving as a shipwright on board the 'Blanche', a man-of-war, seeing action at the battle of Copenhagen on 2 April 1801. The sense of guilt and fear of death and judgment which he had known as a child now increased, and in 1803 he secured his discharge at Sheerness. He married a pious girl and worked as a shoemaker, the family moving to Carmarthen for three years, where he became disillusioned with Methodism and religion generally. On his return to London he chanced to hear Jeremiah Garrett in Southwark and became a Baptist, though on Garrett's death in 1806 he joined the Independents and later, in 1813, the Sandemanians, for whom he became a preacher. 
In 1814 Ward was thrilled to discover what he considered to be an example of inspired prophecy, when he read 'The Fifth Book of Wonders' by Joanna Southcott, who had just died, and for a while he rejoined and preached for the Methodists, but they rejected his enthusiasm for 'the pure Word of Joanna'. He then, in turn, was associated with two claimants to Joanna's mantle, first George Turner (who died in 1821) and then in 1825 the illiterate Mary Boon of Staverton, Devon, becoming the reader of her letters to her London followers and later acting as her secretary. However, in 1826, the year from which his followers came to reckon their beginning of time, Ward started to see himself as a prophetic leader. A series of dreams and visions convinced him that he himself was Shiloh, the Promised One, he, indeed, was Jesus Christ, and the biblical prophecies referred to him. His mother's name being Mary and his birthday being on 25 December seemed to confirm this realization. When in 1828 he gave up his work as a shoemaker and began to proclaim his messiahship, his wife decided that he was mad and the local magistrate committed him to the Newington workhouse for six months. 
In November 1828 Ward escaped and, with help from Charles William Twort of Walworth -- a loyal henchman from then until his death in 1878 -- Ward began to gather a following, claiming to be 'a new man, having a new name'. Sometimes he called himself Shiloh, the name which Joanna Southcott had given to her expected child, but more often he was now known as Zion. His first book, 'The Vision of Judgment, or, The Return of Joanna from her Trance' (1829), was not well received by the Southcottians, but a series of visits to Nottingham, Chesterfield, Birmingham, Sheffield, and other northern towns produced an encouraging response. It is not clear at what stage he encountered the writings of the radical freethinker Richard Carlile, but when Ward taught that biblical events and characters were not historical but figurative, and that he (Ward) was not just Jesus Christ but also Satan and God as well, there are manifest echoes of some of Carlile's ideas. In addition to such daring suggestions Ward had also adopted a politically radical programme, ferociously castigating the government, landlords, and clergy. 'The Archbishop was 'His Grease', the Bishops 'canting tricksters', the clergy 'scurvy nincompoops'' (Balleine, 99). In the context of the 'Reform Bill' disturbances, this sort of oratory was bound to polarize reactions to his addresses at Borough Chapel, Southwark, and at the Rotunda in Blackfriars Road during 1831. By and large his message appealed to the poorer classes, though he was supported financially by some wealthier patrons, such as the Birmingham manufacturers of tobacco and snuff, Bradley and Holinsworth. 
In Derby, on 4 August 1832, Ward and Twort were found guilty of blasphemy (Twort being convicted also of assault) and they were imprisoned for eighteen months in Derby gaol. When, on 15 August, Henry Hunt presented a petition to the House of Commons asking for the release of Ward and Twort, he seized the occasion for a fierce attack on the government. The almost incoherent denunciation of the petition by Spencer Perceval (a pious son of the assassinated prime minister) was probably provoked, at least partially, by Ward having ostentatiously feasted on a leg of mutton on the day appointed by parliament for repentant fasting in the face of the cholera epidemic. Ward's sentence was not mitigated, but the conditions of confinement were comparatively mild. 
Released on 3 February 1834, Ward returned briefly to London and then tried to revive the support which he had previously found in many midland and northern chapels, but with little success. The destructive and individualistic elements in his preaching, which had been so topical during the reform crisis, were hardly calculated to nurture or edify congregational life. In January 1835 he moved to Bristol where he gathered a following which included for a while J. P. Greaves and Sophia Chichester, but in October a stroke deprived him of the use of his hands. In spite of a second stroke he could still speak, and began another tour. Lifted onto the platform at meetings, he could still gather a crowd. 'The man in the street was impressed by the sight of a preacher, obviously earnest and religious, proclaiming that the 'Bible' was a fiction, that prayer was useless, that clergymen were liars, and that God did not care whether men did good or evil' (Balleine, 104). In November 1836 Ward finally settled at Leeds, but suffered a third stroke and died at 91 Park Lane on 12 March 1837. His devoted follower C. B. Holinsworth perpetuated his master's memory in a collection of Ward's writings in seventeen volumes (1899-1904). 


@@@@@


doc= 28694


Ward, John (1805-1890), diplomatist, was born on 28 August 1805 at East Cowes, Isle of Wight, where his father, John Ward, was collector of customs. His mother, Martha (also known as Patty), was one of the four sisters of Thomas Arnold (1795-1842); his grandfather William Arnold had been his father's predecessor in the customs post. Ward was much influenced by the Arnoldian context in which he was reared and by his uncle's friends, such as Richard Whately. In 1831 he jointly edited with his uncle the short-lived weekly journal the 'Englishman's Register', of which Arnold was the proprietor. He abandoned the law, for which he had been trained, on his appointment in 1837 to an inspectorship of prisons. The following year, after acting for some months as private secretary to the first earl of Durham, he became through the earl's influence secretary to the New Zealand Colonization Company, for which he wrote 'The British Colonization of New Zealand' (1837), with E. G. Wakefield, and 'Information Relative to New Zealand' (1839; 2nd enlarged edn, 1840). He had for many years previously taken a keen interest in the politics, and more especially in the commercial and industrial progress, of France, Belgium, and Germany, and had published articles on both home and foreign affairs in the 'Edinburgh Review' and the 'British and Foreign Review'. Early in 1841 he was appointed British commissioner for the revision of the state tolls. In 1844 he was sent to Berlin as British commissioner for the settlement, through the arbitration of the king of Prussia, of the so-called Portendic claims on France, arising out of a blockade by French ships of part of the African coast. In the summer of 1845 Lord Aberdeen appointed him consul-general at Leipzig, with the further commission to visit periodically those places in Germany where the conferences of the Zollverein should be held. At the close of 1850 Lord Palmerston instructed him to act as secretary of legation at Dresden during the diplomatic conferences held in that capital, where he was a close witness of the notable victory achieved by the policy of Austria, represented by Schwarzenberg. In 1854 he attended the Munich exhibition of arts and manufactures, and wrote a report on the state of technical instruction in Bavaria. In 1857 he was charged with an inquiry into the political condition of the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein, their relations with the Danish crown, and the best remedies for grievances which the promulgation of the joint constitution of 1855 had notoriously augmented. His report, though praised by the prince consort and Lord Stratford de Redcliffe, was left unpublished by Lord Clarendon, and the subsequent course of events prevented any possibility of acting on his recommendation to reorganize the Danish monarchy upon federal principles. 
In 1860 Ward, after being made a CB, had been nominated charge d'affaires and consul-general for the Hanse towns and the surrounding parts of Germany, and after in 1865 negotiating, together with Lord Napier and Ettrick, a commercial treaty with the Zollverein, he was in the following year raised to the rank of minister-resident. In 1870, owing to the abolition of direct diplomatic relations with the Hanse towns on their joining the North German federation, he left Hamburg. The remainder of his life he spent in retirement at Dover and in Essex (where his home was Gaston House, near Bishop's Stortford), writing his reminiscences. Ward was married to Caroline (died 1905), daughter of John Bullock, rector of Radwinter, Essex. The second of their sons was the historian Sir Adolphus Ward. Ward died at his home in Kent, 11 Waterloo Crescent, Dover, on 1 September 1890. 


@@@@@


doc= 28695


Ward, John (1825-1896), naval officer and surveyor, was the son of Lieutenant Edward Willis Ward RN (died 1855). He entered the navy in 1840 on the brig 'Spey', packet-boat to the West Indies and the Gulf of Mexico. In November 1840 the 'Spey' was wrecked on the Bahama bank, and young Ward was sent to the 'Thunder', then surveying the Bahamas. He passed his examination in December 1848, and was promoted lieutenant on 2 October 1850. He married, in 1852, Mary Hope, daughter of John Bowie of Edinburgh; they had at least one child. During 1851-3 Ward was borne on the books of the 'Fisgard' for surveying duties, and in March 1854 was appointed to the steamer 'Alban', then commanded by Captain Henry Charles Otter, and attached to the fleet in the Baltic, where she served usefully in destroying telegraphs and in reconnoitring in the neighbourhood of Sveaborg and at Bomarsund. In 1855-6 he was with Otter in the 'Firefly', surveying on the coast of Scotland, and in February 1857 was appointed to command the 'Emperor', a steam yacht going out as a present to the emperor of Japan. In her he went with Lord Elgin to Yeddo, in August 1858, and, when the vessel had been handed over to the Japanese, returned to Shanghai in the 'Retribution'. 
On 24 September Ward was promoted to command the surveying ship 'Actaeon', and in her tender, the gunboat 'Dove', he accompanied Lord Elgin in his remarkable voyage up the Yang-tse, rendering important assistance in examining the navigable channels of the river. For the next three years he commanded the 'Actaeon', and in her surveyed the coast of the Gulf of Pecheli (Beizhili), including the harbours of Weihaiwei and Ta-lien-wan (Dalianwan), until then unknown, as also the Yang-tse for 200 miles above Han-kow (Hankou). For two years after paying off the 'Actaeon' at the end of 1861, he was employed at the hydrographic office in printing the work of the survey, and in March 1864 he was appointed to the 'Rifleman' to continue the survey of the China seas. In 1866 his health gave way, and he was obliged to return to England. He had no further service, and in 1870 accepted the new retirement scheme. On 24 September 1873 he was promoted captain on the retired list, and he died at London on 20 January 1896, at the age of seventy. 


@@@@@


doc= 28696


Ward, John William, earl of Dudley (1781-1833), politician, was born on 9 August 1781, only child of William Ward (1750-1823), later third Viscount Dudley and Ward, and his wife, Julia (1754-1833), daughter of Godfrey Bosvile of Gunthwaite, Yorkshire. He was descended from Humble Ward ('c'.1614-1670), who married Frances (1611-1697), granddaughter of Edward Sutton, fifth Baron Dudley, and was created Baron Ward in 1644. His son Edward (1631-1701) succeeded to both baronies, and Edward's great-nephew John Ward ('c'.1704-1774) became sixth Baron Ward in 1740. He was created Viscount Dudley and Ward in 1763, and his second son, William, the father of this subject, succeeded as third viscount on the death of his elder half-brother, John, in 1788. 
William was a harsh and neglectful parent to John William, who later blamed the 'malady' of depression and self-loathing which blighted his adult life on 'the brutal neglect and unkindness with which I was treated in my early years... I was bred under a task-master and the sound of the lash is never quite out of my ears' (Ward to Lord Aberdeen, 17 Dec 1822, BL, Add. MS 43231, fol. 36). After his education by a succession of private tutors and at the universities of Edinburgh (where he found in Mrs Dugald Stewart a surrogate mother) and Oxford, his father bought him a seat in parliament for the second earl of Radnor's borough of Downton at the general election of 1802, just before he came of age. In August 1803 he was returned unopposed for Worcestershire, where his family had a leading interest. Initially he adhered, like his father, to Pitt, but he became disillusioned with him and joined the Foxite and Grenvillite opposition to his second ministry in 1804. He supported them in office, 1806-7, having abandoned the county and come in as a paying guest, at his father's expense, for Petersfield on the interest of the Jolliffe family at the general election of 1806. He was at first loyal to the whigs in opposition from 1807 when, now politically estranged from his father, he found a seat for Wareham, where the Calcraft family were the patrons. He made a few impressive speeches, which gave him the look of a rising star, but he was never a frequent, and seldom an influential, debater. He was made chairman of the Commons select committee on sinecures in 1810. By then he had become disenchanted with the divisions and incompetence of the whigs. His drift towards a personal attachment to Canning was confirmed by their mutual support for Catholic claims and hostility to parliamentary reform. He declined to be considered for office when the whigs were cabinet-making at the start of the regency in 1811; and in June 1812, when they refused to assume power on a point of punctilio, he washed his hands of them and enlisted with Canning. He thereby lost some whig friends and gained a reputation as a place-seeker. 
At the general election of 1812 Ward bought a seat for Ilchester from Sir William Manners. To his mortification, which he tried unsuccessfully to conceal with wry jokes against himself, he was left stranded by Canning's disbandment of his parliamentary squad in July 1813. On Canning's rapprochement with the Liverpool ministry the following year Ward refused the offer of a privy councillorship and an unpaid place at the India board. He spent much time on the continent until May 1816, when he resumed his seat and, with Canning back in the cabinet, supported the government 'faute de mieux'. Abroad at the time of the 1818 general election, he lost his seat for Ilchester, but in April 1819 he was returned by Canning's friend James Stuart Wortley for Bossiney, where he sat for the remainder of his Commons career, turning down an opportunity to stand for Worcestershire in 1820. In deference to Canning he stayed neutral in the parliamentary struggle over Queen Caroline in 1821. On 12 February during that session his speech in support of the transfer of Grampound's seats to Leeds as a safe and practical reform was reckoned to have been instrumental in carrying the question against ministers (Grenville, 'Memoirs of the Court of George IV', 1.123). He was abroad for most of the 1822 session and returned to England in the summer in a state verging on nervous collapse. In September Canning, having been made foreign secretary after Lord Londonderry's suicide, offered him the under-secretaryship. He did so merely to raise Ward's self-esteem, and neither expected nor wished him to accept; but Ward took him seriously and agonized for three weeks, during which he overcame his father's objections, before declining. Within two months he was torturing himself with remorse over what he now considered a fatally wrong decision. He supported the government silently and without hope of recognition until his father's death removed him from the Commons on 25 April 1823, when he succeeded to the viscountcy and to extensive estates in Staffordshire and Worcestershire, which contained lucrative coal and mineral deposits and brought him $120,000 a year. 
In April 1827 Dudley belatedly attained the public eminence which he craved by accepting Canning's invitation to become foreign secretary in his new administration, in the first instance until the end of the session. He was sworn of the privy council on 30 April. After Canning's death he was persuaded to stay in office under Lord Goderich, who had him created earl of Dudley on 5 October 1827. The duke of Wellington retained him in January 1828, but he resigned with Huskisson and the other former Canningites in May. His performance at the Foreign Office, where he was initially Canning's cipher, was adequate but undistinguished. His tenure coincided with the British naval victory at Navarino. At home his notorious liaison with Lady Lyndhurst, the wife of the lord chancellor, prompted the jest that he had become 'a ward in Chancery' ('Creevey Papers', 2.141). Lady Lyndhurst later claimed that one of her daughters was his child and seems to have blackmailed Dudley, who never married, and whose journals, which were destroyed by his executors along with all his other papers, contained pornographic descriptions of his remorseless but joyless sexual exploits with women 'both in high and low life' ('Greville Memoirs', 5.438). 
Dudley made his last speech in the Lords, a vehement denunciation of the 'Reform Bill', on 5 October 1831. His later years were marked by increasing absences of mind and eccentricities of behaviour, particularly his habit of conducting tormented dialogues with himself in different voices. In the spring of 1832 he exhibited 'every mark of harmless derangement' and was placed under restraint at Norwood, Surrey ('Croker Papers', 2.171). Raikes commented: 'Here is a man with high rank, character, very cultivated talents, and a colossal fortune, courted in society, surrounded with every means of receiving and conferring happiness, -- the most enviable position perhaps in life that could be pictured, -- and what is the result? One single dispensation annihilates the whole!' ('Portion of the Journal', 1.20). Dudley never appeared in society again and died at Norwood, after suffering a series of strokes, on 6 March 1833. His earldom and viscountcy became extinct, but the barony passed to his second cousin, William Humble Ward (1781-1835), on whom he had settled $4000 a year. The bulk of his great fortune went to his heir's son, William Ward (1817-1885), who was created earl of Dudley on 17 February 1860. By a codicil to his will, which was proved under $350,000, Dudley left annuities of $2000 to Lady Lyndhurst and $800 to Susan, the wife of the poet William Spencer, and a legacy of $25,000 to one of her sons, 'whom he always tacitly acknowledged' ('GM', 2nd ser., 103, 1833; TNA: PRO, PROB 11/1821/566). His letters (1814-23) to Edward Copleston, bishop of Llandaff, and to Mrs Stewart (1803-32) were subsequently published. 
Lord Holland recalled Dudley as 'a man of highly cultivated mind and of exquisite and refined though somewhat elaborate wit' given to 'bitter hatreds and unwarrantable resentments', but 'not entirely devoid of benevolence and even generosity' (Fox, 165). Five years after his death Brougham paid him a fulsome and perhaps inflated tribute as 'one of the most remarkable men that have appeared in this country', who 'possessed one of the most acute and vigorous understandings that any man ever was armed with', but was undermined by 'an over-sensitiveness, an exquisitely fastidious taste, a nervous temperament', so that 'unsteadiness of purpose... greatly chequered his existence as a public man during the latter years of his brilliant, but unhappy life' ('EdinR', 67, 1838, 77-9). Creevey wasted no words on his epitaph: 'Poor Ward, with all his acquirements and talents, made little of it, went mad and died' ('Creevey Papers', 2.255). 


@@@@@


doc= 28697


Ward, Joshua (1684/5-1761), medical practitioner and inventor of medicines, was the son of William Ward, owner of an alum works, of Guisborough, Cleveland. He had at least two brothers, one being the wealthy and dishonest businessman and MP John Ward of Hackney (died 1755), and two sisters. According to John Ayrton Paris he was originally a footman who, while serving on the continent, obtained the recipes of his nostrums from some monks. The only certainty however, is that he worked with his brother William as a drysalter in Thames Street, London, where he presumably gained some useful experience in the properties of drugs. 
Ward is claimed to have fled to France in 1715 on account of a 'particular affair', apparently involving sympathy with the Jacobite cause ('Annual Register', 1761, 185). Yet in the same year he became a member of parliament for Marlborough, after one of two rival mayors got hold of the election writ and inserted Ward's name. Ward was returned even though no one had voted for him. Nominally a whig he voted against the 'Septennial Act' of 1716, but in May 1717 he was unseated on petition. 
Ward remained in France for about sixteen years, spending time near Paris and among the English colony at Dunkirk. In 1725 he was co-defendant with his brother John in an action brought in England by the widow of John Sheffield, first duke of Buckingham and Normanby, over some alum works the duke had earlier leased to them. It emerged that John Ward had cheated the duke out of $70,000, only $10,000 being recovered, and he was convicted of fraud and forgery; being abroad, Joshua Ward escaped blame. 
While in France, Ward invented the medicines known as Ward's Pill and Ward's Drop. The composition of these and other nostrums, such as sweating drops and paste for fistula, varied greatly over the years, but essentially the pills contained antimony and a vegetable substance -- dragon's blood -- mixed with wine, whereas the drops comprised a fearsome brew of nitric acid, ammonium chloride, and mercury. Those taking such remedies, in an age when cupping and blistering were regular treatments, thought that the resulting heavy perspiration, vomiting, or purging had beneficial effects. After receiving a pardon from George II, Ward returned to England in 1734, settled in London, and overnight became the talk of the town. 
Ward's reputation was greatly enhanced by royal patronage. He spotted that the king's painful thumb was not gouty but dislocated, and cured it with a violent wrench. For this he was rewarded with the use of an apartment in the almonry office, Whitehall, and the privilege of driving through St James's Park. Ward was also adept at puffing himself, asserting in press advertisements his ability to cure gout, rheumatism, scurvy, palsy, syphilis, scrofula, and cancer. He converted three houses near St James's Park into a hospital for the poor, and set up a further treatment centre in Threadneedle Street, in the City of London. He subsidized these activities by charging the rich what they could afford. 
Not unexpectedly, Ward's spectacular success evoked harsh criticism, not merely from reputable doctors. He was widely accused of hiring 'patients' at half a crown a week and instructing them on how to simulate the symptoms of diseases; better-dressed impostors were said to arrive in their coaches and throng his consulting-rooms for 5's'. a day. The large sums he contributed to charity -- put at over $3000 a year -- and the coins he regularly threw from his carriage only fanned hostility towards him. The 'Grub Street Journal', in articles from 1734 onwards, repeated verbatim in the 'Gentleman's Magazine', at first reasonably attacked the public's indiscriminate use of the medicines, but later castigated him openly as the friend of undertakers, coffin makers, and sextons by poisoning the sick. Ward responded by taking the journal to court on charges of libel -- inadvisedly, as it turned out, as his scant medical knowledge was revealed and his case was thrown out, the defendants gleefully commemorating their victory in prose and doggerel. 
Among men of letters, reactions to Ward and his activities were decidedly mixed. Henry Fielding commended his powers of curing the poor with no expectation of reward, in his 'Voyage to Lisbon' (1755), and Horace Walpole approved of the way in which Ward relieved headaches with a dab of ointment on the forehead. Edward Gibbon as a sickly twelve-year-old was successfully treated by Ward during a life-threatening illness. On the other hand Alexander Pope satirized Ward as a despicable quack at least four times in his verses. In William Hogarth's 'The Company of Undertakers', Ward is depicted with the surgeon and oculist John Taylor (1703-1772) and the notorious bone-setter Mrs Mapp as an impudent fraud. 
Notwithstanding these mixed reactions, Ward seems to have maintained the confidence of the elite. George II cautiously permitted his daughter Princess Caroline -- egged on by John Hervey, Baron Hervey of Ickworth (1696-1743) -- to take Ward's pills for her rheumatism. In 1748, when the House of Commons debated a bill to control apothecaries and others who were dispensing adulterated drugs, Ward petitioned the house, alleging that over the past fifteen years he had had no fewer than 2000 patients under his care, 300 being soldiers; he was duly exempted in the bill, which was rejected in the House of Lords. 
Ward's notoriety for his pills and his treatment of the sick overshadowed his scientific experiments. He had two trained assistants, John White and F. J. D'Osterman, with whose help in 1736 he began to make sulphuric acid at Twickenham, in what were known as the 'Great Vitriol Works'. This acid was produced by igniting nitre (or saltpetre) and sulphur in round-bottomed flasks set in sand. While the chemistry of the process was by then tolerably well known, for the first time manufacture was on a large enough scale to permit continuous production, one operative being able successively to attend the large number of flasks in the works. The price of sulphuric acid was consequently reduced to about one-sixteenth of its former cost. Later Ward removed operations to Richmond, and he patented his process in 1749. In both localities the fumes from the chimneys and the general stench aroused much irritation among the neighbours. 
Ward was a large and ungainly man, his double chin and rotund figure indicating his taste for the good things of life. His nickname of Spot Ward arose from the claret-coloured birthmark on the right side of his face, shown in some (but not all) portraits of him. He showed no undue respect to those above him, even making impertinent remarks to the king, but was kindly and condescending to those he deemed his inferiors. 
There is no evidence that Ward ever married. The 'affair' which drove him abroad was undoubtedly political rather than of the heart. Perhaps he had too many secrets to risk marriage. The last word on a contemporary must go to Dr Johnson: he judged Ward to have been the dullest man he had ever known. 
Ward died at his home in Whitehall, London, on 21 December 1761, his fortune being estimated at $16,000, with $5000 earmarked in bequests, mainly to relatives. He asked for his body to be buried in Westminster Abbey, if possible close to the high altar; he did after all reside within the parish. He was duly interred on 26 December with great pomp in Poets' Corner, not inappropriately for one so versified against. A bust in his possession was to have been placed next to that of John Dryden; however, the only lapidary likeness available was a full-length statue by Agostino Carlini, which was too ostentatious for the abbey. Presented to the Royal Society of Arts by a great-nephew in 1792, it is now in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. Ward's grave remains unmarked and his nostrums were likewise soon virtually forgotten. His friend John Page, an MP and one-time deputy paymaster-general, inherited the recipes, and published them in 1763. White and D'Osterman continued production helped by pensions from George III, and the proceeds were to be divided between the Asylum for Female Orphans and the Magdalen Home for Fallen Women. These revenues, at first plentiful, soon declined sharply. Unlike the fever powders of Robert James, the pill and drop did not long survive their self-important creator. 


@@@@@


doc= 28698


Martin Theodore Ward (c.1799-1874), painter, was William Ward's eldest son. He was trained as a painter under Edwin Landseer, and specialized in portraits of animals commissioned by members of the gentry and lesser aristocracy, showing their favourite hunting dogs, such as terriers, spaniels, and pointers, and horses. He exhibited at the Royal Academy from 1820 to 1825 and at the British Institution from 1819 to 1829, where he showed animal portraits as well as a few animal genre pieces with titles such as 'The Painful Bite' (1821) and 'The Intrusion' (1829). About 1840 he settled in Yorkshire, where he became noted for his eccentricity; he exhibited only once more, at the British Institution in 1858, and died in poverty in York on 13 February 1874. 


@@@@@


doc= 28699


Ward, Mary (1585-1645), Roman Catholic nun and founder of the Institute of the Blessed Virgin Mary, was born on 23 January 1585 at Mulwith Manor, near Ripon in Yorkshire. She was the eldest of the six children of Marmaduke Ward ('b'. 'c'.1552), gentleman and bailiff to Henry Percy, ninth earl of Northumberland, and Ursula Wright ('b'. 'c'.1565), the widow of John Constable; both her parents belonged to close-knit families of minor east Yorkshire gentry. They and their relatives were Roman Catholics who persisted in their faith after the Elizabethan settlement, many of them experiencing a loss of wealth and periods of imprisonment as convicted recusants. From the age of five Mary Ward was cared for mostly in the households of relatives and, through close female relatives, gained practical knowledge of the vital part played by women in the preservation and practice of Catholicism in England. She was educated at home, learning Latin from an early age and later becoming proficient in the major European modern languages. 
Between the ages of five and ten Mary Ward lived with her grandparents Robert and Ursula Wright on their estate, Ploughland, near Welwick in Holderness, returning to her parents when her grandfather died in 1594. But the following year Mulwith Manor was completely destroyed by fire and the rest of the family moved, in 1597, to the Percy estate at Alnwick in Northumberland. Mary Ward herself went first to live with her widowed relative Katherine Ardington at Harewell House near Ripon and then, from 1600 to 1606, with Sir Ralph and Lady Grace Bapthorpe of Osgodby and Babthorpe near York. In this highly religious household, with its Jesuit priest and daily regime of devotions and instruction, Mary Ward began to order her life around prayer and spiritual reading. According to her autobiographical notes, made largely in 1617 and 1627, she was about fifteen when she first expressed the hope of becoming a nun. Her family, however, wished her to marry and encouraged the three or four suitors who made offers of marriage. Contemporaries commented on her beauty and attractiveness of personality while the visual sources, in the form of contemporary and posthumous portraits along with the unusual fifty narrative paintings from the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries which comprise the painted life of Mary Ward, convey these same qualities. 
By 1605 Mary Ward was sufficiently sure of her religious calling to refuse the hand of Edmund Neville, the Catholic claimant to the forfeited earldom of Westmorland, despite the views of her father and her confessor, Father Richard Holtby, that it was her duty to accept. In that same year her father was arrested as an alleged conspirator in the Gunpowder Plot. He was not charged and, according to Peters, was unlikely even to have known of the plans. But two of her uncles, Christopher and John Wright, and Thomas Percy, the husband of her aunt Martha Wright, were deeply involved and were killed in the courtyard of Holbeach House while resisting arrest. In May 1606, soon after this significant series of personal and political events, Mary Ward left England for St Omer in Flanders to seek admission to one of the enclosed contemplative orders. 
Through her contacts, particularly with the Jesuits who had their English College in St Omer, Mary Ward was admitted as a novice external sister with the Walloon Poor Clares. Becoming convinced, however, that her call was to help found a Poor Clare convent for Englishwomen she left the Walloon community in April 1607 to undertake the necessary negotiations with the ecclesiastical and civil authorities. Although she was young and unknown her initiative succeeded and the new convent was established in Gravelines by the end of 1608 with an endowment from the governor and the transfer of professed English nuns from the St Omer Poor Clares. Attracting applicants immediately from England it grew rapidly and Mary Ward, who was one of the novices, recorded her total contentment there. However, according to these same autobiographical notes, in May 1609 she received the first of a series of visions that changed the course of her life and led her to play a significant part in a debate about the role of women religious in the Catholic church that continued beyond her lifetime. 
These mystical illuminations, which she described as intellectual rather than visual or aural revelations, were central to Mary Ward's subsequent actions. From the first occasion in May 1609 she understood only that she was to leave the newly founded Poor Clares and undertake an unspecified work that would bring her opprobrium. She therefore left and returned to London, where she used her social networks to undertake domestic evangelization and religious instruction of former Catholics. While in London she experienced a second illumination (the gloria vision) in November, which made clear that her unspecified mission would be wholly good and for the glory of God. During this period she gathered a group of seven young women from similar backgrounds, several of them related to one another and to her, who were prepared to follow her leadership and to live together in St Omer. There, close to the Jesuit college, they set up a quasi-religious house in early 1610 and gave religious instruction and teaching, first to the adult English emigres living locally and then to their children and boarders sent from England. Known as the 'English Ladies' this small community had ten members by 1611 and was supported by the Jesuits and Bishop Blaes of St Omer. In 1611 Mary Ward's third and crucial vision led her to understand that her community, which had a conventual style of life, a Jesuit confessor, and private vows but as yet no rule, habit, or perpetual vows, should 'take the same of the Society' (Peters, 114), adapted where necessary for women. Peters argues from documentary evidence that Mary Ward interpreted her vision to mean that the fledgeling institute should adopt the 'Formula Instituti' of the Society of Jesus, a position confirmed and reinforced by the final illumination, known as the vision of the 'just soul', of November 1615 (Peters, 116). The vision also revealed that the Jesuits would never permit this, as indeed they could not, since Ignatius of Loyola had expressly forbidden the society to take on the work of directing orders of nuns. The constitution of Ward's institute became, therefore, the critical issue. Between the first vision of 1611 and the last in 1615 individual Jesuits (including her confessor, Father Roger Lee) and other ecclesiastical friends drew up rules for a teaching institute, Schola Beatae Mariae, which Mary Ward ultimately rejected as only approximating to a Jesuit way of life. Simultaneously her proposals and activities prompted controversy within the society and there began a hostile campaign against the institute involving Jesuits, secular clergy, and leading members of the English laity. 
Mary Ward's attempts to realize her revelations through the establishment of a new canonical institute challenged the 'status quo' in three ways: first, it required a recognition that women living under vows could undertake educational and other work, including missionary activity, outside the cloister; second, that an institute of women could be organized across diocesan and state boundaries and therefore needed to be accountable to Rome under the delegated authority of a female chief superior, rather than more locally under a bishop; and third, that in adopting the constitutions of the Society of Jesus women religious would be permitted to develop the same kind of liberty as Jesuits to determine, under obedience to the pope by their fourth vow, what ministries would best achieve the 'greater glory of God and, in any place further the propagation of our Holy Mother, the Catholic Church', even to the point of working individually rather than in community (Byrne, 34). Hers was not the only initiative in this vein, but taken together these three proposals went beyond others and even beyond what the church would accept for women by the early twentieth century. 
Not much is known about Mary Ward between 1609 to 1615, although what is certain is that she led the English Ladies in the development of two distinct ministries: missionary and catechetical work with adults, usually women, in England, and teaching girls in their own schools in St Omer. The first activity was necessarily clandestine, undertaken by a smaller number of highly trained women who worked individually and, like priests, were protected by Catholic families. The second was public, highly regarded by some clerics and involving at least thirty teachers by 1615. Valued though this was by her for its evangelical potential, because through it future wives and mothers would acquire the necessary education to sustain the faith of their households, Mary Ward nevertheless continued to attach considerable importance to the more hidden work in England as the institute expanded across Europe. 
Between 1616 and 1628 the experience of Mary Ward's institute was characterized on the one hand by expansion, new foundations, and support from monarchs and churchmen and on the other by virulent hostility, poverty, and failure to achieve official approval. New houses and schools were opened across the continent: Liege (1616), Cologne and Trier (1620-21), Rome (1622), Naples (1623), Perugia (1624), Munich (1627), Vienna (1627), and Pressburg (1628). Mary Ward travelled considerable distances throughout this time, raised financial resources, and organized the network of her senior and most trusted members to run the new houses. The schools flourished and received hundreds of pupils, impressing Maximilian I, duke of Bavaria, who became a major proponent of their educational work, and Pope Urban VIII, who admired Mary Ward as an individual. As important was her redrafting of the constitution and her attempt to gain papal approbation of the institute from Paul V, Gregory XV, and Urban VIII. She and several companions travelled thousands of miles on foot across Europe to present the document personally to Pope Gregory XV in Rome in 1621 and later to Pope Urban VIII. Mary Ward found the normal Vatican bureaucratic procedures and caution difficult to understand and, despite her optimism about approbation, she received none. Alongside letters of support for the institute the Roman authorities received highly critical documents and petitions from England and elsewhere calling the English Ladies 'Jesuitesses', 'galloping girls', 'chattering hussies' (Peters, 341), and accusing them of moral laxity, usurpation of priestly roles, and even heresy. The controversy became increasingly damaging to the institute. Action was taken by the Inquisition to warn and then to suppress houses of the institute from 1628 onwards, culminating in the promulgation of the papal bull 'Pastoralis Romani pontificis' in January 1631. Described by one source as the 'harshest Bull ever to emanate from Rome', it suppressed the institute itself and denounced its members (Littlehales, 213). 
Mary Ward herself was imprisoned for nine weeks. Throughout these events she remained unswervingly loyal both to her own mission and to the church. In turn many members of the institute stayed loyal to her and she continued to be seen as an exceptional and holy woman by many she encountered personally. On her release she went directly to Rome for an audience with Pope Urban who cleared her of the charge of heresy and allowed her, in 1632, to establish a group of women and a school in Rome under protection of the Holy See. The pope himself paid her a pension and supplied medicines and wine. Former members, working as lay teachers, also reopened the school in Munich in 1635, under the protection of Maximilian of Bavaria. 
These modest restorations of the institute's work were important for future developments, but her own life was now dominated by the ill health she had long experienced from a chronic gallstone condition. In 1637 she made her way slowly across Europe from Rome, visiting Paris and Liege before arriving in London in May 1639. There she remained until the civil war forced her to travel north home to Yorkshire in 1642. She died at Heworth Manor near York on 20 January 1645, attended by members of the institute, including two of her first companions, Mary Poyntz and Winefrid Wigmore, and she was buried in the parish church of St Thomas in the village of Osbaldwick just outside Heworth. Her simple gravestone reads 'To love the poore, persever in the same, live dy and rise with them was all the ayme of Mary Ward'. 
Mary Ward remained a controversial figure in the church long after her death. The institute survived and slowly expanded from the core that remained in Italy, England (York and Hammersmith), and Bavaria but the houses in different countries developed independently and did not sustain the unity across boundaries that had been integral to her vision. Moreover, the tradition of Mary Ward as founder became suppressed within them because the bull of 1631 -- and a subsequent bull concerning women's religious institutes, 'Quamvis justo', issued by Benedict XIV in 1749, which repeated many of the earlier accusations -- had such force. During the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries much archival material on her life was destroyed or was, like the 'Painted Life' series, hidden. Mary Ward's eventual rehabilitation was the work of individual nuns in the English houses, with support from a learned Jesuit writer, and formed part of a more general impulse among nineteenth-century Catholics in England to recover an English Catholic past and create a public identity with a history. As a result of their researches and efforts the different houses joined forces temporarily to petition for papal approbation, which was finally granted in 1877. Detailed research into Mary Ward's life, using archives across Europe, led to the publication of Catherine Chambers's two-volume life in 1882-5. In the context of changing female roles Mary Ward became of interest and her ideas were no longer seen as dangerously radical. By 1909 Pope Pius X was ready to rehabilitate her as founder of the institute, now called Institute of the Blessed Virgin Mary, leading the way to the unification of all the branches in England, Ireland, Germany, Austria, Italy, and Canada in 1911. Interest in Mary Ward from a variety of quarters outside her own institute continued to develop during the twentieth century with Pope John Paul II choosing the first papal visit to Britain in 1982 to single her out as 'an extraordinary Yorkshire woman... a pioneer of the active unenclosed congregations for women' ('The Pope Teaches' (1982) pt5, 143). 


@@@@@


doc= 28700


Ward, Nathaniel (1578-1652), clergyman and compiler of a law code for Massachusetts, was born in Haverhill, Suffolk, the second of five children of John Ward (died 1598), lecturer successively of Haverhill, Writtle in Essex, and Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, and his wife, Susan (died in or after 1639). His brothers, Samuel Ward (1577-1640) and John (died 1661), both followed their father in careers as clergymen. Ward's mother married Richard Rogers, lecturer at Wethersfield, Essex, some time after his father's death in 1598, thereby uniting two puritan clerical families. His stepbrothers by this marriage were the ministers Daniel Rogers and Ezekiel Rogers. He was admitted to Emmanuel College, Cambridge, in 1596, and graduated BA in 1600 and proceeded MA in 1603. His wife, Elizabeth, remains a shadowy figure; they were married before 1606, when their first child was born. Ward decided to pursue a legal career and was admitted to Lincoln's Inn in 1607. After completing his legal training, he travelled throughout northern Europe, studying under David Pareus, professor of theology at the University of Heidelberg, who probably persuaded him to change his career. Ward was ordained in 1618 and in the same year he edited his brother Samuel's sermon 'Jethro's Justice of Peace'. From 1620 to 1624 he served as chaplain to the British merchants at Elbing, Prussia, but was back in England by 1626, when he was curate of St James's, Piccadilly. While in London Ward met Sir Nathaniel Rich, a landowner with strong puritan sympathies, who inspired his interest in the Massachusetts Bay Colony and who became his patron when he gave him the living as rector of Stondon Massey, Essex, in 1628. Ward became part of Thomas Hooker's Essex circle of puritan opposition to Archbishop Laud's attempts to standardize the Church of England. His willingness to conform to the church was questioned as early as 1628, and he supported William Sandcroft for the mastership of Emmanuel College in the same year. Sandcroft's successful election meant the college would continue to produce suitable candidates to occupy puritan pulpits. In 1629 Ward was one of forty-eight Essex ministers who signed a petition to Laud in support of Hooker. The petition was unsuccessful, and Hooker fled to Holland before settling in New England. Ward was offered a position as pastor to the Massachusetts Company, but he declined. However, he maintained an interest in the New England colony and corresponded with Governor John Winthrop to reserve space on an emigrant ship for two families in his congregation. 
Ward's position in Essex came under threat during Laud's visitation of the county in 1631. He was accused of not wearing his surplice, of rejecting the ceremonies of the 'Book of Common Prayer', and of refusing to promote the 'Book of Sports'. Using his legal background to good effect, he talked himself out of trouble on condition that he repaired his surplice and agreed to conform. He turned to his friend John Cotton for emotional support; Cotton, a central figure for puritans in the south-east of England, fled to Massachusetts in 1633. Despite being deeply involved in the project of puritan emigration to Massachusetts, Ward tried to save his position at Stondon when he was again called to account by Laud. However, on this occasion he failed, and was excommunicated and deprived in 1632. He emigrated to Massachusetts in 1634 and took up the pastorship of the church at Ipswich, which he held until 1636 when ill health forced him to retire. In 1639 Ward's two sons John and James, and his daughter Susanna, joined him in Massachusetts, where within a few months Susanna married Giles Firmin; presumably his wife had died by this date. In the same year Ward and Cotton, now living in Boston, were each requested to draft a code of laws for Massachusetts. It was Ward's model which was accepted after a complicated procedure (though portions of Cotton's contribution were added in the final version) and the Massachusetts 'body of liberties' was adopted as law in 1641. Ward's code was based on a combination of English common law and biblical law, and was made up of 100 specific liberties which were accepted as the rights of the freemen of the colony. His concern for authority, especially in the limitation of the power of the magistrate and proper legal procedure, is evident throughout the code. His experiences and those of his puritan colleagues in England also had an influence, with freedom of assembly and movement, the right to bail, and an intolerant attitude to religious matters as characteristic. Ward's influence with the colonial government was considerable. In 1641 he preached the sermon for the general election and received a grant for 600 acres of land near Pentucket, afterwards Haverhill. Two years later he joined with other ministers, including his stepbrother Ezekiel on behalf of Essex county to protest at Winthrop's involvement in the affairs of Massachusetts's French neighbours. He also supported the persecution of religious radicals, most notably in the case of Anne Hutchinson. Ward continued to be a favourite of the freemen of Massachusetts, who often requested a sermon to commemorate events. He maintained his position despite his son James being arrested for theft while a student at Harvard; it was then realized that the 'body of liberties' had no punishment recommended for burglary. Ward served on the committee to revise the laws in 1645 and also began work on 'The Simple Cobbler of Agawam in America', which offers a statement of his beliefs. 
By 1646, perhaps inspired by his success in Massachusetts, Ward decided to return to England with the hope of helping to resolve the crisis in his homeland. He sent 'The Simple Cobbler' ahead to his brother John, a member of the Westminster assembly, for publication, and gave his land to Harvard College before leaving Massachusetts. His son John stayed in the colony as minister at Haverhill; Ward's other children returned to England with him. 'The Simple Cobbler of Agawam' proved to be a huge success. Published in 1647 under the pseudonym Theodore de la Guard, it quickly went through four editions. Ward's fame from his wittily written and many-layered rant against religious toleration and immoral women's fashions imported from France, together with a plea to the king to compromise with his people and end the civil war, resulted in his invitation to preach the monthly fast sermon before the House of Commons in June 1647. The sermon focused on the need for authority in the state and the importance of moderation and consideration in reform. He also censured the army for its control of parliament. The sermon was not well received and Ward was not voted thanks, nor did parliament order it to be printed. It was eventually printed with a covering letter by Ward, which identified the reasons for its unpopularity as 'My perswading so much to lament the King' and 'some passages concerning the Army' (Ward, 'Sermon', sig. A3'v'). Ward continued his conservative approach and attacks on the army with another sermon of 1647, 'A Religious Retreat Sounded to a Religious Army', which advocated state control of the army so that it was 'neither a terror nor a burthen to the Country' (Ward, 'Religious Retreat', 5). Early in 1648 Ward took the living at Shenfield, Essex. In that year he continued his protest at the army's control of the kingdom in a petition presented to parliament on behalf of the eastern association. Deploring religious toleration and the lack of religious union promoted by parliament and the army, he also advised against deposing the king and supported the idea of the kingdom as a mercy of continuity granted by God. The eastern association's concerns also included the practical matters of resolving the quartering and payment of soldiers. Ward continued to be an able preacher until the end of his life. He condemned the execution of Charles I along with his stepbrother Daniel and his son-in-law Firmin. He continued to write, and in 1650 he provided a prefatory poem for Anne Bradstreet's 'The Tenth Muse Lately Sprung up in America'. Ward died sometime before November 1652, when his successor at Shenfield started to keep the parish records. 


@@@@@


doc= 28701


Ward, Nathaniel Bagshaw (1791-1868), botanist, was born in London, the son of Stephen Smith Ward, general practitioner, of Whitechapel. Everyday contact with the nearby docks stimulated a longing for a sailor's life and he was sent on a voyage to Jamaica at the age of thirteen, which, while it succeeded in curing him of that ambition, developed instead a lifelong appetite for luxuriant vegetation. He decided on a medical career and attended lectures at the London Hospital and those given at the Chelsea Physic Garden by the demonstrator to the Society of Apothecaries, Thomas Wheeler, who was a charismatic leader of its plant-hunting excursions into the countryside. Ward was one of many captivated by these: after he qualified in 1812 and joined his father's practice, he kept up a taste for rising before dawn in summer and snatching a few hours in the fields for botanizing before morning surgery. About 1817 he married Charlotte Witte. The couple had nine children. 
A dedicated gardener, Ward at first found the polluted atmosphere of London's East End repeatedly frustrated his efforts. In 1830, however, the chance sprouting of some seedlings in a bottle in which he had placed a chrysalis suggested a solution: if protected with an almost airtight casing of glass, plants could be kept alive indefinitely by the interacting effects of sunlight, soil, and their own transpiration. Though anticipated in this discovery by a professor of law at Glasgow University, Alexander Maconochie (1806-1885), Ward was the first to provide practical demonstration of the principle on an extensive scale and make it widely known. Three years of successful experimenting in collaboration with Loddiges' nursery culminated in the dispatch in 1833 of two of the resulting small cases to Australia. When opened there months later, the plants inside were found to be still growing sturdily; the cases were then refilled and on the return journey their contents again passed unharmed through snow and equatorial heat alike. Meanwhile John Claudius Loudon (1783-1843) had visited Ward's house, seen with astonishment its profusion of greenery, and dashed off an excited report in his widely read 'Gardener's Magazine'. In the next issue Ward was induced to provide the first exposition in print of the underlying principle and the method of constructing what were thenceforward known as Wardian cases. Through shortage of time (or diffidence) that was a mere brief note, as were further communications of his in 1836 in the 'Transactions of the Society of Arts' and the 'Companion to the Botanical Magazine', the latter run off for private circulation among his friends. Lectures and demonstrations to various learned bodies increasingly followed, but only in 1842 did he eventually come forward with a properly detailed account, 'On the Growth of Plants in Closely Glazed Cases'; by then the decor of many a gas-lit home had already acquired through this means a permanent accession of foliage, particularly of ferns. 
The aesthetic impact of Wardian cases was far outweighed, however, by the possibilities they opened up for colonial agriculture. Early adopted by Kew, they substantially changed the world economy by enabling plantation crops to be transferred to novel regions: tea from China to the Himalayas, cinchona from the Andes to India and Java, rubber from the Amazon to Ceylon and Malaya. Rarely has an observation so simple had such far-reaching results. 
Nor was the impact solely botanical. In 1836 Ward pointed out that animals could be kept alive on just the same principle. The parallel invention by him of the vivarium followed and, in 1841, of what he termed the 'aqua-vivarium', though the later fashion for aquariums was mainly due to the writings of Philip Henry Gosse (1810-1888), and the working out of the oxygenating principle that made them possible was the achievement of Robert Warington. 
Ward's allegiance to the Society of Apothecaries proved enduring. For many years he managed its Chelsea garden, initiating numerous improvements, and acted as the examiner in botany. This led to his election as master in 1854. As a botanical investigator, though, he was content with a largely passive role and published almost nothing: his election as FRS in 1852 was for forwarding science in other ways, notably by the pivotal part he played in it socially. Through his often weekly 'soirees' -- his 'stitching parties', as he dubbed them dismissively -- his successive houses were, in J. D. Hooker's words, 'the most frequent metropolitan resort of naturalists from all quarters of the globe of any since Sir Joseph Banks' day' ('Gardeners' Chronicle', 20 June 1868). Displays of microscopy were a particular feature at these occasions and led to the founding in 1839 of what became the Royal Microscopical Society. 
Cheerful and genial, an excellent raconteur with a large store of anecdotes, Ward was at the same time self-effacing almost to a fault, leaving it to others to speak up on his behalf when he failed to receive recognition he was felt to deserve and to agitate for the repeal of the onerous excise duties on glass; the latter was a cause especially dear to him, in his wish to see hospitals and the inner areas of cities benefit from what he believed to be the therapeutic ambience of living plants. Foremost among these champions was his eldest son, Stephen Henry Ward MD, one of two sons who carried on the family's medical tradition. 
On retiring from practice Ward moved to Clapham Rise, in the more salubrious southern environs of London, where he named his house The Ferns. He died at St Leonards, Sussex, on 4 June 1868 and was buried in Norwood cemetery on 10 June. His herbarium of 25,000 specimens was divided between the British Museum and Oxford University. A genus of South African mosses, 'Wardia', was named after him. 


@@@@@


doc= 28702


Ward, Sir Patience (1629-1696), merchant and politician, was born on 7 December 1629 at the manor of Tanshelf, near Pontefract, Yorkshire, the seventh son of Thomas Ward (died 1635) and his wife, Elizabeth (died after 1651). Hoping for a daughter, Ward's puritan father had vowed to name his next child Patience, should he again be disappointed. After his father's death, Ward's mother intended him for the ministry. He was sent up to Cambridge in 1643, but he claimed to have found little edification there. He would instead find his vocation in commerce. He served an apprenticeship, beginning in 1646, to Launcelot Tolson, a London merchant who traded to France. In 1654-5 he entered the French trade himself, becoming free of the Merchant Taylors' Company, and setting up a large establishment in the parish of St Laurence Pountney. He married Elizabeth Hobson (died 1685) of Hackney on 8 June 1653. His wife's religious and political heritage matched his own puritan background, and his father-in-law, haberdasher William Hobson, was a leading London Independent and a supporter of the root and branch petition. Ward himself was both a reformed protestant with dissenting sympathies and an occasional conformist. (One of Ward's brothers, an Independent, was removed as a Pontefract alderman under the 'Corporation Act' of 1662.) 
As a young merchant in the 1650s and 1660s Ward focused on business rather than politics, eventually becoming a major exporter of cloth to France. However, his future as a political opponent of Charles II was anticipated as early as 1664, when he was briefly imprisoned for a 'seditious' petition about the customs. In 1670 he was elected alderman for the ward of Farringdon Within and was accepted by the full court of aldermen after first being rejected. He was also chosen, with a dissenting colleague, as sheriff of London and Middlesex for 1670-71. These elections were intended by urban dissenters to block the local enforcement of the 1670 'Conventicle Act'. He was also chosen as master of the Merchant Taylors' Company in 1671. 
Ward soon became a spokesman for London dissenters who desired liberty of conscience and for merchants with concerns about the growing commercial rivalry with France. His extensive connections to Huguenot traders reinforced his own reformed protestant perspectives: the threat from Louis XIV was, for him, also a threat to English protestantism. In 1673 he was among four aldermen who 'hung an asse' and refused to act as stewards for a London Artillery Company feast in honour of the duke of York, a recent convert to Roman Catholicism. He also promoted a 1673 London petition to the crown about the city's trade, and he was one of the authors and signers of the anti-French 'Scheme of the Trade as it is at Present Carried on between England and France' (1674). Although knighted by Charles in October 1675, he was by then associated with the urban opposition to the Anglican loyalist agenda of the earl of Danby. In 1678 his evidence before the committee of trade of the House of Lords contributed to the adoption of a three-year ban on many French imports. In September 1679 he was one of several London aldermen who refused to acknowledge the king's brother on a visit to Windsor. By 1680 his next-door neighbour was Dr Gilbert Burnet, who may also have been his friend. 
Ward was deeply involved in the movement to exclude the duke of York from the succession during the three parliaments of 1679-81. He was a member of each, serving for Pontefract. He was also elected lord mayor of London in September 1680. He marked that occasion with a speech recommending protestant accommodation or a 'Union in Affection of all those who profess the same Faith', published as 'The Speech of... Sir Patience Warde... the Day of his Election' (1680) (p. 3). Charles II indicated his displeasure with Ward's election by refusing to attend his mayoral installation. Several leading parliamentary advocates of exclusion did attend, however, and some Londoners celebrated his installation in the streets as a prelude to the anticipated recognition of the duke of Monmouth's claim to the throne. During Ward's mayoralty the strengthening alliance between parliamentary, county, and civic advocates of a protestant succession became known as the whigs. For their part, Anglican loyalists (or tories as they became known) charged that 1200 or 1300 dissenters were admitted to the London electorate during his mayoralty without taking the required oaths. 
When the House of Commons adopted an exclusion bill on 11 November 1680 Ward immediately summoned a meeting of the London common council. The king regarded him as responsible for the ensuing unwelcome civic petition that he 'hearken and Incline to the Humble Advice' of his parliament ('To the Kings most Excellent Majesty', 1680). Ward was also among the MPs who promoted an address to the crown for the removal of the London recorder, Sir George Jeffreys. He claimed that Jeffreys had sought to undercut an earlier London petition by falsely suggesting that 'Such Petitioning was bordering upon Treason, and the beginning of Rebellion' (A. Grey, 'Debates of the House of Commons', 10 vols., 1763, 7.463). 
Ward's own commitment to the right of petitioning was further demonstrated when the London whigs reacted to Charles's prorogation of parliament on 10 January 1681. Amid mutterings that the MPs might resume their session in the city, Ward summoned another common council that requested Charles to recall parliament. Charles responded both by dissolving parliament and by warning Ward against meddling 'with those things that do not Concern you' (Library of Congress, London Newsletters, 7.148). 
Ward's subsequent lengthy illness prevented him from taking any part in the events surrounding the third Exclusion Parliament. On 11 May 1681, however, he defied a royal order against summoning a common council, claiming that the 'terrors and amazements' of the time made one necessary ('CSP dom.', '1680-81', 269). When common council adopted another petition for a parliament, Ward and other leading civic whigs were deprived of their places on the London lieutenancy commission. His encouragement of the whig movement in the city hastened Charles's decision to intervene in the corporation on behalf of the tories. Ward's mayoralty was also notable for the decision taken, in part at his behest, to inscribe on the fire monument the famous attribution of the great fire of 1666 to a Catholic conspiracy. Shortly after his mayoralty he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society. 
Ward remained a critical whig player in the 1681-3 political contest for the city. He also continued to advocate accommodation between the Church of England and the dissenters. He invited Burnet to preach in favour of protestant union at the election of his mayoral successor. He presented Charles with a petition against the persecution of protestants and, as a city magistrate, refused to act on several informations against conventicles. Angered by the government's efforts of 1681 to convict the earl of Shaftesbury and other whigs of treason, Ward was rumoured in December 1681 to be collecting depositions for the impeachment of the king's chief ministers, should another parliament be called. In January 1682 he was chosen in common council as a member of the committee to defend the London charter against the crown's 'quo warranto'. In April 1682 he was one of the organizers of a whig banquet in honour of the duke of Monmouth that was objected to by the crown. He was frequently in the company of both Monmouth and Shaftesbury during the next months, and his home was an occasional meeting-place for the whig grandees. Indeed, Shaftesbury may have been at Ward's house as late as 17 October 1682, by which time the earl may have been plotting resistance to the regime. 
Shortly after Shaftesbury's disappearance Ward offered evidence in the trial of his whig friend, Alderman Thomas Pilkington. Pilkington faced the charge of 'scandalum magnatum', at the suit of the duke of York, for allegedly suggesting in public that York had burnt London and intended death to its leading citizens. When Pilkington was convicted of the words, Ward was charged with perjury. His trial in May 1683 provided Sir George Jeffreys, who urged his conviction, with an opportunity for revenge. When found guilty Ward had already gone underground. He was discovered in June in the Barbican house of surgeon Charles Bateman, who was involved in whig resistance plans, but succeeded in fleeing to the Netherlands. 
By this time Ward's unusual given name had become a byword in the tory prints for whig impatience and disloyalty. Indeed, Aphra Behn had employed his name and his fear of 'French papishes' as early as 1678 in the first of her dramatic political satires. Nevertheless, the extent of Ward's knowledge about whig conspiracy in 1682-3 is unclear. The circle of conspirators around Robert West actually marked him for punishment as a 'trimmer' who had insufficiently advanced the whig cause during his mayoralty ('State trials', 9.420). 
Exiled in the Netherlands for the next five years, Ward moved within various circles of English refugees and rebels, keeping his distance from some but consorting with others. Transferring part of his wealth abroad, he contributed $500 to Monmouth's failed rebellion of 1685. He also associated with John Locke, Slingsby Bethel, Robert Ferguson, Thomas Papillon, Sir John Thompson, Lord Wharton, John Wildman, and Benjamin Furley, the Quaker merchant and book collector. He was a financial backer of the English cloth manufactory at Leeuwarden, the profits of which were intended to support resistance to the regime of James II. Sobered by the death of his wife in 1685, and surprised by James's turn towards toleration, he sought and received pardon for his political past in 1687. 
Ward returned to civic and national prominence in the wake of the revolution of 1688. In London he resumed his aldermanic place, was added to the lieutenancy commission, assumed command of a militia regiment, and was elected one of the City MPs for the Convention. The new government also rewarded him with appointments to the customs commission, the commission for discouraging the export of wool, and the assessments commissions for London and the West Riding of Yorkshire. His activity in the Convention demonstrated his continuing commitments to electoral rights, to reformed protestantism in England and abroad, and to advancing English against French trade. In the city he supported a whig effort to release the electorate and the common council from most magisterial restraints. In the Convention he favoured an investigation of the royal intrusion upon civic rights after the Oxford parliament. He also favoured repealing the sacramental test for office-holding, a position that prompted tory talk about expelling him for nonconformity. 
Although Ward promoted corporation loans to the new regime, he and William III were uneasy with one another by September 1689. When the king moved towards the tories in early 1690 Ward lost his militia colonelcy. Like the other whig City MPs in the Convention, he was defeated by the London church candidates who stood for the new parliament. Still an active merchant, he remained a commissioner for the customs and for the London lieutenancy. In 1694 he acquired $4000 of the original stock of the Bank of England. A contributor to funds for the support of dissenting ministry, he also became a member of the largely nonconformist New England Company, which sponsored missionaries to Native Americans. 
Ward died, childless, on 10 July 1696 at St Laurence Pountney and was buried in his parish church of St Mary Abchurch. Still committed to reformed protestantism within the Church of England, he left money to support impoverished Anglican clergy. Complaining of losses amounting to $40,000, he left few other legacies but offered forgiveness to all those who had 'trespassed against and persecuted' him in the late 'evil times' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/433/167). He had already advanced his London nephew, Sir John Ward (1650-1726), who followed him in civic, parliamentary, and commercial affairs. 


@@@@@


doc= 28703


Ward, Robert Plumer (1765-1846), politician and writer, was born in Mount Street, Mayfair, on 19 March 1765, the sixth son and eighth child of John Ward (died 1791), a merchant resident in Gibraltar and chief clerk of the civil department in the garrison, and his wife, Rebecca Raphael (1732-1768), who was descended from a Genoese Jewish family settled in Spain. She died when Robert was three years old. Ward was educated at Macfarlane's academy, Walthamstow, and afterwards at Christ Church, Oxford, which he entered in January 1783. He remained at Oxford until 1787 and, after leaving, travelled in France while pursuing studies in law. During his time in France he witnessed the early stages of the French Revolution. He returned to London and was called to the bar by the Inner Temple on 18 June 1790. 
Ward initially practised law on the western circuit, as well as conducting business in London where he undertook appeals before the privy council. In 1794 he came to the attention of William Pitt when he provided details of a republican plot. This incident occurred on the eve of the government's decision to prosecute members of the London reform societies. Even so, it seems unlikely that the evidence that Ward presented had any influence on the subsequent course of events (Veitch, 304). Nevertheless this meeting just prior to the treason trials led to a suggestion from the brother of Lord Eldon that he write a book on international law. 'An enquiry into the foundation and history of the law of nations in Europe from the time of the Greeks and Romans to the age of Grotius' (2 vols.) duly appeared in 1795. Shortly after this, on 2 April 1796 Ward married Catherine Julia Maling (1772-1821) of West Herrington, co. Durham, thereby becoming closely connected with Henry Phipps, first earl of Mulgrave, who had recently married her eldest sister, Sophia. They had one son, Sir Henry George Ward. 
Ward now moved his legal practice to the northern circuit. The rise of the League of Armed Neutrality brought a request from the foreign secretary, Lord Grenville, for a defence of the rights of belligerents, and Ward produced 'A treatise of the relative rights and duties of belligerents and neutral powers in maritime affairs, in which the principles of the armed neutralities and the opinions of Hubner and Schlegel are fully discussed' (1801). These political services were rewarded when on the personal recommendation of William Pitt he was offered a seat in the House of Commons for the Lowther pocket borough of Cockermouth in June 1802. Both Viscount Lowther and Ward's brother-in-law the future earl of Mulgrave had been Pittite MPs before inheriting peerages. Ward's maiden speech in December 1802 had supported the Addington administration but by the following year Pitt's friends, especially after the resumption of the war against France, moved to restore the former minister. On his own initiative Ward published a pamphlet favourable to Pitt in response to Patten's criticism of Addington's dealings with Bonaparte. When Pitt did return to power in 1804 Ward supported the government's position following the seizure of four Spanish frigates prior to the declaration of war on Spain on 16 October 1804 by publishing 'An enquiry into the manner in which the different wars of Europe have commenced during the past two centuries' (1804). 
In January 1805 Lord Mulgrave was appointed foreign secretary and Ward was offered the post of under-secretary. He decided to accept, turning his back on a lucrative legal career and the offer of a Welsh judicial post. Ward did not speak in parliament on foreign affairs, though a little earlier he had attempted to bolster the government's position by informing the press that French claims of a Russian capitulation at what proved to be Austerlitz were fabrications ('Creevey Papers', 45). The death of Pitt in February 1806 and the advent of the 'ministry of all the talents' led to Ward's resignation and move into opposition. He was not a candidate at the election of 1806 but was returned for Haslemere as Lord Lowther's nominee in January 1807. When later that year the duke of Portland took office, Lord Mulgrave was made first lord of the Admiralty and Ward appointed a junior lord with a place on the Admiralty board. Until 1811 Ward moved the naval estimates in the house and undertook to defend the interest of the Admiralty on other questions. 
Ward worked quite closely with Spencer Perceval, then chancellor of the exchequer, and came to admire his abilities and character. When Perceval became prime minister, Ward continued a firm supporter of the ministry and kept a political diary. The portions published by Phipps cover the period 1809-May 1812 and October 1819-November 1820. Croker declared the journals 'trustworthy and authentic' but cautioned that apart from his under-secretaryship 'Ward... was not in what is considered confidential office -- and had little or no personal share in what we may call the interior working of the higher parts of the political machine' (Croker, 241-2). Perceval offered him a place on the Treasury board but Ward preferred to remain at the Admiralty. However, when Lord Mulgrave became master-general of the ordnance he willingly transferred and was appointed clerk from June 1811. From 1812 he moved the ordnance estimates in the house and by 1816, with the establishment of peace he was able to announce a reduction of $3 million. The earl of Mulgrave made way at the Ordnance for the duke of Wellington in 1818. After initial doubt about his position Ward remained in the post until April 1823. He was then granted the post of auditor of the civil list until its abolition as a sinecure by the whig government in 1831. 
Ward's wife had died on 28 December 1821 and with his political career now over, he produced his first novel, 'Tremaine, or, The Man of Refinement' (1825), published anonymously by Colburn. The work had been edited by Colburn's reader P. S. Patmore, who some two years later, their mutual identities now disclosed, became Ward's literary adviser and close friend. 'Tremaine' was in essence a didactic work, in parts resembling a theological tract. Charles Tremaine is a dandy who flees fashionable society and a short-lived parliamentary career for his country estate. This life too he finds unsatisfactory. Protracted exchanges follow between Tremaine and a neighbouring clergyman, Dr Evelyn, on such themes as deism, free will, and the problem of evil. Tremaine, whose ideas contain many of the assumptions of eighteenth-century 'philosophes', is gradually won over to orthodox Christianity and the hand of Evelyn's daughter Georgina. The novel had drawn a flattering portrait of fashionable society and was an immediate success, selling 1500 copies in three weeks. It was a pioneer of the silver fork genre, Michael Sadleir calling it 'the chief impulse to 'Vivian Grey'' and 'the inspiration of the two most influential novelists of the 'thirties and 'forties' (Sadleir, 117). 
Ward's second novel, 'De Vere, or, The Man of Independence', appeared in four volumes in 1827, and may have prompted Canning's quip that Ward's law books were as interesting as novels and his novels as dull as law books. 'De Vere' took ambition as its main subject, and Ward considered it as didactic as 'Tremaine' but more dramatic. Sharply contrasted with the world-weary Tremaine, Mortimer De Vere is the unworldly idealist whose subsequent enlightenment comes when he enters parliament. He finds himself unwilling to be the tool of his uncle Lord Mowbray and instead gives his support to the opposition leader Wentworth. De Vere declares he will put his trust in 'measures not men', and for this his uncle disowns him. Some of the characters were portraits of actual political figures, Wentworth apparently a composite of Pitt, Canning, and Bolingbroke, and Mowbray in part modelled on the duke of Newcastle. 'De Vere' was a detailed study of the political ethos and politics the motivation behind the action. Its main weakness was a lack of imaginative power (Rosa, 67-8). 
On 16 July 1828 Ward married the wealthy widow Jane Lewin, 'nee' Hamilton (1768-1831), a granddaughter of the seventh earl of Abercorn. Her first husband had been William Plumer (died 1822), and her second husband Richard John Lewin RN (died 1827). Subsequent to the marriage settlement, Ward assumed the additional name and arms of Plumer. Robert Plumer Ward at once took up residence at his wife's estate, Gilston Park, Hertfordshire, and served as sheriff of Hertfordshire in 1832. Mrs Plumer Ward seems to have been on bad terms with her husband's children (Disraeli, 'Letters', 235-6). She died on 26 March 1831 at Gilston shortly after the deaths within days of each other of Ward's two older daughters Catherine and Julia. His youngest daughter Anne died of the same consumptive illness as her sisters in 1835. 
On 14 February 1833 Ward married his third wife, Mary-Anne Okeover (1803-1875), daughter of the Hon. Sir George Anson GCB, and widow of the Revd Charles Gregory Okeover. She was the mother of a young son and daughter. Ward and she now spent long periods on the continent. 'Illustrations of Human Life' (1837) appeared at this time. After his wife became the trustee of her son's estate at Okeover, Staffordshire, Ward and his new family left Gilston to Henry George Ward and his eight children. Ward wrote to Patmore in November 1838 saying 'my son is very welcome to all the cockneys and radicals of Herts. I never felt a real country gentleman before' (Patmore, 97). At this time he published 'An historical essay on the real character and amount of the precedent of the Revolution of 1688' (2 vols., 1838). This was followed by 'Pictures of the World at Home and Abroad' (3 vols., 1839) and at length his last novel, 'De Clifford, or, The Constant Man' (4 vols., 1841). 
In appearance Ward showed no trace of his Spanish ancestry 'his cast of countenance was essentially Saxon; and the bright blue eye, even flow of spirits, and indefatigable energy of his mind and body, proclaimed him a nature-born Englishman' (Phipps, 1.2). Croker said of him: 'he had abundance of small talk and lively conversation, with a prodigious untaught musical talent; and all through life, and even to the last -- though reduced to an ear trumpet -- he had a jaunty air, and appeared, both in countenance and figure, very much younger than he really was. (Croker, 274)' Early in 1846, Ward, now in his eighty-first year, and his wife joined her father Lieutenant-General Sir George Anson at his official residence in Chelsea Hospital. Ward died there on 13 August 1846, after a sudden attack of angina pectoris. 


@@@@@


doc= 28704


Ward, Samuel (1577-1640), preacher, was born in Haverhill, Suffolk, the eldest of three sons of John Ward (died 1598), lecturer successively of Haverhill, Writtle, and Bury St Edmunds, and Susan (died in or after 1639), his wife; his younger brothers were Nathaniel Ward (1578-1652) and John (died 1661). After her husband's death in October 1598 Susan Ward married Richard Rogers (1551-1618), lecturer at Wethersfield near Sudbury, taking on two older stepsons Daniel Rogers (1573-1652) and Ezekiel Rogers (1588-1660); she was still living there in 1639. In November 1594 Samuel was admitted to St John's College, Cambridge, a scholar on Lord Burghley's nomination. He graduated BA in 1597, was a founder fellow at Sidney Sussex College in 1599, and proceeded MA the next year. Like his brothers and stepbrothers, he entered the ministry. Ordained in June 1601, he was for a time lecturer at Haverhill, where his sermon on the calling of Zaccheus converted the eight-year-old Samuel Fairclough. Ward vacated his fellowship on marrying a clergyman's widow, Deborah Bolton ('nee' Leech) (died 1652), at Isleham, Cambridgeshire, on 2 January 1604, taking on two stepsons, John and Robert Bolton. 
On 1 November 1605 Ward was appointed town preacher of Ipswich, preaching up to three times a week to the assembled corporation in St Mary-le-Tower Church while business in the town was suspended. His generous stipend, which over five years increased from $67 to $100 a year, and the house provided for him (19-21 Lower Brook Street today), are two measures of his standing in the town. In 1607 he took a BD. As Thomas Fuller says, 'he was preferred minister in, or rather, of, Ipswich, having a care over and a love from all the parishes in that populous place' (Fuller, 'Worthies', 70-71). He believed, and was not afraid to state from the pulpit, that those who held office in church and state should be puritans, which led to complaints that he interfered in parliamentary elections. He quickly took control of the grammar school, hiring and firing schoolmasters, and planning to divert the endowments to a charity school. From 1612 Ward was given funds and the former dorter of the Blackfriars for a library for his own and other preachers' use, the schoolmasters acting as librarians. More than 100 donors, knights, gentlemen, corporation members, ministers, and townsmen, gave money or books, and the collection survives into the twentieth-first century substantially complete, in which Ward's hand effacing crosses and references to historical characters as saints may still be seen. 
Following what was to be the first of many publications, 'A Coal from the Altar to Kindle the Holy Fire of Zeal' (1615), and his first sermon at Paul's Cross, issued as 'Balm from Gilead to Recover Conscience' (1617), Ward began to exert more than local influence. Consciousness of the importance of a minister's public role is evident in his 'Jethro's Justice of Peace' (1618), preached at Bury St Edmunds assizes, in which he emphasized the mutuality of magistracy and ministry -- 'the principal lights', 'these two opticke pieces', 'guardians and tutors' of the people. In the preface to his 'The Happiness of Practice' (1621) he explained that, in expounding half the scriptures to his hearers, he had 'endeavoured to acquaint you with the whole counsel of God; and what is now the top of all my ambition, but to make you doers of what you have been hearers'. In 1621 he rashly allowed an engraving to be published from Amsterdam inscribed 'Invented by Samuell Ward, Preacher of Ipswich' (BM, Prints and Drawings, DG41, formerly Satires 41). It shows, on the left, the Armada in the grip of a storm, on the right, Gunpowder Plot discovered, and in a central pavilion the pope and his cardinals conferring with the king of Spain, the devil presiding. The Spanish ambassador Gondomar, at the time negotiating a match between Charles, prince of Wales and the Spanish infanta, claimed that this insulted his royal master. After examination by the privy council, Ward was committed to the Fleet. His petition to the king in April 1621 claimed that the 'embleme was... composed... five yeeres since' (probably during earlier overtures from Spain), and that he sent it to the printer 'nigh a yeere since', 'coupling the two grand blessings of God to this nation... without anie sinister intencion... of meddling in any of your Majesties secrett affaires' (Bruce, 1-2). He promised to be more cautious in future and only designed title-pages for his published sermons, most notably that of his anecdotal 'Woe to Drunkards' (1622). 
In 1622 Ward again pleaded for his liberty so that he could maintain his wife and eight children by continuing to preach in Ipswich. He was successful in this, but that August the bailiffs received a letter from the king, demanding that they 'inhibite Mr Ward from preaching the lecture' (Suffolk RO, Ipswich, great court book, 6 Aug 1622). Bishop Samuel Harsnett of Norwich took up the charges of nonconformity against him in his own consistory court, but Ward again appealed to the king, who referred the matter to Lord Keeper John Williams. Williams decided that Ward, though not altogether blameless, was easily won over by fair dealing, and persuaded Harsnett to accept Ward's submission and not to suspend him. Ward was loyal to the church, providing that it resisted what he regarded as corruption; allegations at the time that he stirred up feelings against the king's favourite, Buckingham, were never substantiated, and his general loyalty to the crown is evident in 'A Peace Offering to God for the Blessings we Enjoy under his Majesties Reign' (1624). He reluctantly allowed nine of his sermons to be printed and sold, and the first collected edition appeared in 1627. 
For two periods Ward was incumbent at the Tower church in Ipswich, as well as preacher, but between 1627 and 1630 a conformist minister, Jonathan Skinner, held the cure, and was well placed to collect Ward's public indiscretions for later use. Once William Laud became archbishop of Canterbury in 1633, there was less scope for compromise. His commissary and agent in the town, Dr Henry Dade, soon found an ally in Skinner, and in February 1634 reported to Laud that two ships with 160 emigrants were ready to leave Ipswich for New England, and that, 'Of the breeders of these persons Mr Ward is chief of those parts has caused this giddiness'. However, because Ward was 'very potent in London and about Ipswich', it was recommended that Timothy Dalton, parson of Woolverstone (4 miles down the Orwell), 'a great stickler for transporting these people', be examined instead ('CSP dom.', '1633-4', 450). None the less, that November Ward faced forty-three articles requiring answers in the court of high commission; they were eventually reduced to eleven. He had to make many journeys to London over the next year, and sometimes failed to appear. His preaching against set prayers, devotional attitudes, bowing at the name of Jesus, the real presence, and the like, for stating that religion and the gospel 'stood on tiptoes ready to be gone', were some of the grounds for complaint (ibid., '1635-6', lii). On 26 November 1635 he was ordered to be removed from office and suspended from all ministry, to pay $50 costs (his delay was contempt), and to admit his offences in writing. This he was prepared to do only in his own words, and he was committed temporarily to the Gatehouse prison at Westminster. 
Ward's reputation in Ipswich was greatly enhanced, and the townsmen refused to replace him, hoping in vain that the authorities would eventually relent. Matthew Wren, newly appointed bishop of Norwich, was intent on cleansing the town of puritan dissent, but underestimated the risk of public disorder. When other ministers (including Ward's son-in-law John Ashburne at the Tower Church) were ejected, there were riots on the streets and Wren's agents were driven from the town. On their next visit to Ipswich, Wren and his wife felt intimidated and left hurriedly. For ignoring these commotions, the bailiffs and portmen were summoned to the Star Chamber. Suggestions that Samuel Ward joined William Bridge in the Netherlands on his release can be firmly refuted, as the Ward concerned was John, ordained at Norwich in 1614 and rector of St Michael-at-Plea there from 1617 to his suspension in 1636. 
Over his thirty-five years in Ipswich, Ward was executor to many of the leading townspeople, usually a beneficiary, and became increasingly wealthy. In 1631 he was offered and 'thankfully accepted' (Suffolk RO, Ipswich C/4/3/1/5, assembly book, 196) the interest on the town's $100 stake in the Virginia plantation by a grateful corporation. In the following year he offered land worth $1000 to one Jeffery Kirbye, who would have bequeathed it to the Grocers' Company had they chosen Ipswich rather than Oundle for their foundation. In April 1638 he bought his tied house from the borough for $140. Following his death at his home in March 1640, he was buried on 8 March in the centre nave aisle at St Mary-le-Tower under a stone with the inscription 'Watch Ward and yet a little while and he that shall come will come' (monumental inscription). He was remembered in the anonymous tract 'Wrens Anatomy, Discovering his Notorious Pranks and Shamefull Wickednesse' (1641) as that 'ancient famous, good and painfull Master Ward'. His widow, Deborah, and eldest son, Samuel, continued to enjoy his stipend for their lives. Samuel, a Cambridge graduate, showed symptoms of schizophrenia, for in August 1661 he murdered his brother-in-law John Ashburne by stabbing. Two other sons were in orders. Nathaniel was rector of Stapleford, Cambridgeshire, and Joseph was rector of Badingham, where his mother spent her last days and was buried on 22 October 1652. 


@@@@@


doc= 28705


Ward, Samuel (1572-1643), theologian and college head, was born at Bishop Middleham, co. Durham, the son of John Ward, a man of 'more ancientry than estate' (BL, Harleian MS 7038, p. 355), and baptized on 13 January 1572. He matriculated pensioner of Christ's College, Cambridge, in 1589, graduated BA in 1593, and proceeded MA in 1596. His financial condition while a student was precarious: James Montagu and William Perkins helped him with his college debts. The diary and sermon notebook he kept from 1592 to 1601, along with other notebooks collected in the Sidney Sussex archives, reveal that he was in his youth a vigorous and outspoken puritan, devoted to biblical studies and to intense introspection and self-castigation for his most trivial sins. An ardent admirer of Perkins and of Laurence Chaderton, he was like them much troubled by the introduction of popish 'ceremonies' into the Church of England, by clergy 'too pontifical and papistical', and generally by the 'sins of the land', especially 'want of zeal' and 'coldness in our holy profession' (Sidney Sussex College, Ward MS B, fols. 30'v'-31; MS 45, fol. 62'v'). He was thus a natural choice for election to a fellowship of Emmanuel College in 1596 and in 1610 to the mastership of the newest puritan foundation, Sidney Sussex College, where he remained until his death. He proceeded BD from Emmanuel in 1603 and DD from Sidney Sussex in 1610. 
Two major projects occupied Ward during the first decade of the seventeenth century. First, Perkins entrusted to him posthumous publication of his treatise, 'Problema de Romanae fidei ementito Catholicismo', which duly appeared in 1611. Second, from 1604 until 1611 he worked on translation of the 'Apocrypha' for the Authorized Version of the 'Bible'. He was rewarded with multiple ecclesiastical offices, becoming prebend of Yatton in Wells Cathedral (1610), a royal chaplain (1611), archdeacon of Taunton and 'ex officio' prebend of Milverton I in Wells (1615), rector of Great Munden in Hertfordshire (1616), and canon of York (1618). In 1638 the rectory of Terrington, Norfolk, was added to the list. 
Evidence of Ward's activities outside Cambridge is sparse. As archdeacon, he apparently did visit Taunton on occasion, and he maintained a house in Wells. His designated surrogates in the archidiaconal court can be identified with puritan colleges in Cambridge and in one case -- Walter Vesey, Ward's vicar as prebendary of Milverton -- with outright nonconformity. A collection of English sermons in Ward's hand (Sidney Sussex College, Ward MS 0.8) may have been intended for visitations to Taunton or to one of his rectories. Apart from one on the Gunpowder Plot, their concern is with the state of the heart, and the language is designed to stir the emotions. The style and tone of his vernacular preaching are strikingly different from his Latin academic sermons, which are restrained in tone, rigorously logical, and tightly focused on specific theological questions. His extant sermons are few in number. While committed to the principle that 'Christ frameth men by the word preached', as he wrote in his diary, Ward suffered from a speech impediment that had almost caused him to choose mathematics rather than divinity as his field (Sidney Sussex College, MS 45, fols. 51, 46'v'); it was Perkins who had persuaded him to study theology. 
Ward's principal commitments were always to his college, to biblical and theological scholarship, and especially to the maintenance of Calvinist orthodoxy. His notebooks reveal that administration of the college and its properties occupied much of his time, and also that he devoted attention to areas of scholarship rather new to early modern universities, purchasing globes, maps, and scientific instruments for the college and participating in scholarly exchanges with historians and antiquaries as well as divines. Highly regarded by the other college heads for meticulous scholarship and integrity of life, he was elected vice-chancellor of the university for 1620-21, increasing his administrative burden but not diminishing his theological efforts. The preponderance of both his writing and his use of time was always for theological ends. The virulent anti-Catholicism visible in his edition of Perkins's work is also evident in his actions from 1610 to 1643 as a member of the university vice-chancellor's court, where he actively prosecuted those who articulated 'popish' notions in university sermons. In the 1636 case against John Normanton of Gonville and Caius College, for instance, he added his own detailed list of complaints to the official charges against this obviously Catholic fellow (Sidney Sussex College, Ward MS F, fol. 28). 
Ward also addressed what he regarded as the enemy within protestantism. An outspoken Calvinist, he was one of the five British delegates sent by the king in 1618 to the Synod of Dort, where Episcopius found him 'the most learned member' (J. Hacket, 'Sermons', 1675, xxvi). Historians of the synod have associated Ward with John Davenant against the other three delegates in lending support to the remonstrant doctrine of universalism; however, a debate he recorded with the synod's president, Johannes Bogerman, indicates that the rift was more apparent than real. Ward argued that Christ's death won only the possibility of salvation for all and remained merely potential for the reprobate, God having selected some persons but not others 'liberare efficaciter ex massa damnata' ('to free efficaciously from the mass of the reprobate'; Sidney Sussex College, Ward MS L.4, fol. 3'v'). Ward joined the other delegates in full support of all five articles of the synod against the remonstrants in 'The Collegiate Suffrage of the Divines of Great Britain' (1619, tr. 1629). A few years after his return to England he was made Lady Margaret professor of divinity (1623), from which position he continued to affirm his commitment to strict predestinarianism. His university sermon, 'Gratia discriminans: concio ad clerum habita Cantabrigiae' (preached 1625, published 1626) labels the doctrine of resistible grace a 'perversa notione' and the idea of free will 'radix non paucorum errorum' ('root of many errors'; pp. 18-19). 
In the changed theological atmosphere following the accession of Charles I, Ward found this orthodoxy increasingly threatened by new Arminian heads, supporters of 'novelties in both rites and doctrines', advanced to power in the university by the court ('Whole Works of... Ussher', 15.581, 500-1, 405). In 1629 he was among those censured by the vice-chancellor, Matthew Wren, for purchasing William Prynne's 'Anti-Arminianisme'; later in the year he departed from his reputation for eirenicism by engaging in a name-calling match with Jerome Beale in the consistory over his own 'Gratia discriminans'. He continued actively to defend Calvinists and puritans and oppose Arminians and ceremonialists along with Catholics before the vice-chancellor's court, but with less success than he had enjoyed in the previous reign. Puritans like Thomas Edwards (1628), Nathaniel Bernard and Richard Spynke (1632), William Strong (1634), Christopher Goad (1635), and Thomas Riley (1636) were forced to recant or leave the university for objecting to altars, ceremonies, and Arminian doctrine; anti-Calvinists and ceremonialists like John Tourney and Peter Hausted (1634) and Sylvester Adams and Anthony Sparrow (1637) were exonerated over the vociferous protest of Ward and other Calvinist heads. By 1634 Ward had begun to fear for his own position. He complained to archbishop James Ussher that he had never found university affairs 'in a worse condition since I was a member thereof', with Calvinists 'disgraced and checked,... as myself was... for favoring puritans in consistory' -- a reference to his recent defence of the Sidney Sussex puritan John Barcroft in the vice-chancellor's court ('Whole Works of... Ussher', 15.579-81, 16.521). 
Placing Ward along the spectrum of puritans and conformists is none the less a challenge. Clearly in his twenties he identified himself with the Cambridge puritan circle of Perkins and Chaderton, and the spiritual anxieties expressed in his diary are classic puritan fare. But his mature vernacular sermons show a continuity in his experimental spirituality, and his complaints about corruption and 'novelties' in the church and about popular irreligion continued throughout his life. He was one of the licensers of George Carleton's book attacking Richard Mountague. His actions on the vice-chancellor's court, including his opposition to Laudian metropolitical visitation of the university in 1635, all identify him with a puritan opposition and won him approbation by William Prynne ('Canterburies Doome', 159-92). Puritans regularly consulted him about matters of conscience, judging him 'a man famous for learning and of high estimation... for his soundness of faith and integrity of conversation', as Nicholas Estwick remarked in 1634 (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 71, fols. 186-7). Sidney Sussex College under his leadership continued its tradition of attracting puritans and their sons (including the presbyterian Thomas Edwards, Oliver Cromwell, and the sons of Samuel Ward of Ipswich, John Rogers, and Thomas Gataker) as well as Calvinist refugees from Heidelberg. As master he maintained strict discipline, even ordering surprise raids by tutors on their students' rooms to ensure godly behaviour (Sidney Sussex College, 'Acta collegii', p. 39, fol. 3 from the back). When in 1643 the iconoclast William Dowsing visited Cambridge for parliament he had few complaints about Ward's college: the chapel remained unconsecrated and communion was celebrated at a table rather than an altar, without rail or cross. Ward was invited to be a member of the Westminster assembly of divines as one of two representatives of the university, suggesting that he was perceived by presbyterian puritans as an ally. On the other hand, he supported episcopacy, he was clearly a pluralist, as archdeacon he would have had a seat in convocation, and despite his own strict sabbatarianism he argued in 1634 that the 'Book of Sports' ought to be read for the sake of obedience and order. He maintained close friendships and produced a voluminous lifelong correspondence with Calvinist bishops like William Bedell, Ussher, John Davenant, and Arthur Lake. The puritanism of his youth seems at least to have moderated as he matured. Correspondence with Bedell suggests that he came to realize that if he were to maintain a position from which he could teach true doctrine and preach the gospel, he would have to keep his complaints about the present state of the church muted and compromise on issues he deemed of less importance than the evangelical mandate. His student Thomas Fuller noted that he 'turned with the times', but found him 'a true protestant at all times' (Fuller, 'Worthies', 1.488). 
It is almost as difficult to place Ward along the political spectrum. His writings suggest a traditional devotion to monarchy, as to episcopacy, but he befriended and sheltered the Dutch republican Isaac Dorislaus when in 1627 the latter fell into disfavour for lectures construed as advocating republicanism and the legitimacy of regicide. In the 1620s he privately criticized the king for sabbath breach and 'indulging papists' and the queen for 'want of religion' (Sidney Sussex College, Ward MS B, fol. 31). In 1642 he declined personally to offer financial assistance for the royalist war effort, and he failed to make good on his college's promise of $100 for the king. On the other hand, in March 1643 Ward also refused on behalf of his college to give financial aid to parliament, despite a personal plea from Cromwell. With parliamentarian troops then occupying Cambridge, Ward was imprisoned in St John's College, accompanied voluntarily by his faithful servitor Seth Ward (unrelated, later bishop of Salisbury). Released early in August because of illness contracted in the dank conditions of his imprisonment, Samuel Ward died in the master's lodge at Sidney Sussex on 7 September 1643 and was buried in his college chapel; he was survived by his wife, Martha, about whom nothing further is known. A funeral oration was given in Great St Mary's by Henry Molle, the public orator, on 30 November, and a sermon was preached by Ralph Brownrigg, but the most eloquent tribute to Ward's saintly life, his scholarship, and his strict enforcement of discipline in his college is Seth Ward's prefatory eulogy to the posthumous collection of his theological works, 'Opera nonnulla: determinationes theologicae, tractatus de justificatione, praelectiones de peccato originali' (1658); he called his former master Errorum Malleus (sig. A3'v'), a title that Ward would doubtless have embraced. Another treatise, 'De baptismatis infantilis vi et efficacia disceptatio', also posthumously published (1653) as part of a debate among nonconformists about the nature of baptism, stands testimony to Ward's enduring importance to puritan theology. 


@@@@@


doc= 28706


Ward, Seth (1617-1689), astronomer and bishop of Exeter and Salisbury, was born in Buntingford, Hertfordshire, and was baptized at St Mary's Church in nearby Aspenden on 5 April 1617. He was the second son of John Ward (died 1656), an attorney in Buntingford, and his wife, Martha Dalton (died 1646). His friend and first biographer, Walter Pope ('c'.1630-1714), said that he had never heard Ward speak of his father, but that he often spoke fondly and admiringly of his mother, and believed that his character was due to her (Pope, 4-5). John and Martha produced two other sons, John and Clement, and three daughters. Seth never married, but Clement left three sons and a number of daughters to his care while he was Savilian professor at Oxford, and he also provided throughout his life for his sisters and a number of their sons and daughters. In fact he was so dutiful in looking after his extended family that in later life his enemies found it easy to accuse him of nepotism. 
From the grammar school in Buntingford, Ward entered Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge, on 1 December 1632; he graduated BA in 1637 and MA on 27 July 1640. There he quickly became the favourite of the master, Samuel Ward (died 1643). He lodged in the latter's apartments and had the use of the college library, where he spent much time, being shy of going into the town. He showed great promise, and may have been tutored by Samuel Ward, who had a keen interest in the mathematical sciences. In his third year a disputation of his in mathematics impressed John Bainbridge, first Savilian professor of astronomy, and when taking his BA he disputed on the differences between the Julian and Gregorian calendars. Pope's suggestion that Ward was effectively an autodidact in mathematics is almost certainly incorrect (Pope, 10). Having been chosen in July 1640 by the vice-chancellor, John Cosin (1594-1672), as 'praevaricator', or official jester, Ward inadvertently offended Cosin and was suspended from his degree, but reinstated the following day. In 1643 he was made the university's mathematical lecturer. 
In the same year Samuel Ward, with other leading members of the university, was imprisoned in St John's College for refusing the covenant. Seth Ward voluntarily remained in confinement with his mentor, and upon his release accompanied him home to care for him during his final illness. At that time Ward, together with Peter Gunning (1614-1684), John Barwick (1612-1664), and Isaac Barrow (died 1680), published 'Certain Disquisitions and Considerations Representing to the Conscience the Unlawfulness of the... Solemn League and Covenant'. In the spring of 1644 Ward refused to swear to the covenant, though at least in part this refusal was prompted by the visitors' practice of implying that those who would not take the oath were guilty of various immoralities. Deprived of his fellowship in August, Ward stayed for a time with relatives of Samuel Ward, in or near London, and then went to stay with the mathematician William Oughtred in Albury, Surrey. 
Ward used this unsettled period to improve his mathematics. He had made the acquaintance of Oughtred in 1643 when, together with Charles Scarburgh (1615-1694), he visited Albury to clarify some obscurities in Oughtred's 'Clavis mathematicae' (1631). Ward subsequently introduced the 'Clavis' into his lectures at Cambridge. After studying with Oughtred for a while he went as tutor to the sons of his friend Ralph Freeman to Aspenden, where he remained until 1649. He then served for some months as chaplain to Lord Wenman (1596-1665) at Thame. From there Ward went to Oxford as Savilian professor of astronomy, a post he secured with the help of John Greaves (1602-1652), the ejected professor, and Sir John Trevor (died 1673), who was able to arrange that Ward did not have to take the covenant or the engagement. 
From 29 April 1650 Ward lived as a fellow-commoner at Wadham College, Oxford, where he became a close friend of the much admired warden, John Wilkins, and a leading member of the group of natural philosophers who met in the city at this time. He reinstated the university's astronomy lectures, which had been discontinued for some time, and was the first Savilian professor to teach the Copernican theory. In spite of being exempted from the pulpit as a Savilian professor, he also preached frequently. His first publication as Savilian professor was a work of natural theology, 'A philosophical essay towards an eviction of the being and attributes of God, the immortality of the souls of men, and the truth and authority of scripture' (1652). This exercise in theology shows the influence of John Wilkins, who was a vigorous proponent of rationalist approaches to theology. 
In 1653 Ward produced a study of the nature of comets, 'De cometis, ubi de cometarum natura disseritur', and an examination of the paths of the planets, 'In Ismaelis Bullialdi astronomiae philolaicae fundamenta inquisitio brevis', which was to prove much more influential. Ward's refinement of Johann Kepler's second law of planetary motion, presented as a response to Ismael Boulliau's 'Astronomia philolaica' (Paris, 1645), was developed more completely in his 'Astronomia geometrica; ubi methodus proponitur qua primariorum planetarum astronomia sive elliptica sive circularis possit geometrice absolvi' (1656). Kepler's second law proved unsatisfactory to astronomers because it did not provide an easy way of determining planetary movements. In trying to solve these difficulties Boulliau developed a complex scheme which Ward was able to simplify dramatically. While Boulliau defined planetary movements by reference to the axis of imaginary cones, Ward pointed out that this was equivalent to supposing that planets move in their elliptical orbits with uniform angular velocity about the empty focus of the ellipse (the sun being at the other focus). Neither Boulliau's nor Ward's innovations were a real improvement on Kepler's second law, being only approximately true, but they proved influential among astronomers who would otherwise have to struggle with trial and error or successive approximation methods if they adhered to Kepler's original formulation. 
Ward also wrote, in collaboration with John Wilkins, 'Vindiciae academiarum' (1654). This was a defence of the English universities against John Webster, an illuminist and antinomian sectarian who had just published 'Academiarum examen'; Thomas Hobbes, who had criticized the universities in his 'Leviathan' (1651); and William Dell, master of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, who suggested that there should be universities in all large towns. Ward returned to criticism of Hobbes in 1656 with 'In Thomae Hobbii philosophiam exercitatio epistolica', an examination of the philosophy and theology of Hobbes occasioned by the appearance of the latter's 'De corpore' in 1655, but ranging over his other works. This represented a marked change of attitude towards Hobbes, since Ward had written (though it was signed by the printer, Francis Bowman) the adulatory preface to Hobbes's 'Humane Nature' of 1650. Hobbes replied to Ward's criticisms in the last of his 'Six Lessons to the Savilian Professors of the Mathematics' (1656), the other five being aimed at the more damaging mathematical critique of John Wallis (1618-1673). According to Pope, this exchange so soured things between Hobbes and his erstwhile admirer that whenever their mutual friend Charles Scarburgh entertained leading intellectuals at his home, Hobbes would always check first that Ward was not present before deigning to enter the room (Pope, 125-6). 
The 'Vindiciae academiarum' also made public Ward's interest in continental schemes to provide a universal language that could be understood by all. Through Samuel Hartlib, Ward learned of the efforts of Cyprian Kinner ('fl'. 1650), a Silesian disciple of the intellectual reformer Jan Amos Comenius, to develop a philosophical language in which the words themselves, by their form and structure, reveal all the attributes of the things they signify. By 1650 Ward, one of the first English thinkers to engage with the subject, was trying to develop his own scheme, and he directly inspired Wilkins and George Dalgarno ('c'.1619-1687) in their own universal language schemes. Ward's projected scheme was rather different from that developed by Wilkins in his 'Essay towards a Real Character and a Philosophical Language' (1668). Wilkins's scheme depended upon more orderly and clearer classifications of knowledge, and the assumption that the elements of ensuing classificatory tables could then be given a distinctive oral and visual form. Ward, even in 1654, realized that such a scheme would require an 'almost infinite' number of characters. His own scheme sought to discover supposed 'simple notions', perhaps fewer than a hundred in number, into which all discourse could be analysed and which would form the basis for a more austere and exact discourse capable of revealing the very nature of things. Ward acknowledged the influence of Ramon Lull's 'Ars magna' (1517) and George Ritschel's 'Contemplationes metaphysicae' (1648) upon his thinking. Ward was a member of the unproductive committee established by the Royal Society after the publication of Wilkins's 'Essay' to further universal language schemes, and he also corresponded in 1676 with friends (including Robert Hooke, Andrew Paschall, Francis Lodwyck, and John Ray) who wished to complete Wilkins's project. Their awareness of the fundamental differences between Ward's and Wilkins's approaches added to the already considerable difficulties involved in producing a universal language. 
In 1656 Ward had become chaplain to Dr Ralph Brownrig, the ejected bishop of Exeter, and not only accepted from him the precentorship of Exeter but also paid the full fees for this to Brownrig's secretary, even though there was then little hope that the Anglican church would be restored. The following year the fellows elected him principal of Jesus College, Oxford, but Cromwell put in Francis Howell (1625-1679), a fellow of Exeter College. Ward must have impressed Cromwell, however, since the latter compensated him with an extra stipend of $80 per annum. After Cromwell's death Ward petitioned for its continuation, and from January 1659 it was paid out of a revenue managed by the governors of Windsor. 
Meanwhile, Ward was elected president of Trinity College, Oxford, on 14 September 1659, and immediately began to settle the troubled affairs of the college. At the Restoration, however, he properly resigned his place to Hannibal Potter (1592-1664), who had been ejected in 1649. In August 1660 Ward also resigned the Savilian professorship and settled in London as vicar of St Lawrence Jewry, a benefice in the king's gift. Now Ward's investment gamble with Brownrig paid off. He was confirmed as precentor of Exeter Cathedral on 25 July 1660 and as prebendary in September, elected dean on 26 December 1661, and consecrated bishop on 20 July 1662. 
Ward proved to be an extremely able administrator and immediately began to fill vacant ecclesiastical preferments in his diocese, restore church buildings to their proper use (including the bishop's palace), recover church property, and reform various abuses. He managed to augment the value of the poorer benefices and increase the revenues of the prebendaries, while spending over $25,000 on restoring the cathedral. It is small wonder that Ward declared himself to be $2000 the worse for being bishop of Exeter. He also began to earn a reputation as a prosecutor, even a persecutor, of dissenters, though it is not clear how justified this reputation was. He seems to have approved of and used the Clarendon code, and he certainly supported the 'Five Mile Act'. Nevertheless, Pope records a number of Ward's acts of kindness to individual dissenters. 
Ward's success at Exeter was rewarded by translation to the wealthier see of Salisbury on 5 September 1667. He had buildings repaired, including the bishop's palace and the Guildhall; the cathedral itself had been well preserved during the interregnum, but Ward had the floor of the choir laid with marble and the cloister paved. He tried to exert conformity, and it was said that he was so vigorous in suppressing conventicles that the local cloth trade -- conducted largely by nonconformists -- began to suffer, but there is no independent evidence of this (Pope, 71; Whiteman, 437). During his episcopacy he divided his time between his diocese and London, where he assiduously attended the House of Lords. He used various addresses in London until 1673, when he bought, or possibly had built, a grand house in Knightsbridge, apparently attracted by the opportunities it provided for horse-riding. Always a good horseman, he was encouraged to ride regularly by his physician, Thomas Sydenham (1624-1689), who regarded it as the perfect form of healthy exercise. (Ward had been prone to bouts of ill health after a bad fever which he suffered in 1660.) 
In 1674 Ward was offered translation to Durham, but he refused it, he told Pope, because he 'did not like the conditions' (Pope, 96). It is not clear what these conditions were, but they might refer to suggestions that Charles II had promised Nell Gwynne an allowance out of Durham's bishopric funds (Whiteman, 36-7). Pope also claimed to have heard Gilbert Sheldon (1598-1677) speak of Ward as his preferred successor to the see of Canterbury (Pope, 97), but by the time Sheldon died Ward was out of favour at court. 
While at Salisbury, Ward engaged in a number of charitable schemes. He gave $100 for the building of Chelsea College in 1668 and promised another $100 in 1678. In 1681 he donated $100 to Wadham College, Oxford, and subsequently endowed Christ's College, Cambridge, with four scholarships. In 1682 he established a so-called College of Matrons (to avoid the stigma of the designation 'hospital') in the cathedral close at Salisbury for the maintenance of ten widows of orthodox clergymen. Two years later he established a hospital for ten poor men at Buntingford, his birthplace. In his will he left money to his native parish of Aspenden for apprenticing poor boys, and $1000 for the upkeep of the fabric of Salisbury Cathedral. 
In 1669 Ward successfully petitioned for the return of the chancellorship of the Order of the Garter to the bishops of Salisbury, a right that had originally been granted in the fifteenth century, and he became the new chancellor in 1671 after the death of the lay holder of the office. Ward's administration of Garter funds brought him into trouble, however. He retained money left over from various expenses for himself, and a commission investigating charges of malversation in 1684 ordered him to refund all of this money to the crown. By then he was also busy defending himself against charges of usurping special powers and prerogatives of the king's. In 1682 Cornelius Yeate, vicar of St Mary's, Marlborough, and Thomas Pierce, dean of Salisbury, argued falsely that Salisbury was one of the king's chapels royal, like Windsor and Westminster, and that all its prebends were in the king's gift. Yeate and Pierce's son had been denied preferments by Ward and this was evidently a major cause of their animosity towards him, since charges of nepotism were prominent in their attacks upon him. He was undoubtedly guilty of favouritism, but perhaps no more so than many contemporaries in similar positions, and he arranged preferments for various proteges, including Isaac Barrow, William Lloyd (1627-1717), and Izaac Walton (1593-1683) (Whiteman, 460-64). He was vindicated from the more serious charges laid against him in 1686, when the dean submitted to an archiepiscopal visitation that found in Ward's favour. 
By then, however, Ward had declined into an incapable senility. In his last five years memory failed him, even to the extent that he forgot what he was talking about in the very moment of speaking, and he was hardly aware of what was going on around him. Pope was so affected by his friend's sad decline that he alluded to it in his famous poem, 'Wish': '
To outlive my senses may it not be my Fate, 

To be blind, to be deaf, to know nothing at all, 

But rather let Death come before 'tis so late. 
(Pope, 195)' Death came to Ward, overdue, on 6 January 1689, at his home in Knightsbridge, and he was buried in the choir of Salisbury Cathedral. 
John Aubrey (1626-1697) described Ward as 'a handsome man, pleasant and sanguine' with 'a most magnificent and munificent mind', but Robert Hooke (1635-1703) simply called him 'fals' and 'a courtier' (Whiteman, 50-51). Gilbert Burnet (1643-1715) said that his 'sincerity was much questioned' ('Of the Final Twelve Years of the Reign of King Charles II', 1823, 332); Anthony Wood assessed him as a 'Politician' and remarked on 'his cowardly wavering for lucre and honour sake' ('Athenae Oxonienses', 1721, 2, cols. 827, 1172). Ward's strength was as an ecclesiastical administrator. It is impossible to determine the precise nature of his theological or religious beliefs, but he was a great success in restoring the cathedrals of Exeter and Salisbury, and in reforming the administration of those dioceses after the rigours of the interregnum. During his tenure as Savilian professor he developed an international reputation as a mathematical astronomer, but after leaving Oxford he did not maintain his interest. He did not entirely repudiate natural philosophy, being a fairly active member of the Royal Society from its foundation in 1660 until about 1675 ['see 'Founder members of the Royal Society], but he made no significant contribution to the development of the natural sciences, nor to that of the universal language schemes. 


@@@@@


doc= 28707


Ward, Thomas (1652-1708), Roman Catholic controversialist, was born on 13 April 1652 at Danby Castle, near Guisborough, Yorkshire, the eldest son of a farmer, and was educated at Pickering School, becoming proficient in arithmetic, geometry, and astronomy. He declined his father's advice to enter one of the professions and became tutor to the children of a gentleman of fortune, in which post he became interested in religious controversy, church history, the fathers, and scripture. His 'lively eccentric fancy strongly inclined him' (Ward, 'Reformation', xxiv) to a love of burlesque poetry. He had been brought up as a Presbyterian or Calvinist, but his studies in theological controversy induced him to join the Roman Catholic church, against the wishes of his father, who cut him out of his will. He married a Catholic wife soon after his conversion. After his father's death he brought about the conversion of his mother and the rest of his family. With his wife's and mother's consent he travelled in France and Italy, and at Rome he accepted a commission in the pope's guards, remaining in the service for five or six years, during which time he served in the maritime war against the Turks. Before this he may have served as a trooper in the Horse Guards in England. In Rome he frequented monuments and libraries, especially that of the Vatican, where he researched key documents relating to the religious history of England. 
In 1685, following the demands of his wife and family, Ward returned to England, where lords Derwentwater and Lumley, Colonel Thomas Radcliffe, and Mr Thornton, who were impressed by his learning and wit, became his patrons. His 'Errata to the Protestant Bible' (1688), which saw many editions, showed him to be 'a man of genious, judgment, and erudition' (Ward, 'Reformation', xxvii). Based on Gregory Martin's 'Discoverie of the Manifold Corruptions of the Holy Scriptures by the Heretiques of our Daies' (1582), it sought to demonstrate that errors found in protestant translations of the scriptures were deliberate. From this time he engaged in a polemical war with protestants. His translation of 'Some Queries to the Protestants' (1687), by the convert dean of Derry, Peter Manby, was answered by Dr William Clagett, and his posthumous 'The Controversy of Ordination Truly Stated' (1719), an attack on Gilbert Burnet's 'Vindication' (1677), was responded to by David Williams and Thomas Elrington. A local disputation of 1697-8 is recorded in 'An Interesting Controversy with Mr. Ritschel, Vicar of Hexham' (1819). He was one of the few Catholics who used the broadsheet as a medium, as in his 'Roman Catholick Souldier's Letter to Dr. Tho. Tenison' (1688), and his 'Speculum ecclesiasticum' (1687), which was an epitome of church history, and probably identical to 'The tree of life, or, The church of Christ represented' (1688). He defended the argument of the 'Speculum' in his 'Monomachia, or, A Duel between Dr Tho. Tenison... and a Roman Catholick Souldier' (1687), though Tenison believed its author was really a Jesuit in disguise, and Henry Wharton assured the public that this soldier was originally a Cambridge scholar who had exchanged his black coat for a red one. 'England's Reformation from the Time K. Henry VIII to the End of Oates's Plot' (1710), his most popular, though unfinished work, was modelled on Samuel Butler's 'Hudibras' and written as a burlesque, a 'ludicrous channel for conveying the history of the Reformation to the public, because he saw it most adapted to the state of the times' (Ward, 'Reformation', xxvii). Its later editions with engravings are a unique example from this period of English Catholic graphic satire. 
Ward's flight to the continent at the revolution prevented publication of his 'History of England'. He had one son, the secular priest Lawrence Ward, alias Green, and three daughters, one of whom was a nun in Brussels. He is said to have died and been buried at St Germain in 1708, though there is no reference to his burial in the registers of St Germain-en-Laye. 'His disposition was generous and mild, though not incapable of being provoked to resentment; he even fought two duels in his youth... He was, in fine, a valiant soldier, a penetrating naturalist, an accurate writer, an agreeable companion, and a charitable Christian' (Ward, 'Reformation', xxvii). 


@@@@@


doc= 28708


Ward, Thomas, Baron Ward in the nobility of the Austrian empire (1810-1858), jockey and finance minister, was born on 9 October 1810, the elder son of William Ward of Howden in Yorkshire and his wife, Margaret Marvil of York. He was educated at the national school in York until the age of nine, when he was sent to work in the stables of Robert Ridsdale, possibly at Merton. He was sent to Vienna, where he was jockey to Prince Wenzel zu Liechtenstein from 1826 to 1828, and head groom to Count Francis Hunyady from 1829 to 1831. He was recommended to Charles Louis of Bourbon, duke of Lucca, a great lover of horses, who made him his personal valet. He became the duke's confidential adviser, and in this position suggested that the political independence of Lucca be relinquished to Austria in exchange for relief of the duke's personal financial embarrassment. This end was achieved in 1843 in a meeting between Ward and Archduke Ferdinand. In 1846 he was promoted to be master of the horse and to be director-general of finance, with the title of baron. He is said to have sought popularity by arbitrarily lowering the price of corn, and the partial repudiation or 'reduction' of the debt of Lucca is also attributed to his counsels. In 1847, on the death of the Archduchess Marie Louise, duchess of Parma, and former empress of the French, Ward was sent on a mission to Florence to superintend the details of the transfer of Lucca to Tuscany in accordance with the convention of 1818, by which Charles Louis also succeeded to the duchy of Parma. 
At Parma Ward remained chief minister to the duke, and continued his subservience to the Austrian government, acting as an Austrian agent during the revolutions of 1848 and negotiating the abdication of his old patron in May 1849 and the placing of Charles Louis's son, Duke Charles III, on the throne of Parma. He remained in Vienna as minister-plenipotentiary representing the duchy, and the emperor made him a baron of the Austrian empire. He had married in 1838 Louise Genthner, who came from a Viennese family of housekeepers and domestic servants, and had three sons and a daughter. In 1850 he acquired an estate, Urschendorff, near Vienna, from which he was periodically summoned by Charles III to attend to the chaotic finances of the ducal household. He was regarded with deep suspicion by many at the Parmesan court, particularly by the ultra-legitimist and anti-Austrian Duchess Marie Louise. On 21 July 1853 he received a patent of concession of all the mining rights over iron and copper in the duchy of Parma. 
In 1854 Duke Charles III was assassinated, reputedly by Mazzinians, and Ward was dismissed from all his offices, with some ignominy, and his mining concessions were withdrawn, the duchess regent suspecting him of designs on the sovereignty of Parma. He retired completely from public life, devoting himself to farming, his family, and litigation for the restoration of his mining concessions, in which he had made considerable capital investments. Shortly before his death his suit succeeded. He patented a steam reaping machine, which won the gold medal at the Vienna Exhibition of 1857. He died at Urschendorff on 5 October 1858. 
Dedicated to maintaining the absolutist dukes on their thrones, Ward was constantly hampered by the weakness and indecision of his masters. Despite his meteoric career, he remained 'simple, sometimes even uncouth' in manner (Lamington, 60), and, with little formal education, spoke and wrote in French, German, and Italian, conducting the affairs of state with 'considerable cleverness, if not with remarkable straightforwardness' ('GM', 535). 


@@@@@


doc= 28709


Ward, William (1534-1609), physician and translator, was born at Landbeach, Cambridgeshire, in 1534. He was educated at Eton College, and then was elected a scholar at King's College, Cambridge, on 13 August 1550. On 14 August 1553 he became a fellow. He graduated BA in 1555 and proceeded MA in 1558. On 27 February 1552 the provost of his college requested him to take up the study of medicine, and he became MD in 1567. In 1568 he left his fellowship. His name is attached to the petition signed in 1572 against the new statutes of the university which allowed students to begin their medical training without first undertaking preliminary training in the arts. Ward became regius professor of physic at Cambridge in succession to Thomas Lorkin, who died in 1591. It is probably through his official post at Cambridge that Ward is spoken of as physician to Elizabeth I and James I. Ward was married twice: first, on 26 January 1568, to Margaret Fletcher; second, on 10 February 1584, to Jane Bosom, both times at Great St Mary's Church, Cambridge. He had at least three sons, William, Thomas, and Roger. 
Ward was translator of 'The Secretes of the Reverende Maister Alexis Piemont: Containing Excellent Remedies Against Divers Diseases and other Accidents'. The first edition was published in 1558 containing only the first part, and consisting of six books. Another two editions were printed in 1559 and contain a dedicatory letter by Ward to the earl of Bedford, notable for its protest against the folly of 'some curious Christians among us nowadays... which most impudently despise all manner of medicines', and for its defence of the 'heavenly science' of physic. Ward mentions Christopher Plantin's edition of a French translation (Antwerp, 1557) as his original. The work became very popular as a treasury of medical and other knowledge in all the countries of Europe. The identity of Alessio of Piedmont has not been satisfactorily settled. Of this first part numerous editions were published in England. It occurs usually bound up with 'The Seconde Parte of the Secrets of Maister Alexis of Piemont', again translated by Ward and published in 1560 and 1563. 'The Thyrde and Last Parte of the Secretes of the Reverende Maister Alexis of Piemont' translated by Ward appeared first in 1562. It contains six books, like the first part. Here his work seems to have ended but in many copies of the book a fourth and fifth part are added, translated by R. Androse. 
Ward was the translator of other works from French into English: 'Thre notable sermones made by the godly and famous clerke, Maister John Calvyn, on thre severall Sondayes in Maye, the yere 1561, upon the Psalm 46.... Englished by William Warde' was published in 1562, while 'The most excellent, profitable, and pleasaunt booke of the famous doctor and expert astrologian Arcandam or Aleandrin' appeared in 1578 and was sufficiently popular to be reprinted another four times by 1670. Based on an elaborate calculation of the numerical value of letters in a person's name, it was derived from the 'spheres of life and death', and was of a type that went back to the ancient world. It was a work translated into Latin from 'a confused and indistinct' original by Richard Roussat, 'canonicus Lingoniensis', and published at Paris in 1542. There is also a copy of Latin verses by Ward before James Robothum's 'Pleausaunt and Wittie Playe of the Cheastes' (chess), published in 1562, which Ward may have translated from the French. 
William Ward died in 1609 and was buried at Great St Mary's, Cambridge, on 8 August. In 1590 he had given to the same parish 71/2 acres of arable land in Howsfield and 2 acres of meadowland in Chesterton. 


@@@@@


doc= 28710


Ward, William (1769-1823), missionary in India and journalist, born at Derby on 20 October 1769, was the son of John Ward, a carpenter and builder of that town, and grandson of Thomas Ward, a farmer at Stretton, near Burton in Staffordshire. His father died while William was a child, and the care of his upbringing devolved on his mother, a woman of great energy of character and of exemplary Methodist piety. He was placed with a schoolmaster named Congreve, near Derby, and afterwards with another named Breary. On leaving school he was bound apprentice to a printer and bookseller of Derby named John Drewry, with whom he continued two years after the expiry of his indentures, assisting him to edit the 'Derby Mercury' and in due course editing the paper himself. In 1794 or 1795 he moved to Stafford, where he assisted Joshua Drewry, a relative of his former master, to edit the 'Staffordshire Advertiser'. At the end of 1795 he proceeded to Hull, where he followed his business as a printer, and was for nine months in 1796 editor of the 'Hull Advertiser and Exchange Gazette'. 
Ward began to attend a Baptist church, probably between 1791 and 1793, and on 28 August 1796, after many troubles of heart -- 'fierce volcano fires not to be quenched by a mere sprinkling of words' -- he was baptized at Hull. Preaching constantly in the neighbouring villages, he became known as a man of promise, and, with the assistance of a member of the Baptist community named Fishwick, he proceeded in August 1797 to Ewood Hall, near Halifax in Yorkshire, the theological academy of John Fawcett (1740-1817), where he studied for a year and a half. In the autumn of 1798 a member of the committee of the newly founded Baptist Missionary Society visited Ewood, and Ward offered himself as a missionary, influenced perhaps by a remark made to him in 1793 by William Carey (1761-1834) concerning the need of a printer in the Indian mission field. He sailed from England in the 'Criterion' in May 1799, in company with Joshua Marshman, Daniel Brunsdon, William Grant, and their families. On arriving at Calcutta the party was prevented from joining Carey by an order from the East India Company government, and was obliged to proceed to the Danish settlement of Serampore, where they were joined by Carey. On 10 May 1802 Ward was married at Serampore to Mary, 'nee' Tidd, widow of John Fountain, a Baptist missionary. They had two sons and two daughters, but only two of the children survived. 
In India Ward's time was chiefly occupied in superintending the printing press, by means of which the 'Bible', translated into Bengali, Marathi, Hindi, and more than twenty other languages, was disseminated throughout India. Numerous philological works were also issued. Ward found time, however, to keep a copious journal and to preach the gospel to the Hindus. Until 1806 he made frequent tours among the towns and villages of the province, but after that year the increasing claims of the press on his time, and the extension of the missionary labours in Serampore and Calcutta, prevented him quitting headquarters. In 1812 the printing office was destroyed by fire. It contained the types of all the scriptures that had been printed, to the value of at least $10,000. The moulds for casting fresh type, however, were recovered from the debris, and by the liberality of friends in Great Britain the loss was soon repaired. 
In 1819 Ward, having been for some time in bad health, revisited England. He was entrusted with the task of pleading for funds with which to endow a college at Serampore for the purpose of instructing Bengalis in European literature and science. He undertook a series of journeys through England and Scotland, and also visited Holland and north Germany. In October 1820 he embarked for New York and travelled through the United States, returning to England in April 1821. On 28 May he sailed for India in the 'Abberton' bearing $3000 for the new college, which had been founded during his absence and which still survives. 
Ward was the author of a number of publications, of which much the most important was his 'Account of the Writings, Religion, and Manners of the Hindoos', the first volume of which was published by the Serampore mission press in 1806. The complete four-volume edition first appeared in 1811. A one-volume abridged version edited by W. O. Simpson was published as late as 1863. In the later editions the title was changed to 'View of the History, Literature, and Religion of the Hindoos'. Although Ward did not mince his words in his condemnation of 'Hindoo idolatry', he did comment favourably on the literary and philological achievements of Hindu scholars, and in later versions modified somewhat the harshness of his strictures on Hinduism. Despite some serious inaccuracies, Ward's work remains without parallel as a detailed account by a European observer of Hindu society and religion in early nineteenth-century Bengal. Ward died of cholera at Serampore on 7 March 1823, and was interred in the mission burial-ground there. 


@@@@@


doc= 28711


Ward, William (1766-1826), printmaker, was born in London, probably in Thames Street, near Southwark Bridge, the son of James Ward, a manager for a wholesale fruit and cider merchant, and his wife, Rachel (1736/7-1835), and the elder brother of the painter James Ward (1769-1859). He was educated at the Merchant Taylors' School in London before being apprenticed to the printmaker John Raphael Smith. In 1781-2 his brother James was also apprenticed to Smith, although William took over his brother's indentures when he left Smith in 1783. James worked as William's apprentice until 1791, and it has been suggested that some of the plates James engraved during his apprenticeship years were issued under William's name. About 1785 William and his brother moved with their parents and two unmarried sisters (a third sister had already married) to a house in the Harrow Road, near to J. R. Smith's establishment; by then William's printmaking work was sufficiently well established for him to take on another apprentice, Thomas Gosse. In August 1786 he married the artist Maria Morland, the sister of the painter George Morland, and a month later Morland married William's sister Anne; the two couples set up house together for a short time. 
In 1792 William Ward bought two of his brother's paintings, 'Compassionate Children' and 'The Haymakers', and the following year engraved and published prints after them. In 1799 the two brothers, with 50 per cent funding from a third partner, Dr Daw, formed a short-lived print publishing business, known as Messrs Ward & Co. In 1804 William was appointed mezzotint engraver to the duke of York and in 1813 engraver to the prince of Wales; in 1814 he became an associate engraver of the Royal Academy. Ward engraved both in stipple and in mezzotint; during the 1780s he produced stipple and crayon manner prints, many printed in colours, after drawings by John Hoppner, J. R. Smith, George Morland, and others, as well as some of his own drawings, with titles such as 'Thoughts on Matrimony' (1786) and 'The Musing Charmer' (1787). Among his mezzotint works are plates after paintings by Morland, such as 'A Visit to the Child at Nurse' (1788) and 'A Visit to the Boarding School' (1789), as well as portraits and fancy pictures after contemporary painters such as Joshua Reynolds and Hoppner, notably such impressive pieces as 'The Daughters of Sir Thomas Strickland' (1797) and 'Mrs Michelangelo Tayler as 'Miranda'' (1798), both after Hoppner. He also reproduced historical paintings, including work by Correggio and Murillo and plates after seventeenth-century Dutch and Flemish artists such as Ferdinand Bol, Gerrit van Honthorst, and Rubens. Ward died on 1 or 21 December 1826 at his home in Warren Street, Fitzroy Square, London. The print rooms of the British Museum and the Victoria and Albert Museum both hold collections of his prints. 




@@@@@


doc= 28712


Ward, William (1787-1849), cricketer and banker, was born at Highbury Place, Highbury, Middlesex, in July 1787, the second son of George Ward (died 1829), of Northwood Park, Cowes, a London merchant and large-scale landowner in the Isle of Wight and Hampshire, and his wife, Mary (died 1813), daughter of Henry Sampson Woodfall. Robert Plumer Ward was William's uncle. 
Ward was educated at Winchester College. He was destined for commerce, and spent some time at Antwerp in a banking house. On his return, his father took him into partnership in 1810. On 26 April 1811 he married Emily (died 1848), fifth daughter of Alderman Harvey Christian Combe, a prosperous brewer and radical London politician. They had two daughters and four sons, one of whom was William George Ward, a prominent Roman Catholic theologian and philosopher. 
In 1817 Ward was elected a director of the Bank of England, and distinguished himself by his accurate knowledge of foreign exchanges. In 1819 he gave evidence before the parliamentary committees on the restrictions on payments in cash by the Bank of England. However, from his early days as a director Ward was critical of the bank's singular lack of general plans. And on 6 December 1827 he moved and carried a measure rescinding its policy of reducing its issues so as to obtain a favourable return in the exchanges. Telling the story in 1832, Ward noted that when the bank had been most at fault it had also been 'most in accordance with the Government and the Parliament and the Public at large' (Clapham, 117). 
On 9 June 1826 Ward was elected for the City of London as a conservative MP, and in 1830 at the request of the duke of Wellington, he acted as chairman of the committee appointed to investigate the affairs of the East India Company preparatory to the opening of the China trade. In 1831, discontented at the spirit of reform, he declined to stand for parliament. In 1835 he presented himself as a candidate, and was defeated by the whigs. From about that period he retired from public life. In 1847 he published 'Remarks on the Monetary Legislation of Great Britain', in which he condemned the act of 1816 establishing an exclusive gold standard, and called for a bimetallic currency. 
In addition to his career in the City of London, Ward was a prominent cricketer, and a patron of the sport. Probably the most powerful batsman of his day, he made a record 278 at Lord's on 24 July 1820 for the Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC) against Norfolk. A 'gentleman' rather than a 'player', he was one of those described by Mary Russell Mitford in 1823 in 'Our Village' as playing 'dressed in tight white jackets with neck cloths primly tied around their throats, fine japanned shoes, silk stockings and gloves' (Lewis, 59). 
Ward's greatest contribution to the sport, however, was to save the Lord's ground from the building speculation planned by Thomas Lord. In return for $5000, Ward acquired the lease in 1825. Together with its honorary secretary Benjamin Aislabie, he was one of the dominant figures in the club during the subsequent decade. 
In 1835, around the time of his parliamentary defeat, Ward appears to have suffered 'a reversal of fortune', during which he was assisted by his brother Matthew (Harris and Ashley-Cooper, 49). For whatever reason, in that year Ward transferred the lease to J. H. Dark for $2000. The latter also undertook to pay an annuity of $425 to the Ward family during the remaining fifty-nine years of the lease. Despite ceasing to be proprietor, Ward continued to play occasionally until 1845. 
Ward died on 30 June 1849 at 14 Wyndham Place, London. In his will he left a number of cricketing memorabilia to his children, including his 'only remaining cricket bat and balls' to his daughter Georgiana Mary (Harris and Ashley-Cooper, 49). 


@@@@@


doc= 28713


Ward, William George (1812-1882), theologian and philosopher, was born in London on 21 March 1812, the eldest son of the four sons and four daughters of William Ward (1787-1849), MP, director of the Bank of England, and proprietor of Lord's cricket ground, and his wife, Emily, 'nee' Combe (died 1848), the fifth daughter of Harvey Christian Combe (1752-1818) of Cobham Park, Surrey, MP and brewer. 
From 1820 to 1823 Ward attended a private school, Eagle House, Brook Green, Hammersmith, and in 1823 went to Winchester College, where he won the gold medal for Latin prose composition in 1829, although his verses were deliberately grotesque. In 1830 he matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, and was president of the university's undergraduate debating society, the Union, in the Michaelmas term of 1832. In 1833 he won a scholarship to Lincoln College, Oxford, but in spite of his first-rate abilities as a mathematician and Latinist he took only a second-class degree because he refused to answer questions on applied mathematics and literary history. In 1834 he was elected a fellow of Balliol College, Oxford, at the same time as the future archbishop of Canterbury Archibald Campbell Tait, and was made college lecturer in both logic and mathematics. Being fat and thick-skinned, he claimed to have 'the intellect of an archangel, and the habits of an eating, walking and sleeping rhinoceros' (Chadwick, 130). His liveliness as a debater, lecturer, and conversationalist went with acute depression, which he treated by indulging his love for burlesque, drama, opera, and music; his sensibility oscillated between the dramatic and the dogmatic. Many years later, however, his second son, Wilfrid Philip Ward, would give up an ambition to become an opera singer, out of fear that he would be angry. His deepest friendship was with his pupil Arthur Hugh Clough, although a platonic interpretation must be placed on Ward's request to Clough for the 'unnatural demonstrations' which Clough recorded in his diary ('Oxford Diaries', 85). 
Ward's intellectual development was spurred by his sometimes brutal impatience with what he saw as insincerity and shams. He was first influenced by the logical clarity of the utilitarians Bentham and James Mill, then by the proto-liberalism of Whately and Thomas Arnold, from whom he also derived an intense moral earnestness and sympathy for the poor. He was ordained a deacon in 1836, when still an advocate of Arnold's liberal theology, but soon concluded that this led straight to scepticism. Arnold's moralism, however, prepared Ward to receive J. H. Newman's argument that conscience is the foundation of religion. He attended Newman's lectures defending the Church of England as a 'via media' between popery and popular protestantism at St Mary's in 1836, and after the publication of the first two volumes of Froude's 'Remains' in 1838, when he was ordained a priest, he proclaimed himself a follower of Newman and of the high-church movement, taken in its ultra-Catholic sense. 
Ward still held that Rome was corrupt, but, lacking historical sympathy, he had no affection for the Church of England as a complicated institution created by historic compromise. His love of logic and pure mathematics left him unsatisfied with any position that was less than wholly self-coherent, and made him a restless Anglican. Newman told Wilfrid Ward that his father 'was never a High Churchman, never a Tractarian, never a Puseyite, never a Newmanite' (W. Ward, 'Ward and the Oxford Movement', 136). This was not quite true; Ward was a Newmanite in his absolute trust and regard for Newman, who was embarrassed by his daring logical deductions from his own premisses. From 1838 Ward was the chief of a Romanizing party among the Tractarians, containing another fellow of Balliol, Frederick Oakeley, as well as F. W. Faber, J. D. Dalgairns, J. A. Froude, and J. B. Morris, all of whom (except Froude) were to become Roman Catholics. 
When Newman's 'Tract 90' (1841) was attacked by four Oxford tutors, one of them Ward's Balliol friend Tait, Ward wrote two pamphlets, 'A Few Words in Defence of Tract 90' and 'A Few Words More', in which he incautiously translated Newman's view that the seemingly protestant 'Thirty-Nine Articles' should be read in their 'literal and grammatical sense' into the idea that they might be subscribed in their 'non-natural' sense, that is, in the opposite sense to that intended by their framers. In the resulting furore, Ward readily gave up his college lectureships. 'What 'heresy' may he not insinuate under the form of a syllogism!' worried the master of Balliol, Richard Jenkyns (W. Ward, 'Ward and the Oxford Movement', 175), though Ward was allowed to become junior bursar in 1841 and senior bursar in 1842. His friendships included the Catholic converts and Gothic enthusiasts Augustus Welby Pugin and Ambrose Phillipps, afterwards Phillipps De Lisle. Once Newman had retreated from Oxford to Littlemore, Ward took on the role of a leader of the Oxford Movement, and between 1841 and 1843 contributed eight articles to the 'British Critic', then under the editorship of Tom Mozley, in which he frankly presented the Roman Catholic church as the model of the one true church. William Palmer of Worcester College wrote in reply his anti-Roman 'Narrative of Events Connected with the Publication of the Tracts for the Times' (1843). Ward responded to Palmer in his most celebrated work, 'The Ideal of a Christian Church Considered in Comparison with Existing Practice' (1844), in which he argued that neither evangelical emotion nor the liberal intellect but conscience was the foundation for religion, but that the only proper discipline for conscience was the Roman Catholic church. According to this Newmanesque position, the Catholic church alone trained up conscience into the holiness necessary to eternal salvation, as defined by her moral, ascetic, and mystical theology, and as inculcated practically and pastorally by her religious orders sanctified by vows of chastity, poverty, and obedience. 
Ward's title earned him notoriety under the sobriquet of 'Ideal' Ward. His obvious offence to protestant opinion lay in passages like 'oh most joyful, most wonderful, most unexpected sight, we find the whole cycle of Roman doctrine gradually possessing numbers of English Churchmen' ('The Ideal of a Christian Church', 565) and 'Three years have passed since I said plainly that in subscribing the Articles I renounce no one Roman doctrine' (ibid., 567). These and five other passages were cited by the vice-chancellor of Oxford, Benjamin Parsons Symons, on 13 December 1844 as cause for a motion to the university convocation to condemn the 'Ideal' as inconsistent with the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' and to strip Ward of his degrees (literally to 'degrade' him). A third proposal, to require subscription to the articles in the sense intended by their sixteenth-century framers, raised a storm among liberals like Ward's great friend Arthur Penrhyn Stanley. Like Stanley, Ward argued that the Church of England could not censure any position, not even liberalism, and so could not condemn him, but must be consistent in its inconsistency. The proposal for a test on the articles was abandoned, but was replaced by a censure on Newman's 'Tract 90'. In one of the most celebrated incidents in the history of the Victorian church, in a snow-bound Oxford, with Ward falling head over heels on the steps of the Sheldonian, convocation voted on 13 February 1845 by 777 votes to 386 to condemn the 'Ideal' and by 569 votes to 511 to degrade him (to remove his MA). The two proctors, one of them Newman's disciple Richard Church, vetoed a vote on the condemnation of 'Tract 90'. The size of the minorities that voted for Ward was astonishing, given the charges, while the undergraduates showed their sympathy for him by snowballing the vice-chancellor. 
On 31 March 1845 Ward married Frances Mary Wingfield (1816/17-1898), youngest daughter of John Wingfield (1760-1825), vicar of Bromsgrove, Worcestershire, prebendary of Worcester, and canon of York. Having publicly stated his belief in the virtue of clerical celibacy, Ward was an easy target for the press, and had already provoked ridicule though a letter to 'The Times' in which he declared himself too gross for the celibate priesthood. 'How', he wrote, 'any one can imagine that I have ever professed any vocation to a high and ascetic life, I am utterly at a loss to conceive' ('The Times', 3 March 1845). His son, who wrote his biography, could not bring himself to publish this self-accusation, but it seems to confirm the poet laureate Tennyson's assessment that Ward was 'the most truthful man I ever knew.... He was grotesquely truthful' (W. Ward, 'Ward and the Catholic Revival', 399). On 5 September 1845 Ward and his wife, Frances, were received into the Roman Catholic church at Farm Street by the Jesuit Father Brownbill. In 1846, Ward employed Pugin to design him a Gothic house near the seminary of St Edmund's, Old Hall, near Ware, in Hertfordshire. In 1849 he inherited a fortune on the Isle of Wight from his childless uncle, George Henry Ward, which was entailed on him from his grandfather George Ward (1751-1829). The birth of four daughters preceded that of the first of his three sons, Edmund Granville, in 1853, which elicited a storm of congratulations from fellow Catholics, provoking Ward's indignant remark that fatherhood, unlike theology or philosophy, was 'a thing any man may do' (ibid., 43). Characteristically rigorous, he argued from a syllogism that he must lack affection for his children while they were under the age of reason since: '1. 'I can have no affection for persons with whose character I am unacquainted;' 2. 'I know nothing of the character of my younger children; 'ergo', I can have no affection for them.'' Once they had become 'reasonable beings', however, he showed them an attention which won their undying loyalty (ibid., 67). His youngest son, Bernard Nicholas Ward (1857-1920), later became a headmaster and historian. 
In 1851 Nicholas Wiseman, then cardinal archbishop of Westminster, appointed Ward lecturer in moral philosophy at St Edmund's Hall, near Ware, and then, in 1852, lecturer in dogmatic theology. In order to defer to Catholic opposition to his position as a layman in a seminary, he declined to accept the title of professor. Pope Pius IX conferred on him a doctorate of philosophy in 1854, and is supposed to have defended his status as a seminary teacher by declaring that it was 'a novel objection to anyone who is engaged in the work of God' that Ward should have received a sacrament, marriage, which no pope or priest could receive (M. Ward, 'The Wilfrid Wards and the Transition', 1.12). Ward also had the backing of a new friend, the vice-president of St Edmund's, Herbert (later Cardinal) Vaughan. 
Ward resigned his position at St Edmund's in 1858, but so disliked his life as 'Squire Ward' at Northwood House, Cowes, on the Isle of Wight, that he returned to the seminary in 1861, coming back to Wight in 1871 to live in a new house, Weston Manor, on his estate at Freshwater at the western end of the island. 
Ward's sympathies in the 1860s in the conflict between the liberal Catholic school of John Acton and Richard Simpson and the 'new ultramontanes' like Henry Edward Manning and Ward's own confessor, Father Faber, were entirely with the latter group, as the liberal Catholics seemed to him to exalt the scientific intellect over conscience and the need for holiness. For the same reasons he repudiated his old master, Newman, fearing that he might be a crypto-liberal, although he remained deeply fascinated by him. In a dream, he was once dining with a veiled lady, to whom he exclaimed, ''I have never felt such charm in any conversation since I used to talk with John Henry Newman, at Oxford.' 'I am John Henry Newman', the lady replied', raising her veil (W. Ward, 'Life of John Henry Cardinal Newman', 2 vols., 1912, 2.349). 
In 1863 Ward became editor of the Catholic journal the 'Dublin Review', of which Manning was the proprietor. Leaving politics, literature, and secular history to his sub-editors, Edward Healy Thompson and John Cashel Hoey, he made the 'Dublin Review' 'a kind of theological battering ram' (M. Ward, 'W. G. Ward and Wilfrid Ward', 'Dublin Review', 198, 1936, 237) for his unbending ultramontanism; he warned Hoey he would be ''very' narrow and 'very' strong' (W. Ward, 'Ward and the Catholic Revival', 223). There is no exact date given for the celebrated story that, during the First Vatican Council of 1869-70, he said that he 'should like a new papal Bull every morning with my 'Times' at breakfast' (ibid., 14), but he had defended the infallibility of the anti-liberal encyclical 'Quanta cura' and the accompanying 'Syllabus of Errors' of 1864 as if the pope could hardly open his mouth without making an infallible pronouncement. His critic the Oratorian Ignatius Ryder compared such an extreme view of papal infallibility with the Midas touch of gold, as very inconvenient if very wonderful; Ward was said to have enunciated his startling conclusions with the 'serenity of a philosopher' but defended them with 'the vehemence of a fanatic' ('DNB'). His uncompromising teaching on the papacy was summed up in 'De infallibilitatis extensione' (1869), and he had written about 125 essays and reviews for the 'Dublin Review' by the time of his retirement as its editor in 1878. When, in 1865, the notoriously pro-papal Manning became archbishop of Westminster he jumped with joy once, or according to another account, thrice, over a chair. In 1865 he supported the parliamentary candidature of an anti-Catholic Conservative against Sir John Simeon on the Isle of Wight because he counted Simeon, a Catholic convert like himself, as a liberal Catholic. Pope Pius IX recognized Ward's services to theology in a special brief addressed to him in 1870. 
Ward's connections with philosophers extended far beyond the circle of his fellow Catholics. In his friendly correspondence with John Stuart Mill, which began with his two articles in 'The Tablet' in 1848 on Mill's 'Political Economy' and was resumed in 1865, he denied Mill's empiricism, that knowledge could be derived wholly from reason and experience, on the intuitionist grounds that knowledge depended on the reliability of memory, which could only be assumed. The two joined forces in 1866 to condemn Governor Eyre's brutal repression of the Jamaican rising. In 1871 in the 'Dublin Review' Ward attacked Mill's 'anti-theistic philosophy', arguing against scientific determinism, for the possibility of miracles, and for the freedom of the will. Mill described Ward's writings as 'the best that is likely to be said by any future champion' (W. Ward, 'Ward and the Catholic Revival', 320), while Ward returned the compliment by describing Mill's death in 1873 as a 'severe controversial disappointment' (ibid., 295). With Manning and his neighbour at Freshwater, Tennyson, Ward was a founder member of the Metaphysical Society, created in 1869 by the editor James Knowles. He read three papers to the society in 1869-70, and was its chairman during 1870; his intuitionism, theism, and moralism aligned him with the Unitarian James Martineau against the agnostic T. H. Huxley. Knowles told Huxley's biographer son Leonard Huxley that the 'wonderfully genial and kindly tone' of the society's meetings 'was very largely owing to your father & to Dr Ward -- who habitually hit each other at the hardest -- but never with a touch of lost temper or lost courtesy' (P. Metcalf, 'James Knowles: Victorian Editor and Architect', 1980, 224). 
Mill and Huxley's affectionate portraits of Ward confirm the otherwise inexplicable description of him by the most moderate of men, Richard Church, as 'the most amusing, the most tolerant man in Oxford' (W. Ward, 'Ward and the Oxford Movement', 214), and may account for the request from his old Balliol friend and foe, Archibald Campbell Tait, then archbishop of Canterbury, who was near the grave himself, for news of Ward's condition as he lay dying. Ward died at Netherhall House, Fitzjohn Avenue, Hampstead, London, on 6 July 1882, and was buried in the Catholic churchyard of Weston Manor after a panegyric by Herbert Vaughan, then bishop of Salford. Tennyson recited James Shirley's 'The Glories of our Blood and State' at his graveside, beginning with the last lines, '
Only the laurels of the just 

Smell sweet, and blossom in their dust. 

' He also composed an elegy on Ward; the second, revised, version ran: '
Farewell, whose living like I shall not find, 

-- Whose faith and work were bells of full accord, -- 

My friend, the most unworldly of mankind, 

Most generous of all Ultramontanes, Ward. 

How subtle at tierce and quart of mind with mind, 

How loyal in the following of thy Lord! 

' 



@@@@@


doc= 28714


William James Ward (c.1800-1840), printmaker, the second son of William Ward, was trained by his father and showed precocious talent, winning medals for drawing from the Society of Arts between 1813 and 1815. His work as a printmaker consists mostly of mezzotint prints after contemporary portrait painters such as Sir Thomas Lawrence, William Owen, and H. W. Pickersgill, although he also engraved the work of earlier artists, such as Van Dyck. He was made engraver to the duke of Clarence, but became insane some time before his death, on 1 March 1840. 


@@@@@


doc= 28715


Sir Edward Charles Warde (1810-1884), army officer, born at Government House, Bangalore, India, on 13 November 1810, was Sir Henry Warde's second son. On 19 May 1828 he was gazetted second lieutenant, Royal Artillery, and on 30 June 1830 was promoted first lieutenant, Royal Horse Artillery. He obtained a company on 5 June 1841, and was promoted lieutenant-colonel on 17 February 1854. He commanded the siege train before Sevastopol until incapacitated by fever three weeks before the fall of the fortress; and on the conclusion of the war received, on 29 August 1857, the rank of colonel, taking command of the artillery at Aldershot. In 1859, when war with France seemed imminent, he was ordered to superintend the rearmament of Malta. In 1861 he was appointed to command the artillery in the south-west district, and in 1864 was selected to command the Woolwich district. An explosion at Erith destroyed the river wall and threatened to flood the country to Camberwell, and burst the great sewers just completed. In less than an hour Warde had taken measures which averted the catastrophe. He received the thanks of the government, and, on resigning the command in 1869, was made KCB (2 June 1869). He became major-general on 27 February 1866, colonel commandant on 29 March 1873, lieutenant-general on 17 November 1878, and general on 1 October 1877. On 24 August 1843 he married Jane (died 1895), eldest daughter of Charles Lane, rector of Wrotham and rural dean of Shoreham, Kent; they had four sons and three daughters. He died at Brighton on 10 June 1884 and was buried at Wrotham, Kent. 


@@@@@


doc= 28716


Warde, Sir Henry (1766-1834), army officer and colonial governor, born on 7 January 1766, was the fourth son of John Warde (1721-1775) of Squerryes, near Westerham, Kent, and his second wife, Kitty Anne (died 1767), daughter and sole heir of Charles Hoskins of Croydon, Surrey. The family was descended from a younger branch of that established at Hooton Pagnell in Yorkshire. 
Warde entered the army as an ensign in the 1st foot guards in 1783, and on 6 July 1790 was promoted lieutenant and brevet captain. In 1791 he accompanied his regiment to the Netherlands, but was so severely wounded at the siege of Valenciennes that he had to return to England. He rejoined his regiment in June 1794, and continued to serve with it, acting as adjutant to the 3rd battalion, until his promotion to a company, with the brevet rank of lieutenant-colonel, on 15 October 1794, when he was sent home. Warde served in the expeditions to Ostend and The Helder, and received the brevet rank of colonel on 1 January 1801. In 1804 he was promoted brigadier-general, and in 1807 took part in the expedition to Copenhagen. In 1808 he became major-general. On 28 May 1808 he married Molina (1776-1835), daughter of John Thomas of Hereford. They had five sons including Henry John Warde, and a daughter, Harriett (died 1874), who on 4 May 1826 married Francis North, sixth earl of Guilford. 
Warde commanded the 1st brigade of foot guards sent to Spain in 1808 with the force under Sir David Baird, and returned to England in 1809 after the battle of Corunna. In 1809 he was sent to India, and served under Lieutenant-General (afterwards Sir John) Abercromby (1772-1817) at the capture of Mauritius in 1810. He remained there for some time in command of the troops, and acted as governor from 9 April to 12 July 1811. In 1813 he was appointed colonel of the 68th foot, and promoted lieutenant-general. On the enlargement of the Order of the Bath on 2 January 1815 he was made KCB. On 8 February 1821 he was appointed governor of Barbados, in succession to Lord Combermere. He arrived at the island on 25 June, and continued in office until 21 June 1827. His administration was reportedly popular, although differences between the two branches of the legislature, the council and the house of assembly, at times made the governor's course difficult. The restlessness of the slaves, who were disturbed by rumours of emancipation, also occasioned him anxiety. In 1830 he became general, and in 1831 was appointed colonel of the 31st foot. On 13 September 1831 he was made GCB. He died at his residence, Dean House, near Alresford in Hampshire, on 1 October 1834, and was buried that month. 




@@@@@


doc= 28717


Warde, James Prescott (1792-1840), actor, the son of J. Prescott, was born in the west of England on 27 September 1792, and brought up in wealthy circumstances. Beginning with a grammar school education, including instruction in Latin and Greek, he went on to become a cadet first at the Royal Military College, Great Marlow, in 1806, and then at the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich in 1807. He became a second lieutenant in the Royal Artillery in 1809 and the following year was sent to the Cape of Good Hope, where he remained for three years. Ill health made him return to England in 1813 and resign from the army. He took to the stage, adopting the name of Warde, which was his mother's maiden name. 
Warde's first appearance was at the Liverpool theatre as Lord Towneley in Colley Cibber's 'The Provoked Husband', followed by the Duke in John Tobin's 'The Honeymoon'. To gain more experience he toured Derbyshire, Lancashire, and other provincial theatres. In Bath in December 1813 he was Achmet in Browne's tragedy 'Barbarossa', and the following year he played Faulkland in Sheridan's 'The Rivals', Harry Dornton in Thomas Holcroft's 'The Road to Ruin', and Aladdin in a pantomime at Christmas. In 1815 he was Laertes to W. C. Macready's Hamlet, and in the ensuing years he played a variety of other Shakespearian characters, such as Orlando in 'As You Like It', Macduff in 'Macbeth', Shylock in 'The Merchant of Venice', Edgar in 'King Lear', Posthumus in 'Cymbeline', and Florizel in 'The Winter's Tale'. He was given the original role of Fitz-James in 'The Lady of the Lake', but found greater opportunities in the numerous revivals staged in Bath. He was seen as Jaffier in 'Venice Preserv'd', Joseph Surface in 'The School for Scandal', Doricourt in 'The Belle's Stratagem', Standard in 'The Constant Couple', Alonzo in 'Pizarro', and Bevil in Richard Steele's 'The Conscious Lovers'. In April 1818 he appeared as Rob Roy when the play of that name was performed in Bath for the first time. In the meantime, during the vacations he widened his horizons by making successful and profitable visits to Cheltenham, Weymouth, and other provincial towns. 
Warde made his debut in London at the Haymarket on 17 July 1818, as Leon in Beaumont and Fletcher's 'Rule a Wife and have a Wife'. His choice of part was judicious and he was well received. He was less successful as Shylock a few days later, but gradually established his reputation with the roles of Faulkland in 'The Rivals', Don Felix in Susannah Centlivre's 'The Wonder', Valmont in William Dimond's 'The Foundling of the Forest', and Inkle in 'Inkle and Yarico'. At the close of this engagement Warde received an offer to play leading roles in Dublin, and appeared there for the first time in June 1820 as Leon. He remained in Dublin until a long and severe illness forced him to retire and set up as a teacher of elocution. After his wife nursed him back to health he was able to return to the stage, and made a strong impression in Birmingham. He became the manager of the Birmingham theatre for a while, but sustained heavy financial losses and had to retire in a state of insolvency. 
Warde reappeared on the London stage in the autumn of 1825, when he was engaged at Covent Garden as second lead to Charles Kemble, and was seen as Brutus, Rob Roy, Iago, and the original Kruitzner in Harriet Lee's 'The Three Strangers'. He continued to act in many of his old parts, but occasionally tried new roles, such as Rolla in 'Pizarro', Macbeth, Cassius in 'Julius Caesar', Richmond in 'Richard III', Bolingbroke in 'Richard II', and Sir Brian de Boisgilbert in 'Ivanhoe'. He played the title role in 'Henri Quatre' for his own benefit in June 1830. Soon, however, the quality of the plays produced at Covent Garden began to decline and the finances of the house fell into a state of hopeless confusion. This reached a climax in 1833, when inability to obtain his salary drove Warde to seek refuge at the Olympic and afterwards at the Victoria Theatre, under the management of Abbott and Egerton. The decay of the old 'legitimate' drama to which he was accustomed combined with the decay of his own acting powers to reduce his opportunities to a minimum. He was engaged at Covent Garden during Macready's brief lesseeship of 1837-8, but was entrusted only with second-rate parts, such as Williams in 'Henry V'. His personal life degenerated and he was constantly in debt and under arrest. He died in penury, without friends, in a lodging in Manchester Street, London, on 9 July 1840, at the age of forty-eight. 
According to contemporary opinion, Warde was a seldom great but eminently pleasing actor. He was full of promise at the time of his first appearance in London; latterly, however, he developed 'an unfortunate whining drawl' which prevented him from ever emerging completely from the ranks of 'utility' actors. 


@@@@@


doc= 28718


Warde, Luke (fl. 1576-1590), sea captain, sailed with Martin Frobisher in his three north-west voyages (1576-8). In 1578 he was admitted, gratis, as a $25 shareholder in the enterprise. In the early part of that year he was employed briefly in home waters against privateers; in May he sailed in Frobisher's third voyage as the vice-admiral of a 100-man colony, commanded by Edward Fenton, that was intended to winter upon Baffin Island. The scheme was abandoned due to loss of vital supplies. On 20 June 1578 he was one of a small party of Englishmen, led by Frobisher, which landed upon the southern coast of Greenland (mistakenly believed to be the mythical island of Friesland). Their landing place, possibly first descried by Warde, was named Luke's Sound. Three weeks later he was the first known Englishman to set foot on the northern shore of Hudson Strait; there he briefly parleyed and exchanged gifts with some Inuit. 
In 1581 Warde was involved in preparations for the 'first enterprise', promoted by the earl of Leicester, Francis Drake, and others, to set out a fleet to fortify the Azores Island of Terceira in support of the Portuguese pretender, Don Antonio, and thereafter to seize the Spanish plate fleets and sack the towns of New Spain. When the scheme was abandoned as too provocative, Warde was partly responsible for selling off its supplies. By 1582 he was the owner of a small barque, the 'Elizabeth', which he sold to Sir Humphrey Gilbert for $40. In that year he was appointed to serve as vice-admiral commanding the ship 'Edward Bonaventure' in the intended Moluccas expedition under Edward Fenton (who superseded Martin Frobisher as its commander); he also invested $200 in the project. During the voyage he quarrelled with Fenton regarding their objectives, and the 'Edward Bonaventure' abandoned the expedition following a sea fight against three Spanish ships at Sao Vicente. Warde later provided his account of the voyage to Richard Hakluyt for inclusion in the 1589 edition of 'Principall Navigations'. He was named in a list of 5 January 1586 as one of seventy-six men 'fit to command ships'. In 1588 he served in the Armada battle as captain of the queen's ship 'Tramontana' and, immediately after the campaign, of the 'Foresight'. In 1589 he captained the 'Tramontana' once more as part of Frobisher's Atlantic squadron, which tried and failed to intercept the Spanish plate fleets. On 2 January 1590 Warde was appointed to lead the small channel fleet that was to disembark Willoughby's diseased expeditionary force from Rouen; however, his old commander Frobisher assumed this command a few days later. Warde commanded the ship 'Swallow' in the narrow seas during 1590; the declared accounts of the navy which record this are the final extant reference to his career. 
Richard Madox, chaplain in the 'Galleon Leicester' during Fenton's 1582 expedition, regarded Warde as 'a most villainous man' (Donno, 239). Conversely, his long relationship with Frobisher indicates that he remained a trusted colleague of that notoriously difficult personality. He was undoubtedly a competent sea captain, though possibly not entirely comfortable with the responsibilities his talents conferred. He appears not to have married; the only extant reference to his family is in Madox's diary, which reported that his mother came to the 'Edward Bonaventure' to bid him farewell upon the 1582 voyage. 


@@@@@


doc= 28719


Warden, William (1777-1849), naval surgeon and author, was born at Alyth in Forfarshire on 1 May 1777. From the parish school, he was sent to Montrose, where he served some years with a surgeon, being a fellow-pupil of William Burnett and Joseph Hume. He studied also for some time at Edinburgh University, and in 1795 entered the navy as surgeon's mate on board the frigate 'Melpomene', one of the ships implicated in the mutiny at the Nore. The story is told that the men demanded that the surgeon should be sent on shore and Warden appointed in his stead, but that Warden, on the advice of his captain, refused the promotion. He was, however, promoted in the following year; he was surgeon of the 'Alcmene' at Copenhagen on 2 April 1801, and of the 'Phoenix', when she captured the 'Didon' on 10 August 1805. In the latter engagement Warden was severely wounded, and he was for some time a pensioner of the Royal Naval Hospital, Greenwich. He also received a grant from the Patriotic Fund. In December 1811 the degrees of MA and MD 'honoris causa' were conferred on him by the University of St Andrews. He afterwards served under Sir George Cockburn (1772-1853) during the Anglo-American War of 1812-14, and in 1815 was appointed to the 'Northumberland', Cockburn's flagship in the channel, ordered to take Napoleon to St Helena. 
During the voyage, and afterwards for some months at St Helena, Warden was in frequent attendance on Napoleon, who probably talked frankly to him as to a non-combatant. Warden's knowledge of French, however, was limited, and the conversations seem to have been carried on principally, if not entirely, through the intermediary of Count de Las Cases, who acted as interpreter, sometimes, it may be supposed, not in good faith, and always with a very imperfect knowledge of English. The conversations, as Warden understood them, he noted down in his journal, and from them largely filled his letters to the lady whom he afterwards married. His friends' interest in these letters suggested that the subject matter of them -- as far as they related to Napoleon -- should be published; and Warden, having no experience as an author, and expecting to be called away on active service, put them into the hands of 'a literary gentleman' to prepare for publication and to see through the press. 
The book was published under the title 'Letters Written on Board His Majesty's Ship the 'Northumberland' and at St. Helena' (1816), and, owing to the intrinsic interest of the subject, ran through five editions in as many months. The favourable representation of Napoleon excited bitter criticism from the supporters of the government. In October 1816, in a savage article in the 'Quarterly Review', the author pointed out several passages and expressions which could not have been written by Warden at the time and under the circumstances stated, and plainly suggested that: 'Warden brought to England a few sheets of notes gleaned for the most part from the conversation of his better informed fellow-officers, and that he applied to some manufacturer of correspondence in London to spin them out into the 'Letters from St. Helena'.' There is no reason to doubt Warden's good faith, but his work has small historical value, for it is merely the 'literary gentleman's' version of Warden's recollection of what an ignorant and dishonest interpreter described Bonaparte as saying. Bonaparte -- whether truthfully cannot be established -- afterwards assured Sir Hudson Lowe that his conversation as reported by Warden was different from anything he had said. Lowe mentioned this in a letter to Lord Bathurst, then secretary for war, and represented that Warden, who had been permitted to visit Longwood only as a medical officer in the exercise of his functions, had committed a breach of discipline in publishing the conversations and in publicly commenting on the conduct and character of individuals. A copy of this letter was forwarded to the Admiralty, and they, recognizing the breach of discipline, struck Warden's name off the list of surgeons. It was, however, shortly afterwards replaced at the instance of Sir George Cockburn, and Warden was appointed surgeon of the hospital ship 'Argonaut' at Chatham. 
Warden married, in 1817, Elizabeth, daughter of Richard Hutt of Appleby, Isle of Wight, sister of Sir William Hutt and niece of Captain John Hutt. They had one son, George Cockburn Warden, and two daughters. In 1824 Warden took his MD at Edinburgh, and in 1825 he was appointed surgeon of the dockyard at Sheerness, whence he was moved in 1842 to the dockyard at Chatham, and there he died on 23 April 1849. 


@@@@@


doc= 28720


Warder, Joseph (1654/5-1724), writer on bee-keeping, of unknown parentage, was living at Croydon, Surrey, about 1688. He married, on 9 April 1702, Rachel Hammon of Croydon. For over thirty years Warder practised as a physician, being an extra licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians. He was a leading member and something of a controversialist in the local independent congregation, whose pastor was Richard Conder, his son-in-law. 
Warder made a study of the habits of bees and their external anatomy using a light microscope, and embodied the results of many years of observation in his only book, 'The True Amazons, or, The Monarchy of Bees' (1st edn, 1712). In it he described the use of a hand lens to confirm by simple dissection the sex of the then mysterious drones as male bees. He explained why the drones were, contrary to popular opinion, important to the summer economy of the colony. In discussing the practical management of colonies he also advocated the provision of a nearby source of drinking water. 
Working at a time when straw skeps were the normal accommodation for honeybee colonies Warder explained the advantages of octagonal wooden hives with glass windows. These he had made up on a template to give standard units that could be built up and subdivided as required. He thus laid the foundations of modern apicultural practice. 

'The True Amazons' went through nine editions, all published in London, and after the first edition Warder obtained permission for a dedication to Queen Anne. The editions vary, with additional material not always carried into later versions, the last appearing in 1765. The book was translated into German (1718) and abridged into Italian (1748). Warder died at Croydon between 29 June and 1 July 1724, survived by his wife and two married daughters, to whom he left his several properties. 


@@@@@


doc= 28721


Wardlaw, Elizabeth, Lady Wardlaw (1677-1727), poet, was born on 15 April 1677, the daughter of Sir Charles Halket, baronet, of Pitfirran, Fife, and Janet, daughter of Sir Patrick Murray. She married Sir Henry Wardlaw, baronet, of Pitreavie in 1696 and subsequently bore three daughters and a son. 
Wardlaw was said to have been 'a woman of elegant accomplishments, 'who wrote other poems', and practiced drawing, and cutting paper with her scissors, and 'who had much wit and humour'' (Chambers, 14). She died in 1727, and posthumously became a topic of much antiquarian discourse. 
Wardlaw was the author of the ballad imitation 'Hardyknute'. The poem describes a battle between Haco, king of Norway, and Alexander III of Scotland -- the battle of Largs, 2 October 1263; by the victory, largely due to the lord high steward of Scotland, Hardyknute, Scotland gained the Hebrides and the Isle of Man. Published in 1719 on folio sheets, the poem was not attributed. Somewhat later, it was republished, in extended form, in Allan Ramsay's 'Ever Green' (1724) and in a variety of other antiquarian publications, reaching its apogee when it appeared in Thomas Percy's 'Reliques of Ancient English Poetry' in 1765, courtesy of David Dalrymple, Lord Hailes, who had also sent Percy such 'canonical' exemplars of balladry as 'Sir Patrick Spense', 'Gil Morrice', 'Edward, Edward', 'Jew's Daughter', 'Young Waters', 'Edom o' Gordon', and 'Bonny Earl of Murray'. In the second edition of the 'Reliques', dated 1767, Lady Wardlaw is named as author. 
This set the stage for what became, in the words of Norval Clyne, the Lady Wardlaw heresy. It may have begun with David Laing and/or C. K. Sharpe, and subsequently other antiquaries, seeing a similarity between 'Hardyknute' and the other ballads sent from Scotland to Percy; a logical extension of this surmise was the attribution of the works to Lady Wardlaw. The 'heresy', however, came in the mid-nineteenth century in a publication by Robert Chambers, 'The Romantic Scottish Ballads: their Epoch and Authorship' (1849). Chambers asserts that there is no evidence for similar compositions before the eighteenth century -- that is, these are not old or minstrel productions; that structurally and stylistically these, and an array of other romantic ballads, are similar, sharing incidents and phrases and locales. And that, undoubtedly, the author or reviser is Lady Wardlaw, recognized already for the very similar 'Hardyknute'. Norval Clyne took great exception to Chambers's heavily comparative, stylistic analyses, asserting that if Chambers is right: 'a number of Scottish Ballads, hitherto supposed to be the production of various unknown rhymers living at different periods and in different parts of the country, will have to be assigned to one Scottish lady who amused herself with verse-making, 'and cutting paper with her scissors'. (Clyne, 5)' This somewhat condescending put-down of Chambers, and of Lady Wardlaw who after all did successfully imitate structural and narrative aspects of traditional balladry, marked the end to extensive claims of authorship; but it did not obliterate the influence of 'Hardyknute' on Sir Walter Scott, who claimed that it was the first poem he learned by heart and would be the last he'd forget, making Lady Wardlaw his literary foremother and muse. 


@@@@@


doc= 28722


Wardlaw, Henry (c.1365-1440), bishop of St Andrews and founder of its university, was the nephew of the influential Cardinal Walter Wardlaw; he came of a branch of the Wardlaw family established in the diocese of Aberdeen. A career in the church must have been decided for him at an early stage, as his uncle petitioned the pope on his behalf in 1378 for a canonry of Glasgow. On 7 December 1380 he was granted a safe conduct to enable him and his kinsman Alexander Wardlaw to attend either Oxford or Cambridge university, but there is no evidence for their presence there, and by 1383 both men had taken a BA degree at Paris, where Henry became licentiate of arts by 1385. By October 1387 he had been studying civil law at Orleans for at least two years, after which he continued his studies at the University of Avignon. He was styled scholar of canon law by 1394, bachelor of canon law by 1399, and doctor of canon law by September 1403. 
Wardlaw came to hold canonries and prebends in Glasgow, Moray, and Aberdeen, in addition to the precentorship of Glasgow and the church of Cavers. Initially he secured patronage for his ecclesiastical career from his uncle, the cardinal, but following the latter's death in 1387 it was almost certainly royal patronage which secured the Glasgow precentorship for him and service at the papal court, Scotland having espoused the cause of Avignon during the schism, which brought him subsequent rewards. Wardlaw was provided to the bishopric of St Andrews, left vacant by the death of Walter Trail in 1401, by Benedict XIII on 10 September 1403, although his appointment was opposed by Chancellor Gilbert Greenlaw, bishop of Aberdeen, who was the candidate preferred by the duke of Albany, then governor of Scotland, and by the St Andrews Cathedral chapter. He was consecrated between 21 September and 4 October and returned to Scotland in the following year. 
Robert III seems to have placed considerable trust in Wardlaw, as it was to him that he sent his son, the young Prince James, for safe keeping some time between 1404 and 1406. Albany's hostility caused Wardlaw to seek other political allies, and he made common cause with Sir David Fleming of Biggar and Cumbernauld and with Henry Sinclair, earl of Orkney. Orkney's sphere of influence was the south-east of Scotland; consequently relations with England were a matter of particular concern to all three men. When Henry Percy, earl of Northumberland, rebelled against Henry IV, Wardlaw, with Fleming and Orkney, provided Scottish support for the rebel earl, and Wardlaw received him in St Andrews Castle following his flight from England. So far was Wardlaw in his confidence that Northumberland left his grandson and heir, another Henry Percy, in the bishop's care, where he was educated alongside Prince James. This period was one of political ascendancy for Wardlaw, Orkney, and Fleming, as the king's closest councillors, but after the death of Robert III on 4 April 1406 and the subsequent appointment of Albany as governor of the realm Wardlaw of necessity turned his attention to ecclesiastical affairs. 
St Andrews became the focus of Wardlaw's activities, and he seldom seems to have travelled far from the diocese. Walter Bower, a contemporary of Wardlaw, describes him as a gentle man, but censures him for entertaining on a lavish scale, spending far beyond his means. He certainly devoted considerable effort to restoring St Andrews Cathedral following a serious fire, sending ships to Prussia to fetch timber for the rebuilding, and he improved the route for pilgrims travelling to St Andrews by erecting the Guard Bridge over the mouth of the River Eden. That he concerned himself with trade is shown by the protests which Wardlaw lodged with Henry IV of England over a trading vessel returning to St Andrews from Flanders which was captured by the English in 1404; restitution had been secured by March 1405. In 1405 he received from Robert III a grant of the whole of the customs of St Andrews for himself and his episcopal successors, a significant advance on the one-third enjoyed by his predecessors. 
Wardlaw's particular claim to fame is his establishment of St Andrews as the first university in Scotland, the first lectures being delivered, according to Bower, after Whitsunday 1410. On 28 February 1411 Wardlaw issued a charter referring to his foundation as a university, so taking advantage of his influence with Benedict XIII to anticipate papal acceptance; this duly followed in the form of a bull on 28 August 1413 which granted apostolic confirmation and authorized the university to teach theology, canon and civil law, arts, and medicine, and to confer degrees. Wardlaw was nominated chancellor of the new university, and his active interest in its affairs sometimes led to clashes with Laurence Lindores, the principal master of the arts faculty's pedagogy. In 1417 the election of Martin V brought the schism to an end, and by August 1418 the University of St Andrews had made its submission to him. 
Wardlaw's influence with the papacy later waned somewhat. As a result of a dispute between Wardlaw and the abbey of Arbroath concerning procurations in 1420 Martin V exempted the abbey from the bishop's jurisdiction for a short time, showing that Wardlaw could no longer depend on papal support. He officiated at the coronation of James I, which took place at Scone on 21 May 1424, but he was not so closely identified with royal policy that St Andrews could not be regarded as appropriately neutral ground for the detention of the Albany Stewarts following their arrest in 1425, and he later failed to support James I in his stand against the papacy. For this defiance the king intervened in university politics, siding with Laurence Lindores against Wardlaw and attempting, unsuccessfully, to transfer the university from St Andrews to Perth. On 15 October 1431 it was to Wardlaw that the three estates entrusted the chest of money raised for the king's northern campaign, in preference to allowing James I direct access to the money for fear he would squander it. Wardlaw died in the castle of St Andrews on 6 April 1440 and was buried in the cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 28723


Wardlaw, Ralph (1779-1853), Congregational minister and theologian, was born on 22 December 1779 in Dalkeith, near Edinburgh. He was the fourth of eight children of William Wardlaw (1741-1821), merchant and later a bailie of Glasgow, and his second wife, Anne Fisher (died 1784), daughter of James Fisher, professor of divinity in the Associate Synod (popularly known as the Burgher church), a nonconformist Presbyterian denomination. The family moved to Glasgow six months after Ralph's birth, and his mother died in childbirth when he was only five. After attending the Glasgow grammar school (1787-91) Ralph matriculated at the University of Glasgow in October 1791, while not yet twelve years of age. From 1795 to 1800 he prepared for the ministry of the Associate Synod. The Associate Synod was at that time being split by a bitter dispute over the nature of the relationship between church and state. Alienated by the controversy, young Wardlaw was drawn to the Congregational church, which was then being revitalized in Scotland through the evangelistic work of the brothers Robert and James Haldane. Wardlaw joined the Congregational church in 1800, and soon gained recognition as a forceful evangelical preacher at meetings sponsored by the Haldanes. He had developed into a handsome, vigorous man of medium height and slim build, with a love for literature and poetry, and a gift for expressive language. The Congregationalists in Glasgow built a church for him on North Albion Street, and Wardlaw was ordained as its minister on 16 February 1803. Several months later, on 23 August 1803, he married his cousin, Jane Smith, the daughter of a Secession minister in Dunfermline. They would eventually have eleven children together, nine of whom survived to adulthood. 
In 1808 the Congregational church in Scotland experienced a disruption when the Haldanes and their followers rejected the doctrine of infant baptism and seceded from the Congregational church, entering the Baptist church. It was a bitter break. Wardlaw, who had published a pamphlet in support of infant baptism the previous year, remained within the Congregational church. When in 1811 the Congregational church formed the Glasgow Theological Academy for the training of its ministers, Wardlaw was appointed professor of systematic theology, serving alongside his friend Greville Ewing, who taught biblical literature. Combining his professorship with his busy urban pastorate, he developed a reputation as both a forceful champion of orthodox reformed theology and an evangelical activist. In 1812 he took a leading role in the formation of the Glasgow auxiliary of the British and Foreign Bible Society, serving as its secretary for twenty-seven years. He worked to establish schools for the children of the labouring poor of Glasgow. His treatise on the doctrine of the atonement, published in 1814 in response to the Unitarian teaching, presented a lucid exposition of the care of the poor, rejecting compulsory assessments on property for poor relief and insisting that the care of the poor should be left to voluntary charitable societies. In May 1818 he travelled to London to preach one of the annual sermons on behalf of the London Missionary Society, which brought him acclaim from the English nonconformist community, and in September of that year he was granted a doctorate in divinity by Yale College in the United States. His growing Glasgow congregation erected a large new chapel, with an imposing Grecian front and accommodation for 1600, which was opened late in 1819. 
A long-standing opponent of slavery, Wardlaw was one of the founders of the Glasgow Anti-Slavery Society in 1823. He came to reject the moderate anti-slavery position that the abolition of slavery should be a gradual process. In November 1830 he delivered a powerful speech before the Glasgow Anti-Slavery Society, in which he demanded the immediate abolition of slavery. This was a courageous position to take in Glasgow, which had long-standing trading connections with the West Indies. The speech led to the break-up of old friendships, a decline in attendance at his church, and personal attacks upon him in the press. Although his health collapsed under the strain in the spring of 1831, he would not relent in his advocacy of immediate abolition. 
The following year saw the beginning of the voluntary movement in Scotland, with a number of leading nonconformists calling for the disestablishment and disendowment of the Church of Scotland. Religion, the voluntaries argued, should be placed on a purely voluntary basis, with all denominations enjoying equal status before the law and none having a connection with the state. Wardlaw became active in the voluntary movement from the autumn of 1832, speaking at public meetings, and in 1833 he was elected president of the Voluntary Church Association. For him voluntarism was a matter of religious principle, and he refused to engage in invective against the established church. In 1838 he was a member of a deputation from the Scottish central board of dissenters sent to London to lobby politicians against the proposal to grant public money for building new churches in connection with the establishment. The following year, at the invitation of representatives of the main English nonconformist denominations, Wardlaw presented a series of lectures on voluntarism in London -- in response to the lectures given in support of establishments by his fellow Scot, the celebrated Thomas Chalmers, in 1838. His fellow nonconformists heralded Wardlaw's lectures as a triumph, and some 14,000 copies of the lectures were sold within a few months. 
In the mid-1840s Wardlaw turned his attention from disestablishment to protestant church union, taking an active part in the Evangelical Alliance, formed in 1845, and contributing (alongside his former opponent Chalmers) to the influential collection 'Essays on Christian Union' published that same year. His last years were troubled by controversy, as in 1849 a faction within his congregation charged him with having misused his pastoral connection with an elderly widow thirty years before to obtain a gift of money. He successfully defended his reputation, but the attack had pained him deeply. Wardlaw died in his home in Easterhouse, Glasgow, on 17 December 1853, and received a public funeral. He was buried at the Glasgow necropolis on 23 December. A figure of courage, eloquence, and learning, Wardlaw contributed significantly to the growth of religious and political liberalism in Britain. 


@@@@@


doc= 28724


Wardlaw, Walter (c.1320-1387), bishop of Glasgow and cardinal, was possibly the son of Henry Wardlaw, who possessed half of the barony of Wilton, Roxburghshire; his mother, according to later tradition, was the daughter of Sir James Stewart of Durrisdeer, a cousin of King Robert II. He was also related to Gilbert Wardlaw, an Edinburgh burgess. From the later 1330s until the mid-1350s Wardlaw attended Paris University. He obtained several degrees including a doctorate of theology by 1358. In addition to his studies and teaching responsibilities, Wardlaw served periodically as regent in arts and as proctor of the English nation, and in 1345 as university rector. He has been credited with authorship of works which no longer survive, including a history of his family and others entitled 'De fallacia astrologorum' and 'De inani divinationum vititarum scientia'. 
Academic prestige did little to augment Wardlaw's financial resources. Among the poorest class of student in 1341, his ecclesiastical advancement was initially limited. He held a canonry of Glasgow by 1344 and, together with this, successively the parishes of Dunino, Fife, by 1349 and Errol, Perthshire, by 1351. It was not until after the conclusion of his university career that more lucrative benefices followed. By 1359 he had been appointed archdeacon of Lothian (the southern part of the diocese of St Andrews), and in 1366 he won Edward III's approval to exercise his office in the English-controlled parts of the archdeaconry. He also obtained canonries in Aberdeen, Moray, and Ross. In part this advancement reflected the patronage of William Landel, bishop of St Andrews, whose family were Roxburghshire neighbours of the Wardlaws of Wilton. Wardlaw presided at Landel's funeral at St Andrews in 1385, which was delayed until his arrival. It was perhaps also Landel's influence which led to Wardlaw's appointment as royal secretary. He held this position from at least May 1363 and probably until 1367. From 1359, but especially when secretary, he regularly witnessed royal charters and served on embassies to England, often with Landel. It was probably with David II's support that Wardlaw was elected bishop of Glasgow, his consecration taking place at Avignon in 1367, probably in April. 
Wardlaw's domestic political prominence declined following Robert II's accession in 1371. He assisted in the negotiation of the Franco-Scottish alliance of 1371 but spent the ensuing five years at the papal court, returning to Avignon periodically afterwards, notably in the immediate aftermath of the schism of 1378. It is possible that having been a leading agent of David II, he deliberately chose to distance himself thus from the new king, with whom his relations may have been uneasy. So rarely was he seen in Scotland that rumours of his death in 1374 prompted the seizure of his moveable goods. On 23 December 1383, while Wardlaw was briefly home, Pope Clement VII appointed him a cardinal, the first ever from Scotland. He continued to act as bishop of Glasgow 'in commendam', but also resumed his diplomatic career, visiting Berwick in 1380 to conclude an Anglo-Scottish truce; Vincennes in 1383 to conclude another Franco-Scottish alliance; and Leulinghen in 1384 to represent Scottish interests at the international conference there. The exact date and place of Wardlaw's death are unknown. He witnessed a charter at Edinburgh on 22 May 1387 and was dead by 20 September following. Sixteenth-century sources place his death on 21 or 23 August. 


@@@@@


doc= 28725


Wardle, Gwyllym Lloyd (1761/2-1833), soldier and politician, was born at Chester, where he was baptized at St John the Baptist's on 16 January 1762, the only son of Francis Wardle JP, of Hartsheath, near Mold in Flintshire, and his wife, Catherine, daughter and heir of Richard Lloyd Gwyllym of Hartsheath. He was at Harrow School in 1775, but left through ill health. He was afterwards educated in the school of George Henry Glasse at Greenford, near Ealing, Middlesex, and was admitted pensioner at St John's College, Cambridge, on 12 February 1780, but did not take a degree. After travelling on the continent, he settled at Hartsheath. In November 1792 he married Ellen Elizabeth Parry (1766/7-1844), daughter of Love Parry of Madryn, Caernarvonshire, who brought him considerable estates in that county, and to whom he was frequently unfaithful, especially in London; they had seven children. Wardle became a partner of W. A. Madocks in the development of Porthmadog. 
When Sir Watkin Williams Wynn raised a troop of dragoons, officially called 'the ancient British light dragoons', and popularly known as 'Wynn's lambs', Wardle served in the troop, accompanied it to Ireland, and is said to have fought at Vinegar Hill. At the Peace of Amiens the troop was disbanded, and Wardle, who desired in vain to be incorporated with the regular forces, retired with the rank of lieutenant-colonel. 
About 1804 Wardle rented Green Park Place, Bath, and is said by William Farquharson, in a pamphlet on him, to have been concerned in a gin distillery in Jersey. He was resident at Bath when he was elected for Okehampton in 1807; he was at the head of the poll with 113 votes, and is said to have been returned without the support of the borough's patron. He voted against the government in most of the divisions in 1808, and developed an interest in corruption in army contracts, naming Frederick, duke of York. The next year he took this further, introducing the name of the duke's former mistress, Mary Anne Clarke. His motion led to an investigation by the whole house on 1 February 1809, which lasted until 20 March, with huge public interest focused on the saucy and resourceful Mrs Clarke. With whig support, and despite initial setbacks, Wardle pressed his case and secured the duke's resignation as commander-in-chief, a remarkable achievement for a recently elected back-bencher. He followed up his triumph with a programme of retrenchment, presented in a three-hour speech on 19 June 1809; his resolutions were accepted by ministers who knew they were impractical. 
This was the crowning point in Wardle's popularity. The freedom of the City of London was voted to him on 6 April 1809, and congratulatory addresses were presented to him by many corporations throughout the kingdom. A medallion with a striking likeness of him was published by Bisset of Birmingham, and portraits and engravings of him were widely sold. By the following summer his popularity was gone. An upholsterer, Francis Wright, brought an action against him on 3 July for alleged non-payment of a bill for furnishing Mrs Clarke's house. The attorney-general led the prosecution, making clear the government's intention to destroy Wardle. It emerged that he had had negotiations with Mrs Clarke about the duke before launching his parliamentary attack. She alleged he had bought her testimony with a promise to furnish her house. The jury found against him. Wardle brought, on 11 December, an action against the Wrights and Mrs Clarke for conspiracy, but this failed. In 1810 Mrs Clarke's 'The Rival Princes' portrayed the whole affair as a conspiracy organized by the duke of Kent, with Wardle in his confidence. Charles Williams Wynn gave this assessment of Wardle in August 1810: 'until last year I had no doubt of his honour or integrity. He had lived certainly rather a debauched life but not more so than many others... Wardle may be a rogue but I am sure he is also an enthusiast and blinds himself to his own misconduct. (HoP, 'Commons')' Wardle voted against the duke of York's reinstatement on 11 June 1811, but was not re-elected at the dissolution in 1812 (a Westminster politician named Brooks is said to have raised a subscription of $4000 for him). He withdrew to a farm between Tunbridge Wells and Rochester, taking, as Mrs Clarke said, 'to selling milk about Tunbridge'. About 1815, in severe financial difficulties, he went abroad, and settled in Florence. An address, 'Colonel Wardle to his Countrymen', arguing for Catholic emancipation, was circulated in 1828; it was dated 'Florence, 3 Nov 1827', and referred to the happy conditions of life in Catholic Tuscany. He died in Florence on 30 November 1833, aged seventy-one, and was buried in the protestant cemetery there. 


@@@@@


doc= 28726


Wardrop, James (1782-1869), surgeon, the youngest child of James Wardrop (1738-1830) and his wife, Marjory, daughter of Andrew Marjoribanks, of Marjoriebanks, Dumfriesshire, was born on 14 August 1782 at Torbane Hill, Linlithgow, a small property which had been in the family for generations. Wardrop was educated first under a Mr Stalker and then at Edinburgh high school from the age of seven. In 1797 he was apprenticed to his uncle, Andrew Wardrop (1752-1823), a surgeon in Edinburgh. He also assisted John Barclay, the anatomist, and he was appointed house surgeon at the Royal Infirmary, Edinburgh, at the age of nineteen. 
Wardrop went to London in 1801 to attend the lectures of John Abernethy, Henry Cline, and Astley Cooper, and to see work at St Thomas's, Guy's, and St George's hospitals. In May 1803 he went to Paris, and though English residents in France were treated at the time as prisoners of war, he evaded the police and, after a few months, escaped to Vienna, where Georg Joseph Beer's teaching first interested him in ophthalmic surgery. He returned to Edinburgh, and was admitted FRCS (Edinburgh) in 1804. He practised surgery there for a time, studying especially pathology and diseases of the eye, and was active in the formation of the museum of the Royal College of Surgeons. 
As there was no immediate opening for Wardrop in Edinburgh, he went to London in April 1808; he first took rooms in York Street, and then rented 2 Charles Street, St James's Square, where he lived until his death. He married, in 1813, Margaret, a daughter of Colonel George Dalrymple, a lineal descendant of the earl of Stair, and they had four sons and a daughter. 
In London Wardrop was admitted MRCS without examination in 1814, the master, Sir Everard Home, saying that Wardrop's published works were quite sufficient to entitle him to the diploma. He became FRCS (England) in 1843; the honorary degree of MD had been conferred upon him by the University of St Andrews in 1834. In September 1818 he was appointed surgeon-extraordinary to the prince regent, and in 1823, when the latter visited Scotland as George IV, he attended him on the journey. 
Wardrop had practised for many years among the poor by giving advice chiefly at his own house. In 1826, with William Willocks Sleigh, he founded a hospital in Nutford Place, Edgware Road, called the West London Hospital of Surgery. It was not only a charitable institution, but it was free to every member of the medical profession. On one day each week operations of importance were done and a clinical discussion followed. The hospital's expenses were met mainly by Wardrop, who reluctantly had to close it at the end of ten years. 
In 1826 Wardrop and William Lawrence gave a course of lectures on surgery at the Aldersgate Street school of medicine, and after Lawrence went to St Bartholomew's Hospital, Wardrop for a few seasons gave these lectures alone. He joined the Great Windmill Street School as a lecturer on surgery about 1835. 
Wardrop took a leading part in the discussions on the state of the medical profession, and he was an active supporter of the liberal policy advocated by Thomas Wakley. In 1825-6 'The Lancet' published a series of letters from Wardrop, written under the pen name of Brutus, which attacked the way the College of Surgeons was organized. Wardrop also quarrelled with Robert Liston over bloodletting, Liston saying that patients should lose as little blood as possible, Wardrop the opposite. 
Wardrop succeeded Astley Cooper as surgeon-in-ordinary to the king in 1828, and he declined a baronetcy shortly afterwards. Circumstances which occurred during the last illness of George IV convinced Wardrop that he was unfairly treated by several of his medical colleagues who were attached to the court, and after the king's death in 1830 he avoided their circles. Indeed, he took the matter much to heart, and exacted revenge by writing a series of anonymous 'Intercepted letters' for 'The Lancet'. They claimed to contain confidential details of events communicated by Henry Halford, Benjamin Collins Brodie, and William MacMichael, librarian of the Royal College of Physicians. Scurrilous though they are, they are well written and amusing. However, when it leaked out that Wardrop was the author he was 'regarded as a 'pariah' by men who could do much either to benefit or ruin him' (Clarke, 338), and he lost much of his practice. 
Wardrop was celebrated not as an operator but as a diagnostician and a medical writer, and it is both as a surgeon cardiologist and as an ophthalmologist that he is remembered. He was, however, the first surgeon in England to remove a tumour of the lower jaw by total vertical section of the bone, and he carried out and modified Pierre Brasdor's operation for peripheral aneurysm (blood-filled sac) by distal ligature -- that is, by tying the artery on the side of the aneurysm farthest from the heart ('On Aneurysm', 1828). His treatise 'On the Nature and Treatment of Diseases of the Heart' (1837, 1851) was never regarded as authoritative, but his ophthalmic works show 'shrewdness and enthusiasm... and testify to the brilliance of their author' (Albert and Robinson, 907). In sympathetic ophthalmitis, the germ of the idea of prophylactic enucleation of the eye to prevent the spread to the unaffected eye came from Wardrop, who had veterinary experience of the disease in horses and had treated the prince regent's horse. Wardrop himself had an exotropic left eye (wall eye). He coined the term 'keratitis' for inflammation of the cornea, and had a partial understanding of glaucoma. His publications in ophthalmology included his two-volume 'Essays on the Morbid Anatomy of the Human Eye' (3 edns, 1808-34), a work on eye diseases of the horse (1819), and two papers. Wardrop also edited the works of Matthew Baillie in 1825, and prefixed to it a biographical sketch of the author. 
A tall, thin man, Wardrop was vain and self-opinionated, and fond of scandal and gossip. However, his social gifts, family connections, knowledge of horses, and love of field sports brought him both friendly acquaintance and patients from the aristocracy. He collected art, though much of his collection was sold later in his life. He died at his house, 2 Charles Street, St James's Square, on 13 February 1869 and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 28727


Ware, Hugh (1776-1846), officer in the French service, was born near Rathcoffey, co. Kildare, on 19 January 1776. He was descended from the same family, of English origin, as Sir James Ware the historian. Hugh supported the Irish national movement, and was a member of the United Irishmen. On the outbreak of the 1798 uprising he raised a body of insurgents and maintained a desultory warfare in co. Kildare. After the battle of Vinegar Hill (21 June) he joined a detachment of defeated insurgents and retreated towards co. Meath. They were dispersed by government troops, but Ware and some of the other leaders were imprisoned, he at Dublin, then at Kilmainham until the peace of Amiens in 1802, when he was released on condition of voluntary banishment for life. 
On his release Ware went to France, and in 1803, on the rupture of the peace of Amiens, obtained a lieutenancy in the new Irish legion in the French army. In 1804 he was appointed captain of grenadiers. After the breaking up of the camp at Boulogne, the legion served in the Netherlands, Spain, and Germany. Ware displayed undaunted courage on every occasion, and gained the respect of his superiors by his military talent. In 1810 the Irish regiment was sent into Spain, and it took part in the siege of Astorga. In June, at the siege of Ciudad Rodrigo by Ney, Ware was appointed by Junot to the command of an elite battalion selected from his own regiment. He took part at the head of 900 men in a successful attack by General St Croix on the British outposts, and was promoted 'chef de bataillon' (lieutenant-colonel). 
After the Russian campaign of 1812 the Irish legion was transferred to Germany to reinforce the French army. Ware served successfully in the 1813 campaign. On 28 March he drove a party of cossacks out of Celle, inflicting heavy losses. Under General Puthod he took part in the French victories at Bautzen and Gros Warschen, which gained for Napoleon the truce of 4 June. During the armistice Ware received the cross of the Legion d'honneur. In the battle of Lowenberg on 19 August the Irish regiment bore the brunt of the engagement, and Ware received three grapeshot wounds and had his horse killed under him. In the second battle of Lowenberg, two days later, the colonel of the regiment, William Lawless, had his leg taken off by a cannon shot, and command devolved upon Ware, who led the regiment over the Bobr in the face of the enemy. At the battle of Goldberg on 23 August he carried with the bayonet the hill of Goldberg, the key to the enemy's position, and had a second horse killed under him. At the conclusion of the action the French commander, General Lauriston, wrote from the field requesting for Ware the rank of colonel. On 29 August he saved the eagle of the regiment from capture. After the retreat from Leipzig, Ware took his regiment (reduced to ninety men) to the Netherlands, where the reserve battalion was stationed at Bois-le-Duc. He took part in the defence of Antwerp, and on 14 January 1814, at the head of 1000 men made a successful sortie against the British troops. 
Napoleon, on his return from Elba, promoted Ware colonel. During the Belgian campaign the Irish regiment was in garrison at Montreuil, and after Waterloo it was disbanded. Ware retired to Tours, where he died on 5 March 1846. Ware was tall, 'of gigantic proportions' and great strength ('GM', 541), and was noted for his hospitality to English prisoners, whom he eagerly sought out during the Spanish campaigns. 


@@@@@


doc= 28728


Ware, Isaac (bap. 1704, d. 1766), architect, was born in London, where he was baptized in the church of St Giles Cripplegate on 6 March 1704; his father, also Isaac, was a cordwainer (or shoemaker). Ware himself is said to have told the sculptor Roubiliac that he began life as a chimney sweep's boy, and that he was launched on his architectural career when a benevolent gentleman spotted him sketching the Banqueting House in Whitehall with a piece of chalk; the anonymous gentleman, later putatively identified as the third earl of Burlington, had him educated, sent him to Italy, and on his return furthered his career. What is certain is that in 1721, aged seventeen, Ware was apprenticed in the Carpenters' Company to the architect Thomas Ripley, who was shortly afterwards appointed master carpenter to the office of works. Ripley's intervention is likely to have secured for Ware the posts of clerk itinerant, draughtsman, and purveyor at the end of his apprenticeship in 1728. His rise in the office of works continued with clerkships of the works at Windsor Castle (1729-33) and Greenwich (1733-6), and finally the secretaryship of the board of works (1736-66). 
Although Ware was thus a senior architectural civil servant of long standing, little or nothing can be attributed to him in this capacity, and his reputation rests on his activities outside the office of works. Whatever the truth of the story supposedly told to Roubiliac, he seems in the earlier years of his career to have been part of Lord Burlington's circle. Having in 1727 subscribed to William Kent's 'Designs of Inigo Jones' (a volume sponsored by Burlington), in 1731 he published his own 'Designs of Inigo Jones and Others', which contained designs by the earl. Ware's translation of Palladio's 'Quattro libri dell'architettura' (generally considered the best and most reliable English edition), published in 1738, was dedicated to Burlington, and acknowledges his assistance. Another project, reliant on his help, which Ware contemplated but never brought to completion, was a new edition of the Palladio drawings of Roman baths then in Burlington's collection. Other publications were, in 1735, 'The Plans, Elevations and Sections of Houghton in Norfolk' (on whose construction he had probably worked as assistant to Ripley), and a translation of Lorenzo Sirigatti's 'La prattica di prospettiva', brought out serially in 1756-7. The same years also saw the serial publication of Ware's most important book, the massive and compendious 'Complete Body of Architecture'. 
Ware's known output as an architect is relatively small, and much of it has been demolished or drastically altered. It includes the conversion of Lanesborough House, Hyde Park Corner, into St George's Hospital (1733; rebuilt 1828-9), Oxford town hall (1751-2; dem. 1893), Wrotham Park, Hertfordshire (1754; altered 1811 and damaged by fire 1883), and Amisfield House, Haddingtonshire (1756-9; dem. 'c'.1928). His most complete surviving building is Clifton Hill House in Bristol (1746-50), which can be said to have introduced Palladian restraint to the domestic architecture of that city. Other well-preserved Palladian interiors are at Leinster House, Dublin, remodelled about 1759 for the twentieth earl of Kildare; Ware's unexecuted designs for remodelling the earl's seat at Carton are dated 1762. Ware was also involved in speculative developments in London, particularly in Mayfair, and illustrated interior features from a number of the houses in the 'Complete Body'. 
Most of Ware's designs were as Palladian in character as might be expected from an architect of his background and credentials. However, as a prominent member of the St Martin's Lane Academy he was also a colleague of such rococo artists as Hogarth, Roubiliac, and Francis Hayman: this is reflected not only in the surprisingly latitudinarian views occasionally found in the pages of the 'Complete Body' but also in the dazzling interiors of his most important work, Chesterfield House, Mayfair (1748-9; dem. 1934), designed in a full-blooded French rococo idiom for the francophile fourth earl of Chesterfield. 
Ware was married twice; his first wife, Elizabeth, daughter of James Richards, master carver in the office of works, whom he married on 22 September 1729, bore a son, Walter James Ware. With his second wife, Mary Bolton (who predeceased him), he had two daughters, Mary and Charlotte, one of whom is depicted with him in the portrait by Andrea Soldi now in the RIBA drawings collection. In 1742 Ware bought a small estate at Westbourne Grove, Paddington, and subsequently built himself a new house there. In 1764 he moved to Frognall Hall, Hampstead, where he died on 6 January 1766; he was buried in Paddington Old Church. His skin was said to have retained the stain of the chimney sweep's soot until his dying day. 


@@@@@


doc= 28729


Ware, Sir James (1594-1666), antiquary and historian, was born on 26 November 1594 in Castle Street, Dublin, the eldest son of Sir James Ware (died 1632), and his wife, Mary Briden. His father had gone to Ireland as secretary to Sir William FitzWilliam, the lord deputy, in 1588; he became auditor-general, was knighted by James I, and was elected MP for Mallow in the Irish parliament of 1613. James Ware entered the recently founded Trinity College, Dublin, in 1610, graduating MA in 1616. While there, he encountered James Ussher, who encouraged him to take an interest in antiquarian matters. Shortly after leaving the university, about 1617, he married Mary, the daughter of John Newman of Dublin. Ware began to collect manuscripts and charters that had a bearing on Irish history, and developed an acquaintance with Irish scholars, one of whom, Duald MacFirbis (Dubhaltach Mac Fhirbhisig), proved particularly helpful to him. His first publication was 'Archiepiscoporum Casseliensem et Tuamensium vitae' (1628), the lives of the archbishops of Cashel and Tuam. He went to England for the first time in 1629, and undertook research in several libraries. 
In 1629 Ware was knighted, and in 1632, after the death of his father, he succeeded to the office of auditor-general. His political life developed rapidly thereafter: he was elected MP for the University of Dublin in the Irish parliaments of 1634 and 1637, and became a member of the privy council in Ireland in 1639; he also joined the staff of Thomas Wentworth, earl of Strafford, the lord deputy. In 1633 he made a major contribution to Irish scholarship by publishing three important Elizabethan accounts of Ireland, by Edmund Campion, Meredith Hanmer, and Edmund Spenser. (This was the first printing of Spenser's 'View of the Present State of Ireland'.) Ware entitled this collection 'The History of Ireland' and dedicated it to Wentworth. Also dedicated to Wentworth was his 'De scriptoribus Hiberniae', published in Dublin, 1639, a biographical register of Irish writers which contains an impressive number of names and titles that give an impression of great scholarly achievement in the early Christian centuries. Unfortunately, in most cases only the names and titles have survived, and the texts have disappeared. The register is heavily dependent on the compilations of John Bale, the mid-sixteenth-century bishop of Ossory. 
In 1643 Ware assisted the marquess of Ormond in the treaty with the Irish rebels after their defeat, and in 1644 he was sent by Ormond, along with Lord Edward Brabazon and Sir Henry Tichborne, to inform King Charles about the situation in Ireland. Charles was then based in Oxford, and Ware spent much time in the libraries there; he was created DCL during his visit. On the voyage back his ship was captured by a parliamentarian vessel, but Ware was able to throw overboard a packet of letters to Ormond from the king. For eleven months he was a prisoner in the Tower: on his release he returned to Dublin, only to be expelled from that city in 1649 by Colonel Michael Jones, the parliamentarian governor. Ware then went to France, where he spent time at Caen and Paris. At this time he formed a friendship with the French pastor and controversialist Samuel Bochart, who was based in Caen. Bochart had a lively antiquarian curiosity, and was the author of 'Geographia sacra' (1646), which offered imaginative views of 'Old Testament' history and described the settlements of the Phoenicians around the shore of Europe. Ware moved to London in 1651; his friends during this period in England included John Selden, Sir Roger Twysden, William Dugdale, Elias Ashmole, Sir John Marsham, and Edward Bysshe. In 1654 he published in London his major work 'De Hibernia et antiquitatibus eius disquisitiones' (2nd edn, 1658), the most comprehensive account of Ireland, from its legendary origins to the conquest by the Normans, that had yet appeared. 

'De Hibernia' remains a work of impressive scholarship in which Ware proves himself a worthy successor to his early patron James Ussher in the matter of Irish antiquities. The sections on the origins of the Irish people exhibit the characteristic preoccupations of his time with etymology and honourable lines of national descent: he derives the Scoti, who occupied Ireland in Roman times, from Scythii, and imputes a Scythian origin to the Irish, as had been the conventional opinion in the sixteenth century. He shows an unusual interest in the field monuments of ancient Ireland, with intelligent discussion of their significance. He painstakingly puts together all references to Ireland in the classical writers, to produce a valuable anthropological picture. As he moves into the early Christian period his sources multiply, so that he is able to construct a serious and credible account of the development of Irish society, with its particular manners and customs, up to the coming of the Normans. He explains at length the origins of the leading Irish families, and the meaning of Irish names, reports the superstitions of the country and the natural phenomena, and gives a knowledgeable description of Irish costume and the Irish ways of fighting. Particularly valuable are Ware's accounts of the forms of government, the codes of law, and the systems of land tenure that prevailed up to the Norman invasion. With its copious detail and trustworthy description of the antiquities and traditions of Ireland, 'De Hibernia' finally brought the country out of the shadow of Britain and characterized it fully to a scholarly European audience. 
Ware returned to Ireland at the Restoration in 1660, and resumed his position as auditor-general. He was made one of the commissioners for lands but managed to devote much time to antiquarian researches, publishing 'Venerabilies Bedae epistolae duae' (1664), 'Rerum Hibernicarum annales, 1485-1558' (1665), and 'De praesulibus Hiberniae commentarius' (1665). He died at his family house in Castle Street, Dublin, on 1 December 1666, and was buried in St Werburgh's Church. His manuscripts, of which catalogues were published in Dublin in 1688 and in London in 1690, were purchased by Henry Hyde, second earl of Clarendon, in 1686 when he was lord lieutenant of Ireland. They subsequently passed to the British Library (Clarendon Collection) and the Bodleian Library (Rawlinson Collection). 


@@@@@


doc= 28730


Ware, James (1756-1815), surgeon and oculist, born at Portsmouth on 11 February 1756, was son of Elizabeth Dale (1716-1795) and Martin Ware (1717-1801), who was successively the master shipbuilder of the royal dockyards of Sheerness, Plymouth, and Deptford. James Ware was educated at the Portsmouth grammar school, and went on trial to Ramsay Karr, surgeon of the King's Yard in Portsmouth on 3 July 1770. He was bound apprentice to Karr on 2 March 1771, to serve for five years from the previous July. During his apprenticeship he attended the practice of the surgeons at the Haslar naval hospital, and, as he had served a part of his time, his master allowed him, as was then usual, to go to London for the purpose of attending the medical and surgical practice of one of the general hospitals. Ware selected St Thomas's, and entered himself as a student on 25 September 1773. He remained there for three years, during the course of which he kept a diary (now in the Surrey History Centre, Woking). 
Ware made such progress that Joseph Else appointed him in 1776 his demonstrator of anatomy. On 1 January 1777 he began to act as assistant to Jonathan Wathen, a surgeon who devoted himself principally to diseases of the eye; and on 25 March 1778 he entered into partnership with Wathen, taking a fourth share. The partnership was dissolved in 1791, after which Ware began to practise on his own account, chiefly but not entirely in ophthalmic surgery. In 1788 he became one of the founders of the Society for the Relief of the Widows and Orphans of Medical Men in London and its vicinity, a society of which he was chosen president in 1809. In 1800 he founded the school for the indigent blind, in imitation of a similar institution which had been established at Liverpool ten years earlier. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London on 18 January 1798, and on 11 March 1802 he was admitted a fellow of the Royal Society, where his proposers included the eminent surgeons Everard Home and John Abernethy. He married in 1787 Ursula, the widow of N. Polhill, and daughter of Robert Maitland; they had a large family of sons and daughters. 
Wathen and his pupil Ware did much to raise the status of eye surgery. Specialism in this field was long associated with quackery and regarded with suspicion in many quarters, but the efforts of men like Ware promoted its acceptance as a respected branch of the profession. Ware had a receptive and enquiring mind, and was ready to learn from any source that satisfied his critical judgement. In his day he was the best-read man in his subject, and he greatly influenced his colleagues by his practice. He was the first English surgeon to arouse any enthusiasm for Dominique Anel's syringe in the treatment of diseases of the lacrimal duct, previously much disparaged by English surgeons. After Ware's visit to Paris in 1791, the method became widely adopted. In the same year he translated Baron de Wenzel's 'Traite de la cataracte'. He freely acknowledged (although not without reservations) that he had learned more from the baron than from anyone else, even though Wenzel was often regarded as a quack. Ware himself was noted for his skill in the extraction of the lens in cataract, which was to supersede the traditional procedure of couching. 
Ware was modest and self-critical. He did not like to talk about his philanthropic activities and, unusually for his time, he could write about his failures. 'An Enquiry into the Causes which have Most Commonly Prevented Success in the Operation of Extracting the Cataract' was published in 1795. He was a prolific writer and some of his works were translated into several languages. His first book, 'Remarks on the Ophthalmy, Psorophthalmy and Purulent Eye' (1780), first drew attention to the contagious nature of ophthalmia of the new-born, and its venereal origin. This work and his books on the treatment of lacrimal fistulae, as well as the translation of Wenzel, were collected and republished in 1805 in two volumes as 'Chirurgical Observations Relative to the Eye'. Ware published several papers of professional importance in the 'Transactions of the Medical Society of London' and the 'Transactions of the Medical and Chirurgical Society', of which the most interesting describe cases of recovery of sight after long periods of blindness. His contribution to the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society' made some important observations on refractive errors. 
Ware practised in New Bridge Street, Blackfriars, and his contemporaries regarded him as one of the leaders of the profession. He died at his country house at Turnham Green, Middlesex, on 13 April 1815, and was buried on 21 April in the family tomb in the Bunhill Fields burial-ground, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 28731


Warelwast, William de (d. 1137), administrator and bishop of Exeter, was a Norman who took his name from Ver-a-Val, some 5 kilometres north-west of Yvetot (Seine-Maritime), then on the demesne of the abbey of St Wandrille. His family, education, and career before 1087 are unknown. Although Hugh the Chanter, a hostile chronicler, claimed that he was no scholar ('scholasticus'), this, except possibly in the narrowest sense, is clearly wrong. His career in diplomacy at the highest ecclesiastical levels shows that he was a rhetorician and could speak, as well as read and write, Latin. And the subjects of his diplomacy and his work as a royal justice prove that he was well versed in law, probably of various kinds. As he sent his nephew, Robert de Warelwast, to school at Laon and, when bishop, was a great patron of Augustinian canons, Laon could have been his own alma mater. 
Warelwast appears first at the very beginning of William Rufus's reign as a royal clerk, and he served Rufus as a specialist in diplomacy at the papal curia until the king's untimely death. He may well have been in the royal hunting party, also attended by the king's brother Count Henry, in the New Forest on 2 August 1100, when Rufus was killed. Certainly he transferred immediately to Henry's side, thus disregarding the claim to the throne of the eldest brother, Robert Curthose, for he attested the new king's letter, sent shortly after the hasty coronation on 5 August, to the exiled Archbishop Anselm of Canterbury, inviting him to return. That he witnessed third, after a bishop and a bishop-elect and before two important barons, one an earl, is proof that Henry was glad, despite his general dislike of Rufus's servants, to recruit the clerk; and Warelwast served him for the whole of his reign, although after 1120 blindness began to restrict his activities. 
As a trusted ambassador to the pope, Warelwast handled first Rufus's standing difficulties with his archbishop of Canterbury, Anselm, over the 'ancestral' royal customs in the English church, travelling to Rome in 1095, perhaps 1096, and 1098. Although he could not secure Anselm's deposition, he did manage to neutralize Urban II ('r'. 1088-99). He then took care of Henry I's dispute with Anselm over the investiture of bishops and abbots, with visits to the curia in 1101, 1103, 1105-6, and 1107. He must be regarded as one of the architects of the compromise of Bec (1106) which settled the English investiture dispute. Finally, he pursued the king's interests in the Canterbury-York quarrel over primacy, with embassies in 1116 (perhaps), 1119, and 1120. Eadmer, Anselm's companion and biographer, reports Warelwast's actions on a few of these occasions in some detail. His tone softens from his outrage at the clerk's examination of the archbishop's baggage, piece by piece, 'as though he was a fugitive and criminal' ('Life', ed. and trans. Southern, 98) on the beach at Dover in 1097 as he prepared to leave for exile, to his eventual acceptance that in 1105-6 he was working for peace and was genuinely concerned over Anselm's weak health. In the meantime he marvels at the ambassador's fearless, indeed audacious, bearing at the papal curia and his skilful conduct of his business. In 1103 Warelwast used 'threatening words' to Pope Paschal II ('r'. 1099-1118) at the hearing of the case concerning investitures. He declared that all present should clearly understand that, whatever might be said there on this subject, 'my lord, the king, would rather lose his realm than suffer the loss of the investiture of churches'. To which the pope replied, 'And let me tell you before God, Pope Paschal would rather lose his head than allow him freely to retain them' ('De gestis pontificum', 112) -- intemperate words in open court, but a deal was done behind the scenes. Eadmer believed that the distribution of money and the threat of cutting off English subsidies were important weapons in Warelwast's armoury. The ambassador had no qualms about exploiting the insecure Urban's need for Henry's support or the weaker character of his successor. 
Henry I rewarded his clerk by earmarking Warelwast for the bishopric of Exeter, vacant since Osbern's death in 1103, and put him in the archdeaconry until the settlement of the quarrel over investitures allowed his consecration by Anselm on 11 August 1107. These ecclesiastical offices seem hardly to have weakened Warelwast's closeness to the king. He appears to have been with him in Normandy from August 1111 to July 1115, in 1118, and from June 1123 to September 1126; and these may not have been the only occasions. The many absences from his diocese determined his style of government and required him to create a subordinate structure. Exeter, under the quasi-monastic rule of St Chrodegang, and presided over from 1050 until 1103 by two former clerks of Edward the Confessor, had become old-fashioned. The new bishop brought it into the new age. He replaced the single, personal archdeacon with four territorial archdeaconries; he probably enlarged the cathedral chapter to twenty-four canons and established two dignitaries, a treasurer and a precentor; he reformed Crediton Minster, the earlier see of the Devon bishops, as a satellite community; and 'c'.1114 he started the rebuilding of the cathedral church. By 1133, four years before his death, when the church was dedicated, it extended to a west front flanked by the two great Norman towers that still survive in the transepts. 
In the diocese at large Warelwast reformed in the 1120s the secular colleges at Plympton, Bodmin, and St Stephen's, Launceston as convents of Augustinian canons regular. Plympton, his favourite foundation, repaid by remembering him as a prelate intent on eradicating married priests and starting his reforms at the top. However that may be, he was, in a lawful way, a good family man. He made one nephew, Robert, his archdeacon and another, William, his steward, in effect his deputies in spiritualities and temporalities. He seems also to have burdened his church by enfeoffing an excessive number of knights on the episcopal demesne. Although it can hardly be thought that he fulfilled the prognosticon at his consecration, 'When thou makest a dinner or a supper, call not thy friends, nor thy brethren, neither thy kinsmen nor thy rich neighbours... but the poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind' ('Luke' 14: 12-13), he was clearly a man of many virtues. Not only did he enjoy the trust of both his royal masters, but he also earned the respect of the two popes with whom he negotiated. And even Anselm, the victim of much of his diplomacy, bore him no lasting grudge. He was a progressive and reforming diocesan bishop, a religious and probably good man. He and his nephew Robert were members of the Exeter Kalendar guild; and just before his death he retired to Plympton, where he was presumably admitted as a canon 'ad succurrendum', and where, after his death on 27 September 1137, he was buried in the chapter house of the priory. He was succeeded as bishop by his nephew, Robert de Warelwast, archdeacon of Exeter; and the two were remembered as great benefactors of the cathedral church. 


@@@@@


doc= 28732


Warenne, Hamelin de, earl of Surrey (d. 1202), magnate, was the natural son of Geoffrey, count of Anjou (died 1151), and half-brother of Henry II, from whom he received the Warenne Anglo-Norman honours with the title earl of Surrey in April 1164 on his marriage to Isabel de Warenne, countess of Surrey (d. 1203), widow of William of Blois, Earl Warenne (d. 1159). Although Hamelin readily adopted the Warenne family name, he proudly acknowledged in his charters both his Angevin paternal heritage and his debt to his royal brother. Hamelin's first reported political act, a vociferous denunciation of Thomas Becket at the Council of Northampton in October 1164, was motivated by the archbishop's perceived injury to the royal family in blocking the marriage of William FitzEmpress to the Countess Isabel on grounds of consanguinity. William had died shortly thereafter while seeking the intervention of his mother, the Empress Matilda, in the matter. Many of his friends believed that the disappointment had helped to cause his death. Few at court could have missed the connection, psychological or otherwise, of Hamelin's good fortune in gaining his title and high-born wife with the equally great misfortune of the death of the king's (and Hamelin's) younger brother. It is within this context that Hamelin's early confrontational attitude towards Thomas Becket is best explained. Years later the earl became, as did Henry II himself, an active participant in the then sainted archbishop's cult, having been healed, miraculously it was thought, of a cataract in one eye by the covering which lay on Becket's tomb. 
In England in 1166, and again in Normandy in 1172, Hamelin was one of a handful of elite Anglo-Norman courtiers who were not obligated to report their knights' fees and their royal or ducal knight service. Consequently the Warenne fiefs are missing from the great surveys of Henry II's reign: the 'Cartae baronum' and the 'Infeudationes militum'. None the less, other near-contemporary sources indicate something of the magnitude and importance of the Warenne honours. The 'Domesday' evaluation of the family's lands in England amounted to some $1140, which placed them among the four or five wealthiest secular holdings below the king. By the second half of the twelfth century over 140 knights' fees had been subinfeudated by the Warennes, making Hamelin in 1173 the ninth greatest lord in England as reckoned by enfeoffments. What his ranking may have been in Normandy is difficult to say, except that his wife's ancestral lands, centred on the strategic castles of Mortemer and Bellencombre, would have made the earl a major force in Upper Normandy. Indeed castles are as good a measure as any other of power, prestige, and wealth. On the English side of the channel Hamelin inherited castles at Lewes, Castle Acre, Reigate, and Sandal. For his part he built ('c'.1180) the magnificent keep at Conisbrough, which was later to serve as an inspiration for Sir Walter Scott's 'Ivanhoe'. 
Hamelin was well connected politically outside the royal family. His brother-in-law, Reginald de Warenne, worked frequently as a baron of the English exchequer. Hugh de Cressy, a Warenne under-tenant and sometime seneschal, rose to become Henry II's constable for Rouen and constant companion. Like so many of his peers Hamelin enjoyed prestige and wealth without much interference from royal government. According to the English pipe rolls the earl was assessed a total of $276 over a period of thirty-eight years, against which he paid the sum of $74, mostly on scutages taken from his under-tenants. It would be wrong to conclude from this, however, that Hamelin lived the pampered life of a detached aristocrat. His wealth and connections did obligate him to an active participation in state affairs, an obligation he took seriously. Throughout his tenure as earl, Hamelin remained steadfastly loyal to his brother the king, to his nephew Richard I, and, when challenged, to Angevin royal interests. 
Judging from the relatively low number of royal charters attested by Hamelin (ten), the earl apparently never entered the intimate, inner circle at Henry II's court, as did other family members like Reginald, earl of Cornwall. And yet, at critical moments in the reign, he is found at his brother's side. When Henry met Raymond de St Gilles, count of Toulouse, in February 1173 at Fontevrault to settle long-standing differences, Hamelin was there attesting charters as 'vicomte of the Touraine'. That Henry chose the earl to act as vicomte in this sensitive border region between the houses of Anjou and Blois displays great trust. Perhaps Hamelin took up this office during the king's stay in Ireland (1171-2), when the hostility of the French court, particularly the Blois family, was directed against the Angevin monarchy for Henry's perceived complicity in the murder of Thomas Becket. If so, Hamelin acted as one of the chief protectors of his brother's dominions during the time of Henry's self-imposed Irish exile. Equally important, the political manoeuvrings of February 1173 saw the king negotiating a marriage for John to the daughter of the count of Maurienne and fending off the demand of Henry, the Young King, to be put in control of some part of his inheritance. Henry's announced intention of the conveyance of the Tourangeaux castles of Chinon and Loudun to the five-year-old John as a marriage portion precipitated the premature launching by Henry, the Young King, of the rebellion he had been planning against his father. Lost in subsequent events is the fact that Hamelin would have been the local overseer of John's properties had the original plan been carried out. Hamelin held fast with his brother against his nephews and their French and Scottish allies in the ensuing civil war and next appears in the chronicles in 1176 as a member of Joan's escort through central and southern France as his niece, the princess, journeyed to Sicily for her marriage with King William. In the 1180s Hamelin focused much of his energy on his estates in Yorkshire, building the wondrous castle and keep at Conisbrough. He undoubtedly spent more time in Yorkshire than any of the other Warenne earls and may have been attracted to the region as much by the opportunity to leave his own fresh mark in a family of prodigious builders as by the thriving northern economy. Years of experience at the Angevin court, coupled with private success in the management of the diverse Warenne properties, earned Hamelin a respect which would serve him well in the troubled years following Henry II's death in 1189. 
Although Hamelin played no ceremonial role in Richard I's first coronation, as did other earls, he travelled widely with the new king, attesting thirteen charters, at Geddington (three), Bury St Edmunds (three), Canterbury (three), Rouen (three), and Montrichard (one), all before July 1190, when the main Angevin armies departed on crusade. With Richard gone Hamelin quickly attached himself to the king's chancellor, William de Longchamp, bishop of Ely. Their friendship was born of necessity: Longchamp was attempting to whittle down the power in the north of Hugh du Puiset, bishop of Durham, while fending off the intrigues of the king's brother, Count John; and Hamelin was equally disturbed by Hugh and John, holding true to the monarchy and his nephew, the king, as he had to his brother. Hamelin felt most comfortable adhering to the law (the legend on his seal reads 'pro lege, per lege') and, with Richard gone, William de Longchamp represented the law. When Geoffrey, archbishop of York (yet another nephew), was taken into custody at Dover in September 1191, when he attempted to enter England contrary to royal order, it was Earl Hamelin who was dispatched by the chancellor to bring the archbishop to London to face judgment by the 'barons of the realm'. When the outrage over the archbishop's treatment, combined with a growing sense of Longchamp's unrestrained ambition, allowed Count John to galvanize baronial discontent for a showdown with the chancellor at Loddon Bridge near Windsor in October, Hamelin again was conspicuous in his support of Longchamp. And after the chancellor's exile, when news of Richard's captivity in Germany reached England, Hamelin acted as one of only two magnates (William d'Aubigny, earl of Arundel, being the other) who were entrusted with the collection and safe keeping of the king's ransom. After Richard's return in 1194 the earl took a place of honour at a second coronation, carrying one of the three swords of state with William, king of Scots, and Ranulf (III), earl of Chester. A northern orientation again is apparent in these pairings. At the Council of Nottingham that same year Hamelin sat with Richard as sentences were handed out to John's followers and other disturbers of the king's peace. With this, Hamelin's long involvement in national politics slowed to an end. Present at John's coronation in May 1199, the earl attested no royal charters from the reign, though he is reported by Roger of Howden to have witnessed an oath given by William, king of Scots in November 1200. 
Absorbed by private matters, most notably a dispute with Cluny over the right to appoint the prior of Lewes, Earl Hamelin died on 7 May 1202 and was buried in the chapter house at St Pancras Priory, Lewes, Sussex. The Countess Isabel died shortly thereafter and was interred with her husband. The earl and countess were survived by four children: William (IV) de Warenne, who succeeded to the earldom; Isabel, who married first Robert de Lacy of Pontefract and second Gilbert de l'Aigle of Pevensey; Maud, who married first Henry, count of Eu, and second Henry de Stuteville, lord of Valmont in Normandy; and Ela, who married first Robert of Naburn and second William fitz William of Sprotborough. If many of the personal details of Earl Hamelin's life are unknown, something of his mind comes through in these words taken from a grant to Lewes: 'grounds for forgetfulness and dispute are wont to be removed by the good effect of a written deed' ('Cartulary of the Priory of St Pancras of Lewes', 1932-3, 38.45). In his heart, then, the earl was both lawyer and historian. 


@@@@@


doc= 28733


Warenne, Isabel de, 'suo jure' countess of Surrey (d. 1203), magnate, was the daughter and only surviving heir of William (III) de Warenne, earl of Surrey (c.1119-1148), and Ela (died 1174), daughter of Guillaume Talvas, count of Ponthieu. This position ensured her matches of considerable importance. In 1148, the year of her father's death, and at a critical moment in the civil war, she married William of Blois (d. 1159), the younger son of King Stephen, as part of the king's attempt to ensure control of the Warenne estates. About 1162-3, in what may have been a love match, William FitzEmpress, the brother of Henry II, sought her hand in marriage. However, Thomas Becket, archbishop of Canterbury, objected on grounds of consanguinity, earning the lasting enmity of the allegedly heart-broken William. Isabel's reaction is, unfortunately, not recorded. In April 1164, with a valuable trousseau worth $41. 10's'. 8died, she married Hamelin of Anjou (died 1202), the half-brother of Henry II, who by this marriage came to be known as Hamelin de Warenne. Isabel had one son, William (IV) de Warenne, who succeeded to the earldom and married Matilda, daughter of William Marshal (d. 1219) and widow of Hugh Bigod (died 1225). Her three daughters with Hamelin all married twice: Ela married Robert of Naburn and William fitz William (died 1219); Isabel married Robert de Lacy and Gilbert de l'Aigle, lord of Pevensey; Matilda married Henry, count of Eu (died 1190/91) and Henry de Stuteville: by the former marriage Isabel became grandmother of the powerful Alice, countess of Eu (d. 1246). 
As a countess and great heiress Isabel was involved in the secular and religious patronage of the Warenne estates. Of particular interest is her patronage during both marriages, and as a widow, of the chief English Cluniac house, Lewes Priory, Sussex, founded by her grandparents. She was present at Lambeth when a long-standing dispute between the great abbey of Cluny and her husband was resolved on 10 June 1201. She and Earl Hamelin also patronized St Mary's Abbey and West Dereham Abbey, Norfolk; St Katherine's Priory, Lincoln ('c'.1198-1202); and the chapel of St Philip and St James in their castle at Conisbrough (1180-89). In 1202-3, as a widow, she confirmed various grants to these houses, and was involved in pleas in her Yorkshire estates. Isabel died on 12 July 1203 and was buried alongside Earl Hamelin in the chapter house at Lewes, the traditional Warenne resting place. She was commemorated by the monks of Beauchief Abbey on 12 July. 


@@@@@


doc= 28734


Warenne, John de, sixth earl of Surrey (1231-1304), magnate, was the only son of William (IV) de Warenne, earl of Surrey (d. 1240), and Maud, one of five daughters and eventual coheirs of William (I) Marshal, earl of Pembroke (d. 1219), and widow of Hugh Bigod, earl of Norfolk (died 1225). Isabel de Warenne, founder of Marham Abbey, was his elder sister. 
Through his father, Warenne eventually inherited an estate that stretched across England. Centred on the barony of Lewes in Sussex, it included Stamford and Grantham in Lincolnshire; Castle Acre in Norfolk; Conisbrough, Sandal, and Wakefield in Yorkshire; and Reigate in Surrey. Through his mother, he was related to some of the most illustrious families in England and France. 
Aged only nine on his father's death in 1240, John de Warenne became a ward of Henry III, who gave Peter of Savoy custody of the family lands, but raised the boy at court. In 1246 Henry promised to marry his ward to one of Amadeus of Savoy's daughters, but the match was never made. Instead, in August of the following year Henry arranged for Warenne to marry Henry's own uterine sister, Alice, the daughter of Hugues de Lusignan, count of La Marche and lord of Lusignan and Valence, and of Isabella, daughter of Audemar, count of Angouleme and widow of Henry's father, King John. The marriage was part of Henry's policy of enriching his Lusignan relatives, and was accordingly denounced by Matthew Paris, claiming that it was beyond the bride's station. After marrying, Warenne received two extra robes at Christmas, and in 1248 received some of his father's lands. 
In the early 1250s Warenne was drawn into the court circle that revolved around the Lusignans and the Lord Edward, eight years younger than Warenne. Brother-in-law of both William de Valence and Aymer de Lusignan, Warenne took part, along with William, in the dispute between Aymer, bishop-elect of Winchester, and the archbishop of Canterbury in 1252-3. In 1252 he came of age, and obtained the emoluments of his earldom. In 1254 he was knighted along with the Lord Edward and was with the king in Gascony, where he stood surety for Henry's debts in Bordeaux. The following year Warenne went overseas with William de Valence and the earl of Gloucester. He was also one of the English barons who escorted the young king of Scots, Alexander III, and his wife, Margaret, Henry's daughter, from Edinburgh to Wark-on-Tweed, where they met with Henry, and was present when a new regency council was instituted for Alexander. He accompanied Richard of Cornwall for his coronation as king of the Romans at Aachen in 1257. Warenne's first daughter, Alice, was born in 1251, followed by Isabel in 1253, and his only son, William, in January 1256. Yet his wife died less than a month later, and, perhaps surprisingly, Warenne never remarried. 
Like many barons, Warenne changed allegiance several times during the turbulent period of reform that began in 1258, though, doubtless because of his background and upbringing, he most often supported the crown. In 1255 he had been among those barons who protested against the large number of foreigners Henry was bringing into England, but by 1257 he was a member of Edward's retinue, and was also often in the company of his own brother-in-law, William de Valence. When the reform movement coalesced at the Oxford parliament in July 1258, Warenne was one of the twelve chosen from Henry's side (who also included William and Aymer de Lusignan) to help elect a council of fifteen which was to direct the government of the realm. Though he swore to uphold the reforms, he baulked at the order to resume the lands and castles that Henry had given to his Lusignan favourites, and fled with the latter to Aymer's castle of Wolvesey. But Warenne was persuaded to abandon his resistance, and after the Lusignans had surrendered and were banished from the realm, he was one of the barons who escorted them to Dover. 
Warenne was in the political affinity that Edward gathered in late 1258 and 1259 to assert his political independence. He stood by Edward when he allied with the earl of Gloucester in March 1259, and later in October witnessed Edward's letter giving support to Gloucester's opponent, Simon de Montfort. The following spring, however, Warenne's loyalty to Edward wavered, and he seems to have been induced to return to Henry's side. At the end of March 1260, Henry authorized payment of a yearly fee to Warenne. When Edward appeared to be preparing to oppose his father in April 1260, Warenne was one of those magnates whom Henry summoned to come armed to London, where he was given lodgings inside the city while Edward was forbidden entry. Any rift between the earl and Edward was soon patched, however. After his reconciliation with his father, Edward travelled overseas to participate in tournaments, taking Warenne and other knights with him. Warenne had probably returned to England by 17 February 1261, when Henry summoned him and twenty-six other magnates to come armed to London. 
Yet, with Henry's assertion of personal power that spring, Warenne once again sided with Simon de Montfort, along with Warenne's half-brothers, Roger (III) and Hugh Bigod. They insisted on adherence to the provisions of Oxford, and appealed to Louis IX of France to arbitrate in the dispute. In December, after the resistance had collapsed, Warenne like other opponents was pardoned for his actions. He then went overseas, and returned on 10 March 1263 in the company of Henry of Almain and Henry, son of Simon de Montfort. Simon himself returned from France in April, and assembled a group of young councillors including Warenne, Henry of Almain, and Gilbert de Clare. They met at Oxford, and again insisted on the enforcement of the provisions of Oxford. Warenne was then part of Montfort's army that attacked royalists and occupied the Welsh marches, and was among those summoned in May to come to Worcester armed for war. In August, after Henry III had capitulated to the barons, Warenne was named custodian of Pevensey Castle on the advice of the nobles. As a member of the royal council he was appointed, along with Simon de Montfort, Henry of Almain, and others, to negotiate for peace with Llywelyn ab Iorwerth. At about this time, however, he again changed sides and, with Henry of Almain, Roger and Hugh Bigod, and others, once more joined Edward. On 18 September Warenne received his reward, a heritable grant of all of the Norman lands that he held or that would fall to him within his estate. On 23 September Warenne and Henry of Almain sailed to France in the company of Henry III, Edward, and the queen to meet with King Louis. During December Warenne strengthened his ties to the king and Edward. He served on the royal council, witnessed charters, and received various favours. He was with the royal army that marched on Dover Castle on 3 December, and was listed among the royalists in the letter in which Henry agreed to submit the quarrel over the provisions to Louis's judgment. On 24 December the king appointed him military warden of the counties of Surrey and Sussex. 
Warenne fought on the king's side throughout the civil war in 1264-5. Along with Roger of Leybourne he commanded Rochester Castle, which Simon de Montfort and his army besieged on 19-26 April. He fought under Edward at the battle of Lewes on 14 May but, when the tide of battle shifted and he saw the ferocity of the baronial attack, he and William de Valence, Gui de Lusignan, and Hugh Bigod fled to Pevensey Castle, and thence overseas. Chroniclers condemned him for his flight, one of them blaming Edward's capture on him. While in France the exiles implored the king of France to aid their cause, and counselled the exiled Queen Eleanor to collect an invasion force. In England the seizure of Warenne's lands was ordered, and on 20 June they were committed to Gloucester's custody, except for the castles of Reigate and Lewes. Warenne's lands in Sussex were given to the younger Simon de Montfort. 
Warenne did not return to England until the spring of 1265, as the country moved toward another military showdown. In early May Warenne landed in Pembroke with William de Valence and a force of 120 men, both cavalry and infantry, and they soon joined forces with the earl of Gloucester, who had deserted Montfort. A few weeks later Warenne and Valence sent the prior of Monmouth to meet with the king, who was then with Montfort at Hereford, and to sue for the restoration of their lands, claiming they had been seized unjustly. Henry replied that he was prepared to do justice to anyone and would give them a safe conduct, but added that they would also have to answer for certain trespasses. On 28 May Edward escaped from his captors, and soon linked up with Warenne and Valence. Under Edward's leadership they quickly captured several towns in the marches. On the night of 1-2 August Warenne and Valence accompanied Edward in his surprise attack on Kenilworth, which resulted in the capture of a considerable number of Montfort's noble commanders. Presumably, Warenne was with Edward at the battle of Evesham on 4 August, though the chronicles do not note his role. 
Several features of Warenne's formative years stand out. He plunged into the thick of political conflict, but never became a prominent leader for either side. He was most often in the company of a group of coevals related by blood or marriage -- the Lord Edward, Henry of Almain, William de Valence, and the Bigods -- whose friendship may have been more meaningful to him than political idealism. He seems to have looked to one of his kinsmen -- Edward, Henry, or William -- for political cues for changes in allegiance. Yet despite his fickle loyalties, he forged a close bond to Edward that lasted throughout his life. 
In the aftermath of the barons' wars Warenne was called upon to help restore order. He was dispatched to subdue Kent and the Cinque Ports, and brought 200 archers from the weald of Sussex to intimidate London. Warenne and Henry of Almain routed northern rebels led by the earl of Derby. He and William de Valence attacked Bury St Edmunds in an effort to reduce the turmoil and disobedience in East Anglia. In 1267 the king deputed the two men to urge Gloucester to attend parliament, which he had refused to do. In 1268 the king pardoned Warenne for any rebellion against the king and for the actions of his followers. His rewards were not particularly lavish. He received an important wardship, London houses forfeited by Hugh Neville, a promise of $100 of land out of royal escheats, 200 marks in cash, and several Jewish debts. The crown also made some gifts and pardons at his request. 
At the parliament of Northampton in June 1268 Warenne, along with Edward, Henry of Almain, William de Valence, and other magnates, vowed to go on crusade. In the end, however, Warenne remained in England. Henry III died on 20 November 1272, and at his funeral four days later Warenne, together with other magnates and prelates, swore loyalty to Edward, who was still on his way back from Palestine. Warenne acted as one of the custodians of the realm, making a new seal, appointing officials, and protecting the king's treasure and peace in Edward's name. 
Warenne was active and aggressive in asserting his privileges and property rights. In 1253 a royal court convicted him of unjustly enclosing much of the commons around Wakefield, and ordered him to tear down fences he had recently erected. In 1269 he collided with the earl of Lincoln over some pastureland. They mustered private armies, but royal justices determined that the land belonged to Lacy and averted war. A little later Warenne feared he would likewise lose another legal battle, with Alan de la Zouche. Appearing in court at Westminster, the two men exchanged increasingly insulting words until Warenne's followers drew their swords, set on the Zouches, and wounded Alan mortally. Warenne fled to his castle of Reigate, and only agreed to submit to the king's judgment after the earl of Gloucester and Henry of Almain guaranteed his safety. Warenne swore that he attacked Zouche not out of premeditated malice but out of uncontrollable anger. He was pardoned for a fine of 10,000 marks, which was initially to be paid off in instalments of 700 marks a year. The king reduced the annual payments to only 200 marks, but even then Warenne paid very little of the fine, to the consternation of some. 
In 1270 the archbishop of York scolded Warenne for levying unheard-of exactions on account of the recent civil war. In 1274 archers and other men of the earl roamed about the lands of Robert d'Aguillon harassing his men and causing general disquiet in the neighbourhood. The inquests of 1274-6 recorded in the hundred rolls reveal 'diabolical, innumerable oppressions' by his stewards and bailiffs on manors throughout England ('Rotuli hundredorum', 1.108). They prevented royal ministers from executing their duties; they levied arbitrary taxes, fines, and tolls; and they imprisoned persons who stood up to the earl or violated his rights. The earl high-handedly exercised liberties without royal warrant and illegally enclosed vast acres. The animals in his well-stocked parks posed a danger to crops in nearby fields, a complaint that Archbishop Pecham echoed in a letter to Warenne asking him to correct the situation. It is little wonder that the chancery rolls are peppered with commissions appointed to hear and determine claims of trespass against the earl's warrens, parks, lands, and animals. 
When Edward I undertook a survey of military fees in 1284, Warenne's bailiffs refused to allow the commissioners to enter the earl's liberty, and his tenants refused to respond or appear before them. This background makes understandable the legend of Warenne's defiance of the king's justices in 1279. The story relates that when he was challenged to show by what warrant he held his lands, Warenne held up a rusty sword and declared 'Here my lords, here is my warrant! My ancestors came with William the Bastard and conquered their lands with the sword, and I shall defend them with the sword against anyone who tries to usurp them. The king did not conquer and subject the land by himself, but our forefathers were partners and co-workers with him. ('Chronicle of Walter of Guisborough', 216)' Reynold de Grey of Ruthin, the justice of Chester, discovered that Warenne meant what he said about defending his lands with the sword, when in 1286-8 Warenne summoned military forces to combat Grey's alleged encroachment in his Welsh lordship. 
Warenne was a prominent military commander in Edward I's wars in Wales and Scotland. He sat on the court that rendered judgment against Llywelyn ap Gruffudd in 1276. He served in Wales in 1276-7 and again in 1282-3, when he captured the castle of Dinas Bran. Edward rewarded him with Bromfield and Yale, one of several new lordships carved out of Welsh lands. During the uprising of Rhys ap Maredudd in 1287 he led a contingent to Wales, and was summoned again in 1294 to help reduce the rebellion in north Wales led by Madog ap Llywelyn. True to his character, in 1294 he strenuously, though unsuccessfully, asserted his right to the custody of the temporalities of the bishopric of St Asaph within his Welsh territories during vacancies. 
Even during the Welsh wars Warenne was active in Scotland. In 1278 he accompanied Alexander III, king of Scots, to London and sat in parliament when Alexander swore fealty to Edward. Warenne travelled to Scotland with Edward in 1285, and in 1289-90 he served as a royal envoy in the sensitive negotiations for a marriage between Prince Edward and Margaret (the Maid of Norway), designated queen of Scots. He helped negotiate the treaty of Salisbury in the autumn of 1289, and the treaty of Birgham, which set the final terms of the marriage and of future relations between England and Scotland, in July 1290. Warenne was also one of the prince's proctors, and was one of the ambassadors sent to Margaret's father, Erik of Norway. In the discussions that followed Margaret's sudden death in September 1290, Warenne strongly supported the candidacy of his son-in-law, John Balliol, to the throne of Scotland. 
When Balliol and the Scots rebelled in 1295, Edward entrusted Warenne with the defence of English interests in Scotland, but the earl failed to live up to the confidence placed in him. He performed well at first. In 1295 Edward named Warenne keeper of the sea-coasts, one of the keepers of the northern part of England, and then keeper of Bamburgh Castle. Warenne captured Dunbar Castle on 27 April 1296, a minor battle but one proclaimed as a great victory, so demoralizing to the Scots. He then accompanied Edward on his victorious march through Scotland that summer, and on 3 September was appointed custodian of Scotland. Warenne, however, returned to the north of England, and refused to go back to Scotland when William Wallace's revolt erupted in May 1297, claiming that the weather there was bad for his health. The revolt raged out of control, and Edward ordered Warenne to return and fight. The earl slowly made his way northward and only reached Berwick in July. His grandson, Henry Percy (died 1314), whom he had sent ahead, met with some success. In August Edward tried to replace Warenne as keeper of Scotland with Brian fitz Count, but Brian claimed that he was too poor to undertake such an expensive responsibility. At the beginning of September Edward firmly enjoined Warenne to stay in Scotland to subdue the rebellion. Warenne marched to Stirling, where a narrow bridge crossed the Forth, with the Scots camped on the opposite side. Warenne tried to negotiate, but Wallace would have nothing of it. Though warned of the danger, Warenne (who was being urged on by the Scottish treasurer, Hugh of Cressingham) decided to push ahead. On the morning of 11 September he overslept, and the advance made a late start. As predicted, the Scots attacked just after a substantial portion of the English and Welsh forces had crossed the bridge and cut them down. Warenne, who had stayed on the other side, ordered that the bridge be destroyed and fled the field, leaving behind a small force to hold the castle. He raced to Berwick, and then to Prince Edward. He was in York by 27 September. 
Notwithstanding the ineptitude Warenne had shown, and although one tradition had Edward speak derisively of his character, Edward still placed his trust in the old warrior, now in his mid-sixties, and in December 1297 appointed him captain of an expedition against the Scots. Warenne had not been directly involved in the crisis of 1297, but as a royalist he swore to uphold the 'Confirmatio cartarum' in November and in January 1298 presided in Edward's name over a parliament at York which confirmed 'Magna Carta'. He then led a quick campaign in Scotland and reoccupied Berwick. When Edward returned to England from Flanders, he warmly thanked Warenne for his service in Scotland and ordered him to come to England to discuss the Scottish situation. During the summer of 1298 Warenne served in Scotland, and he fought at Falkirk on 22 July. In November Edward appointed him one of the justices inquiring into the oppressions and misdeeds of forest officials throughout the realm. He was summoned for military service in Scotland once again the following year, and in September attended the banquet celebrating Edward's second marriage. In November the king entrusted Warenne with the custody of the latter's own grandson Edward Balliol, a potential claimant to the throne of Scotland. During the Scottish campaign in 1300, Warenne was given command of the 2nd battalion and was present at the siege of Caerlaverock, and he was summoned to Scotland again in 1301, 1302, and 1303. He died on about 29 September 1304 at Kennington, Kent, where his body lay until 1 December. After Christmas he was buried before the altar of Lewes Priory church. The archbishop of Canterbury conducted the funeral ceremony, with many nobles attending. 
Warenne's children had married well, so that he left behind highly ranked grandchildren. His daughter Alice had married Henry de Percy (d. 1272) in 1268, and her son Henry fought along with Warenne in Scotland. Isabel was married in 1279 to John Balliol, who later became king of Scotland. Warenne's only son, William (V), married Joan (died 1293), daughter of Robert de Vere, earl of Oxford (died 1296). Their son John de Warenne, was born on 30 June 1286 and baptized on 7 November just weeks before William was accidentally killed in a tournament (according to one chronicler he was murdered by envious rivals). Foreshadowing his role at the elder John's funeral, the archbishop of Canterbury presided at William's entombment before the altar at Lewes. The younger John de Warenne was thus his grandfather's heir. 
High-handed and impudent in his dealings with tenants and subjects, John de Warenne seems to have been hesitant and perhaps even pusillanimous on the battlefield and in politics. A man who regularly missed the chances to take a lead in national life to which his high ancestry might appear to have entitled him, he became rather a symbol of a crude conservatism, given apt expression in the story of his defiance of the king's justices. 


@@@@@


doc= 28735


Warenne, John de, seventh earl of Surrey (1286-1347), magnate, was the son of William (V) de Warenne (died 1286) and his wife, Joan (died 1293), daughter of Robert de Vere, earl of Oxford (died 1296), and the grandson and heir of John de Warenne, earl of Surrey and Sussex (1231-1304). 
Born on 30 June 1286, John was less than a year old when his father died, and only seven when his mother, Joan, died in 1293. At the time of Joan's marriage to William de Warenne, it had been arranged that if William and Joan died leaving a minor, the custody of land and heir would fall to Joan's parents, Robert de Vere and his wife, Alice. Robert died in 1296, and it is not known where John de Warenne spent his childhood. He emerges from obscurity after his grandfather died in 1304. Through his grandfather Warenne inherited the earldom of Surrey and Sussex, as well as lands and manors in Sussex, Surrey, Lincolnshire, Yorkshire, Wiltshire, and Norfolk. Since Warenne was still a minor, his grandfather's lands were taken into royal custody and held on his behalf until he came of age, which would have been in 1307. In February 1305 Edward I sent Warenne to attend a tournament at Guildford, part of his family estate, and provided considerable funds for his upkeep. Though the Warenne property remained in the hands of royal custodians, John de Warenne lived on the estate, and for that summer Edward commanded him to provide him with forty salted and dried deer, packed in barrels. 
The parliament that met at Westminster in May 1306 marked Warenne's coming of age. On 7 April, just before parliament opened, Edward granted him his grandfather's lands, even though Warenne was not yet twenty-one, and had not performed homage. It is also likely that Warenne obtained the custody of his first cousin Edward Balliol, son of John de Balliol, sometime king of Scots, and of Isabella, daughter of John's grandfather and so John's aunt. Edward had been entrusted to John de Warenne senior in November 1299, and remained with the younger John until King Edward ordered him to deliver the boy back into royal custody in 1310. On 15 May 1306, while parliament was in session, the king brought Warenne to the royal chamber at Westminster and offered him the marriage of his granddaughter, Joan, daughter of Henri, count of Bar, and his daughter Eleanor. Warenne readily accepted, though the girl was less than half his age. Joan had arrived in England on 13 April and was escorted to Westminster with great pomp. A week after their betrothal Edward conducted a magnificent ceremony for the knighting of his eldest son, at which nearly 300 men were also knighted, including John de Warenne. The celebrations also involved the marriages of a number of barons and nobles. Warenne and Joan were married on 25 May, and about the same time Edmund Fitzalan, who had been a ward in the custody of the elder John de Warenne, was married to the younger John's sister, Alice. John and Edmund would be closely linked over the next few years. 
A new phase of Warenne's career began with the death of Edward I on 7 July 1307. He was among those earls who witnessed Edward II's charter granting the earldom of Cornwall to Piers Gaveston on 6 August. On 26 August Warenne was summoned to parliament for the first time and was summoned continually thereafter. Early in 1308 he travelled with the king to France for Edward's marriage and performance of homage to the king of France. He was also summoned to attend Edward's coronation on 25 February. 
Despite appearances of unity among the king and barons, relations were deteriorating rapidly, ushering in a lengthy period of political turmoil. John de Warenne's loyalties changed several times during the course of this conflict. However close he may have been to Edward at the very beginning of his reign, he soon opposed Gaveston. He fought, along with the earls of Arundel and Hereford, against Gaveston and his followers in a tournament at Wallingford in December 1307. Though the earls bested the favourite's side, Gaveston was declared the winner. Warenne was so annoyed that he showed Gaveston no favour thereafter. In January 1308, while he was with the king in France, he was one of the four earls who were party to an agreement at Boulogne that sought to ensure the redress of wrongs against the crown and oppressions against the people. This agreement is regarded as the first formal step in opposition to Gaveston. This opposition coalesced at the parliament in April when the nobility, including Warenne and Arundel, demanded that the king's favourite be exiled. At some point in these years Warenne became a retainer of Thomas, earl of Lancaster, the most powerful nobleman in England, and the staunchest opponent of Gaveston and Edward II. Warenne agreed to serve Lancaster with eighty men-at-arms and another earl. Perhaps this relationship had been sealed by the time of the tournament at Dunstable in late March and early April 1309, which Warenne attended in Lancaster's company along with Arundel, who may have been the other earl specified in the agreement. In June Edward forbade Lancaster, Warenne, Arundel, and three other earls to participate in any tournaments or adventures. 
Shortly afterwards, however, Gaveston returned from exile, and Warenne moved over to the king. The earl of Lincoln, Henry de Lacy, was instrumental in persuading Warenne to accept Gaveston's return, and according to one chronicler Warenne became the latter's friend and helper. Warenne was with Edward and Gaveston in October at York, when all the other earls refused to attend a secret parliament that Edward summoned. In February 1310 Edward appointed him to help keep the peace in London during a parliament that other nobles would only attend in arms because of their fears about Gaveston. So close was he to Edward that he was the only earl besides the earl of Oxford who was not an ordainer in the following year. In response to a summons in August 1310 to fight against the Scots, Warenne travelled north with Edward, but he and Gloucester were the only earls willing to serve with Edward in Gaveston's company. In February 1311 the two earls rode through the forest of Selkirk, and received the foresters and others there into the king's peace. Warenne remained in Scotland through the spring and summer with a force of knights and men-at-arms. Warenne thus maintained his ties to Edward and Gaveston throughout 1310 and 1311. 
Edward generously repaid Warenne's steadfastness. He granted favours to individuals at Warenne's request and a number of gifts to Warenne himself, including life grants of two Northamptonshire manors. In June 1310, moreover, Warenne received a life grant of the castle, forest, and honour of High Peak for an annual rent of just over 437 marks. The rent was to be paid in two instalments, but in 1310 Edward remitted the bulk of the rent, and the following year remitted payment for life. Although the honour and lands were subsequently resumed on several occasions, Warenne always recovered them. 
The murder of Gaveston in 1312 strained Warenne's relationship with the king. Archbishop Winchelsey persuaded Warenne to join in the pursuit of Gaveston, who had returned to England unauthorized after parliament banished him from the realm in 1311. With the earl of Pembroke, Warenne besieged Gaveston in Scarborough Castle, forcing him to surrender on 19 May. The earls of Warwick and Lancaster captured Gaveston as Pembroke was escorting him to London, and he was summarily executed on 19 June. Gaveston's slaying enraged Edward and divided the baronage. Pembroke and Warenne stayed loyal to Edward. In August the king appointed Warenne keeper of the peace in Sussex. The following year, in both January and September, Edward issued orders forbidding Warenne to participate in tournaments, the latter involving Lancaster, Arundel, and three other earls. Then in June 1314, along with Lancaster, Arundel, and others, Warenne declined to participate in the ill-fated campaign in Scotland that ended at Bannockburn. 
Warenne may have wavered in support of Edward at this point because his domestic difficulties put an intense strain on all of his relationships. By 1313 it was clear that Warenne's marriage had proved unhappy and childless. The earliest official indication of problems came in 1309, when Edward gave the earl permission to make whomsoever he pleased his heir, as long as he did not disinherit any children he might have with Joan. Then, in the spring of 1313, Edward dispatched his yeoman William Aune to take Joan from Warenne's castle of Conisbrough and bring her to the king, and by June she was living in the Tower of London, supported by the king. Warenne was now living with his mistress, Maud Nereford, and as a result was threatened with excommunication in May. Though Edward initially stepped in to prevent it, the bishop of Chichester finally issued the sentence. There ensued a lengthy legal battle involving Warenne, the church, the king, and some of the nobility. Warenne wanted to dissolve his marriage to Joan so that he could marry Maud and make their two boys his legitimate heirs. He claimed that he had been pressured into marrying Joan against his will, and that they were within the prohibited degrees of kinship. Maud brought her own suit claiming that he had first contracted to marry her. Further disapproval of their relations was registered by a church council as well as by a council of nobles, who included Thomas of Lancaster. The case dragged on for another two years, as Warenne sought to find a friendly ecclesiastical forum, but he could not get satisfaction. In 1316 he promised to pay Joan $200 a year while the suit was in progress. In addition, he bound himself to provide Joan with lands worth 740 marks once their marriage was dissolved. 
As the likelihood that Warenne would obtain an annulment faded, he set out on a different course. In a series of transactions in the summer of 1316, he surrendered the bulk of his family lands to the king, who then regranted them to Warenne for life. The regrants also specified that some of his lands would descend after his death first to John, son of Maud Nereford, then to his brother Thomas if this John died without heirs, and finally to the heirs general of Warenne if both sons died without heirs. Warenne stipulated that after his death, two of his more valuable properties, Stanford and Grantham, were to revert to the king, a clear benefit to the crown for engineering Warenne's settlement. In this manner, Warenne provided a legacy for his children but at great cost to the family patrimony. He did not give up hope for a dissolution of his marriage, and seems to have enlisted the assistance of the earl of Pembroke in presenting a petition to the pope seeking an annulment. In the meantime, in August 1316, Joan had departed England for France. 
Warenne soon incurred even greater costs. He steadfastly stuck to his support for Edward throughout the political crises of the middle years of Edward's reign. In February 1317 Edward summoned a small group of noblemen, including Warenne, to a colloquium at Clarendon. The topic was not specified, but they may have discussed the problems in Scotland as well as an attack on Lancaster. Warenne hesitated to carry out a direct assault, but on 9 May abducted Alice de Lacy, Lancaster's wife, from Canford Castle and took her to his own castle of Reigate. He did so, it was claimed, not for purposes of adultery but in order to humiliate Lancaster. Warenne may have acted in retaliation for Lancaster's opposition to his plan to dissolve his marriage, or for their long-standing political rivalry, or at the behest of Edward and the courtiers. Whatever the reason, Warenne soon discovered that he had bitten off more than he could chew. Lancaster was enraged, and in October and November launched a series of raids on those of Warenne's lands in Yorkshire that bordered his own estates. Edward tried to halt the fighting, but Lancaster persisted. He even ejected Maud Nereford from her property. In 1318 Edward, Lancaster, and other nobles tried to patch up their quarrels through a series of negotiations that culminated in the treaty of Leake on 9 August. Lancaster's war with Warenne, however, was regarded as a private matter and was specifically excluded from the negotiations, and in June 1318 Lancaster attacked Warenne's lordship of Bromfield and Yale in north Wales. Warenne was forced to come to terms with Lancaster on his own, and appears to have been coerced into a punishing settlement. He agreed to a disadvantageous exchange of lands, in which he gave up the Yorkshire and Welsh portions of his estate as well as lands in Norfolk for his life, in return for lands in Somerset, Dorset, and Wiltshire. In addition, he acknowledged that he owed Lancaster $50,000, though none of it was ever collected. 
Not surprisingly, Warenne adhered to the king through most of the troubles that ensued over the next few years, though his loyalty sometimes wavered. He was ordered to attend a muster in 1319 at Newcastle and went to Scotland, but the campaign achieved little. In 1321 the barons, led by the lords of the Welsh marches, once again united in opposition to royal favourites, this time the Despensers, father and son. The baronial coalition pressured Warenne, Arundel, and Pembroke into joining them to banish the Despensers at a parliament in August. Edward later pardoned Warenne for his actions against the Despensers between March and August. In October, however, Edward took the offensive, beginning with the siege of Leeds Castle in Kent, at which Warenne was present. He also marched west with Edward's army pursuing the marchers early in 1322. Warenne, Arundel, Pembroke, and Richmond were appointed to negotiate with Roger Mortimer of Wigmore on 17 January, an action that resulted in Mortimer's capture. Edward then turned northward to attack Lancaster. In March a council of magnates, including Warenne and Arundel, declared the rebels to be traitors and commissioned Warenne and Edmund, earl of Kent, to arrest Lancaster. Once Lancaster had been captured, Edward named Warenne as one of the judges at the trial that condemned him to death. Afterwards Warenne sat in the parliament at York that revoked the ordinances of 1311, participated in the campaign in Scotland that summer, and was in Scotland again in February 1323. 
In 1325 Warenne was named captain of the expedition to Aquitaine. Abroad for a year, he returned in 1326 and was appointed as a captain of the array in the north in May and again in July. That May, Edward restored some of the lands that Lancaster had coerced from him. Yet, despite his support of Edward II, Warenne surrendered one of his manors to the elder Despenser to save himself from destruction. Time was now running out for the Despensers and Edward. Warenne adroitly shifted his allegiance to Queen Isabella after she landed in England in September 1326, and thereby avoided the fate of his brother-in-law, Edmund Fitzalan, who was executed in the fury that accompanied the downfall of Edward II. Warenne, in fact, was a member of the delegation that approached Edward in captivity in January 1327 and implored him to abdicate. He attended Edward III's coronation, and was a member of the regency council named to counsel and oversee the young king. 
Warenne's domestic troubles seem to have subsided temporarily in these years. It was said that when he returned from Aquitaine in 1326, his wife, Joan, accompanied him, and in February 1327 he received protection to travel abroad with her. She had spent much of her time with Queen Isabella, and was in France with her and the young Prince Edward before their invasion. Furthermore, the upheaval in landholding that attended the rebellions in 1322 and 1326 led to the revision of the terms of Warenne's property settlement, in which he abandoned his effort to make his sons with Maud Nereford his heirs. Instead they entered the order of the hospital of St John of Jerusalem. Warenne's brother-in-law, Edmund Fitzalan, supported this change in his plans. Edward III settled some lands on Joan for her life in recognition of her service to his mother, Isabella, and granted her some of the goods forfeited by Fitzalan. Warenne finally recovered possession of his Yorkshire castles and lands from Henry of Lancaster in 1328, in return for a payment of 2000 marks. 
Warenne had survived personal and political turmoil and remained an important figure at the royal court. Although chroniclers condemned the fickleness of the barons throughout Edward II's reign, Warenne's career shows why most nobles were uncertain in their loyalties and unwilling to cling unwaveringly to a particular position. The rampant factionalism that beset the court and country made steadfastness dangerous and trimming a rational act. Warenne never became a political figure as imposing as Lancaster, but he was consistently at the centre of political action. 
For Edward III, Warenne proved to be a faithful servant in a variety of capacities. Edward named him an overseer of the keepers of the peace in Oxfordshire in 1327, and between 1327 and 1332 appointed him to several judicial commissions. In the spring of 1327 Edward summoned him to perform military service in Scotland, and appointed him to negotiate with the Scots in November. Like most of the baronage Warenne was actively engaged in the Scottish wars for the next few years. He thus served in Scotland in 1330, and in 1333 was present at the siege of Berwick and battle of Halidon Hill. When rumours of unrest in the Welsh marches reached the king that year, he ordered Warenne and others to take steps to keep order. For the campaign of 1334-5 in Scotland, Warenne sent a sizeable contingent but did not personally attend, though he was present at Newcastle on 12 June 1334 when his cousin Edward Balliol granted much of Scotland south of Forth to Edward III. He was with Balliol in the campaign of 1335. In 1336 he was named one of the defenders of the realm while the king was in Scotland. Warenne served Edward in the next few years by sitting on commissions, laying before the people of Surrey the decisions of the council (1337), and overseeing the array in some southern counties (1338). In 1339 he was acting sheriff of Surrey and Sussex. When Edward went overseas in 1338, and again in 1340, he named his eldest son, Edward, and Warenne as keepers of the realm in his absence. In 1345 Warenne was one of the councillors appointed to advise the regent, Edward's second son, Lionel. 
Edward III rewarded Warenne amply for his service, especially at Halidon Hill. In 1333 he pardoned all debts owed by Warenne or his ancestors, and granted that his executors would have free administration of his goods after he died. In addition, Warenne's cousin and former ward, Edward Balliol, granted Warenne the earldom of Strathearn after Earl Malise had forfeited it. Thereafter, Warenne styled himself earl of Surrey and Sussex and earl of Strathearn. Edward III also promised to provide Warenne with 2000 marks out of the proceeds of wardships and escheats. 
Perhaps as a result of his experiences under Edward II, Warenne managed to steer his way through the political undercurrents of the early years of Edward III's reign without getting deeply involved in the intrigue. He witnessed royal charters fairly consistently until his death, and played a role in government as a royal councillor. In 1330 the king granted him a manor and more than $230 in rents out of the properties forfeited by the earl of Kent, in return for his agreement to remain with the king. This agreement might indicate that he had the blessing of Roger Mortimer, who then controlled the government, but he was unscathed by Mortimer's fall later in the year. In the financial and political crisis of 1340 he stood up in parliament to challenge the presence of royal officials, on the grounds that it was the peers of the realm who should give him aid and counsel. The only other possible indication of political resistance came in 1342, when Edward summoned Warenne to his campaign in Brittany. Warenne did not participate. Whether this was out of rebelliousness, or age -- Warenne was now fifty-six -- cannot be determined, but there were no repercussions. The same year he was excused from attending a tournament at Dunstable because of age and infirmity. 
Warenne's political steadfastness did not spill over into his private life, and domestic problems again haunted the last years of his life. Joan was in his company and regarded as his wife in 1331 and 1337, but went overseas in 1337 with her entire household. By this time Warenne may have been thinking once again of having his marriage dissolved. The bishop of Winchester wrote to him in 1344 charging him to hold Joan in marital affection, and to honour the dispensation that had been granted for his marriage. Joan went abroad yet again the following year, and the king acted at that time to guarantee her right to her lands in the face of any attempt by Warenne to regain them for himself. By 1345 Warenne was confessing that he had had an affair with Joan's aunt Mary of Woodstock (1278-c.1332), daughter of Edward I, before he married Joan. Whatever the truth of the claim, it did not result in a dissolution of his marriage to Joan. What probably drove him to these lengths was the prospect of another marriage. Despite his age, he was living with another mistress, Isabella Holland, the daughter of Sir Robert Holland, long Thomas of Lancaster's leading retainer, and subsequently notorious for betraying his lord in 1322; in his will Warenne refers to Isabel as 'my companion'. He undertook a series of land transactions designed to undo his previous settlements and to make provision for Isabella and any potential heirs he might have with her. Initially the king acquiesced, until Richard (II) Fitzalan, earl of Arundel, son of Warenne's brother-in-law Edmund Fitzalan, and thus Warenne's nephew, pointed out that the settlement would disinherit him since he was the heir general to Warenne's lands. The king agreed and nullified the new settlements. How disappointed Warenne might have been cannot be gauged, but in his will, dated 24 June 1347, just before his death, he left various gifts to Isabella and to various of his bastard children, and nothing to Joan. Despite his personal behaviour, Warenne demonstrated a reasonable degree of piety. He endowed a chantry, gave lands to monastic houses, entered the confraternity of Durham Priory, and possessed a 'Bible' in French. 
Warenne was becoming quite feeble, and in July 1346 Edward excused him from attending parliament or performing other services because of his frailty. He died without a legitimate heir between 28 and 30 June 1347 at his castle of Conisbrough, and was subsequently buried in Lewes Priory church. He was sixty-one. Joan was abroad when he died and lived for another fourteen years. Warenne left behind several illegitimate children, including at least three boys and three girls. His heir was Richard (II) Fitzalan, who obtained Warenne's estate but did not adopt the title of earl of Surrey until Joan died in 1361. 
John de Warenne did not leave behind an impressive political or personal legacy. He was directly involved in most of the important political activity that occurred in England during his lifetime, but he was never a leader. Though he did not seem to act on high moral or political principles, he did display important chivalric qualities such as steadfastness, loyalty, and prowess. Yet his desire to provide for the descent of his lands, and his failure to sustain his marriage, undermined his actions and cost him dearly. 


@@@@@


doc= 28736


Warenne, William (I) de, first earl of Surrey (d. 1088), magnate, was among the inner circle of Norman lords of Duke William's generation whose campaigns over some forty years consolidated the duchy and conquered England. 
William's father, Rodulf or Ralph de Warenne (died in or after 1074), was a minor Norman magnate with lands near Rouen and in the Pays de Caux, and William's earlier ancestry has long been debated. In the twelfth century the Warennes were believed to be descended from a niece of Gunnor, the wife of Duke Richard (I) of Normandy (died 996) and the person seen as the linchpin of the wider ducal kin. He was certainly related in some way to them, since Anselm, archbishop of Canterbury, later prohibited the proposed marriage of his son William (II) de Warenne to a bastard daughter of Henry I on the grounds of their blood relationship. The most likely interpretation of the fragmentary evidence is that either William (I)'s mother or his paternal grandmother was Duchess Gunnor's niece Beatrice. Probably in his father's time the family adopted a surname from the village of Varenne, on the river of that name inland from Dieppe. 
William owed his eventual standing more to his own capabilities than to family connections or inherited wealth. By the mid 1050s, though still young, he was capable and experienced enough to be given joint command of a Norman army. His first recorded military action, during a period in which the Normans were constantly at war, was in the Mortemer campaign of 1054, as one of the leaders of the army which defeated the French. His reward was a swathe of lands which had belonged to his disgraced kinsman Roger (I) de Mortimer. Although some of the lands were soon restored to the Mortimers, William kept the important castles at Mortemer and Bellencombre. The latter, less than a day's ride from Varenne, became the capital of the Warenne estates in Normandy. At almost the same time he was further rewarded with lands confiscated in 1053 from William, count of Arques. The continuing confidence with which the duke regarded him kept William at the forefront of Norman affairs over the next two decades, and he was among those consulted when the expedition to England in 1066 was planned. 
William de Warenne is among the handful of Normans known for certain to have fought at Hastings, and in 1067 was one of four men left in charge in England when the king returned to Normandy. His role as a military commander continued to be important for another twenty years, suggesting a physical constitution as robust as the king's. In 1075 he and Richard de Clare were delegated to deal with the rebellion of Earl Ralph de Gael of East Anglia. The two first summoned the earl to attend the king's court to answer for an act of defiance, then mustered an army which defeated the rebels at Fawdon in south Cambridgeshire, mutilating their prisoners after the battle. Ralph retreated to Norwich, where Warenne and Clare began a siege which lasted three months but failed to prevent the earl's escape by boat. In the early 1080s William campaigned with the king's forces in Maine. 
William de Warenne's rewards in England were very large, elevating him into the first rank of the magnates. By 1086 he was the fourth richest tenant-in-chief, surpassed only by the king's half-brothers and his long-standing comrade and kinsman Roger de Montgomery. Such riches were accumulated over the course of the reign. The earliest acquisitions were presumably in Sussex, where he held the rape of Lewes, one of the five territories into which the shire was divided. The town of Lewes, a flourishing port on a tidal estuary, was divided between William and the king. One or the other built a castle there which became the capital of the Warenne lands in England. The original castle may have lain south of the town, where William is known to have reconstructed the church of St Pancras, and where a large mound may represent the motte. If that was the first site, it was abandoned in the 1070s when Warenne founded a priory there around the existing church. He would then have built the present castle north of the town, remarkable for having two mottes, one at each end of the bailey. 
The rape of Lewes as first created for William de Warenne may have stretched from the River Adur on the west to the River Ouse on the east, and indeed beyond the Ouse at its northern extremity. Before 1073, however, the rapes were reorganized. A new rape west of Lewes was created for William (I) de Briouze, to whom Warenne surrendered seventeen manors. On the east, twenty-eight manors in four hundreds beyond the Ouse were transferred to the count of Mortain's rape of Pevensey. In compensation for those losses Warenne received lands in East Anglia. 
William's second acquisition may have been the large estate of Conisbrough in Yorkshire, an important manor which occupied the gap between the marshes at the head of the Humber estuary and the Pennine foothills, and commanded the fords where the main road north crossed the River Don. Conisbrough was an old royal manor which had belonged to Earl Harold, and it seems likely that it was transferred to Warenne during the campaign against the English rebels at York in 1068. 
Far more important than Conisbrough, and overshadowing even the rape of Lewes in 1086, were William's lands in eastern England. In Norfolk, especially the west of the county, he was the largest landowner in a large and wealthy shire, and his manors there were complemented by others which spilled over the county boundary and through the western side of Suffolk and Essex as far as the Thames estuary and reached into south-east Cambridgeshire. The centre was at Castle Acre, where Warenne built not a castle but a large stone manor house (it was fortified only in the twelfth century). The estates in those four eastern shires were clearly acquired in stages. Some had belonged to Earl Harold and might have been handed over soon after 1066. Another group, before the conquest the possessions of a thegn called Toki, had fallen first to Warenne's Flemish brother-in-law Frederic, and after Frederic's death in 1070 came to William through his wife. He may not have controlled them directly until she died in 1085. Others seem to have been given to him in the aftermath of the 1075 rebellion, while the series of exchanges for parts of the original rape of Lewes may still have been going on in the 1080s. 
In 1086 the eastern shires accounted for half the value of Warenne's estate (more than half of that being in Norfolk), and Sussex two fifths. The other tenth, which included Conisbrough, was scattered about the country in little parcels: a single manor in Hampshire, another in Buckinghamshire, Kimbolton and its outliers in Huntingdonshire and Bedfordshire, a couple of estates on the Thames near Wallingford, two small manors in south Lincolnshire, some fishermen in Wisbech. The rationale for their dispersal is not easy to discern, and it may be wrong to look for any single all-inclusive purpose. Several besides Conisbrough had belonged to Earl Harold, including Kimbolton and the Lincolnshire manors; indeed outside Wessex only Warenne and Hugh d'Avranches, earl of Chester, were given Harold's property. At least one of the manors furthest from William's bases in Sussex and Norfolk had strategic importance: his Hampshire property was Fratton on Portsea Island, watching the entrance to Portsmouth harbour. 
William's dispositions of his landed estate suggest that he was a good organizer greedy for further spoils. Almost everywhere except Sussex he pushed at the limits of what he had been given, testing what more he could either claim legitimately, or simply take without opposition. Some of his extra acquisitions were peaceful enough, like the large manor of Whitchurch in Shropshire, which his distant cousin Roger de Montgomery gave him. But others were not. In Norfolk especially he asserted his lordship over freemen who might or might not have been assigned to him, leading to the many counterclaims and disputes recorded in 'Domesday Book'. He was active even in shires where he was far less powerful. In Essex he stole land from the bishop of Durham and the abbot of Ely, and in Sussex from the nuns of Wilton; in Yorkshire he was at loggerheads with several of his neighbours about what properties were sokelands of Conisbrough; in Bedfordshire he won over the English thegn Augi from the Norman lord to whom the king had assigned him, and when Augi died took control of land which ought perhaps have gone to Augi's lord's successor; in Huntingdonshire in 1086 he staked some sort of a claim to a manor held by Hugh de Bolbec. 
Warenne was wealthy enough not to need to concentrate his resources in just one or two parts of the country, and the pattern of demesne estates which he created after granting others to his men had the deliberate effect of accentuating its dispersal and shifting the balance towards Sussex rather than Norfolk. Whereas the ratios of manorial values in 1086 over the honour as a whole, between eastern England, Sussex, and the rest, were 49:41:10, what William chose to retain in his own hands was balanced 33:48:20. In Sussex he kept only four manors, but far and away the four largest, whereas in Norfolk he was not so choosy. Elsewhere he retained under his direct control one manor in each of Buckinghamshire and Oxfordshire, the core of Kimbolton, and all of Conisbrough. 
William's options may have been constrained by a lack of close lieutenants to whom he was willing to give a great deal of land and authority. Despite his gains in Normandy in the 1050s his lands there were not very extensive, and he did not succeed to any part of his paternal inheritance until at least the mid-1070s. His father was still alive in 1074 and there was an older brother, Rodulf or Ralph, who inherited probably the greater part of their father's estates. Some of William's tenants in England, including the ancestors of the families of Cailly, Chesney, Grandcourt, Pierrepont, Rosay, and Wancy, can be traced back to fiefs around his Norman capital of Bellencombre, but they were only a small minority of the fifty or more men to whom William gave lands. Some others were perhaps his Norman kinsmen: Tezelin and Lambert, for instance, had unusual forenames which are known to have been used in other branches of Beatrice's family. Only a handful of his leading men held in both the eastern counties and the rape of Lewes, and the wealth which William had at his disposal was widely distributed. 
Warenne's vigour in running his estates is evident from improvements in their economic condition. It seems that he took an interest in running his manors not just efficiently but aggressively, and that he was good at choosing capable reeves and bailiffs. Conisbrough was well stocked with ploughteams and intensively cultivated by Yorkshire standards, and, almost uniquely in a county devastated by warfare, more than doubled in value between 1066 and 1086. Values on the four demesne manors in Sussex also went up sharply after William acquired them, and at Castle Acre he more than tripled the size of his sheep flock. 
Despite an evil reputation at Ely, where it was later believed, or at any rate hoped, that Warenne's departing soul had been claimed by demons, William was at least conventionally pious. The story of the foundation of Lewes Priory by William and his wife, Gundrada de Warenne (d. 1085), was preserved there only in much later traditions, but in essence it is believable. Probably at an early stage William consulted Archbishop Lanfranc of Canterbury. Later, William and Gundrada went on pilgrimage to Rome, but reached no further than the great Burgundian abbey of Cluny because of the war in Italy between the pope and the emperor. Their journey probably took place within the period 1081-3 rather than at the date of 1077 assigned to it elsewhere. At Cluny the couple were received into the fellowship of the monks and resolved to found an English priory following the rule of Cluny. After difficulties and one false start, it was accomplished under a prior and three monks sent from Cluny. The monastery was established around the existing church of St Pancras in the suburbs of Lewes, it was well endowed, and an ambitious building programme was put in train. Lewes was the first house of Cluniac monks in England and the precursor of several others, and the importance of the Warennes' role in their arrival needs to be stressed. 
William clearly regarded Lewes Priory as his spiritual home, and had both Gundrada and himself buried there. It was also a focus for the spiritual aspirations of his men, at least one of whom entered the priory as a monk and donated the manor which he had held as William's tenant. When he died, William was planning to establish a second priory at Castle Acre, a project brought to fruition by his son William (II). 
In the turmoil which enveloped England after the death of William the Conqueror in September 1087, William de Warenne stood firm by William Rufus. His reward, some time between Christmas 1087 and the end of March 1088, was the titular earldom of Surrey and very probably three valuable Surrey manors, Reigate, Dorking, and Shere. Warenne fought for the king during the invasion of England by supporters of Robert Curthose and was wounded by an arrow during the siege of Pevensey Castle in spring 1088. He was carried to Lewes and died there of his wounds on 24 June. 
William's first wife was the Flemish noblewoman Gundrada, whom he married 'c'.1066. They had at least three children and she died in childbirth in 1085. He then married a sister, name unknown, of Richard Gouet, a landowner in the Perche region. Her attempt to make restitution for the damage which he had inflicted upon Ely Abbey by a gift of 100 shillings a few days after his death was refused by the monks. William's elder son, William (II), succeeded him in England and Normandy; his younger son Reynold inherited Gundrada's Flemish lands. A nephew, Roger, son of Erneis, was first a knight in the household of Earl Hugh of Chester and later a monk of St Evroult, where he told the historian Orderic Vitalis much about the family. 
William's remains were reburied in a leaden chest at Lewes Priory during rebuilding there 'c'.1145, from where they were disinterred during railway construction in 1845. In 1847 they were placed alongside Gundrada's remains in the parish church of St John, Southover, in Lewes, where they still rest. 


@@@@@


doc= 28737


Warenne, William (II) de, second earl of Surrey (d. 1138), magnate, the eldest son of William (I) de Warenne (d. 1088) and Gundrada de Warenne (d. 1085), sister of Gerbod the Fleming, earl of Chester, succeeded to the newly created earldom of Surrey on his father's death on 24 June 1088. He usually styled himself 'Willelmus comes de Warenna' and less often 'Willelmus de Warenna comes Sudreie' (or 'Surregie', 'Suthreie', or 'Sudreie'). He was a great-great-nephew of the Duchess Gunnor and thus a kinsman of the Norman kings. From his father he inherited one of the largest of all 'Domesday' estates, with lands worth about $1165 a year spread across thirteen counties, concentrated in Sussex (the rape of Lewes), Norfolk (including Castle Acre), and Yorkshire (Conisbrough). He was a benefactor of the great Cluniac priory of St Pancras, Lewes, which his parents had founded about 1077, and also patronized the abbeys of St Evroult and St Amand and the priories of Castle Acre, Longueville, Wymondham, Pontefract, and Bellencombre. The Hyde chronicler reports that whereas William (II) de Warenne received his father's lands in England, his younger brother, Reginald, received the maternal lands in Flanders. The chronicler says nothing of the paternal lands in Upper Normandy, centring on the castles of Mortemer-sur-Eaulne and Bellencombre in the Pays de Caux, but they probably went to Reginald as well, and when Reginald died after 1106 passed to Earl William. 
In 1118 or 1119 Earl William, probably in his later forties, married Isabel de Vermandois (died 1147), granddaughter of Henri I of France and widow of the Beaumont magnate Robert, count of Meulan (died 1118); the offspring of that marriage were the twins Waleran, count of Meulan, and Robert, earl of Leicester, and five or six other children. She and Earl William had five children, including William (III) de Warenne, earl of Surrey (c.1119-1148), and Reginald de Warenne (1121x6-1178/9). Through their daughter Ada, countess of Northumberland (c.1123-1178), Isabel and Earl William were the grandparents of Malcolm IV and William the Lion, kings of Scotland. Henry of Huntingdon reports that Isabel's first husband, Robert, count of Meulan, had suffered the humiliation of having his wife carried off by 'a certain earl'. The circumstances and details of this scandalous event cannot be discerned, but it was not long after Count Robert's death in June 1118 that Isabel married Earl William. 
Unlike his father William (I) de Warenne, a veteran of Hastings and a staunch royalist, Earl William was seldom at the court of William Rufus (he attested only one or possibly two of the king's surviving charters) and showed little respect for Henry I during his initial years. The trouble may have begun when, some time in the 1090s, Earl William tried unsuccessfully to win the hand of Matilda, the eldest daughter of King Malcolm and Queen Margaret of Scotland, who was later to marry Henry I. According to the late testimony of Master Wace, Earl William ridiculed the young Henry for his pedantic approach to the joyous aristocratic pastime of hunting, mocking him with the nickname 'Stagfoot' for having examined the sport so studiously that he could tell the number of tines in a stag's antlers simply by examining his footprint. At some point after his accession in 1100 Henry tried to win Earl William's support by offering him one of his bastard daughters in marriage, but Archbishop Anselm blocked the project on grounds of consanguinity. When Robert Curthose, duke of Normandy, invaded England on 20 July 1101, Earl William and many other barons joined the ducal side, but Henry bought off Duke Robert with an annuity of 3000 marks, and Earl William was left stranded. For the violation of his homage to the king, and perhaps as a punishment for acts of violence by his men in Norfolk, he was disseised of his English estates and forced into exile. 
Earl William complained to Robert Curthose in Normandy of being deprived of his vast English estates, and recovered them when the duke crossed impulsively to England in 1103, interceded with Henry on the earl's behalf, and agreed to relinquish the annuity. Thenceforth Earl William gradually regained the king's confidence and became a trusted member of his 'familia'. At the climactic battle of Tinchebrai in September 1106 he commanded a division of the victorious royal army, and from then until Henry's death in 1135 he is known to have been in the king's company on each of the royal sojourns in Normandy and England. He attended the royal council at Nottingham on 17 October 1109 and was a surety for the king in his treaty of Dover with Robert, count of Flanders, on 17 May 1110. In 1111 he served as a judge in the Norman ducal court. In 1119, on the eve of Henry's crucial battle against Louis VI at Bremule, with many Norman lords in rebellion, Earl William is said to have told the king, 'There is nobody who can persuade me to treason... I and my kinsmen here and now place ourselves in mortal opposition to the king of France and are totally faithful to you.' ('Liber monasterii de Hyda', 316-7). With Earl William's force in the vanguard, Henry's army won a decisive victory. 
Henry had taken steps to cement (or reward) Earl William's loyalty by adding to his holdings in England and Normandy. William received ('c'.1106-21) the great royal manor of Wakefield in Yorkshire, possibly relinquishing lands in Huntingdonshire, Bedfordshire, and Cambridgeshire in partial exchange for it. Henry also ceded to Earl William the castlery of St Saens shortly after its lord, Elias de St Saens, fled Normandy, 'c'.1110, with Henry's nephew and adversary, William Clito. St Saens, three miles up the River Varenne from Bellencombre, constituted a valuable addition to Earl William's estates in Upper Normandy and bound him even more closely to the royal cause. Should Clito ever regain Normandy from Henry I, Clito's friend and guardian Elias would surely recover St Saens. (His family had recovered the castlery by 1150.) 
Thus, after his initial false step, William de Warenne became the most ardent of royalists. He attested no fewer than sixty-nine of Henry's charters, and in the reign's one surviving pipe roll (1130) he is recorded as receiving the third highest geld exemption of any English magnate ($104 8's'. 11died) -- reflecting both the extent of his landed wealth and the warmth of the king's favour. He was at Henry's deathbed at Lyons-la-Foret in 1135 and was one of five 'comites' who escorted his corpse to Rouen for embalming. Afterwards the Norman magnates appointed Earl William governor of Rouen and the Pays de Caux. He was back in England in the spring of 1136 at Stephen's Easter court at Westminster (22 March) and at Oxford shortly afterwards, where he attested Stephen's charter of liberties for the church. His last attestations of royal charters occurred on Stephen's expedition against Exeter in mid-1136, but there is good reason to believe that he was alive in 1137. He probably died on 11 May 1138, and was buried with his parents in Lewes Priory. 


@@@@@


doc= 28738


Warenne, William (III) de, third earl of Surrey (c.1119-1148), magnate and crusader, was the eldest of the five children of William (II) de Warenne (d. 1138) and Isabel de Vermandois (died 1147). His younger siblings included Ada, later countess of Huntingdon and Northumberland, and Reginald de Warenne. It was through his mother that he made the two most important family connections in his life: his eldest half-brother, Waleran, count of Meulan, the elder of the well-known Beaumont twins, and his distant cousin, Louis VII of France. Warenne married Ela, the daughter of Guillaume Talvas, count of Ponthieu, and Ela, daughter of Odo Borel, duke of Burgundy. She died on 4 October 1174. Their only child and Warenne's heir was a daughter, Isabel de Warenne (d. 1203), who married William, son of King Stephen, and after his death, Hamelin, half-brother of King Henry II. 
Between 1130 and 1138 Warenne appeared with his brother Ralph as co-grantor or witness in several of their father's charters, but his first known independent action was one which presaged a life of military misfortune. He was among those 'hot-headed youths' (as Orderic Vitalis called them) who deserted King Stephen during his unsuccessful attempt to take Normandy in 1137. Probably in 1138 Warenne's father died, and he succeeded as earl of Surrey, though he consistently styled himself as Earl Warenne. In the summer of 1138 he or his father witnessed and possibly acted as guarantor for Roger, earl of Warwick, in an important charter in which Roger, husband of William (III)'s sister Gundreda, settled marriage arrangements between Roger's daughter and the chamberlain Geoffrey of Clinton. By the end of the year he had joined Waleran in Normandy and acted along with him as a witness to an agreement made in Rouen on 18 December. The brothers proceeded to their kinsman King Louis's court on an embassy from Stephen. By no later than 1139 Warenne had returned to England, probably with Waleran, most likely to attend his sister Ada's marriage to Henry, son of King David of Scotland. At that time he began his attendance at Stephen's court, where he became a regular witness to royal charters (at least a dozen between then and 1147) and began a career of unbroken, if not always distinguished, service to that troubled monarch. 
The low point in Warenne's service to Stephen was at the battle of Lincoln on 2 February 1141, at which he and Waleran were among those who panicked and ran when they faced the first charge of Earl Robert of Gloucester's army, leaving the king to be captured. That it was panic rather than treachery that caused the flight could be seen by their support of Queen Matilda during Stephen's captivity and Warenne's appearance at the king's court after his release. Warenne redeemed himself on 14 September of that year and achieved the brightest moment of his military career when he led the Flemish mercenaries (usually under the command of William of Ypres) in taking Robert of Gloucester prisoner at Stockbridge. His activities in the following years included an appearance at Stephen's Christmas court, held at Canterbury, and an expedition against the town of St Albans, which he and three of the king's other captains were kept from burning by the payment of a rich bribe by Abbot Geoffrey of St Albans. 
The next word of Warenne's military activity came in January 1144, during the king's last effort to win Normandy from Geoffrey of Anjou. When the city of Rouen surrendered to Geoffrey's forces, Stephen's men refused to give up the royal castle, and, led by Warenne's mercenaries, they held out for another three months before surrendering the castle of Neufchatel-en-Bray. A double irony of this event is that Earl William was not identified specifically as having been present at this exercise in gallant futility, and that one of the leaders to whom his men surrendered was Count Waleran, that half-brother who had most guided his early career and who had been forced by then to take the Angevin side to defend his Norman holdings. If Warenne was indeed in Normandy at some time during the year, he left for England, where he was present on two occasions at the royal court during 1144 and 1145. 
On 24 March, Palm Sunday of 1146, motivated perhaps by the example of his royal cousin and of Count Waleran, or by the rhetoric of an emotionally moving occasion, or by the desire to leave behind bad memories of the Anglo-Norman war, Warenne took the cross near Vezelay. After making some confirmatory grants to Lewes Priory and making his brother Reginald administrator of the honour of Warenne in his absence, he departed in June 1147, and met up with the French king, Louis, at Worms on the Rhine. He served in the king's personal guard, in which capacity he suffered loss of men and materials in an early encounter with the enemy. On 19 January 1148 he was among those in Louis's rearguard who were butchered in the defiles of Laodicea, and neither the wishful thinking of his brother Reginald nor the rumours of his survival that reached the northern chronicler John of Hexham would bring Warenne home again. 
Although his short life meant that Warenne could not compete with his comital contemporaries in the field of religious benefactions, he did fulfil his obligations with donations to the family foundations of Lewes Priory and, to a lesser extent, Castle Acre Priory. He also made grants to the abbey of St Mary, York, and the templars at Saddlescombe, and he founded the priory of the Holy Sepulchre, Thetford, and possibly Thetford Hospital as well. He issued confirmations to Battle Abbey and Coxford and Nostell priories. 


@@@@@


doc= 28739


Warenne, William (IV) de, fifth earl of Surrey (d. 1240), magnate, was the only son and heir of Hamelin de Warenne, earl of Surrey (d. 1202), an illegitimate son of Geoffrey, count of Anjou, and hence half-brother to Henry II. William's mother, Isabel de Warenne (d. 1203), daughter of William (III) de Warenne (d. 1148), inherited a claim to the earldom of Surrey together with sixty knights' fees in England, the honour of Lewes in Sussex, the castles of Reigate in Surrey, Castle Acre in Norfolk, Conisbrough and Sandal near Wakefield in Yorkshire, and extensive estates in Normandy at Mortemer and Bellencombre close to Varenne, the original Warenne stronghold. 
Warenne was probably raised in Normandy. He witnessed a charter of Richard I issued at Rouen in September 1197, and for several years before 1202 witnessed and confirmed charters of his father, Earl Hamelin. Hamelin died on 7 May 1202, and on 12 May, in Normandy, Warenne was allowed to do homage for his father's estates. Over the next eighteen months he played a leading part in the defence of Normandy against the French. With the collapse of Plantagenet power in 1204 he sought permission to do homage to the French king, Philip Augustus, for his Norman lands, while promising King John that his heart would remain loyal to the king of England. John refused this offer, and instead, in April 1205, Warenne was awarded the major estates of Stamford and Grantham in Lincolnshire as compensation for his Norman lands which were seized by the French. He none the less maintained his contacts with Normandy via his sisters, Isabel, married to Gilbert, lord of l'Aigle, and Matilda, married first to Henri, count of Eu, and later to Henry de Stuteville or Etoutteville, lord of Valmont. When Gilbert de l'Aigle defected to the French after 1204, Earl William fined $2000 with the crown to have possession of Gilbert's English estates on behalf of his sister, Gilbert's wife. The fine was paid in full between 1207 and 1212, and eventually, after 1217, Gilbert was able to recover his lands in England. Likewise in 1217 Warenne acquired custody of lands in Yorkshire, Nottinghamshire, and elsewhere, seized at the death of Leonia, mother of Henry de Stuteville, Warenne's brother-in-law. No doubt in the hope of regaining his French estates, in 1206 he served on the king's expedition to Poitou. In the following year he was engaged in peace negotiations with Scotland. He sent knights to the king's army in Ireland in 1210, and in 1212 was briefly appointed sheriff of Northumberland with custody of several castles seized from northern barons suspected of plotting against the king. Over the next two years he took charge of various baronial hostages surrendered to the king, and in 1213 acted as one of the king's guarantors for the terms of peace with the church, intended to put an end to the papal interdict on England and to encourage the exiled English bishops to return. In 1214 he sent knights to the king's army in Poitou. 
With the outbreak of civil war Warenne sided with the crown: he carried out negotiations with the rebel barons at Northampton, and in June 1215 was named as one of the royalists present at the issue of 'Magna Carta'. He attended the siege of Rochester in November 1215 and, once again, was involved in a parley with the rebel barons. Thereafter he served as royalist commander in Sussex and on 26 May 1216 was sent to take charge of the Cinque Ports. However, on 6 June 1216 the rebel army commanded by Louis of France was allowed to enter Warenne's castle at Reigate unopposed, and later that month, at Winchester, Warenne himself came to the French prince and offered him his support. Possibly he hoped that Louis would restore his estates in Normandy. Like the earls of Salisbury and Arundel, and the count of Aumale who defected at the same time, he may have believed the Plantagenet cause to be doomed. Alternatively it has been suggested that he had a more personal grievance against King John, who many years before had conducted an adulterous affair with one of Warenne's sisters, mother of the royal bastard Richard fitz Roy (or de Warenne); but this seems an improbable motive for rebellion given that the affair had taken place twenty years before and that Warenne was himself the son of Earl Hamelin, another royal bastard. Warenne remained in rebellion for less than a year. As early as March 1217 he was in receipt of instructions from King Henry III over land at Stamford, and at Chichester on about 17 April he entered into a truce with the royalists, negotiated by the papal legate Guala. Probably to safeguard his interests in France he was scrupulous in his approach to his former French allies, and in June 1217 sent formal letters to Louis notifying him of his decision to abandon the rebel camp. Although he himself took no part in the naval battle off Sandwich on 24 August 1217, he equipped a ship of knights which was one of the first to engage the French fleet, and which took many prisoners. In the aftermath Warenne was prominent in the negotiations which put an end to the war. His own interests were at stake here, since after the battle of Sandwich he had paid more than 1000 marks to the men of the Cinque Ports to take possession of various French prisoners, from whom he clearly hoped to extract heavy ransoms. The treaty arranged in September forbade any such ransom payments, so that Warenne was forced to accept an undertaking from his fellow royalists that he would be refunded the 1000 marks from the royal exchequer. The problems involved in obtaining this money ensured that for much of the next decade Warenne was dependent upon loans and occasional payments from the crown. He also borrowed heavily from his kinsman the justiciar Hubert de Burgh, who had married the daughter and heir of William de Warenne of Wormegay in Norfolk, a cousin of Earl William. 
His kinship to Hubert de Burgh was to prove very useful to Warenne after 1217 in enabling him to obtain favours from the royal court. In 1218 he successfully pursued a claim to the sheriffdom of Surrey, disputed during the civil war by the alien royalist Engelard de Cigogne. He remained sheriff of Surrey until November 1226. In 1219 he was one of those who attended the funeral procession of William (I) Marshal, earl of Pembroke, from Caversham to the Temple Church in London, and in the same year he obtained the restoration of her estates to Alice, countess of Eu, his niece, who through negotiation had succeeded in recovering her lands both in Normandy and in England. Acting as custodian on Alice's behalf, Warenne henceforth enjoyed custody of the honours and castles of Tickhill in Yorkshire and Hastings in Sussex. His possession of Tickhill was vigorously resisted by a local magnate, Robert de Vieuxpont, leading for a time to the threat of violent unrest. In 1220 he was prominent in negotiations with the French and with the king of Scots, Alexander II, and in 1221 he sent knights to the army dispatched to recover Bytham Castle on behalf of Henry III. In the spring of 1223 he made a pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela, but returned in time to serve on the king's campaign against Montgomery, providing the king with twenty knights, and witnessing the eventual terms of truce with the Welsh. During the winter of 1223-4 he supported Hubert de Burgh against his rivals at court. He joined the army besieging Bedford Castle in 1224 and afterwards was appointed to conduct the disgraced alien constable, Falkes de Breaute, into exile. Probably in reward for his loyalty he was granted custody of the royal castle of Bramber, and the castle of Hornby in Lancashire. However, in November 1226 he was replaced as sheriff of Surrey and in February 1227 was forced to surrender Hornby to its rightful heir. 
These disappointments may help to explain Warenne's involvement in a brief confederation against the crown, led between July and October 1227 by the king's brother Richard of Cornwall and the earls of Pembroke and Chester, confirmed at Warenne's manor of Stamford. In the aftermath Warenne was forced to surrender his custody of Tickhill, but his disgrace was short-lived. In 1228 he was confirmed in possession of the manors of Stamford and Grantham for life, and for the first time received the third penny of the county of Surrey, an honorary payment due to the earl of any particular county, but which seems previously to have been denied to Warenne and his father, despite their claim to be recognized as earls of Surrey by right of Warenne's mother. In 1230, during the king's expedition to Brittany, Warenne was appointed keeper of the ports of the English east coast, and in the following year he served with the king's army in Wales. In 1232 he was involved, albeit incidentally, in the disgrace of his former protector, Hubert de Burgh, being one of the four earls appointed to keep de Burgh prisoner at Devizes Castle. However, he seems to have remained sympathetic to de Burgh, and after the fall of Hubert's persecutors in 1234, returned to government, accepting the surrender of the castles of Bramber and Knepp from de Burgh's enemies. He served as a ceremonial cup-bearer at the coronation of Queen Eleanor in 1236, and in 1237 witnessed the reissue of 'Magna Carta' as one of the few surviving barons who had witnessed the charter of 1215. In the same year he was admitted to the king's council, and in 1238 was sent to defend the papal legate Otto against violent attacks at Oxford. 
Warenne married twice: first, before 1207, Matilda, daughter of William d'Aubigny, earl of Arundel (died 1223). She is said to have died, childless, on 6 February 1215, and was buried at Lewes. His second wife, another Matilda, was the eldest daughter of William (I) Marshal, earl of Pembroke, and widow of Hugh Bigod, earl of Norfolk (died 1225). Warenne purchased her marriage and her dower in Norfolk before July 1225. She outlived him by several years, and died in April 1248. Her body was buried at Tintern Abbey and her heart at Lewes. Warenne died in London on 27 or 28 May 1240, and was buried before the high altar of his family's foundation at Lewes in Sussex. The king ordered that a wayside cross be erected in his memory, on the road between Merton and Carshalton in Surrey. With Matilda Marshal Warenne had two children: a son and heir, John de Warenne, who succeeded to his father's estates in 1248, and a daughter, Isabel de Warenne (1226x30-1282), married to Hugh d'Aubigny, earl of Arundel (died 1243). During his lifetime Warenne had been a regular patron of religious foundations. He granted or confirmed lands to the priories of Lewes, St Michael Stamford, and the Holy Sepulchre at Thetford, and at some time between 1219 and 1222 founded a Cluniac cell at Sleves Holm near Methwold, dependent upon Castle Acre Priory. In Normandy, before December 1203, he made gifts to the monks of Bonne-Nouvelle, and in 1223 he confirmed land at Little Palgrave in Norfolk to the monks of St Riquier in Picardy. He also supported the foundation by his subtenant, Hugh de Pleiz, of an Augustinian priory at Broomhill in Norfolk, and is credited, not entirely convincingly, with the foundation of priories or hospitals at Reigate and Stamford. His daughter, Isabel, widow of Hugh d'Aubigny, earl of Arundel, founded a Cistercian nunnery at Marham in Norfolk, on land that she had received from Warenne in dower. Warenne was the last survivor of the Anglo-Norman aristocracy who had held land in both France and England before 1204. It is clear that throughout his life he endeavoured to maintain the links between England and Normandy, in the hope that the old Anglo-Norman realm might one day be re-established. 


@@@@@


doc= 28740


Warford, William (c.1560-1608), Jesuit, was born at Bristol. Little is known of his parents save that his mother was called Jane. He was admitted a scholar of Trinity College, Oxford, on 13 June 1574, graduated BA on 12 March 1578, was elected a fellow of his college in 1578, and graduated MA on 30 March 1582. He was reconciled to the Roman Catholic church at the English College, Rheims, on 7 November 1582 and remained there until sent to the English College at Rome on 13 August 1583. He took with him a glowing recommendation from Dr Barret, the president of Douai. He was ordained priest in the college chapel in Rome on 16 December 1584 and he remained there in the household of Cardinal Allen until 1588. After a visit to Spain he was sent to England on the mission in April 1591 and worked in Kent. He entered the Society of Jesus in Rome on 23 May 1594 and was penitentiary at St Peter's for some time. During his time in Rome between 1594 and 1599 he wrote his relation about the English martyrs, later collected by Christopher Grene and deposited among his transcripts at Stonyhurst. He left Rome in late 1599 for Lisbon, where he was confessor to the English College. He was in Cadiz until 1608 when, owing to ill health, he returned to Valladolid, which he had visited in 1594. He was the author of 'A Briefe Instruction by Way of Dialogue Concerninge the Principall Poyntes of Christian Religion, Gathered out of the Holy Scriptures, Fathers, and Councels', published under the name George Doulye at Seville in 1600, and of 'A Briefe Manner of Examination of Conscience for a Generall Confession', published under the same pseudonym (Louvain, 1604). Both works saw a number of later editions. He died at the English College, Valladolid, on 6 November 1608, and was buried at Valladolid. 


@@@@@


doc= 28741


Warham, William (1450?-1532), administrator and archbishop of Canterbury, was born in Church Oakley, Hampshire. A later archbishop of Canterbury, Matthew Parker (died 1575), said that this predecessor was of gentle birth, but Warham's origins were not distinguished. An uncle, Thomas, was a carpenter (but also a citizen of London) at one time professionally employed in the archiepiscopal residence in Croydon, which his nephew would later occupy; another relation was a 'taloughchaundeler' of London; William's parents, Robert and Elizabeth, are commemorated by a brass in their parish church of Church Oakley (presumably set up at their son's expense) which carries none of the emblems of social distinction. The Warhams eventually held considerable estates in north-west Hampshire thanks to William's promotion to the primacy of all England and subsequent purchases by his nephew and heir, Sir William Warham. By then the Warhams had arrived among the local elite. 
The future archbishop was educated at Winchester College and New College, Oxford, where he became a fellow in 1475 and acquired a doctorate in canon law. Eventually, in 1488, Warham went to London to a post in the court of arches, the first sign that he might fly high in public life. Two years later he probably went to Rome as a proctor of John Alcock (died 1500), bishop of Ely, and was soon acquiring a variety of profitable sinecures, including (in 1496) the archdeaconry of Huntingdon, one of a number of archdeaconries that were regular stepping-stones to bishoprics, and the precentorship of Wells. In April 1491 he performed his first secular duty when he was appointed to the English party sent to Antwerp to settle disputes with Hanseatic merchants. Two years later he joined Sir Edward Poynings (died 1521) on an embassy to Margaret, duchess of Burgundy, to halt Burgundian support for the pretender to the English throne, Perkin Warbeck, and is reported to have made a powerful, though fruitless, speech on behalf of Henry VII. On 13 February 1494 he received his first royal preferment -- to the mastership of the rolls. This in turn produced numerous assignments: in 1496 to negotiate with the Spanish ambassador details of the marriage of Prince Arthur to Katherine of Aragon, for instance; between 1496 and 1499 to deal with commercial disputes with the Netherlands and even the city of Riga; in September 1501 to conclude a deal with the emperor Maximilian I ('r'. 1493-1519) for the handing over to Henry of the chief surviving 'white rose' threat to his throne, Edmund de la Pole. 
Warham had still not achieved major office in either church or state, despite all this activity. Quite suddenly, however, preferment was showered on him. On 20 October 1501 he was papally provided to the vacant see of London, though not consecrated until 25 September 1502. On the previous 11 August he was appointed keeper of the great seal and gained the full dignity of the lord chancellorship on 21 January 1504. At royal request Pope Julius II ('r'. 1503-13) had translated him on 29 November 1503 from London to Canterbury, where he was enthroned as archbishop on 9 March 1504, having sworn fealty to the pope and, on 2 February, received at Lambeth the symbol of his primatial authority, the pallium from Rome. After a distinctly slow start, therefore, he had suddenly soared to the highest office in the royal government and the supreme ecclesiastical dignity of archbishop of Canterbury, 'legatus natus', and primate of all England. Since he was by then well over fifty, neither he nor others could have expected that he would have a further claim to fame, that of almost being Canterbury's longest-serving archbishop. His primacy lasted 28 years and 7 months, second only to Thomas Bourchier's 31 years and 7 months (1454-86). 
As chancellor Warham was presumably concerned with the day-to-day legal and formal administration business of his court, but there is no evidence that he had much impact on chancery's evolution. Initially, however, he was conspicuous on major state occasions. Thus he crowned the new king, Henry VIII, and his wife, Katherine of Aragon, at Westminster on 24 June 1509, and presented the golden rose sent to Henry in the following year by Pope Julius. He delivered the customary -- but well received -- speeches at the opening of four parliaments (those of 1504, 1510, 1512, and 1515), and on two occasions led a formidable delegation to the lower house to demand assent to heavy taxation. As well as being prominent in parliament, he presided 'ex officio' over the upper house of southern convocation, which regularly met at the same time as the secular assembly. Indeed, the church's affairs brought him as much into the limelight as did those of the prince. 
Warham's first convocation, that of 1504, had spoken firmly in defence of the 'liberties' of the church in England, by which was meant essentially the legal privileges of churchmen against a crown and its lawyers who were intent on clipping them. In 1512, despite strong opposition from convocation and in the Lords, and in the wake of an unsuccessful attempt two years before to secure a bill confirming the church's liberties, an act was passed that denied clergy in minor orders their 'benefit', that is, immunity from the king's courts when accused of serious crimes. As a compromise the act was to run for an initial trial period of three years. When it fell due for renewal in 1515, however, there quickly developed a dangerously heated confrontation between church and state -- a conflict exacerbated by the famous case of Richard Hunne, allegedly murdered in 1514 by the bishop of London's officers, following a dispute over mortuaries -- which split the episcopate and brought Warham into open opposition to the king. The climax to this crisis was a conference at Baynard's Castle, presided over by Henry, at which the archbishop dared to remind the assembly that a predecessor had died a martyr in defence of clerical liberties, whereupon Henry replied with a trumpet blast about kings of England never having had any superior 'but God only'. Warham's final attempt to stave off defeat by suggesting that the whole issue be referred to Rome for adjudication was brushed aside. His courage and loyalty to the church cost him a bruising. 
Three years before there had been a sharp dispute between Warham and his suffragans concerning Canterbury's right to prove wills (and received fees therefrom) of persons who had had possessions in more than one diocese. Wrangles of this kind are the stuff of much medieval ecclesiastical history; but thanks particularly to the fact that the archbishop's opponents were led by Richard Fox (died 1528), bishop of Winchester and keeper of the privy seal, this clash was especially sharp. A compromise eventually emerged, but the whole episode was decidedly discomfiting. 
Shortly after that tense encounter at Baynard's Castle Warham was solemnly handing over a red hat to Thomas Wolsey, archbishop of York (died 1530). On 22 December of that year (1515) he resigned the lord chancellorship, which passed to the same Thomas Wolsey. Some have supposed he was dismissed by the king. Edward Hall and Polydore Vergil believed he was thrust aside by the ambitious new cardinal. Thomas More (died 1535), however, writing soon after the event, assured Erasmus that Warham was glad to quit. After eleven years as chancellor the archbishop may have resolved to devote himself entirely to his spiritual duties. Possibly the whole truth contains all these views. Warham had probably never been cordial with the young king, who had inherited him from his father, and could never have competed with the dashing, self-confident, and much younger Wolsey. The recent contretemps probably settled the matter for Henry. As for Warham himself, he could reasonably have supposed that he was nearing his end and that the time had come to escape the hurly-burly of public life. More was surely right when he reported that Warham had been wanting to go for some years in order to enjoy quietude and his books. 
Wolsey probably always hoped thereafter that Warham would die and thus allow him to exchange York for Canterbury, the ultimate prize. But it was Wolsey who died. Warham probably disliked Wolsey, initially at least, as the latter bullied Rome into granting him both a red hat and a legateship 'a latere', eventually for life, which in theory brought the whole English church under his sway. So, when Wolsey summoned all the bishops of England and Wales to a legatine council in March 1519, Warham counter-attacked by calling his own southern convocation to meet the month before. An indignant Wolsey (called a 'great tyrant' by one of Warham's chaplains) summoned the archbishop to his presence. The same chaplain reported that a 'praemunire' charge against Warham was being threatened. In the event Warham retreated. Whether Wolsey succeeded in holding a national legatine council in 1523 is uncertain; what is known is that in the meantime he and Warham had had a collision over testamentary jurisdiction that mirrored the earlier conflict between Warham and the bishops of his province, with Wolsey claiming that, as legate, he was entitled to override Canterbury's prerogative court and receive all the fees. Once again good sense prevailed. A remarkable compromise allowed Canterbury a half share of both testamentary administration and income. 
Much of all this may have been formal ecclesiastical manoeuvring rather than genuine conflict. Certainly relations between cardinal and archbishop eventually became respectful, even warm. In 1522 Wolsey sent Warham a jewel for Becket's shrine, and the following year, when the archbishop fell ill, invited him to convalesce at Hampton Court. When, two years later, a dispute over the will of John Roper, father of More's son-in-law, apparently bypassed the recently established joint court, which dealt with business arising from both the legate's and the archbishop's jurisdictions, Wolsey handled a ruffled archbishop so tactfully that Warham could gratefully explain how it was only his 'very singular trust and confidence' in the cardinal's 'undoubted favour and benignity' towards him that had allowed him to undertake such 'plain writing' to him ('LP Henry VIII', 4, no. 1157). Shortly after this episode the so-called 'amicable grant' (1525), an emergency war levy, caused much consternation and brought protesters to Warham's gate. But the latter could write to Wolsey that, while some called him an 'old fool' for co-operating with the government, much worse awaited the cardinal, for anyone 'in most favour and most in counsel with a great prince shall be maligned and ill-spoken of do he never so well' (ibid., 4, appendix no. 39). 
An archbishop of Canterbury who can record that he is being called an old fool and write perceptively about a statesman's lot is endearing. It is no less noteworthy that Warham, trained in canon and civil law, and given to what many contemporary reformers would have regarded as a typical preoccupation with clerical rights and privileges, should nevertheless have also been an ally of John Colet and patron of Erasmus -- both of them critics of the very system that Warham seemingly personified. In his famous address to convocation, traditionally assigned to 1512 but now thought to have been made in 1510, Colet had proclaimed the special dignity of the clerical estate, as well as denouncing war and clerical sins. He could not have been the leading speaker without the archbishop's approval. And then he was appointed to a committee to discuss clerical reform. It is not clear what, if anything, this body achieved, not least because Wolsey was soon on the scene, charged to use his legatine authority to carry forward a wide-ranging renewal of the church. After Wolsey's departure Warham returned to the cause of reform, so that what emerged from convocation in his last months represented a continuation rather than a new initiative. 
In the meantime Warham had been one of Erasmus's most generous patrons. He showered him with gifts of cash and even a horse, and was eager to secure his return to England. 'No brother, or father even, could be more loving', declared Erasmus ('Correspondence', no. 286), and gratefully dedicated to him his Latin translation of two plays of Euripides (1506-7) and Lucian's 'Dialogi' (1514), and his multi-volumed edition of St Jerome's works. Warham also shared the dedication of Erasmus's celebrated 'New Testament' of 1516. 
Thanks to Hans Holbein the younger Warham's likeness has been preserved. He is the first archbishop of Canterbury of whom that can be said with complete confidence. His watery, melancholic eyes, thick nose, and heavy jowl are memorably depicted. He comes alive also, as do many of his contemporaries, in his correspondence with Erasmus, for whom he clearly had affection. Thus when Erasmus complained, as he often did, of 'stones', the archbishop could ask what was to be built 'super hanc petram', and continued, 'You are not, I imagine, building fancy houses... instead spend money to have those stones taken away; unlike me, who am spending money every day to have stones brought to my buildings' ('Correspondence', no. 1504) -- a reference in particular to the massive reconstruction of his palace at Otford. 
In 1511, like other bishops in the southern province, Warham launched a sudden and fierce campaign against Lollardy in his diocese -- the first major assault for over seventy years on a sect that was well rooted and organized in several towns, notably Maidstone, Staplehurst, and Tenterden. Of thirty-nine accused, thirty-four abjured, but five suffered death for obstinate heresy. The victims included William Carder of Tenterden, zealous leader of Kentish Lollardy, and one woman. Only Coventry produced a higher total of burnings. By the early 1520s Warham, like others, was beginning to be alarmed by the first signs of protestantism, and was eventually much concerned with the activities of Hugh Latimer (died 1555). By 1527, however, a different crisis had broken, namely, the king's Great Matter. As primate of all England Warham was inevitably involved; and since he had allegedly had doubts about the validity of the papal dispensation that had enabled Henry to marry his dead brother's wife in 1509, he was someone from whom the king could expect support in his quest, nearly two decades later, to have his marriage declared null. 
In May 1527 Warham agreed to examine the case secretly with Wolsey. However, it was soon apparent that this collusive action could not provide the definitive verdict that Henry required, and that it was therefore necessary to invoke the aid of Rome. After intense diplomatic activity Henry eventually persuaded Pope Clement VII ('r'. 1523-34) to send to England Cardinal Lorenzo Campeggi to preside with Wolsey over a legatine court at Blackfriars, London, and to try the case. In the meantime Warham had been appointed one of Katherine's counsel. Perhaps the appointment was a formality: Warham was scarcely a suitable nominee and does not seem to have exerted himself on her behalf. Indeed, Katherine reported that he had merely remarked unhelpfully 'ira principis mors est' ('the anger of the prince is death'). 
Katherine outwitted her husband. By late July 1529 she had appealed to the pope against her judges and the case had been 'advoked' to Rome. This humiliating setback for Henry was a crucial moment of his reign. Arguably, much that was done and said on the national stage during the next two or even three years, including the dismissal of Wolsey and the summoning of the Reformation Parliament, was intended to force the pope to hand the case back to England, where Henry was confident he would get his way. Even the episode known as the 'pardon of the clergy' in early 1531, which began with a 'praemunire' charge against the whole clergy of the land, may similarly have been designed to intimidate Rome. And so also (probably) was the next royal move, which resulted in Warham's delivering to convocation the king's demand to be recognized as head of the church and possessed of the spiritual cure of his subjects. John Fisher of Rochester (died 1535), Warham's episcopal neighbour, rallied his colleagues, including Warham, to reject the latter claim and accept the former only after the words 'as far as the law of Christ allows' had been added. 
During the long and unsuccessful struggle to recover the case from Rome Henry frequently named Warham as the person most fit to be appointed judge, praising him for his integrity and independence. In fact he was confident that the archbishop could be trusted to deliver the right verdict. Further proof of this was that, as its chancellor (since 1506), he had encouraged Oxford to come down on the king's side when the well-known consultation of the universities was set in train, and in December 1530 even called Fisher to his house to urge him to retract what he had written on the queen's behalf. Fisher refused. 
However, in the months that followed Warham shifted his ground, less perhaps because he had changed his mind about the intrinsic merits of the case, than because of the aggressive tactics of the king. Moreover, Rome had forbidden public discussion of the case while it was 'sub judice', and explicitly prohibited the archbishop of Canterbury from taking cognizance of it. On 13 January 1531 Clement VII's nuncio in England visited Warham to show him the latest papal brief and to bid him 'have regard to God, his conscience and the pope' ('LP Henry VIII', 5, no. 45). Warham was reported to have replied that he would never disobey Rome. 
It was later suggested that two other people helped to make the archbishop 'harder and less to favour the king's cause': one was John Fisher, who allegedly did all he could to 'embolden' him; the other was Elizabeth Barton, reputed 'the Holy Maid of Kent', whom Warham had treated with circumspection when she first claimed to have visions, but who may have impressed him when she later denounced the royal divorce and warned him, and Wolsey, not to 'meddle' further in the matter, else they would be 'utterly destroyed' (Whatmore, 467). That, at any rate, is what was claimed at her execution in November 1533. 
Whatever the truth of this, on 24 February 1532, in an upper room in Lambeth Palace, Warham swore to a public instrument repudiating anything done or henceforth done since November 1529 that violated the rights of Rome, ecclesiastical authority, or the privileges of his metropolitical see. All were publicly condemned. That was provocative enough, but, according to the Venetian ambassador in London, on the following 15 March Warham went further. He stood up in the Lords and openly upbraided the king for his conduct. 
It can reasonably be assumed that it was now, in response to such defiance, that the archbishop was charged with a 'praemunire' offence. The charge was manifestly trumped up. Warham was accused of misprision of treason on the ground that fourteen years previously he had consecrated the new bishop of St Asaph before full royal assent had been given. The only record of this extraordinary episode is a draft of a heroic speech to be made in self-defence which has survived. There is no record of any formal proceedings, and no evidence that the speech was ever delivered, presumably because on 22 August 1532, in Hackington, Kent, a natural death carried off the archbishop. 
Yet that same apparently courageous and defiant Warham had on the previous 15 May presided over the convocation which surrendered its legislative independence to the crown, and was one of only three bishops who gave apparently unqualified assent to what is known as the 'submission of the clergy', after weeks of wrangling and cajoling. It is not easy to explain his conduct. Was he intimidated? Did he believe that his protest of 24 February had exonerated him of responsibility for betrayal seven weeks later of a fundamental liberty of the 'Ecclesia Anglicana'? Was he acting merely 'ex officio' when he delivered convocation's surrender document to the crown? 
There is another possibility. Although modern historians have insisted that the events culminating in the humiliating submission of May 1532 had nothing to do with the royal divorce, it could be that this sudden assault on the clerical estate, like that of early 1531 and like so much else said and done after the debacle at Blackfriars in July 1529, was another -- the last -- desperate attempt to bully Rome into handing back the case to England. If Warham had believed that much that was happening was not to be taken at its face value, but was sabre-rattling aimed at frightening a pope into compliance, his conduct becomes less unworthy and inconsistent. Fisher took royal words and deeds seriously. Some who were close to the king probably had exactly the agenda that Fisher perceived. But Warham (and maybe other bishops), while protesting at the extravagances, could have believed that the root problem was the king's Great Matter. This would surely be resolved. It was not something to die for. Once the crisis had blown over, all would be well again. The 'pardon', the 'submission', all the wild talk about the king's imperial status, and so on, would be forgotten. If this is a correct interpretation, Warham was guilty of naivety and wishful thinking rather than anything more serious. 
Warham was a respected, conscientious prelate but not a pastoral one. There is little evidence of preaching or concern for the instruction of his flock. But his large register survives in two volumes, containing 638 folios, to suggest that he attended carefully to the administration of his diocese. He was seriously dedicated to his books -- which he bequeathed to Winchester, and to New College and All Souls at Oxford -- and, as has been said, was a steadfast supporter of Erasmus. But since he could embarrass the latter by offering him the rectory of Aldington, Kent, and then, to avoid a flagrant example of non-residence, commute the gift to an annual pension, it is questionable how well he understood his client. In his will Warham recalls that he spent a prodigious $30,000 on buildings, especially his palace at Otford, which boasted a courtyard bigger than Hampton Court's. This was a distinctly un-Erasmian activity. On the other hand Erasmus tells us that, though he entertained sumptuously, Warham himself ate frugally and drank little wine. He neither hunted nor played dice. He died, More said, a poor man. There is no firm evidence that his 'nephew' William, upon whom he conferred the archdeaconry of Canterbury and other benefices, was really an illegitimate son, the offspring of some youthful liaison, and no source hints at sexual impropriety in later life. Warham seriously promoted clerical reform at the beginning and end of his episcopate, as well as defending clerical liberties and privileges throughout his career. But it must be added that 'reform' for him did not cut deeper than concern for clerical dress and conduct, and minor improvements in ecclesiastical procedures. But perhaps this was not so much because he was unperceptive, as because the English church was not in need of radical new legislation. 
Although no believer in ostentation for its own sake, Warham remained mindful to the end of his days of the need to maintain the dignity of his primatial office. An account of his exequies written by a herald tells how the archbishop's coffin, with his effigy upon it, was placed in the sanctuary of the cathedral, on a hearse surmounted by huge candelabra bearing 1000 lights, before being interred in a small chantry chapel, which Warham had had built for himself as long ago as 1507. The chantry was situated in the Martyrdom, in the cathedral's north transept, and Warham was clearly devoted to Canterbury and St Thomas. He referred regularly to Becket in his correspondence, and seems always to have tried to be in the diocese for the saint's major feasts. He had fought hard for a bull to celebrate the 350th anniversary of Becket's death in 1520, and carefully chose to be buried as close as possible to the spot where Becket fell. He quoted Becket at Henry in 1515. When he faced the king again in 1532 the identification with his predecessor was complete. 
The speech in which Warham had prepared to defend himself against the 'praemunire' charge is, by any standards, magnificent. 'The case that I am put to trouble for is one of the articles that Saint Thomas of Canterbury died for', he declared, quoting from a contemporary life and the martyr's letters. He, Warham, had done no wrong. Rather, he had acted in obedience to Rome, and in accordance with his duty as primate. He had acted as all his predecessors had done. Let his assailants 'hew me to small pieces', he continued, but remember that whoever lays a violent hand on an archbishop shall be accursed and can be 'assoiled but by the pope', and the place where he is taken, together with the two neighbouring dioceses, put under an interdict; and so on (TNA: PRO, SP 1/70, fol. 236). 
It was a long time since an archbishop had been ready to speak thus. Apparently the octogenarian Warham was seriously bracing himself for martyrdom. Had he lived a little longer and indeed chosen the path that John Fisher took, it would be much easier to pass a final verdict on him. Furthermore, the religious history of sixteenth-century England might be markedly different from the one we know. 


@@@@@


doc= 28742


Waring, Edward (c.1735-1798), mathematician, was born in Shrewsbury, the eldest son of John and Elizabeth Waring, a prosperous farming couple. He received his early education in Shrewsbury Free School under a Mr Hotchkin and was admitted as a sizar at Magdalene College, Cambridge, on 24 March 1753, being also Millington exhibitioner. His extraordinary talent for mathematics was recognized from his early years in Cambridge. In 1757 he graduated BA as senior wrangler and on 24 April 1758 was elected to a fellowship at Magdalene. He belonged to the Hyson Club, whose members included William Paley. 
At the end of 1759 Waring published the first chapter of 'Miscellanea analytica'. On 28 January the next year he was appointed Lucasian professor of mathematics, one of the highest positions in Cambridge. William Samuel Powell, then tutor in St John's College, opposed Waring's election and instead supported the candidacy of William Ludlam. In the polemic with Powell, Waring was backed by John Wilson (1741-1793). In fact Waring was very young and did not hold the MA, necessary for qualifying for the Lucasian chair, but this was granted him in 1760 by royal mandate. In 1762 he published the full 'Miscellanea analytica', mainly devoted to the theory of numbers and algebraic equations. In 1763 he was elected to the Royal Society. He was awarded its Copley medal in 1784 but withdrew from the society in 1795, after he had reached sixty, 'on account of [his] age' (Waring to Gilpin, 22 Aug 1794, RS). Waring was also a member of the academies of sciences of Gottingen and Bologna. In 1767 he took a degree of MD, but his activity in medicine was quite limited. He carried out dissections with Richard Watson, professor of chemistry and later bishop of Llandaff. From about 1770 he was physician at Addenbrooke's Hospital at Cambridge, and he also practised at St Ives, Huntingdonshire, where he lived for some years after 1767. His career as a physician was not very successful since he was seriously short-sighted and a very shy man. 
Waring had a younger brother, Humphrey, who obtained a fellowship at Magdalene in 1775. In 1776 Waring married Mary Oswell, sister of a draper in Shrewsbury; they moved to Shrewsbury and then retired to Plealey, 8 miles out of the town, where Waring owned an estate. During his last years he sank into a deep religious melancholy, and a violent cold caused his death, in Plealey, on 15 August 1798. He was buried in the churchyard at Fitz, Shropshire. 
Waring wrote a number of papers in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society', dealing with the resolution of algebraic equations, number theory, series, approximation of roots, interpolation, the geometry of conic sections, and dynamics. The 'Meditationes algebraicae' (1770), where many of the results published in 'Miscellanea analytica' were reworked and expanded, was described by J. L. Lagrange as 'a work full of excellent researches' (Lagrange, 3.370). In this work Waring published many theorems concerning the solution of algebraical equations which attracted the attention of continental mathematicians, but his best results are in number theory. Included in this work was the so-called Goldbach conjecture (every even integer is the sum of two primes), and also the following conjecture: every odd integer is a prime or the sum of three primes. Euler had proved that every positive integer is the sum of not more than four squares; Waring suggested that every positive integer is either a cube or the sum of not more than nine cubes. He also advanced the hypothesis that every positive integer is either a biquadrate or the sum of not more than nineteen biquadrates. These hypotheses form what is known as 'Waring's problem'. He also published a theorem, due to his friend John Wilson, concerning prime numbers; it was later proved rigorously by Lagrange. 
In 'Proprietates algebraicarum curvarum' (1772) Waring reissued in a much revised form the first four chapters of the second part of 'Miscellanea analytica'. He devoted himself to the classification of higher plane curves, improving results obtained by Newton, Stirling, Euler, and Cramer. In 1794 he published a few copies of a philosophical work entitled 'An Essay on the Principles of Human Knowledge', which were circulated among his friends. 
Waring's mathematical style is highly analytical. In fact he criticized those British mathematicians who adhered too strictly to geometry. It is indicative that he was one of the subscribers of John Landen's 'Residual Analysis' (1764), one of the works in which the tradition of the Newtonian fluxional calculus was more severely criticized. In the preface of 'Meditationes analyticae' Waring showed a good knowledge of continental mathematicians such as Clairaut, d'Alembert, and Euler. He lamented the fact that in Great Britain mathematics was cultivated with less interest than on the continent, and clearly desired to be considered as highly as the great names in continental mathematics -- there is no doubt that he was reading their work at a level never reached by any other eighteenth-century British mathematician. Most notably, at the end of chapter three of 'Meditationes analyticae' Waring presents some partial fluxional equations (partial differential equations in Leibnizian terminology); such equations are a mathematical instrument of great importance in the study of continuous bodies which was almost completely neglected in Britain before Waring's researches. One of the most interesting results in 'Meditationes analyticae' is a test for the convergence of series generally attributed to d'Alembert (the 'ratio test'). The theory of convergence of series (the object of which is to establish when the summation of an infinite number of terms can be said to have a finite 'sum') was not much advanced in the eighteenth century. 
Waring's work was known both in Britain and on the continent, but it is difficult to evaluate his impact on the development of mathematics. His work on algebraical equations contained in 'Miscellanea analytica' was translated into Italian by Vincenzo Riccati in 1770. Waring's style is not systematic and his exposition is often obscure. It seems that he never lectured and did not habitually correspond with other mathematicians. After J. J. Lalande in 1796 observed, in 'Notice sur la vie de Condorcet', that in 1764 there was not a single first-rate analyst in England, Waring's reply, published after his death as 'Original letter of the late Dr Waring' in the 'Monthly Magazine', stated that he had given 'somewhere between three and four hundred new propositions of one kind or another'. Waring's proud statement gives an idea of the lack of structure of his mathematical output, a study of which is still awaited. 


@@@@@


doc= 28743


Waring, John Burley (1823-1875), architect, was born on 29 June 1823 at Lyme Regis, Dorset, the son of Henry Waring (1773-1837), a captain in the Royal Navy, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Franks (1789-1842). From 1836 he was educated at the Bristol branch of University College, London, where he was also taught watercolour drawing by Samuel Jackson. In 1840 he was apprenticed to his second cousin Henry E. Kendall, a London-based architect. Then in 1842 he became a student at the Royal Academy, and obtained a silver medal at the Society of Arts for designs in architectural adornments in 1843. His health was never robust and he spent the winter of 1843-4 in Italy 'to improve himself in art and to become a painter' (Waring, 9). On returning to England he was elected an associate of the RIBA in 1845 and became a draughtsman successively in the offices of A. Poynter, Laing of Birkenhead, Sir Robert Smirke (1846), and D. Mocatta (1847). 
With Thomas R. Macquoid, Waring went to Italy and Spain in 1847 and studied architecture, measuring and drawing the public buildings. The result was an illustrated work entitled 'Architectural Art in Italy and Spain', which was published in 1850. For this all he received was a small payment for lithographing the sixty fine folio plates. He also produced 'Designs for Civic Architecture'. From 1850 to 1852 he studied under Thomas Couture in Paris and afterwards lived at Burgos, where he studied the monuments at the Cartuja de Miraflores. In conjunction with Sir Matthew Digby Wyatt he wrote four architectural guidebooks to the courts of the Crystal Palace at Sydenham in 1854. While again in Italy in 1855 he made a further series of drawings, which were purchased for the South Kensington Museum, and published in 1858 as 'The Arts Connected with Architecture in Central Italy'. 
Waring was appointed superintendent of the works of ornamental art and sculpture in the Manchester exhibition of 1857, and edited 'Art Treasures of the United Kingdom from the Art Treasures Exhibition, Manchester' (1858). He was elected FRIBA in 1860. In the International Exhibition at Kensington in 1862 he was the superintendent of the architectural gallery and of the classes for furniture, earthenware, and glass, goldsmiths' work and jewellery, and objects used in architecture. In connection with this exhibition he published 'Masterpieces of Industrial Art and Sculpture' (3 vols., 1862), consisting of 300 coloured plates and descriptions, which were in English and French. He was chief commissioner of the exhibition of works of art held at Leeds in 1868. An extract from his exhibition report was published as 'The National Exhibition of Works of Art at Leeds' (1867). He was interested in ancient glass paintings and wrote an introduction to C. Winston's 'Catalogue of Drawings from Ancient Glass Paintings' (1865); he also wrote on 'Ceramic Art in Remote Ages' (1874) and 'Stone Monuments, Tumuli and Ornament of Remote Ages' (1870). During a further tour in Italy he sent a series of notes to 'The Architect'. In February 1871 the American Institute of Architects elected him an honorary member, but he obtained little practice. 
Waring wrote several books on the subject of the church, faith, and doctrine, and was also the author of a volume of 'Poems: by an Architect' (1858). At the age of twenty he had been an enthusiastic follower of Swedenborg's doctrines; later he somewhat changed his opinions, and in his 'A Record of Thoughts on Religious, Political, Social, and Personal Subjects' (2 vols., 1873), he advanced an eccentric claim to write under 'special divine inspiration' and the power of making prophecies concerning political events. Latterly resident in London, he was described as a widower in the census returns of 1871 but no record of a marriage has been located. He died at the Castle Hotel, Hastings, on 23 March 1875. 


@@@@@


doc= 28744


Waring, Robert (1614?-1658), writer, was born to a family long settled at the Ley, Staffordshire. His father was Edmund Waring; his mother was the daughter of Richard Broughton of Owlbury in the parish of Bishops Castle, Shropshire, and a niece of the rabbinical scholar Hugh Broughton. He had at least one older brother, Walter Waring, and at least one sister, Anne, later Staunton. 
Waring attended Westminster School and entered Christ Church, Oxford, in 1630. He matriculated in 1632, graduated with a BA on 20 June 1634, and received his MA on 26 April 1637. During the civil war he bore arms for Charles I at Oxford but his loyalty cost him dearly: no sooner had he been elected senior proctor and Camden professor of ancient history (on 29 April and 2 August 1647 respectively) than he was ordered to give up both posts by the parliamentary visitors sent that year to purge the colleges of royalists. Waring's election had been contested by Charles Wheare, son of the previous professor, Degory Wheare, whom the parliamentary visitors favoured (Burrows, 236). The prelude to the clash between the visitors and Christ Church is documented in 'A Publike Conference Betwixt the Six Presbyterian Ministers, and Some Independent Commanders... a Satire' (1646), attributed to Waring, while an account of the heated dispute that ensued is given in 'The University of Oxfords Plea Refuted' (1647). The latter was written jointly by several afflicted royalists, including Waring and John Fell, son of the dean of Christ Church, Samuel Fell; the latter had also been ousted by the visitors unceremoniously. Waring defended his position staunchly: he defied the visitors' order that he be removed from his posts and on 14 December 1647 was 'adjudged guilty of high contempt and denyall of authority of Parliament' (ibid., 185). Selden's intervention saved him from being entirely banished from the university, but on 7 April 1648 he was summoned to London and ordered into custody. Yet again Waring defied the order and escaped to Oxford; on 14 September 1648, however, he was among those ordered to leave the university within a fortnight (ibid., 19, 185-6). 
In the end Waring was stripped of his proctorship, professorship, and student's place, and forced to hand in his books and other personal belongings to the visitors. Defeated, he retired to Apley, Shropshire, at the invitation of Sir William Whitmore, that 'great patron of distressed cavaliers' with whom he later travelled to France. 
As an author Waring is probably best known for his 'Amoris effigies, sive, Quid sit amor?' [1657], written in Latin and translated into English by John Norris in 1682 as 'Effigies amoris in English, or, The Picture of Love Unveil'd'. Norris was clearly enraptured by Waring's treatise on love: having mastered 'this novel', he writes in the preface (Norris, 'Effigies amoris in English', 2nd edn, 1701, 5), 'the judicious reader... will discern new thoughts like little stars glimmering out of the rich Galaxy' (ibid., 8). Waring also published 'A Sermon Preached at St. Margarets in Westminster, at the Funeral of Mrs Susanna Gray' (1657) and contributed to John Fell's 'The Life of the most Learned, Reverend and Pious Dr H. Hammond' (1661). Some of his verse in Latin is included in various editions of 'Amoris effigies'. In Wood he is described as a Latin and English poet 'but a better orator,... reckoned among the great wits of his time in the University' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3rd edn, 3.453-4). 
Back in England, Waring fell gravely ill and died in Lincoln's Inn Fields on 9 May 1658. On 10 May he was buried at St Michael's Church, College Hill. His eldest brother, Walter, was buried in the same grave only ten days after Robert's funeral (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3rd edn, 3.453-4). Robert never married; his will was proved by his sister and sole executor, Anne Staunton. 


@@@@@


doc= 28745


Barrow, William (c.1609-1679), Jesuit, was born in Weeton-cum-Prees, Lancashire, the younger son of John Barrow, a yeoman and recusant, and Margaret (probably 'nee' Waring), also a recusant. In 1628 he entered the English College at St Omer where he was educated until he entered the Society of Jesus at Watten in 1632. He completed his studies at Liege and was ordained on 30 March 1641. He was prefect of morals at St Omer in 1642-3 and was sent on the English mission in 1644. He lived at the house of probation of St Ignatius (1644-9) and on 21 November 1646 he was professed of the four vows. He served as a missioner in London for thirty-five years. In 1671 he was procurator of the province in London, and in 1678 was declared rector of the College of St Ignatius, comprising the metropolis and the home counties. This rendered him conspicuous, and he was singled out as one of the victims in the aftermath of the Popish Plot. Opportunities were offered to him to escape to the continent but he remained in England to provide temporal and spiritual comfort to his accused brethren. By constant change of dress and lodgings he eluded his pursuers until 7 May 1679, when he was betrayed by a servant and committed by the privy council to Newgate. He was tried at the Old Bailey session (13 June) with Father Whitbread (the provincial) and fathers Caldwell, Gavan, and Turner. Being condemned to death, he suffered with them at Tyburn on 20 June 1679. 'The Tryals and Condemnation' of Barrow and the other martyrs was published as part of a series of state tracts in 1679 and their last protestations, 'A Remonstrance of Piety and Innocence', was published in 1683. 


@@@@@


doc= 28746


Warington, Robert (1807-1867), chemist, was born on 7 September 1807 at Sheerness, the third son of Thomas Warington, a provisioner of ships. His early childhood was spent in, among other places, Portsmouth and Boulogne. In 1818 he entered the Merchant Taylors' School and in November 1822 he was apprenticed for five years to the practical and manufacturing chemist John Thomas Cooper. There he became familiar with the rapidly evolving opportunities for a metropolitan chemist, such as the electrolytic manufacture of the recently discovered halogens and alkalis and the teaching of chemistry to medical students, required by the 'Apothecaries Act' of 1815. In 1828 he was appointed an assistant to Edward Turner, first professor of chemistry in the new University of London. From 1831 until 1839 his principal employment was as a brewery chemist to the firm of Truman, Hanbury, and Buxton; he was among the first professional chemists to hold such a position. From 1842 to 1866 he was chemical operator and resident director to the Society of Apothecaries, giving up the position because of illness shortly before his death. From 1854 to 1861 he also served as a referee to several of the metropolitan gas companies. In 1835 he married Elizabeth, daughter of George Jackson, surgeon and microscopist; they had three children. 
Recognizing the need for a professional association among the numerous young metropolitan chemists, Warington was instrumental in organizing the Chemical Society of London (later the Chemical Society) in early 1841. In large part it was initially to be a self-help institution, housing a laboratory, a library, and reagent resources that would have been beyond the means of most of its members. For the society's first decade Warington was honorary secretary, and he served as vice-president of the Chemical Society in 1851-4 and 1862-5. Warington was also involved in the establishment of the Cavendish Society (1846), formed to facilitate the translation and publication of important works in chemistry, and served as co-secretary of the society from 1846 to 1849. In 1845 he was a member of the provisional committee that established the Royal College of Chemistry. In June 1864 he was elected fellow of the Royal Society. 
Most of Warington's scientific papers, of which there were about forty, dealt with the analysis of materials of commerce, such as tea, glass, distilled water, and guano, or the balanced aquarium, which he invented in 1850 as a device to illustrate complementary chemical activities of plants and animals that sustain life on earth, and which he presented initially to the Chemical Society; ownership of such an aquarium quickly became a popular hobby, providing a conversation piece for the mid-Victorian parlour. For Warington, however, the aquarium was an instrument for tentative explorations in what would now be called aquatic ecology. In this work he anticipated the popular naturalist P. H. Gosse, who would refocus the attention of aquarium enthusiasts on marine creatures. These interests were followed by his son Robert Warington, who became an agricultural chemist and bacteriologist of note, and served as professor of rural economy at Oxford from 1894 to 1897. 
In his post at the Society of Apothecaries Warington was concerned with modernizing the pharmacopoeia. In 1851 he took over revision of the pharmacopoeia of the Royal College of Physicians after the death of Richard Phillips, and after the 1858 reform of the medical profession he was centrally engaged in preparation of a national compendium. He was joint editor, with Boverton Redwood, of the second edition of the 'British Pharmacopoeia' (1867), though by that time he was too ill to take an active role. This work chiefly entailed discovering chemical protocols by which practitioners could estimate the quality of raw materials and produce medicaments of known strength. 
Warington was author of 'A Series of Chemical Tables, Arranged for the Use of the Chemical Student' (1833), and assisted F. J. Farre and R. Bentley in preparation of a 'Manual of Materia Medica and Therapeutics: being an Abridgement of... Dr. [Jonathan] Pereira's Elements of materia medica...' (1865). His most important contributions were not published articles and books, however, but his efforts in organizing metropolitan chemists and in standardizing pharmaceutical manufacture. He died at Poplar Cottage, Budleigh Salterton, Devon, on 12 November 1867. He was survived by his wife and sons. 


@@@@@


doc= 28747


Warkworth, John (c.1425-1500), ecclesiastic, college head, and supposed chronicler, is thought to have been a native of the diocese of Durham, named from the Northumberland village of Warkworth. He was elected bachelor of Merton College, Oxford in 1446, admitted as bachelor fellow 'c'.1447 and was a fellow by 'c'.1448. He still held that position in 1456. He was also second bursar there in 1451-3 and 1455-6. He graduated MA at Oxford in 1449, and at about that time was one of the fellows of Merton admitted to the confraternity of the English Hospital of the Holy Trinity and St Thomas the Martyr at Rome. He was appointed an auditor of university library accounts in 1449 and of the proctor's accounts in 1455. He was ordained acolyte at St Frideswide's Priory, Oxford, in 1450. The next year he became principal of Bull Hall, and in 1453 of Neville's Inn, both belonging to Merton College. He was appointed keeper of the Turville chest in December 1455. Some time after 1454 he became domestic chaplain to William Grey, bishop of Ely (died 1478), after which he received various livings in Cambridgeshire: he was rector of Cottenham (1458-72); vicar of Wisbech St Peter (1472-3); and rector of Leverington (1473-90). He was also vicar of Latton, Essex (1460), and canon of Southwell and prebendary of Sacrista (1475-98). Cambridge permitted him to incept as doctor of theology in 1462-3. He was appointed in 1471 one of thirteen feoffees of whom Elizabeth Howard, dowager countess of Oxford, entrusted her lands; with six of his colleagues he later opposed turning the property over to Richard, duke of Gloucester, until Richard in 1474 successfully brought suit against them. In 1473 Bishop Grey appointed him master of Peterhouse, Cambridge. 
Warkworth donated an astrolabe and fifty-five books to the library of Peterhouse in 1481, not 1483 as some have written. He also contributed 100 's'. for the erection of Grove Wall on the west side of Peterhouse. About 1485 Cambridge granted Warkworth a grace, presumably on the grounds of ill health, so that he was not required to attend funeral rites of graduates, or meetings of congregations or convocations, unless he was specifically named. His first will was dated 31 December 1485, and a second was written on 28 May 1498. In the latter he requested burial in the chantry chapel that he had built and endowed in 1487 on the south side of the nave of St Mary-the-Less, Cambridge. He bequeathed a 'Bible' to Merton College and made bequests to Peterhouse, the churches of St Mary-the-Less, Leverington, and Cottenham, and the monasteries of Ely, Crowland, and Barnwell. He also made bequests for masses for his own soul and for those of his parents and Bishop Grey. Peterhouse has a portrait of him as a cleric holding an open book. The date 1498 on the picture was added by a later hand. He remained master of Peterhouse until his death in October or November 1500. His will was proved on 17 November 1500. He is not to be confused with another John Warkworth of Durham, who was ordained acolyte by William Grey in 1468 and was a fellow of Peterhouse from 1468 to 1479. 
One of Warkworth's books, a manuscript written in English, 'Liber cronicorum in Anglicis' (Cambridge, Peterhouse, MS 190), contains one of the two known texts of Warkworth's chronicle, which covers the first thirteen years (1461-74) of Edward IV's reign. This work's emphasis on events in northern England has led some to believe that Warkworth was the author of it, but there is no proof of this. A Latin note records that the book was given to Peterhouse by Warkworth, who may simply have commissioned its transcription. According to Lister Matheson, earlier scholars were incorrect in assuming that the first part of Peterhouse 190 is a copy of Caxton's 1482 edition of the 'Chronicles of England'; it is instead a different 'Brut' text, to which a second hand has added a continuation from 1419 to 1461 based upon one of Caxton's two editions of the 'Chronicles of England' and his 1482 edition of Trevisa's translation of the 'Polychronicon'. Warkworth's chronicle, covering the years 1461-74, was added to this continuation in the Peterhouse manuscript. The Peterhouse manuscript refers to another copy of Warkworth's continuation, the location of which was for many years unknown. Matheson, however, found a copy in University of Glasgow Library, Hunterian MS 83, and has argued that this is the text from which the Peterhouse version of Warkworth's chronicle was copied. Since the continuation of the 'Brut' to 1461 in the Peterhouse manuscript could not have been written until after the publication of Caxton's 'Polychronicon' in 1482, and since part of the Hunterian manuscript was copied from the St Albans edition of the 'Chronicles of England' ('c'.1483), the two manuscripts of Warkworth's chronicle could not have been copied before 'c'.1484, after Warkworth had donated his books to the library. Matheson believes that another fellow of Peterhouse, either Roger Lancaster or Thomas Metcalf, probably wrote the chronicle attributed to Warkworth. 
The chronicle has some pro-Lancastrian bias, such as sympathy for the deposed Henry VI, and criticism of Edward IV for failing to establish peace and end the hardships caused by war. Nevertheless, the tone is generally moderate and reasonably objective. Scholars have valued it for the information it gives about events in the north, such as Edward IV's subjugation of Northumberland, Henry VI's capture of Lancaster (1465), the rebellion in Lincolnshire (1470), and the battle of Tewkesbury (1471). Written in 1484, after Richard III had become king, it does not include charges against Richard found in Tudor works, such as his being involved with the murder of Henry VI. At some points it confirms statements found in less objective accounts like the Yorkist 'Chronicle of the Rebellion in Lincolnshire'. Known to Leland in the sixteenth century, Warkworth's chronicle was first published by the Camden Society in 1839, in an edition by J. O. Halliwell, and by the Boydell Press in 1999, in an edition by L. Matheson. 


@@@@@


doc= 28748


Warmestry, Gervase (1604-1641), poet, was the second son of William Warmestry (died 1640), principal registrar of the diocese of Worcester, and of his wife, Cicell (died 1650), daughter of Thomas Smith of Cuerdley in Lancashire. Thomas Warmestry was his younger brother. The Warmestrys were an ancient Worcester family who gave their name to the Warmestry Slip, a narrow street leading down from the city to the Severn, where their house formerly stood. The post of registrar of the diocese of Worcester had been held by a Warmestry since 1544 and Gervase was born and brought up in the city believing he would follow in this family tradition. He was educated first at Worcester grammar school, then moved on to Westminster School, and in 1621 was elected a scholar of Christ Church, Oxford. He matriculated on 24 July 1624 and graduated BA on 5 May 1625 and MA on 27 June 1628; in November 1628 he became a student of the Middle Temple. 
Warmestry contributed a Latin poem to 'Camdeni insignia: a Collection of Panegyrics on William Camden' (1624), but is more notable for a poetical tract entitled 'Virescit vulnere virtus: England's Wound and Cure' (1628). It is a characteristic appeal to patriotism, couched in a poem dedicated to Endimion Porter, esquire, and written following the duke of Buckingham's disastrous expedition to the Ile de Re in 1627. This military humiliation, and its loss of men, had left king and parliament very much divided. A copy of the work, which is scarce, is in the Bodleian Library; it bears no name of place of publication nor of printer and was probably privately printed. The poem was reprinted in 1875 in the second series of 'Fugitive Tracts, written in Verse, which Illustrate the Condition of Religious and Political Feeling in England, and the State of Society there during Two Centuries' (ed. W. C. Hazlitt). Warmestry's work was chosen as one of the few to throw light on the condition of England in the year leading up to the assassination of the duke of Buckingham, when crisis seemed close at hand. 
Warmestry succeeded his father as registrar of the diocese of Worcester, having been appointed in reversion on 20 November 1630. He died on 28 May 1641 and was buried in Worcester Cathedral. He left a widow, Isabella, to whom letters of administration were granted in London on 31 August 1641. 


@@@@@


doc= 28749


Warmestry, Thomas (1609/10-1665), dean of Worcester, was born in Worcester, the son of William Warmestry (died 1640) and his wife, Cicell Smith (died 1650). The Warmestry family was prominent in the town: William, as registrar of the diocese, occupied a position which members of the family had held since 1544. Thomas's elder brother was the minor poet Gervase Warmestry. Thomas was educated at the King's School, Worcester, and at Oxford. He graduated BA from Brasenose College on 3 July 1628, matriculated from Christ Church, aged eighteen, the following day, and proceeded MA on 30 April 1631. In April 1635 he was instituted rector of Whitchurch, Warwickshire. In 1640 he was clerk for Worcester diocese in both of the convocations of the clergy. At the second convocation he delivered a speech against 'Images, Altars, Crosses, the New Canons, the Oaths', which was edited for publication by his friend Thomas Dugard in 1641. It is highly significant that a man who on his subsequent record may be called a moderate Anglican should be driven by dislike of Laudian ceremonialism to take up such a position. 
In the crisis of 1641-2 Warmestry, like many other moderates, turned increasingly to the idea of reconciliation, in both church and state, as in his 'Pax vobis, or, A Charme for Tumultuous Spirits' and 'Ramus olivae, or, An Humble Motion for Peace'. The former was published in London in 1641: its subtitle included 'an earnest and Christian advice to the people of London, to forbeare their disorderly meetings at Westminster'. 'Though he had always been accounted a Puritan' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.713), Warmestry joined the king at Oxford in 1642. There the same year he published 'Ramus olivae' and was created DD. In 1643 he resigned the living of Whitchurch and became rector of Minchinhampton, Gloucestershire, but, as he stated in a petition to the House of Lords in 1660, he was 'hindered by the warre then on foot in that County' ('Walker rev.', 178). 
By 1644 Warmestry was back in the royalist city of Worcester. On 17 June 1646, during a lull in the siege of the city, he challenged Richard Baxter, chaplain to one of the besieging regiments, to a disputation about the nature of a church. 'The result', according to the account that Warmestry gave to the Worcestershire gentleman and diarist Henry Townshend, 'was a confession of Mr Baxter's that he differed from me but in Terms. To which I replied that 'I would never quarrel with terms so they agreed in sense'' ('Diary', 1.124). Warmestry was also one of those chosen to negotiate about the surrender of the city. 
In 1648 Warmestry published 'Suspiria ecclesiae et reipublicae Anglicanae', dedicated to Prince Charles; he describes it as 'An Exhortation to Humiliation'. In the same year he wrote urging peace with the king ('The Preparative for London... An Hearty and Friendly Premonition to the City of London') and a defence of the observance of Christmas. He may have been the author in 1649 of 'A Hand-kirchife for Loyall Mourners, or, A Cordiall for Drooping Spirits, Groaning for the Bloody Murther, and Heavy Losse of our Gracious King'. For his failure to compound by 1650, his estate at Paxford, Worcestershire, was sold in 1653. By the latter year he seems to have acquired a church living in Shropshire (it is not clear which one). At any rate, in September 1653 Warmestry and another Shropshire conformist, Thomas Good, met Richard Baxter at Cleobury Mortimer in that county. They expressed their 'very good likeing' of the new Worcestershire association. Baxter was delighted that 'some Men of great Learning and Piety that are of the Episcopal Way' were in favour of the association and were prepared to promote it in Shropshire (Keeble and Nuttall, 1.109; 'Reliquiae Baxterianae', pt 2, 164-6). However, Warmestry, after consulting his 'London Brethren' (notably, Peter Gunning), changed his mind about the association, and sent Baxter a series of objections to his views (they were, in fact, written by Gunning). This does not mean that Warmestry's initial interest had been insincere: as in 1640-42, his moderation and his Anglican loyalism pulled him in opposite directions. 
In the interregnum Warmestry acted as confessor to ex-royalists and as an almoner to distressed cavaliers, living in London in the later 1650s. He waited, like other Anglicans, for the political and ecclesiastical climate to change; he regarded, for instance, the conversion of a Muslim effected by Gunning as a propitious sign to the Church of England 'in these evil times' (N. Matar, 'Islam in Britain, 1558-1685', 1998, 145). That change came about with the Restoration of 1660. In June Warmestry became master of the Savoy; in July a prebendary of Gloucester Cathedral; and on 27 November 1661 he was installed as dean of Worcester Cathedral, where he remained until his death. As dean he had to steer the cathedral through a difficult period of recovery and refurbishment after the damage suffered in the civil wars. One difficulty concerned the installation of a new choir organ. The dean interfered with the work of the organ-builder. In a letter of 5 August 1665 to Archbishop Sheldon (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 45, fol. 19), Bishop Skinner commented on Warmestry's 'utter ignorance' of music. 
Having supported Bishop Morley in his opposition to Baxter in 1661, Dean Warmestry went at least twice to Kidderminster after Baxter's departure from the town and preached 'vehement, tedious Invectives' ('Reliquiae Baxterianae', bk 1, pt 2, 149) from the pulpit against Baxter and his former flock 'to cure them of the Admiration of my Person' (ibid., bk 1, pt 2, 376). He was being forced by the polarities of the time to relinquish his former moderation. At an unknown date, Warmestry married Anne or Anna Wright (died 1671), daughter of Richard Wright, clerk, but they had no children. He died at Worcester on 30 October 1665, and was buried in Worcester Cathedral two days later. 


@@@@@


doc= 28750


Warmington, William (b. c.1556, d. after 1627), Roman Catholic priest, who used the alias Peters, was born in Dorset. His father, whose forename is unknown (died before 1594), was a recusant and died in Ilchester gaol where he was imprisoned for his faith. His mother was named Eve (died after 1594) and lived at Wimborne Minster. William matriculated on 20 December 1577 at Hart Hall, Oxford. He left England for the English College at Rheims to be trained as a Catholic missionary priest, arriving there on 7 December 1579. He was ordained at Soissons on 28 May 1580 and was sent to England on 31 January 1581. Arrested in England, he was committed to the Marshalsea prison on 10 December 1582 and was sentenced to death on the false charge of plotting the death of the queen. He was reprieved, however, and banished to France along with a number of other convicted priests. He made for his old college at Rheims, which he reached on 3 March 1585, and then left for Rome on 10 April 1586. Here he became chaplain to Cardinal William Allen. On the death of Allen in 1594 he became an oblate of St Charles. 
Warmington decided to return to England to resume his work, and was certainly there in 1603. In 1608 he was arrested and committed to the Clink. In 1612 he gained instant notoriety by publishing a pamphlet entitled 'A Moderate Defence of the Oath of Allegiance'. The oath of allegiance had been devised by James in the aftermath of the Gunpowder Plot as a test of Catholic loyalty. Catholics found it objectionable because it contained a clause denying the papal power in temporals. By accepting the oath Warmington was placing himself in opposition to many English Catholics, but not to all. For the government of James it was something of a public relations coup to have a former chaplain of the cardinal of England on their side. It is reported that Warmington was now cold-shouldered by some of his Catholic colleagues. He was given preferential treatment by the government, and in 1612 he was let out of prison and was placed for a time in the household of the Church of England bishop of Winchester. However, it is clear that he continued a Catholic, and between 1626 and 1627 was again imprisoned in the Clink. He ended his life in obscurity, and there seems to be no record of the date or circumstances of his death. 


@@@@@


doc= 28751


Warne, Charles (1801-1887), archaeologist, was born in Moreton, Dorset, on 6 July 1801, the youngest son of Joseph Kingston Warne (died 1823) and Leah Kingston Warne (died 1838). Shortly after his birth the family moved to the manor house at Pokeswell, near Warmwell. Charles Warne was educated in schools in Weymouth and Wimborne, and after his mother's death in 1838 settled in Milborne St Andrew, Dorset. In 1844 he became a member of the British Archaeological Association, and in 1856 a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries. On 15 May 1847 he married Anne Holland of Upper Chelsea, London. Shortly after the birth of Alexander Bradley, one of their sons, in August 1850, they moved to London, and subsequently lived at Ewell, Surrey. On 15 April 1859 Anne died. Her wedding ring, late medieval and engraved with figures of saints, was sold at Sothebys in June 1959. Charles Warne, for the sake of his health, settled in Brighton, where he died at his home, 45 Brunswick Road, on 11 April 1887. He was buried in Brookwood cemetery, Woking. 
Although Warne made archaeological tours in France in 1853 and 1854, in company with Charles Roach Smith and Frederick William Fairholt, the focus of his work was Dorset. After two years of travelling through Dorset, accompanied by Charles Hillier, he published an 'Illustrated map of Dorsetshire giving the sites of its numerous Celtic, Roman, Saxon and Danish vestiges' (1865). His studies also led to the 'Celtic Tumuli of Dorset' (1866), and 'Observations and details of Vespasian's first campaign' ('Archaeologia', 41, 1867). In 'Ancient Dorset' (1872) he gave an account of the minting of Saxon, Danish, and Norman coinage in Dorset, and this 'exhaustive treatise' (Hutchins, 1.lxxii) was used for the third edition of Hutchins's 'History of Dorset'. Charles Warne was a keen collector of coins and relics. Many of his coins were sold in 1899, but the museum at Dorchester received his splendid collection of relics and sepulchral urns in 1885, and these included over forty items of Bronze Age pottery. 


@@@@@


doc= 28752


Warneford, Samuel Wilson (1763-1855), philanthropist, was perhaps born at Warneford Place, in the hamlet of Sevenhampton, attached to Highworth vicarage, north Wiltshire. His family, one of the most ancient in that district, owned the manor and all the land in Sevenhampton. Samuel Wilson was the younger son of the Revd Francis Warneford (1732-1784) of Warneford Place, who married Catherine (died 1757), daughter of Samuel Calverley, a wealthy drug merchant of Southwark, and his third wife, Catherine, residing at Ewell, Surrey. Money from the Calverleys greatly enriched the Warnefords. He matriculated from University College, Oxford, on 14 December 1779, and graduated BA (18 June 1783), MA (23 May 1786), BCL (10 July 1790), and DCL (17 May 1810). He was ordained priest in 1787, becoming curate of Norton Broyne (later Brize Norton). 
Warneford married, at Colney Hatch, Middlesex, on 27 September 1796, when he was described as 'of Broughton, Oxfordshire', Margaret (1775-1840), eldest daughter of Margaret and Edward Loveden Loveden (afterwards Edward Pryse Pryse, MP) of Buscot, Berkshire, and his own property was augmented by his wife's fortune. His wife, previously a ward of court, was sickly but rich. In due course, and in the face of strong hostility from Edward Loveden, a marriage settlement was reached linking the two fortunes. Deaths in both families subsequently further augmented Warneford's capital, his wife being left $34,000 by her grandfather. In 1809 Warneford purchased the advowson of the rectory of Lydiard Millicent, Wiltshire; he held the rectorship until his death, but sold the advowson to Pembroke College, Oxford, in 1828. In 1810 he also bought the advowson of the vicarage of Bourton on the Hill, Gloucestershire. On the creation of honorary canonries in the cathedral of Gloucester in June 1844 his name was placed first on the list, and he remained an honorary canon until his death. 
Warneford was an energetic and sharp manager of his and his wife's money and soon became known as an able man of business who expected high standards of his colleagues. He gave his donations gradually, so as to expose and be able to correct errors and deficiencies in the bodies to which he gave them. He did not sermonize, and, beyond his general intention to be a philanthropist, his priorities are chiefly to be inferred from his charitable actions, which were considerable. He became one of the governors of the Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford, which in 1812 appointed a committee to establish a lunatic asylum for persons 'who though poor were not Paupers' (Beckwith, 25). Warneford was one of the subscribers. He was a member of the hospital and of the building committee, becoming impatient in 1831 at the slow progress in building the Radcliffe Asylum, as it was initially known. He particularly worked with Vaughan Thomas on the asylum's development. Warneford's donations (over $70,000 in money and property over his lifetime) and his active involvement led to its being renamed the Warneford Lunatic Asylum in 1843. 
The churches of Bourton and Moreton in Marsh were refitted and improved by Warneford at a cost of $1000 each. He built and endowed at Bourton a 'retreat for the aged', and at Moreton he erected school buildings for children and an infants' school with house for its mistress. He provided also means for securing medical aid for the poor of these districts. The whole diocese of Gloucester received large sums from him for similar purposes, and he gave numerous benefactions to the colonial sees of Sydney and Nova Scotia. 
Warneford founded in 1832 the Warneford, Leamington, and South Warwickshire Hospital at Leamington, and left it at his death the sum of $10,000. His benefactions towards the cost of new buildings at the Queen's Hospital at Birmingham, and for endowments including chaplaincies, a professorship of pastoral theology, and scholarships at the Queen's College, represented a total of $25,000. He there became 'the real ruler of the college' (Beckwith, 43), but became discouraged at its lack of progress and did not leave it the large benefaction for which it hoped. On King's College, London, he bestowed large sums for the foundation of medical scholarships and for establishing prizes for the encouragement of theology among the matriculated medical students. He gave the site of a new boys' school to the Clergy Orphan School near Canterbury, and at his death he left that institution the sum of $13,000. He also contributed large sums, during his life and at his death, to the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, and the Corporation for the Sons of the Clergy. The total of such gifts is said to have equalled $200,000; in fulfilment of his intentions his niece, Lady Wetherell-Warneford, bequeathed $30,000, the income of which was to be applied in building churches and parsonage-houses in poor districts within the ancient diocese of Gloucester, and $45,000, the accruing interest of which was to be expended for the benefit of the widows and orphans of the poor clergy in the same district. His sister Philadelphia, a wealthy woman in her own right, contributed to many of the charities he supported. Warneford's correspondence with Joshua Watson on charities began in 1837 (Churton, 2.59, 313). 
Warneford died at the rectory, Bourton, on 11 January 1855, in his ninety-second year, preserving his faculties to the last. On 17 January he was buried under a tomb in the church. Warneford, though strict, was not ostentatious. After his death it was noted in Leamington Spa: 'Little is now remembered of the good man except his yearly visits to partake of the Waters, and of the extent of his benefactions, few, besides the Committee of the period, were aware' (Beckwith, 52). 


@@@@@


doc= 28753


Warner (fl. 1106), Benedictine monk and homilist, may have come to England from Bec. He became a monk of Westminster, where he was present when the relics of St Wihtburh were translated in 1106. He was known as 'homeliarius' on the strength of the book of homilies that he dedicated to Gilbert Crispin (died 1117), then his abbot. Both the creation and the loss of this collection are significant in an age when original homilies are not common, and even the most modest addition to the surviving corpus would have been welcome. Gilbert Crispin may have provided him with a model through his own preaching, or perhaps even encouraged him directly in the work. 


@@@@@


doc= 28754


Warner, Sir Edward (1511-1565), soldier, was the eldest son of Henry Warner (died 1519), soldier, of Besthorpe, Norfolk, and Mary Blennerhasset. In 1542 Edward married Elizabeth, a daughter of Thomas Brooke, eighth Baron Cobham, and widow of Sir Thomas Wyatt (died 1542); they had three sons, all of whom died in infancy. After Elizabeth's death Warner married in 1560 Audrey Hobart (died 1580), daughter and heir of William Hare, of Beeston, Norfolk. 
By 1537 Warner held a position in the household of Henry VIII, for which he was awarded tithes in Leicestershire. In 1543 he led six footmen in the army for Flanders and was then sent to Scotland, where he was knighted (18 May 1544) by the earl of Hertford for his service in the burning of Edinburgh. In Scotland he was the captain of 100 men. 1546 saw him brought before the privy council, with Lord Haward, to explain his 'indiscreet' talk about the scriptures, although the two were dismissed. Later in 1546 he was involved in an inquiry into the arms of Henry Howard, earl of Surrey, which were held to demonstrate some threat to King Henry. In 1549 he was involved in the defence of Norwich against Ket's rebellion. He was appointed lieutenant of the Tower in October 1552. In April 1553 he was appointed (with others) to audit the king's ordnance. During Henry's and Edward's reigns he received many grants of ecclesiastical lands. In May 1540 he and Lord Cobham were granted the lands of a former Carmelite priory in Norfolk, and in 1549 chantry lands in Norwich and Yorkshire followed. In 1545 and 1547 he was MP for Grantham. 
When Mary acceded to the throne, Warner was removed from his position in the Tower. He was hostile to the new regime, and sympathetic to the cause of Lady Jane Grey; indeed he held the Tower for Northumberland during the attempted coup. He was MP for Grantham in Mary's first parliament, where he stood for the protestant religion. When Wyatt's rebellion unfolded, the government monitored his activities; he may have been involved in discussions about the rebellion at an early stage. In January 1554 Simon Renard (Charles V's ambassador in England) gave the chancellor information that Warner intended to surprise the Tower. He was arrested on 25 January 1554 with the marquess of Northampton, and taken to the Tower. On 10 November 1554 he was indicted. However, the privy council allowed his wife to receive his revenues while he was in prison. On 18 January 1555 he was released on a surety of 300 crowns, and on 2 July 1555 granted a pardon. He was subsequently employed by the crown: in early 1558 he was sent on a mission to the Isle of Wight under Sir Thomas Tresham. 
In November 1558, after Elizabeth's accession, Warner was reappointed lieutenant of the Tower. In September 1559 he was an assistant to the mourners at the obsequies of Henri II in London. He was MP for Great Grimsby in 1559. In his duties as lieutenant of the Tower he dealt with suspected spies and counterfeiters. Among his most important prisoners were the deprived Marian bishops; Lord Wentworth, late lord deputy of Calais, suspected of treason; and, in 1562, John Kele and James Golbourne. The latter were suspected of selling information about the English court to the king of Sweden. The most important prisoner he had to deal with was Katherine Seymour, countess of Hertford. She had clandestinely married Edward Seymour, a union that Elizabeth viewed with suspicion as an attempt to establish their claim for her throne. Warner was instructed to examine her in August 1561. Other duties included his appointment in November 1561 to survey all lands within 2 miles of London that had been formerly used for archery practice, but were now enclosed. He was to see that these were to be reinstated because archery practice was declining. However, he was dismissed from his post at the Tower, and spent a short time in prison, because he treated his prisoners with too much leniency. In 1563 he was MP for the county of Norfolk, and at the opening of the first session of that parliament he was one of the nobles who held a canopy over Elizabeth in her procession. He was sent to the Low Countries in 1565 to examine the state of English trade. Finally in November of that year he was nominated as a commissioner to examine measures for dealing with piracy. He died in Norfolk on 7 November 1565 and was buried in the church at Little Plumstead in Norfolk, his will ordering that his funeral should be conducted with little pomp. In the church there is a monument and inscription to his memory. In 1566 his brother Robert, his heir, was granted licence to enter upon his lands. 
It is clear that Warner was a committed protestant. The first sign of his radicalism was in 1546, and his Calvinism is apparent in the manner of his funeral. Moreover his parliamentary patron in the earlier years was the second earl of Rutland, a committed protestant. It is thus surprising that he escaped any severe punishment in Mary's reign. However, although he was suspected of involvement with Wyatt, this was never proved. He was also a very competent military commander; this may have helped save him in Mary's reign, as Philip did not wish to alienate the nobility and gentry, especially if they could prove useful in a military capacity. 


@@@@@


doc= 28755


Edward Warner (b. 1609/10), colonial governor, Sir Thomas's eldest son, travelled with his father on the initial voyage to St Kitts and acted as deputy governor of that colony during his father's frequent absences. Hilton describes him as 'young in yeares, & as yett not ensighted in government' but innocent of the plottings of his advisers (which in one case included murder): he was 'alwayes of a loving, affable, tender disposicion' (Hilton, 6-7). In 1632 he was appointed by Sir Thomas the first governor of Antigua. Very little else is known of his life except that his wife and child are said to have been carried away from Antigua by Caribs in 1640. This tragedy is said to have contributed to his early death, the date of which is unknown. 


@@@@@


doc= 28756


Warner, Ferdinando (1703-1768), Church of England clergyman and writer, was born at Tewkesbury, possibly the son of James Warner, minister at Tewkesbury. He took holy orders, and was ordained deacon by the bishop of Salisbury in August 1727. On 15 December 1730 he was instituted to the vicarage of Rowde, Wiltshire, where he remained for two years. For the next decade his career is hard to trace, although he was married by 1736 when his son was born. He was admitted as a fellow commoner at Clare College, Cambridge, on 19 January 1742. On 13 February 1747 he was appointed to the united rectories of St Michael and Holy Trinity, Queenhithe, London. In that capacity, he preached before the lord mayor on 30 January 1748 and again on 2 September 1749. He attracted some notice from Archbishop Thomas Herring who awarded him a Lambeth LLD in 1754. Herring's death obliged Warner to endear himself to Lord Chancellor Hardwicke and, to a lesser extent, to the duke of Newcastle. These contacts yielded little in practical results, though Warner depicted himself to Newcastle as 'having done more notwithstanding in support of Your Grace's administration than any man in England of my Rank -- even those whom Your Grace has preferred not excepted' (BL, Add. MS 32947, fol. 218 11 March 1763). Warner welcomed the duke's return to office in 1765-6 but had no more success in extracting preferment from his patron, though his son, John Warner (1736-1800), was a beneficiary. He had meanwhile received the rectory of Barnes in Surrey in June 1758 from the dean and chapter of St Paul's Cathedral. 
Warner had an eclectic range of interests and published on them all. He began in the field of controversial divinity, editing compendia. The first was 'A System of Divinity and Morality' (5 vols., 1750), a series of discourses on natural and revealed religion drawn from the writings of Anglican divines, mainly the moderate whigs who were installed in the 1690s, such as Tillotson and Stillingfleet; 'A Rational Defence of the English Reformation and Protestant Religion' (1752) (dedicated to Archbishop Herring) had extracts from Anglican authors on points of Roman Catholic belief. In 1754 were published 'An Illustration of the Book of Common Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments' and 'A free and necessary enquiry whether the Church of England, in her liturgy... have not... given so great an advantage to papists and deists as may prove fatal to true religion', his concern being with some ambiguous expressions in the liturgy too apparently suggestive of transubstantiation and the real presence. He was also the anonymous author of 'Advice from a Bishop' (1759), intended to be of service to his son, who was on the point of entering the ministry. It was a manifesto for further moderate reformation in the established church. Warner bewailed the 'ignorance and sloth' prevalent in the church and used in evidence the failure to obtain subscriptions to his own history of England ('Advice from a Bishop', 4-6). He was a constant advocate of improved clerical charities, as in 'A Scheme of a Fund for the Better Maintenance of the Widows and Children of the Clergy' (1752), and 'An address to the clergy; with some proposals for raising and establishing a fund... to make a provision for their widows and children' (1755). His later 'Letter to the fellows of Sion College... proposing their forming themselves into a society for the maintenance of the widows and orphans of such clergymen' (1765) contained a proposal that was duly accepted. 
Warner also tried his hand as a historian, showing some modest success. His 'Ecclesiastical History to the Eighteenth Century' (1756-7) is the work for which he is best known, with the second volume dedicated to Hardwicke. The latter offered some material help with 'The History of Ireland to the Year 1171' (1763), only one volume of which was published. Warner worked on original manuscripts in Dublin during 1761. Despite backing from the Dublin Society, the Irish House of Commons extended no financial assistance and he abandoned the project. He made use of the material he collected for 'The History of the Rebellion and Civil War in Ireland' (1767), a volume which expressed the hope that it would encourage greater religious tolerance in contemporary Ireland. Other miscellaneous writings by Warner were: three sermons; 'An imaginary dialogue between Robert Boyle and Lord Bolingbroke, or, A dialogue on the origin and authority of revelation' (1755), the piece Warner himself most valued; 'Memoirs of the Life of Sir Thomas More' (1758), dedicated to Sir Robert Henley, L.K., who helped him secure the living of Barnes; 'Remarks on the History of Fingal and other Poems of Ossian' (1762); and 'A full and plain account of the gout... with some new and important instructions for its relief, which the author's experience in the gout above thirty years hath induced him to impart' (1768). The irony was that Warner died of the disorder on 3 October 1768, within weeks of publication. 


@@@@@


doc= 28757


Warner, John (d. 1565), dean of Winchester and physician, was born in Great Stanmore, Middlesex. He graduated BA at Oxford University in 1520, and was elected a fellow of All Souls College in the same year. He proceeded MA in 1525, and was admitted BM in 1529. At about the same time he was licensed to practise by the university. He acted as proctor in 1529 and 1530, proceeded DM in 1535, and was elected warden of All Souls on 26 May 1536, a position which he retained until 1560 (with an intermission under Mary). In 1540 Henry VIII appointed him first regius professor of medicine at Oxford University. He resigned the chair in 1554, when he became vice-chancellor, a post he also held in 1559-60. 
Warner had taken holy orders in 1537 and became rector of Northmoor, Oxfordshire (1538), of Great Houghton, Northamptonshire (1539), Lower Heyford, Oxfordshire (1544), and Elmley Chapel, Kent (1545). On 30 April 1547 he was appointed to the prebend of Ealdstreet in the diocese of London, and in July of the same year he was nominated archdeacon of Cleveland, an appointment which he resigned about a year before his death. In 1550 he was installed a prebendary of Winchester. He was also archdeacon of Ely and of Cleveland, canon of St Paul's and of Lincoln, and royal chaplain, resigning before 1560. On account of his pro-Reformation sympathies, he was in disgrace during the reign of Mary, but received in 1557 the rectory of Hayes, together with the chapel of Norwood, in Middlesex. He was restored to All Souls in 1559, after the death of Mary, and then received a prebend at Salisbury; and on 15 October of the same year he was nominated dean of Winchester. He was also archdeacon of Ely in 1560, but resigned in the same year. On 17 October 1561 he was admitted a fellow of the College of Physicians. 
Warner was clearly an ambitious man. Wood said that 'He was a learned man of his time, but published nothing, and was a great intruder into ecclesiastical benefices and dignities'. Warner died at his house in Warwick Lane, London, on 21 March 1565, and was buried in the chancel of the church of Great Stanmore, Middlesex. He bequeathed a small number of books to the library of All Souls. 


@@@@@


doc= 28758


Warner, John (bap. 1581, d. 1666), bishop of Rochester, was baptized on 17 September 1581 at St Clement Danes, London, the son of Harman Warner, a merchant tailor. He matriculated from Magdalen Hall, Oxford, on 13 October 1598, was a demy at Magdalen College from 1599, graduated BA on 13 December 1602, and proceeded MA on 12 June 1605. Already 'esteemed a witty man, a good logician and philosopher' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 4.731), Warner was elected perpetual fellow of Magdalen in 1604 but resigned in 1610, perhaps because of the $16,000 he was bequeathed by his godmother or the wealth inherited from his father. In 1613 he proceeded BD and was licensed to preach, and in 1616 he became DD. His first appointments came from Archbishop George Abbot: the rectory of St Michael's, Crooked Lane, London, in 1614, and the first prebend in the chapter of Canterbury in 1616. He resigned the former when he was instituted rector of Bishopsbourne with Barham, Kent, in 1619, but was allowed to retain the latter when Abbot appointed him rector of St Dionis Backchurch, London, in 1625. He also served as proctor for Canterbury diocese in the early 1620s. 
After 1625 Warner may have been detaching himself from Abbot's influence, for he is said to have incurred the wrath of parliament for a sermon, highly critical of its opposition to royal policies, that he preached during Easter week 1626 or 1627 before Charles I at Whitehall on the text 'Matthew' 11: 38 ('This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and seize on his inheritance'). He escaped punishment, but not before securing a royal pardon for any offence given. He became an active Laudian in London in the 1630s, without ever penetrating the inner circle of Caroline ecclesiastical power. In 1633 he was made dean of Lichfield; as a royal chaplain he accompanied Charles I to Scotland for his coronation in Edinburgh; and in 1635 he became rector of Hollingbourne with Hucking, Kent. He may have been the John Warner who on 4 May 1634 at St Michael at Plea, Norwich, married Bridget Bloye: it is certainly possible that his wife's name was Bridget, and becoming through inheritance and investment a rich man, Warner acquired land in Norfolk (where he bought Walsingham Abbey) as well as in Lincolnshire. Perhaps because of his personal wealth, in 1637, at the relatively advanced age of fifty-six or fifty-seven, he was nominated to the poorly endowed bishopric of Rochester. Having been forced to resign his deanery and other benefices, in 1638 he became rector of Bromley, Kent, which was often appropriated to that bishopric; here, although personally frugal, he is said to have been very hospitable. As bishop, Warner acted to enforce the railing of the communion table at the east end of the church; he was also the donor of the magnificent font erected in Canterbury Cathedral in 1639. 
In March 1640 Warner preached in Rochester Cathedral another sermon against Charles's opponents, on 'Psalm' 74: 23 ('Forget not the voice of thy enemies'), which was later denounced as self-serving in 'The Scots Scouts Discoveries' (1642). He also gave $1500 to swell the royal coffers in the campaign against the Scots. He kept a brief diary during the Short Parliament of 1640, supported the decision to permit convocation to continue sitting after its dissolution, and played a part in drafting the new set of canons, which he subscribed. In September 1640 he was one of only two bishops who attended the great council of peers at York, and on 14 May 1641 he signed the protestation against threatened changes to the constitution of church and state. He was one of the thirteen bishops impeached on 4 August 1641 for passing the canons of 1640 and granting the king a benevolence, but was chosen by joint consent of the accused to organize their defence. His stubborn defence of the legality of their actions and of the canons themselves, together with pressure of other business in parliament, contributed to the impeachment's being dropped. On 13 February 1642 'dying episcopacy gave its last groan in the House of Lords' (Fuller, 6.237) when Warner and two other bishops defended the right of bishops to sit in the upper house. 
In 1643 all Warner's lands and goods were sequestered, his books seized, and debts owed him were cancelled. Writing to Gilbert Sheldon in 1660, he recalled that he was also regularly harassed by parliamentarian forces, had to escape to Oxford in disguise, and then moved further west, living on the Welsh border for three years; he spent some time with his wife's relatives in Bromfield, Shropshire. By the late 1640s he was back in Kent, and was consulted by Henry Hammond about the legality of the toleration then being forced on the king; Warner clearly had reservations. At the king's command he also published 'Church-Lands Not to be Sold' -- a long pamphlet painstakingly rebutting parliament's case for the right to sell episcopal and capitular lands. Wood knew of an edition in 1646, but the only extant copies have '1648' on the title-page, amended on Thomason's copy to October 1647. Two years later Warner published 'The Devilish Conspiracy' -- a sermon on 'Luke' 18: 31-3 (foretelling Christ's death) which Warner delivered on 4 February 1649, just days after Charles I's execution. In it he used the Jews' 'hellish treason, heathenish condemnation, and damnable murder' of Jesus Christ, their king (title-page), as the basis for a detailed comparison of the trials and executions of Christ and Charles. 
Warner had already decided to pay fines of about $5000 to have the sequestration on his personal property discharged, and was finally forced out of Bromley Palace on Christmas eve 1648. In the 1650s he lived quietly, but read prayer book services twice daily, preached weekly, celebrated communion monthly, and confirmed the children of the supporters of the old church. In addition he kept in contact with other episcopalians, giving (he later claimed) up to $600 a year to sequestered clergy and their widows. Jeremy Taylor dedicated two books to him, but Warner wrote to Taylor criticizing his account of original sin in the second, 'Unum necessarium'. Taylor printed this and responded to it in 'An Answer to a Letter Written by the R. R. the Lord Bishop of Rochester' (1656). Although extensive sermon notes and many of Warner's other papers, including his notes on political matters in the 1640s and some of his financial records, survive (Bodl. Oxf., MS Eng th.b.4-8 and Norfolk RO, LEEW), the only publications correctly associated with Warner (apart from those cited above) are the three sets of visitation articles for Rochester diocese published in 1638, 1662, and 1666. However, he is said to have been generous in helping others prepare works for the press, such as William Somner's 'Dictionarum Saxonico-Latino-Anglicum' (1659) and Matthew Poole's 'Synopsis criticorum' (1669-76). 
Warner appears to have played little part in 'the business of the Church' -- the campaign to ensure the continuity of the episcopal succession -- and at the Restoration, although he clearly expected promotion to a more important or richer see, and was at one stage allocated Norwich, he was passed over and soon felt 'utterly forgotten' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 49, fol. 23'r'). He was one of four surviving bishops, dressed in episcopal habits, to greet Charles II publicly on his return to London on 29 May 1660, and one of the five survivors who consecrated five new bishops in Westminster Abbey on 28 October, and was placed on the list of court preachers in February 1661. In November he took his seat again in the House of Lords, but thereafter his public role was increasingly confined to his diocese. He addressed his clergy in Rochester Cathedral on 14 October 1662, telling them that he still had 'work enough to set all in order that is left undone or done amiss' (J. Lee-Warner, 47). Having drawn up his will in September 1666, on 21 or 22 October he died; he was buried in Merton's chapel in Rochester Cathedral, where a fine monument by Joseph Marshall was raised to him. 
Warner died childless and his considerable estates descended to his sister's son John Lee, archdeacon of Rochester, who assumed the additional name of Warner as the bishop had stipulated in his will, proved on 7 February 1667. Warner was a great philanthropist, and a member of his family estimated that he gave the equivalent of over $40,000 to good causes during his lifetime and in his will. For example, in addition to the gifts already mentioned, Warner claimed to have given over $1000 to young scholars at Magdalen, a further $1000 to the repair of St Paul's, and over $2500 to redeem Christians held captive in north Africa in the 1660s. The font in Canterbury Cathedral cost him $3000, including repairs undertaken in 1660, and he bought books for the libraries of the college and cathedrals with which he had been associated; $2000 went to buy in impropriations to raise the value of poor vicarages in Rochester diocese, $8500 to build Bromley College, Kent, to house twenty impoverished widows of clergymen, plus $450 a year for its support, and $80 a year in perpetuity to Balliol College, Oxford, for scholarships to support four young Scottish ordinands each year. Warner's learning and wealth had been reflected in his book-collecting over several decades. In 1685 a collection of books said to consist 'principally' of Warner's library was auctioned: the accompanying catalogue, 'Bibliotheca Warneriana', listed well over 2400 titles, over half of which were 'valuable and scarce books in divinity' -- editions of the fathers and councils, church histories, and biblical commentaries (many in Greek and Latin), and many treatises and sermons in English -- together with works on history, philology, and mathematics. His manuscript sermons and political papers, together with this library, confirm what one near-contemporary affirmed, that he was 'a good scholar, an able linguist, a deep divine, and one well read in the Fathers' (BL, Add. MS 4224, fol. 76'r'). 


@@@@@


doc= 28759


Warner, John (1628-1692), Jesuit, was born in 1628 in Warwickshire, the third son of Robert Warner of Ratcliffe, Warwickshire. After his education and ordination in Spain in 1653 he lectured in philosophy and divinity at the English College at Douai from 1657 until 1661-2. During these years he wrote 'Vindiciae censurae duacenae, seu, Confutatio scripti cujusdam Thomae Albii', which was published in Douai in 1661 and which upheld the University of Douai's censures upon the work of Thomas White (alias Blacklo). Warner became a Jesuit in 1662 and from 1665 he lectured in divinity at the English Jesuit college at Liege. While there he wrote 'Conclusiones ex universa theologia propugnandae in collegio Anglicano Soc. Jesu', published in Liege in 1670. From 1671 until 1676 he was stationed at Paris as procurator responsible for the property of the English Jesuits there. He published a number of works of controversy, notably 'Anti-Haman' (1678), entitled 'A defence of the doctrin and holy rites of the Roman Catholic church from the calumnies and cavils of Dr Burnet's mystery of iniquity unveiled', in its second edition (1688); he is sometimes accredited with authorship of 'Dr. Stillingfleet Still Against Dr. Stillingfleet' (1675), more often attributed to John Keynes. From 1678 until 1679 he was rector of the college at Liege. In 1679 he was appointed provincial superior of the English Jesuits in succession to Thomas Whitbread, whose arrest Titus Oates had secured, and he held this appointment until 1683. Later he wrote of this period in a Latin manuscript history, later published under the title 'The History of English Persecution of Catholics and the Presbyterian Plot' (1953). Of this work it has been said that his aim was to present a history of the plot for general European consumption in the light of the contemporary political scene (Warner, 1.xvii). Dodd considered Warner a man of profound learning and especially esteemed his controversial abilities. In 1682 Warner attended the twelfth general congregation of the Jesuits in Rome which elected Charles de Noyelle as superior-general and from 1683 to 1687 he was rector of St Omer College. In 1686 James II appointed him royal confessor. At the revolution he escaped to the continent but only after being arrested twice and imprisoned for a month in Maidstone gaol. It was at this time, probably, that he lost his letter-book covering the years 1678-85, a manuscript now in Cambridge University Library. After making his way to St Germain he followed James to Ireland as a chaplain. Soon after the king's return to France, Warner died at St Germain on 2 November 1692. 


@@@@@


doc= 28760


Warner, John (bap. 1673, d. 1760), horticulturist, was baptized on 11 January 1673 at St Giles Cripplegate in the City of London, the son of James and Mary Warner. He was eminent for his skill in growing fruit. In business as a merchant, he lived in Rotherhithe, on the east side of East Lane, where he constructed a garden which became celebrated for its products. He paid special attention to cultivating vines, and, in 1720, was the first to introduce the Burgundy grape into England. Finding that this variety, when planted against a wall, ripened earlier than others, he conjectured that the vines might ripen as standards; on trial they succeeded beyond his expectation. He considerably enlarged his vineyard, until it afforded him more than 100 gallons of wine annually, and gave cuttings from his vines to all who would plant them. When he started his experiments the only other vineyards in the country, one at Dorking and the other at Bath, were planted with grapes less suited to the English climate. 
Warner's garden comprised several acres. A broad canal ran through the length, on either side of which were planted, besides vines, a treble row of dwarf pears and apples. He raised pineapples, then a rare fruit in Britain, on stoves, and grew other exotic plants. 
The name of Warner's wife, who predeceased him, is unknown. He was survived by a son, Simeon, a daughter, Ann, and their children, and by a daughter Mehitabel, who had married against his wish. Warner died at Rotherhithe on 24 February 1760 and was buried in the Quakers' burial-ground in Long Lane, Bermondsey, as requested in his will, where he speaks of 'the Quakers, with whom I have walked in communion since my youth' (PROB 11/854, sig 129). 


@@@@@


doc= 28761


Warner, John (1736-1800), classical scholar and Church of England clergyman, was born in London, the son of Ferdinando Warner (1703-1768), a clergyman. After initial schooling in Greenwich, he was admitted to St Paul's School, London, on 30 March 1747. On leaving, he spent a few months in Lisbon, but his family felt him to be unsuited to the commercial life. Instead, on 2 July 1754, he was admitted as a sizar at Magdalene College, Cambridge, but moved to Trinity College on 6 November. After matriculating in the Lent term 1755, he became Pauline exhibitioner and Perry exhibitioner the same year. He graduated BA from Trinity College in 1758, and proceeded MA in 1761 and DD in 1773. 
Warner was ordained priest in London on 21 September 1760, and on the 30th was elected lecturer of St Andrew by the Wardrobe and St Ann Blackfriars. That same month he was nominated as morning preacher of his own proprietary chapel in Long Acre (later sold to Dr King, formerly chaplain of the British factory at St Petersburg) by the vicar of St Martin-in-the-Fields, so beginning a ministry which brought him some celebrity as an eloquent preacher at London. He looked to his father's connections with the old corps whigs for patronage. On 20 December 1763 he was licensed to perform the office of assistant preacher and reader at Tavistock Chapel in the parish of St Martin-in-the-Fields (leased from the Bedford estates) and on 30 November 1765 he was licensed as a general preacher throughout the London diocese. He also gained his first living, the vicarage of West Ham, Essex, which he held for ten years until resignation in March 1775, when he was admitted to the rectory of North Benfleet, Essex. West Ham was a crown living bestowed by the duke of Newcastle (newly returned to office) as a means of silencing Ferdinando Warner's complaints of official neglect. 
John Warner also advanced his career outside the capital. In 1777 he was presented to the rectory of Scrivelsby-cum-Dalderby, Lincolnshire. Having been instituted on 4 August, he promptly resigned the living within two months, and was appointed instead to the united rectories of Hockcliffe and Chalgrave in Bedfordshire on 19 December 1777, suddenly vacant after the execution of the previous incumbent, the unfortunate Dr William Dodd, for forgery. The precise reasons for ceding the Lincolnshire parishes so quickly are unclear. Hockcliffe, at $200 p.a., was slightly more profitable than Scrivelsby, valued at $160 p.a. in 1777. It may be that Warner was attracted by the greater proximity to his metropolitan friends. Whatever the explanation, he was largely non-resident and continued to hunt for more comfortable preferment. It was his ambition, he told George Selwyn, 'to be a tight Trulliber, to feed pigs, and grow fat with them' (Jesse, 4.343). His search for the right living finally ended in 1790, when he resigned Hockcliffe and was presented by his friend Sir Richard Colt Hoare to the rectory of Stourton, Wiltshire (instituted 8 October), which he held until his death. In June 1790, on the recommendation of Frederick, fifth earl of Carlisle, and George Selwyn, Warner served as chaplain to the new British ambassador in Paris, Earl Gower. Warner knew the city well. His sister, a Roman Catholic convert, had become a nun there, while Warner himself had lived there previously in the winter of 1778-9, staying with the Abbe Raynal, a sure token of his progressive sympathies. 
Once in France, Warner exhibited an enthusiasm for the revolution deemed excessive for an Anglican clergyman, and he stayed in France for the next three years beyond the closure of the embassy. With other radical whigs (including fellow cleric Horne Tooke) Warner's name was put forward in the Convention in September 1792 for citizenship as one 'known for his energetic speeches, in which he deploys his love of liberty and hatred for kings', as one French newspaper reported, with embarrassing exaggeration (Erdman, 188). There is no evidence to suggest it was granted. In October 1793 the Convention decreed the arrest of all British subjects. The decree came into force just as Warner had reached Boulogne, and he was obliged by the authorities to live outside the town until some time after the overthrow of Robespierre in July 1794. He remained sympathetic to the ideals of the revolution, despite the excesses of the terror, opining that he did not 'think it an advantage to this country [Britain], that Bourbon politics should grow in fashion, and that, because the French run mad, the sound principles of English liberty should be trodden under foot' ('Monthly Magazine', 171). 
Warner was a committed whig, an advocate of parliamentary reform, and a friend of his fellow radical parson Horne Tooke; he subscribed to the 'Diversions of Purley' and left Tooke a silver goblet in his will. Warner was an excellent scholar with a reputation for wit that made him, in later life, a close friend of George Selwyn (by whom he was nicknamed The Snail) and a member of the circle of the fourth duke of Queensberry (whom he attended to both Drumlanrigg and Amesbury). As one obituarist recorded: 'His attachment to literature was unbounded; he was moderate to an extreme at the table, and equally abstemious at the bottle: a book, a pipe, and cheerful conversation, in which he eminently excelled, were his supreme delight' ('GM', 70/1, 1800, 92). His humanitarian concerns were well known. He personally relieved distress among his parishioners in the 1790s and was an ardent admirer of his Bedfordshire neighbour the philanthropist John Howard: Warner was a moving spirit in the erection of the statue to Howard's memory in St Paul's Cathedral. 
Warner died in St John's Square, Clerkenwell, on 22 January 1800, and was buried in a vault in St John's Church on the 30th. His genial, sociable temperament limited his literary productivity. He published anonymously, 'Metronariston, or, A new pleasure recommended, in a dissertation upon a part of Greek and Latin prosody' (1797) and a memoir of Major Cartwright in 'Public Characters' (1798). He never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 28762


Warner, Joseph (1717-1801), surgeon, was the eldest son of Ashton Warner (1691-1752), politician, of Antigua in the West Indies. Joseph Warner later inherited the estate in Antigua, together with a ring, said to be the one given by Elizabeth I to the earl of Essex. Warner was sent to England when young and was educated for six or seven years at Westminster School. He was apprenticed for seven years to Samuel Sharp, surgeon to Guy's Hospital, on 3 December 1734. Warner passed his examination for the great diploma of the Company of Barber-Surgeons on 1 December 1741, and on 2 March following he paid the usual fee of $10 and took the livery of the company. At this time he was acting with his master, Sharp, as joint lecturer on anatomy at Guy's. 
Warner volunteered to accompany the expedition in 1745, under the duke of Cumberland, to suppress the rebellion in Scotland, and he was elected surgeon to Guy's Hospital, in succession to James Pierce, on 22 February 1746, an office he resigned on 30 June 1780. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 6 December 1750, and on 5 April 1764 he was chosen as a member of the court of assistants of the Company of Surgeons. He became a member of its court of examiners on 6 August 1771, and he served as its master in 1780 and in 1784. When the Royal College of Surgeons was created in 1800 Warner became its first member, so that he was one of the very few surgeons who belonged to the three corporate bodies of surgeons which have existed in England. He was a member of the college's court of assistants from 1800-01. Warner shared with William Bromfield, Sir Caesar Hawkins, and Sharp the civil surgical practice of London. He was one of those surgeons who 'from midcentury on... began to insist ever more vehemently that a good surgeon avoided operating if possible, and cured, instead, by regimen and medicines' (Lawrence, 305). 
Warner contributed little to the literature of surgery, but what he wrote provides an insight into the opinions of contemporary surgeons. He was the first surgeon to tie the common carotid artery, an operation he performed in 1775. Warner's reputation rests on his 'Cases on surgery... to which is added an account of the preparation and effects of the agaric of the oak in stopping of bleedings after some of the most capital operations' (1754), translated into French (Paris, 1757). The cases extend over the whole domain of surgery and are related with brevity, skill, and judgement. A dispute with John Hunter over surgical teaching at Guy's led Warner to write a memorandum in which he describes the nature of surgical training at the hospital. It is printed in Wilks and Bettany's 'A Biographical History of Guy's Hospital' (1892). Warner died at his house in Hatton Street, London, on 24 July 1801. 


@@@@@


doc= 28763


Warner, Mary Amelia (1804-1854), actress and theatre manager, was born in Manchester, the daughter of Thomas Huddart (died 1831), a Dublin chemist turned actor, and his wife, Ann, 'nee' Gough, of Limerick. Huddart had acted briefly at the Crow Street Theatre, Dublin, before appearing in London at the Theatre Royal, Covent Garden, in October 1798 as Othello and enjoying some success later in provincial theatres. After playing at Greenwich for her father's benefit, Mary Huddart joined John Brunton's company at the reputed age of fifteen, appearing at Plymouth, Exeter, Bristol, and Birmingham. She is said to have played also at the Surrey and Tottenham Street theatres in London. In 1829 she joined the company at the Theatre Royal, Dublin, and on 22 November 1830, as Miss Huddart from Dublin, appeared at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, as Belvidera in Thomas Otway's 'Venice Preserv'd', having been recommended to the managers, Captain Polhill and Alexander Lee, by W. C. Macready, who took the part of Pierre. Macready's diaries suggest that there was for a time a strong mutual attraction, and, despite his growing criticisms of her, both professional and personal, their friendship lasted until her death. 
Among the parts played by Huddart in her first season were Emma in Sheridan Knowles's 'William Tell', Alicia in Nicholas Rowe's 'Jane Shore', and Constance in 'King John'. She was also the original Queen Elswith in Knowles's 'Alfred the Great'. She then returned to Dublin and played leading roles under Granby Calcraft. In 1836, under Alfred Bunn's management, she was again at Drury Lane, where she supported the American actor Edwin Forrest in John Galt's 'Lady Macbeth' and was the original Marian in Knowles's 'Daughter', then called 'The Wrecker's Daughter'. This led to her engagement at the Haymarket Theatre for the first production in London of 'The Bridal', on 26 June 1837. The play was an adaptation by Macready and Knowles of 'The Maid's Tragedy', in which Huddart appeared as Evadne with Macready as Melantius. She also played Portia to Samuel Phelps's Shylock and Helen McGregor to his Rob Roy. On 6 July 1837, at St George's, Bloomsbury, she married Robert William Warner, formerly the landlord of The Wrekin tavern, Broad Court, Bow Street, a haunt of actors and journalists, who had become bankrupt four months earlier. Warner described his subsequent role as making engagements for his wife and escorting her to and from rehearsals and performances. 
In the autumn of 1837 Mrs Warner joined Macready's company at Covent Garden, where she stayed for two years, supporting him in many Shakespearian parts and gaining in reputation. She was the original Joan of Arc in T. J. Serle's play of that name. Premature labour prevented her from playing at Covent Garden the heroine of Thomas Talfourd's 'The Athenian Captive', but she took the part at the Haymarket on 4 August 1838. She was again in Macready's company when he took the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, in the autumn of 1841, and played the Queen in 'Hamlet' (29 April 1842), and the original Lady Lydia Lynterne in Westland Marston's 'The Patrician's Daughter' (10 December 1842). In 1843 she acted with Phelps in Bath, and on 27 May 1844, with him and T. L. Greenwood, began the memorable management of Sadler's Wells Theatre, London, in which they sought to make the theatre 'a place for justly representing the works of our great dramatic poets' ('The Era', 1 Oct 1854). She spoke the address, by Serle, on the opening night, when she played Lady Macbeth. 
During the first season Mrs Warner appeared in many roles, including those of Mrs Oakley in Colman's 'The Jealous Wife', Gertrude in 'Hamlet', Lady Allworth in Kemble's 'A New Way to Pay Old Debts', Queen Margaret in 'Richard III', Portia in 'The Merchant of Venice', Evadne in 'The Bridal', Lady Frugal in Massinger's 'City Madam', Queen Katharine in 'Henry VIII', and Madeline in Serle's 'The Priest's Daughter'. On 21 May 1845 she played Madame Chateaupres in Sullivan's 'The King's Friend'. During the 1845-6 season she again took many parts, including Julie in Bulwer Lytton's 'Richelieu', Belvidera in 'Venice Preserv'd', Elvira in Sheridan's 'Pizarro', Hermione in 'The Winter's Tale', Clara Douglas in Bulwer Lytton's 'Money', and Alicia in 'Jane Shore'. She then retired from the management of Sadler's Wells, and, in a spirit of apparent rivalry, undertook that of the Marylebone Theatre off the Edgware Road, then described as 'one of the prettiest minor theatres in London' ('The Times', 31 Aug 1847). She opened on 30 August 1847 with 'The Winter's Tale' and a farce, 'The Windmill', by Thomas Morton junior. She aimed, as at Sadler's Wells, to provide productions of Shakespeare based on the authentic text. She also sought historical accuracy in costume and set. Perhaps unwisely, she took parts better suited to a younger actress, such as Julia in Knowles's 'The Hunchback', Lady Teazle in Sheridan's 'The School for Scandal', and Lady Townly in Cibber and Vanbrugh's 'The Provoked Husband'. In November she revived 'The Scornful Lady' of Beaumont and Fletcher, altered by Serle, in which she played the Lady; and in April 1848 she put on Serle's 'The Double Marriage', playing Juliana. Macready starred with the company that month, but the theatre closed on 9 May with a reputed loss of $5000. Mrs Warner then returned to the Haymarket, where she supported Macready during his farewell performances before his departure for America. On 28 July 1851 Sadler's Wells was opened for a few nights before the beginning of the regular season to give Mrs Warner an opportunity of playing her best-known characters before also starting for America. What proved to be her last appearance in England was made in August, as Mrs Oakley in 'The Jealous Wife'. She met with great success in America, but after developing cancer she travelled to England in 1852 for an operation, and then revisited New York. There she became too ill to fulfil her engagements, and she returned to London in June 1853, gravely ill. On 10 December 1853, through her husband, she applied for protection to the insolvent debtors' court, where it was reported that a fund had been established on her behalf by a group of friends, among them Dickens and Macready. Subscribers to this included the queen and Angela Burdett-Coutts. A benefit at Sadler's Wells brought her $150. Miss Burdett-Coutts undertook the charge of a daughter and Macready of her son, John Lawrence Warner, who later tried but failed to make a career as an actor. Mrs Warner died on 24 September 1854 at her home, 16 Euston Place, Euston Square, and was buried on 2 October at Highgate cemetery. Despite child bearing and a perennial burden of debt, Mrs Warner sustained leading roles in the principal London theatres for some fifteen years, most notably in tragedies, and was ranked second only to Helen Faucit (Lady Martin) and Mrs Charles Kean (Ellen Kean). She was equally good in pathos and in tragic emotion. Her chief success was obtained as Evadne, in which role Dickens described her as a 'defiant splendid Sin'. Both energy and intensity were at her disposal, though she was open to the charge of ranting. In management she followed Macready and Phelps in insisting on the original text of Shakespeare's plays, although she was happy to accept contemporary versions of other stage classics. Macready spoke of 'a sympathy in her friendship, a strong good sense in her observations and an acuteness of penetration that makes her society soothing and pleasing' ('Diaries', 1.196), but later referred to her mind 'never very elevated, undergoing a process of vulgarization' (ibid., 2.357). 


@@@@@


doc= 28764


Warner, Philip (d. 1689), army officer in Antigua, was born in the Leeward Islands, the third son of Sir Thomas Warner (c.1580-1649), founder of English settlements there, whose family was from Suffolk. His mother, the second wife of Sir Thomas Warner, was Rebecca, daughter of Thomas Paine of Surrey. Warner reached his maturity during a period when island society, comprised largely of impoverished time-expired indentured servants, was crude in the extreme and dangerously exposed to destructive raids by Carib natives from the island of Dominica. In the disastrous war of 1666-7, in which all of the English Leewards except Nevis were captured and despoiled by the French and their Carib accomplices, he accompanied Deputy Governor Daniel Fitch in an undistinguished and unsuccessful mission to relieve the beleaguered island of Antigua. Thereafter, in 1667, he commanded a regiment of 500 men in successful assaults upon the French settlement at Cayenne and the Dutch fort at Surinam. After resettlement of the English Leeward colonies Warner returned to planting, taking part in the transition from tobacco to sugar culture. He was a member of the Antigua council and from 1672 to 1675 served as deputy governor of Antigua and commander of the militia, a force numbering 1052 foot soldiers and 100 horse. After a particularly destructive Carib raid in late 1674, he was dispatched by Colonel Stapleton, governor-general of the Leeward Islands, to avenge the English colonists. With 300 men he routed the Caribs of Dominica, killing many, including Indian Warner ['see 'Warner, Thomas (c.1630-1674)], who was widely believed to be his half-brother, a natural son of Sir Thomas Warner and a female Carib slave. The crown was displeased. It considered Indian Warner a useful, if unreliable, ally in the colonial struggle against France and an asset in restraining hostile Caribs. On a visit to England in 1675 Warner was arrested for Indian Warner's murder and held for months in the Tower. He was tried in a Barbados court and acquitted. Events surrounding the death of Indian Warner remain disputed. Although abundant testimony by colonists affirmed the good character and proper conduct of Warner, he was forbidden to hold further office under the crown. He was elected to the Antigua assembly and became speaker in 1679. He died on 23 October 1689 of injuries sustained when his horse stumbled and fell on him, and was buried at St Paul's, Antigua. He and his wife, Henrietta (died 1697), the daughter of Henry Ashton, a former governor of Antigua, had six children, two sons and four daughters. 


@@@@@


doc= 28765


Warner, Richard (1713?-1775), botanist and literary scholar, was born in London, the third son of John Warner (1663-1721), goldsmith and banker, in business in the Strand, near Temple Bar. John Warner, sheriff of London in 1640, and lord mayor in 1648, in which year he was knighted, was probably his great-grandfather. His father was a friend of Bishop Burnet and with his brother Robert, a barrister, purchased property in Clerkenwell, comprising what was afterwards Little Warner Street, Cold Bath Square, Great and Little Bath streets, and the surrounding area. In 1722 after his father's death, Richard Warner's mother bought Harts, an estate at Woodford, Essex, which, at her death in 1743, she left to him. On the death of his brother Robert about 1765 he also inherited the Clerkenwell property. 
Warner entered Wadham College, Oxford, in July 1730 and graduated BA in 1734. He was 'bred to the law, and for some time had chambers in Lincoln's Inn; but, being possessed of an ample fortune, resided chiefly at a good old house [built 1617 by Sir Humphrey Handforth, master of the wardrobe to James I; demolished 1815] at Woodford Green, where he maintained a botanical garden, and was very successful in the cultivation of rare exotics. (Nichols, 75)' Little, except a few trees and the remains of a mock ruin, survives. He was 'also in his youth, as is related of the great Linnaeus... remarkably fond of dancing; nor, till his passion for that diversion subsided, did he convert the largest room in his house into a library' (R. Pulteney, 'Historical and Biographical Sketches of the Progress of Botany in England', 1790, 2.283). 
In 1748 Pehr Kalm, a pupil of Linnaeus, then on his way to collect plants in North America, visited Warner at Harts. Warner took him to London, to Peter Collinson's garden at Peckham, to visit Philip Miller at Chelsea, and to see the aged Sir Hans Sloane. In 1754 Warner received from the Cape of Good Hope the so-called Cape jasmine, actually the gardenia, a double-flowered form of a Chinese species, which flowered for the first time in his hothouse four years later. In a letter to Linnaeus, John Ellis (1710?-1776) proposed that it should be called 'Warneria'. Warner, however, objected because his friend Miller believed it to be a true jasmine, and Ellis named it 'Gardenia', now correctly 'G. augusta' (Rubiaceae). Miller dedicated a genus based on the North American goldenseal to him in 1760, but that had been given the name 'Hydrastis' by Linnaeus in the previous year, and so is known by that name. 
Up until 1766 Warner, who had copies of all four early folio printings, had 'been long making collections for a new edition of Shakespeare; but on Mr [George] Steevens's advertisement of his design... he desisted' (Nichols, 75). In 1768 he published 'A letter to David Garrick, esq., concerning a glossary to the plays of Shakespeare... to which is annexed a specimen'. Although turning aside to other studies, Warner was employed 'to the last hour of his life' on this glossary, and bequeathed all papers relating to it to his 'friend David Garrick, esq. of Adelphi Buildings', that they might be published, and the profits, if any, applied to a fund for decayed actors. In a codicil, however, he left the papers absolutely at Garrick's disposal, and gave $40 to the fund. Two manuscripts of this glossary, one in fifty-one quarto volumes, and the other in twenty octavo volumes, with an interleaved copy of Tonson's edition of Shakespeare (1734), with numerous manuscript notes by Warner, the original manuscript of the 'Letter to Garrick', and an alphabetical index of words requiring explanation in the plays of Beaumont and Fletcher, are now in the British Library (Add. MSS 10464-10543). 
Warner also translated several plays of Plautus into prose, and the 'Captives' into verse, before the announcement of Bonnell Thornton's version. In the preface to the two volumes published in 1766 Thornton writes that Warner, 'to whom I was then a stranger, was pleased to decline all thoughts which he had before conceived of prosecuting the same intention... communicating to me whatever he thought might be of service.... The same gentleman also took upon himself the trouble of translating the life of our author from Petrus Crinitus.' On Thornton's death in May 1768 Warner issued a revised edition of the two volumes (1769), and then continued the work, translating fourteen plays and issuing them in three additional volumes, two published in 1772, and the last in 1774, the continuation being dedicated to Garrick. 
Meanwhile Warner had, in 1771, printed his best-known work, 'Plantae Woodfordienses: Catalogue of... Plants Growing Spontaneously about Woodford'. This little book had its origin in the 'herborisations' of the Apothecaries' Company, to the master, wardens, and court of assistants of which it is dedicated. An index of Linnaean names is added. Though by no means free of errors, the 'Plantae Woodfordienses' served as a model for Edward Jacob's 'Plantae Favershamienses' (1777), and in 1784 Thomas Furly Forster thought it worthwhile to print some thirteen pages of 'Additions'. In one of his own copies of the book, now at Wadham College, Warner had made several additions for an intended reissue. 
Warner died, unmarried, on 11 April 1775, at Harts, and was buried on the 20th in the churchyard of St Mary's, Woodford Green, being probably, as stated in the register, 'aged 62', and not, as stated on his tomb, sixty-four. He bequeathed the bulk of his property to Jervoise Clarke-Jervoise, the widower of his niece Katherine (Kitty), second child of his brother Robert. Having been elected a director of the East India Company in 1760, he left 'as is customary', $100 to its hospital at Poplar, $50 to Garrick, and all books and drawings relating to botany and natural history to Wadham College, with $300 to found a botanical exhibition at the college. Warner's books (over 4000 volumes), now at Wadham, comprise, besides several valuable botanical works, including presentation copies of Miller's works and other items from Miller's library, interleaved copies of Shakespeare, the works of Spenser, Milton, and Beaumont and Fletcher, and some small collections of dried plants of little intrinsic value. A collection of mosses and lichens made by him was presented by Sir Jervoise Clarke-Jervoise to the Essex Field Club. 


@@@@@


doc= 28766


Warner, Richard (1763-1857), antiquary, was born on 18 October 1763 at St Marylebone, Middlesex, the only son of Richard Warner, a tradesman prosperous enough to retire about 1776 to Lymington in Hampshire as a gentleman with a substantial house. Lymington was dominated by the family of the younger Richard's friend Sir Henry Burrard Neale (1765-1840). Warner attended Christchurch grammar school and familiarized himself with the New Forest and its antiquities: he even excavated some barrows. He intended to enter the church, but his chosen route -- from Winchester College to New College, Oxford, and a fellowship -- proved unattainable. Only in 1787, after a period spent in an attorney's office, did he enter St Mary's Hall, Oxford; he left after eight terms without a degree, apparently to take up a curacy at Boldre, Hampshire. Here he served under the Revd William Gilpin (1724-1804), an enthusiastic walker and admirer of New Forest scenery, who could no longer minister to his parishioners himself. Gilpin became a close friend, a fatherly patron, and a formative literary influence. Since the bishop of Winchester, Brownlow North, would not ordain a non-graduate, Warner was ordained instead by Archbishop William Markham of York. He served three months as curate of Wales, near Doncaster, before returning to Boldre. About 1793 he became curate of Fawley, the valuable living of the Revd Henry Drummond of Cadland. 
Warner's early publications were prodigious, if ephemeral. Unlike his mentor, Gilpin, his interests were antiquarian rather than picturesque. He wanted fame, but also wrote for money. Although his 'Companion in a Tour Round Lymington' (1789) lost him $22 5's'., he followed it immediately with a translation of the Hampshire 'Domesday', published in the same year. His 'Southampton Guide' (1790) made a profit of $5, but his 'Antiquitates culinariae' (1791) involved him in costs and damages of $70 for pirating a print. His scholarly 'Attempt to Ascertain the Site of the Ancient Clausentum' (1792) was followed by his two-volume 'Topographical Remarks on the South-Western Parts of Hampshire' (1793), his brief 'General view of the agriculture of the Isle of Wight' in the larger Hampshire volume (1794), and, in 1795, 'A History of the Isle of Wight'. In the same year, he published a Gothic novel about Netley Abbey, which was well received (as were the four preceding publications). He also proposed a full-scale three-volume history of Hampshire, but although there were enough subscribers by 1793, he abandoned the project on grounds of expense. Warner's so-called 'History of Hampshire' of 1795 was in fact the worthless compilation of another anonymous author. 
In 1794 Warner became the first minister of All Saints, Bath, a curacy of Walcot, before moving next year to the officiating ministership of St James's, Bath, a curacy of Bath Abbey, where he remained until 1817. At once he immersed himself in the history, environs, and literary society of Bath, where he became a prominent figure and a frequent correspondent in the 'Bath Journal'. The town's neglected Roman past stimulated his 'Illustrations of the Roman Antiquities at Bath' (1797) and his full-scale 'History of Bath' in 1801. 
Warner's vacation in August 1796 was spent in Wales, walking from Bath to Caernarfon and back; he covered 36 miles on the first day and 462 miles in all, at an average of 26 miles a day. Naturally his tour included visits to antiquities, which he described in a series of eighteen letters, published as 'A Walk through Wales' in 1797. Emboldened by the popularity of this work, he published works based on walks in Wales, the south-west, and the borders in 1798-1802; these reached further and even foreign editions. Warner's marriage to Ann ('nee' Pearson) in 1801 and fatherhood in 1802 may henceforth have focused his attention once again on Bath: in 1807-9 he published three satirical volumes on local society, under the pseudonyms of Peter Paul Pallet and Thomas Goosequill. 
Warner 'distinguished himself by his worthy endeavour to inculcate rational piety' ('GM', 1st ser., 100/1, 1830, 612): St James's Church was always crowded, and his sermons were 'models of pulpit eloquence'. Starting with a 'Chronological History of our Lord and Saviour: an English Diatessaron' (1803), his religious publications included practical discourses, sermons, companions, and introductions. He was a political reformer, a supporter of Fox and the 1832 'Reform Act'. As an opponent of the younger Pitt, in 1804 he gave the sermon 'War inconsistent with Christianity' to volunteers destined for service abroad. Warner objected to evangelicalism for encouraging disrespect to the church: 'I conceive the 'Evangelical Clergy' as a body of the established priesthood, separating themselves from their brethren of the ministry, by the arrogant claim of an exclusive 'knowledge of the Gospel', and as a sole right to be considered as 'evangelical' preachers. ('Letter to the Hon. and Rt Rev. Henry Ryder', 15)' He also opposed Catholic emancipation, belittling the supposed ills of Catholics under Britain's constitution. From 1824 he found a sympathetic patron in Dr George Law (died 1845), bishop of Bath and Wells. 
According to the Revd Joseph Hunter, the Unitarian minister of Bath and a fellow antiquary, Warner's 'liberality of sentiment... stood in the way of his advancement' (BL, Add. MS 26527 fol. 134). He remained at Bath on presentation in 1809 by Burrard Neale to Great Chalfield rectory, worth only $62 a year, but resigned his curacy on presentation to Norton St Philip with Hinton Charterhouse in 1817. After remaining there only a year, he lived at Widcombe Cottage, Bath, from 1818 to 1822, when he let it to reside briefly at Great Chalfield. He moved subsequently to Newton St Loe (1822-7), Coltard, near Pensford (1827), and Castle Cary (1830). Surviving letters to Hunter illuminate his work on his 'History of... Glaston: and... Town of Glastonbury' (1826), which he dedicated to Bishop Law. Law collated him in 1825-7 in turn to Timberscombe (worth $222), Croscombe ($170), and Chelwood by Bath ($200), where he apparently resided from 1833 to 1847. Though retaining Great Chalfield and Chelwood rectories until his death, Warner had retired by 1848 and died on 27 July 1857 at his home, Widcombe Cottage, Chelwood, where his long-blind widow died in 1865. He was buried on 11 August 1857 in Chelwood church. Of the Warners' two daughters, Ellen Rebecca died in 1833 and Elizabeth Sophia outlived them both. 
Warner wrote with great facility and parade of learning, but his works were commercial rather than scholarly, and as such were often derivative and inaccurate. Hunter observed that 'he was deep in no subject. He had read little, made no particular preparations for publication, and began to read in a subject only when he had previously determined to publish upon it' (BL, Add. MS 26527, fol. 134). His histories of Bath and Glastonbury were useful compilations, but they left their subjects as Warner had found them. 


@@@@@


doc= 28767


Warner, Samuel Alfred (1793/4-1853), charlatan, was born at Heathfield, Sussex, the son of William Warner, a carpenter. His own fanciful account of his early years was contradicted by information later confided to Sir Robert Peel when Peel was becoming convinced of Warner's deceit (BL, Add. MS 40555, fol. 160): this revealed that Warner's family resided at Faversham, but that he and his father were often away for long periods and were known locally as smugglers; and that Samuel Warner became friendly with a chemist in Holborn named Garrald whom he persuaded to move to Camberwell, where, perhaps, they devised around 1819 an explosive other than gunpowder for the so-called 'invisible shell'. This appears to have been a submerged mine which detonated when a passing ship entangled and dragged on a line attached to the charge. 
Warner then entered the service of Emperor Dom Pedro of Portugal, taking part in 1832-3 in the defence of Porto (from which time he styled himself 'Captain'). This episode was confirmed by two British officers who had also been there and who asserted that Warner had tried unsuccessfully to sell Dom Pedro his invisible shell. On his return Warner determined on selling his invention to the British government. News of the invisible shell reached a Mr Lufkin of the War Office and ultimately came to the ear of William IV. The 'sailor king' invited Warner to discussions and encouraged his ministers and sea lords to investigate the whole affair. Demonstrations were arranged and assorted experts gave evidence to several parliamentary select committees. Warner's own testimony involved a rambling account of an expedition on board his father's ship 'Nautilus' during the late war, when it had been hired by the British government for undercover operations against the French; he claimed to have devised the shell around 1819, and with it to have sunk two French privateers, leaving no survivors. However, the most diligent government enquiries failed to find trace of any such vessel or its logbook, or of the Warners' being hired for any such operations, or indeed of any prize money being claimed for sinking enemy ships. 
As the experts failed to agree on the value of Warner's supposed invention, and one committee followed another, Warner became more truculent. He refused to demonstrate the shell before those whom he suspected of opposing him and he wrote boasting or defiant letters to various influential men and to the editor of 'The Times'. The government found itself in a predicament: should Warner be ignored as just another impostor, or did he really have a secret of immense military value which must on no account fall into enemy hands? Warner refused to disclose the nature of his invention without a promise of $200,000 should the device be found acceptable; the government refused to make any such promise ahead of disclosure. Warner threatened and wheedled, ministers declared their wish to see him treated fairly, but neither party was willing to budge from its entrenched position. More demonstrations were arranged; in February 1841 a party including Sir Robert Peel, Sir George Murray, Sir Henry Hardinge, Sir Francis Burdett, Viscount Ingestre, and Colonel Goodwood gathered by a lake in Essex where Warner blew up a small boat, without allowing the onlookers to see how it was done. 
In 1844 Warner advertised in the newspapers his intention to demonstrate his shell off Brighton. On 17 July a huge crowd, swelled by many MPs and Londoners brought there by excursion train, lined the cliffs to watch a tug steam into view, towing the target vessel which, at a signal from shore, blew up and sank in full view of the spectators. The event was colourfully described and pictured in the 'Illustrated London News'. Members of parliament could not, however, agree on the value of what they had seen, for there was no clue as to where the charge had been laid or how it had been fired. Their doubts were fuelled by rumours from Shoreham harbour that the tug and target vessel had been connected by many underwater ropes, and moreover that timbers washed ashore from the wreck were found to have been sawn through as if to weaken the target's structure. 
Warner's principal supporter at this time was Viscount Ingestre, who on 31 July delivered a long speech to the House of Commons arguing that the government had a duty to reach an agreement with the inventor. In the other camp was an equally vocal opponent, Lord Howard Douglas (author of the standard treatise on naval gunnery) who thought that Warner's invisible shell sounded remarkably like that described in print in 1821 by Montgery, a French naval officer. 
Warner then claimed to have invented in 1835 what he termed his 'long-range', which could deliver a shell onto a target such as an enemy fortress several miles distant. His price for disclosing the secret of this useful device was also $200,000. Eventually the government conceded a sum of under $2000 towards his expenses in preparing a demonstration. Peel and his advisers assumed that the long-range was a fired missile but when ordnance experts attended the demonstration they found that the shell was to be delivered by balloon. It later emerged that Warner, under an assumed name, had arranged with the noted balloonist Charles Green to provide and launch a balloon for trial. This balloon had risen to a great height and burst, but when the wreckage was examined, the gunpowder was still unexploded. Not surprisingly, Green was never paid for his contribution. When the government-funded demonstration took place in August 1846 before the appointed observers, the balloon was seen to trace an erratic path aloft, dropping shot from time to time, a delivery clearly so inaccurate and beyond control as to have no military value whatsoever. By May 1847 Peel and Douglas were describing Warner as a charlatan and impostor and most of the house agreed with them. Warner then found a new supporter in Lord Talbot, who, as the editor of the 'United Service Magazine' remarked in the course of a blistering attack on Warner, his fabulous early life and his absurd demands that he 'like Frankenstein -- has breathed life into this invisible shell. After the judgements of the Duke of Wellington, Sir Howard Douglas, Sir Byam Martin, Colonel Chalmer, and Captain Chads how could anyone be so credulous of Warner's claims' (Lord Talbot, 276-83). 
The last committee to be appointed never reported. On 5 December 1853 Warner, resilient to the last, died suddenly of apoplexy at 1 Bloomfield Place, Pimlico, London, leaving a 'widow' and seven children destitute. He was buried in Brompton cemetery on 10 December, the cost of his funeral being met by a George Smith, and the local curate did his best to raise money for the support of his family. Even this family was not what it appeared to be, for Warner's real wife was found to be living on parish relief in Ashford, Kent, and one of his daughters was married to a clerk in the Stationery Office. The author of his obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' described him as 'one of those monomaniacs who after repeated attempts to deceive others, are at length supremely successful in deceiving themselves... [He] maintained to the last that he was possessed of the secret of an explosive compound much more powerful than any in known use'. Few such impostors have, however, succeeded in playing successive governments on such a slender line for more than twenty years. 


@@@@@


doc= 28768


Warner, Sir Thomas (c.1580-1649), colonial governor, was a younger son of William Warner, landowner, and Margaret, daughter of George Gernigan or Jerningham of Belsted, Suffolk. It is likely that Thomas Warner was born at Parham, in Suffolk, where his father owned land. 
Very little is known of Thomas Warner's early life. By 1610 he had married Sarah, daughter of Walter Snelling of Dorchester. They had two children: Mary and Edward ['see below']. Warner served as a captain in James I's bodyguard and as lieutenant of the Tower of London before embarking for Guiana on 30 April 1620 with Captain Roger North. The charter of North's Amazon Company was revoked by James I after Spanish protests and North was recalled and gaoled in the Tower. His colonists were left to fend for themselves. By this point Warner had met Thomas Painton, who impressed on him the advantages of a colony on one of the smaller Caribbean islands, principally St Kitts. The chief advantage was that small islands were less likely than a mainland colony to attract Spanish attention. In 1622 Warner left Guiana for England. On the way he visited several Caribbean islands including St Kitts, where he made the acquaintance of the Carib 'King Tegreman [or Tegramond], king of St Christophers', and settled on that island as a likely spot for a plantation (Hilton, 2). 
After returning to Suffolk, Warner enlisted the support of Charles Jeaffreson, a neighbour and friend, and Ralph Merifield (or Merrifield), a merchant of London. In 1623 Warner, his wife (presumably Sarah), son Edward (aged thirteen), and about fourteen others, mostly from Suffolk, sailed for Virginia and from there to St Kitts, where they landed on 28 January 1624. The colonists set to work planting tobacco but their first crop was destroyed by a hurricane in September, which also carried away most of their houses. Their second crop was ready by February of the following year, and on 18 March 1625 Jeaffreson arrived in the 'Hopewell' with men and provisions sent by Merifield. In September 1625 (either in the 'Hopewell' or the 'Black Bess' of Flushing) Warner returned to England with a cargo of tobacco. It may have been while in England that he married his second wife, Rebecca, daughter of Thomas Payne of Surrey; they had two sons, Thomas and Philip Warner, an army officer. 
While Warner was absent a French privateer commanded by Pierre Belan, sieur d'Esnambuc, stopped at St Kitts badly damaged and in need of refitting. The French were welcomed to the island, and their desire to establish a colony there was seconded by the English, most likely because of fear of the island's Carib population. It is also possible that the English recognized some French claim to prior possession: when Warner's first party arrived on St Kitts there was at least one Frenchman already living on the island and perhaps more. After the French colony was begun the combined French and English forces (who in Thomas's absence were under the command of his son Edward) fought off two concerted attacks by Caribs from St Kitts and neighbouring islands, in November and December 1625. 
While in England, Warner secured royal recognition and protection for his colony, receiving on 13 September 1625 the first letters patent for a West Indian colony and the title of lieutenant of St Kitts, Nevis, Barbados, and Montserrat. In the grant St Kitts is also referred to as 'Merwar's Hope', a name derived from the first letters of Merifield and Warner, but the name never caught on. After securing his patent, title, more investment, and letters of marque, Warner left England for St Kitts. With him were the London merchant Maurice Thompson, about 100 colonists, and sixty slaves. Along the way Warner's small fleet of three ships took some Spanish prizes in the North Sea and the channel before unsuccessfully attacking the Spanish in Trinidad. 
Warner reached St Kitts in August 1626. Soon afterward an Indian woman (some sources suggest this may have been the same with whom Warner had an illegitimate son, Thomas Warner, known as Indian Warner), warned him of another impending attack by the Caribs. In a pre-emptive strike French and English forces surprised the island's original inhabitants at night, killing Tegreman and expelling all survivors from the island except an unknown number of women retained as slaves. After killing or driving off the Caribs, St Kitts's French and English settlers concluded a formal treaty on 13 May 1627 that divided the island and defined the relationship between the two groups. The treaty awarded each end of the island to the French and the middle portion to the English. The treaty also provided for mutual defence against Spanish or Carib attack and dictated neutrality in a European war unless expressly forbidden by each government, and only then after a warning had been given. 
In June 1627 Warner's patent was replaced by a proprietary charter granted to James Hay, first earl of Carlisle, which offered the island's planters secure title to their lands and assistance in defending the island in exchange for a substantial rent. Although Warner's own patent was voided, as 'de facto' governor he was diligent in furthering the earl's interests. During the late 1620s the population of St Kitts grew steadily in number, wealth, and importance, bolstered by a steady supply of migrants. Captain John Smith relates the arrival of Warner's wife in 1627, presumably his second wife, Rebecca; it is not known when she died, but at some point Warner married Anne, whose background is unknown. They had no children. As St Kitts became more populous and prosperous Warner oversaw the expansion of English settlements in the Leeward Islands: to Nevis in 1628 and Montserrat and Antigua about 1632. Montserrat was settled largely by the numerous Irish migrants to the Caribbean, and Antigua was first governed by Warner's son Edward. 
By 1629 the demands of the increasing English population for land had begun to sour relations with the French of St Kitts, who complained of encroachments on their territory. Relief arrived in August of that year, when Esnambuc returned to St Kitts accompanied by six ships of the line and 300 colonists. Esnambuc demanded that the English abandon French lands they had settled and, after seizing some English merchant ships, compelled the acting governor, Edward Warner (Warner had left for England in September or November 1628), to submit. 
Unfortunately for the planters of St Kitts, the French fleet did not linger long, and in September 1629 an overwhelming Spanish force under Don Fadrique de Toledo attacked and laid waste to the island. After a brief fight many of the French colonists managed to escape to St Martin, and Edward Warner surrendered the English forces to the Spanish. Under the generous terms of surrender most of the island's settlers were allowed to return to England, but many retreated inland instead. After the Spanish withdrew, these colonists elected a governor and set about rebuilding. They were soon joined by returning French settlers and later by Warner, who had been knighted in England on 21 September, no doubt in recognition of his services since the void of his patent; a week later, on 29 September, Carlisle named him as governor of St Kitts for life. Since the island had been surrendered to the Spanish, Warner was forced to renegotiate the rents owed to the earl (who had provided little or no protection from the Spanish). But despite his strained relationship with the planters, Warner resumed control. 
After the death of the first earl of Carlisle in 1636 loyalties among the English settlements in the Caribbean became tangled and strained. St Kitts and the rest of the Carlisle patent (which included the Leewards, St Vincent, St Lucia, and Barbados) were caught up in the disputes between the second earl of Carlisle and his father's creditors. Warner, ever loyal to the first earl, was appointed lieutenant-general of all colonies under the Carlisle patent, but his authority was openly challenged by Henry Hawley, governor of Barbados, who refused to supply men from Barbados for Warner's plans to expand settlement in the Antilles. 
In May 1639, acting in keeping with royal policy, Warner entered an agreement with Chevalier Phillippe de Longvilliers de Poincy, governor-general of all French island possessions, to ban tobacco cultivation in the islands for eighteen months. The policy was intended to prop up tobacco prices and force planters to diversify their crops. Although the French planters resumed tobacco cultivation after the term expired, tobacco planting in the English islands was banned for an additional twelve months, until 1 October 1641. During this period planters' debts increased, their servants' terms expired, and their plantations yielded them no marketable commodity. After they were allowed to resume planting, landholders faced the prospect of paying back-rent to the proprietor in addition to managing their increased debt burden and the need to pay for new servants. Since he re-established control in 1630 Warner had managed to rule St Kitts with an appointed council and without consulting the island's planters. But given the financial pressures on planters and Warner's staunch support for the proprietor's demand for rents, the situation soon became explosive. 
In late 1641 the island's planters rebelled and in early 1642 Warner and his council declared martial law and imprisoned some of the leaders of the rising, succeeding briefly in regaining control. Rebellion flared again after Warner's council executed a man named Short for defaming John Jeaffreson, an old ally and a member of the council. On 8 February 1642, facing some 1500 armed rebels to his 100 supporters, Warner was presented with the landholders' grievances. Among other things the island's planters refused to pay rent to the proprietor and refused to acknowledge laws passed without their consent. Warner issued a general pardon on 11 February and soon afterwards the island elected its first assembly of burgesses, which began drafting new laws regarding the payment of rents and debt relief. 
But Warner refused to share power with a representative assembly and by the end of 1642 he was back in complete control of the island. How he managed this is unclear, but Bennett suggests he may have had help from the French. The burgesses were dispersed: some were executed, some imprisoned, and some banished. Others had fled. Once the Antilles came under parliamentary control, Warner was rewarded with an appointment (on 4 November 1643) as governor and lieutenant-general of the Caribbee Islands under Robert Rich, earl of Warwick. This grant would be confirmed when the patent passed to Lord Willoughby of Parham, and Warner's position as the chief official in the British West Indies and the unquestioned ruler of St Kitts would continue until his death. 
As a colonial governor and investor Warner was remarkably successful. Compared with other islands, St Kitts under his leadership was relatively stable and quickly profitable. In 1639 Warner estimated that the island generated $12,000 in fees and duties. Further, he survived many political changes, remaining virtually synonymous with the government of St Kitts from its founding until his death. His inflexible rule and powerful connections spared his colony the turmoil experienced by Barbados, but he also unwittingly contributed to the declining importance of the island among the British West Indian colonies. By the time the sugar revolution had come to Barbados, St Kitts's small landholdings, depleted soil, lack of credit, and high population density made it unsuitable for sugar plantation, and it forever faded in importance in comparison. Warner died on 10 March 1649 and was buried in the churchyard of St Thomas, Middle Island, St Kitts. His wife Anne outlived him by over forty years and died between 16 July 1692 and 27 February 1693. 




@@@@@


doc= 28769


Warner, Thomas (c.1630-1674), colonial governor, was the son of Sir Thomas Warner (c.1580-1649), colonial governor, and a Carib woman whose name is unknown but who lived from about 1600 to 1700. Warner was raised in his father's household until Sir Thomas's death in 1649, when his stepmother began treating him as a slave. Warner fled St Christopher for Dominica and soon assumed a leading role among that island's Carib settlements. Warner's ability to act as a mediator made him an important figure in England's Caribbean policy. In 1664 he was made governor of Dominica by Francis, Lord Willoughby of Parham. In this position Warner was able to soothe French fears of an English settlement on the island even as he held the title of British governor. During the Second Anglo-Dutch War, however, Warner was imprisoned by the French for two years and freed only after the personal intervention of William, Lord Willoughby, in 1668. Soon after gaining his freedom, Warner negotiated a peace between the English and the Caribs of Dominica, St Vincent, and St Lucia, and was reappointed governor of Dominica by Willoughby. 
In retrospect it is impossible to say whether Warner's primary loyalty lay with the English or the Caribs, but English colonists on Antigua were certain that Warner was behind repeated Carib attacks. In December 1674 Antigua's governor, Colonel Philip Warner (another son of Sir Thomas and therefore Thomas Warner's half-brother), led a controversial expedition against the Indians in Dominica, in the course of which Thomas Warner was killed under mysterious circumstances. An eyewitness accused Philip of luring his brother and many of his Indian allies on board his sloop and massacring them. Other contemporaries defended Philip by claiming that Thomas died in combat, but the circumstances of this battle are itself unclear. Philip's case was a 'cause celebre': he was accused of murder, taken to England and imprisoned in the Tower, then sent to Barbados, where he was tried and finally cleared of all charges. 


@@@@@


doc= 28770


Warner, William (1558/9-1609), poet and lawyer, was born in London. His verse history, 'Albion's England' (1586), confirms his father was a voyager who accompanied Richard Chancellor to Russia in 1553, and died on the way to Guiana under William Towerson in 1577 (book 11, chap. 62, ll. 1-2; book 12, chap. 70, l. 30). There are no records to support Anthony Wood's claim that Warner studied at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, and he certainly did not take a degree there. Nevertheless, 'Albion's England' includes a panegyric on the 'Primer-schooling' university, which could be either Oxford or Cambridge (book 15, chap. 99, ll. 1-6). Having settled in London, Warner practised as an attorney in the court of common pleas. On 3 October 1599 he married the widow Anne Dale in Great Amwell, Hertfordshire; a son, William, was born at Ware in Hertfordshire on 18 February 1604 (Mahon, 8). 
Warner's earliest publication was an episodic prose romance, 'Pan his Syrinx, or Pipe, Compact of Seven Reedes' (1584); a second edition appeared in 1597. A translation of Plautus by 'W. W.', 'Menaecmi: a Pleasant and Fine Conceited Comaedie' (1595), has been attributed, probably mistakenly, to Warner. The author is more likely the committed innovator of English versification William Webbe, whose 'Discourse of English Poetrie' (1586) includes a defence of Plautus. 
Warner is best remembered for 'Albion's England, or, Historicall Map of the same Island', licensed to Thomas Cadman on 7 November 1586. A pirate edition had already been printed by Roger Ward; the sheets were seized on 17 October 1586. The long episodic poem narrates the history of Britain from the time of Noah until the Norman conquest, and contains a prose 'Breviat of the true Historie of AENEAS'. In the editions which followed in the next twenty-six years, 'Albion's England' expanded from four to sixteen books. A second edition in six books appeared in 1589, complete with a folding woodcut detailing the lineages of the houses of Lancaster and York. The third and fourth editions of 1592 and 1596/7, in nine and twelve books respectively, continued the history of England up to the reign of Elizabeth I. In the fifth edition of 1602, enlarged to thirteen books, Warner added a prose 'Epitome of the whole historie of England'. Warner praised the new reign of James I in 'A Continuance of Albion's England' (1606), and 'Albion's England' appeared for the final time in 1612, after Warner's death. 

'Albion's England' records in fourteen-syllable couplets 'the gests of 'Brutons' stout, and acts of English men' (book 1, chap. 1, l. 4). The text is an eclectic mixture of classical mythology and Christian legend, together with episodes from the English chronicles and theological debate. 'Albion's England' was dedicated to the lord chamberlain, Sir Henry Carey, first Lord Hunsdon; the 1606 'Continuance', however, was dedicated to Sir Edward Coke. After Henry Carey's death in 1596, Warner added a second dedication in the fourth edition to Henry's son Sir George Carey, second Lord Hunsdon. 
Warner was a well-respected poet in his time. Many quotations from 'Albion's England' appeared in Robert Allott's 'England's Parnassus' (1600) and Warner's story of Henry II and Rosamund probably influenced Samuel Daniel's 'Complaint of Rosamond' (1592). Michael Drayton drew on Warner for 'Matilda' (1594), 'Englands Heroicall Epistles' (1597), and 'Poly-Olbion' (1612), acknowledging the debt in 'To my most Dearly Loved Friend Henry Reynolds' ('The Works of Michael Drayton', 1931-41, 3.228). Francis Meres called Warner 'our English 'Homer'' in 'Palladis tamia' (1598, 281), while Gabriel Harvey found in 'Albion's England' 'many things... commendable, divers things notable, somethings excellent' ('Pierces Supererogation', 1593, 191). John Weever included an epigram on Warner, the 'prince of Poets', in his 'Epigrammes in the Oldest Cut, and Newest Fashion' (1599, sig. G1'r'). Thomas Nashe is perhaps more lukewarm in his preface to Robert Greene's 'Menaphon' (1589), concluding that poetry 'hath not beene any whit disparaged by 'William Warners' absolute 'Albions'' (1610 edn, sig. B3'v'). 
Warner died on 9 March 1609 in the parish of Great Amwell, Hertfordshire, where he had 'dwelt awhile' according to John Scott's poem 'Amwell' (1776). He was buried at the church of St John the Baptist on 11 March 1609. His sudden death is recorded in the parish register by Thomas Hassel, vicar of Great Amwell: 'Mr William Warner a man of good yeares and of honest reputation; by his profession an Atturnye at the common plese: author of 'Albions England', diynge suddanly in the night in his bedde without any former complaynt or sicknesse on Thursday night, beeinge the 9th daye of March; was buried the Saturday following, and lyeth in the church at the upper end under the stone of Gwallter Fader.' 



@@@@@


doc= 28771


Warre, Sir William (1784-1853), army officer, was born at Porto, Portugal, on 15 April 1784, the eldest son of James Warre and his wife, Eleanor, daughter of Thomas Greg of Coles Park, Hertfordshire. He was educated at Harrow School and on 5 November 1803 commissioned ensign in the 52nd foot, which he joined at Hythe. Promoted lieutenant by purchase on 2 June 1804, he purchased his company in the 98th foot on 25 April 1806. On 7 August he exchanged into the 23rd light dragoons, and joined them at Clonmel, co. Tipperary, in October 1806. 
In the following summer Warre attended the recently established Royal Military College at High Wycombe. In May 1808 he became aide-de-camp to Major-General Sir Ronald Crauford Ferguson, who was serving in an expedition assembled at Cork to attack the Spanish colonies in America. However, the expedition sailed instead for Portugal under the command of Sir Arthur Wellesley. Warre took part in the battles of Rolica (17 August) and Vimeiro (21 August), after which he fell ill with dysentery. He was sent to Lisbon, where Major-General William Carr Beresford took him into his house, and on his recovery attached him to his staff. Warre served with Beresford throughout Sir John Moore's campaign, ending with the battle of Corunna on 16 January 1809. Warre remained with his division to cover the overnight evacuation of the army, embarking himself the following afternoon, along with Beresford and the rear guard. 
Beresford accepted the chief command of the Portuguese army in March 1809 and took Warre with him, making him a major in the Portuguese service and his senior aide-de-camp. Warre was with Beresford at Lamego and the passage of the Douro on 12 May. After the capture of Porto, Warre destroyed the bridges in the rear of the retreating French army, despite inadequate means and violent opposition from local peasants. As a consequence of Warre's work Wellington was able to overtake Marshal Soult at Salamonde, from where on 16 May Soult managed to escape only by abandoning his guns and baggage. Warre took part in all the operations of Beresford's division 1809-10, but during the withdrawal to the lines of Torres Vedras in September 1810 he fell ill with rheumatic fever and had eventually to return to England. 
Warre rejoined Beresford in May 1811 after the battle of Albuera, and took part in the second siege of Badajoz in May and June. He was promoted brevet major in the British army on 30 May 1811, and lieutenant-colonel in the Portuguese service on 3 July. He was at the siege and capture of Ciudad Rodrigo on 19 January 1812, at the third siege and capture of Badajoz on 6 April, where with Lord FitzRoy Somerset he played a prominent part in Wellington's success, and at the battle of Salamanca, where Beresford was wounded, on 22 July. Warre accompanied him to Lisbon and then returned to England. 
For his services Warre was made a knight of the Portuguese order of the Tower and Sword, and a commander of the Portuguese order of St Bento d'Avis (1816). He was promoted brevet lieutenant-colonel in the British army on 13 May 1813. His 'Letters from the Peninsula, 1808-1812' was edited by his nephew the Revd Edmond Warre in 1909. 
Warre married on 19 November 1812 Selina Anna (died 3 Feb 1821), youngest daughter of Christopher Thomson Maling of West Herrington, Durham, and sister of the first countess of Mulgrave. They had seven children, three of whom died in South Africa. The third son, General Sir Henry James Warre (1819-1898), colonel of the Wiltshire regiment, served in the Crimean and New Zealand wars. 
On Beresford's advice Warre accepted the appointment of deputy quartermaster-general at the Cape in 1813, returning from there in 1821. Two years later he was appointed one of the permanent assistant quartermasters-general, and for the following fourteen years served in middle-ranking staff appointments, mostly in England and Ireland. In December 1826 he was appointed assistant quartermaster-general of the force hastily assembled under Lieutenant-General Sir William Henry Clinton to aid the Portuguese who were threatened by Spain. The troops did not have to fight, and Warre returned to England in 1828. In 1837 he was made commander of Chatham garrison. He was made CB on 19 July 1838 and knighted in 1839. On promotion to major-general on 23 November 1841 he relinquished the command in Chatham and became colonel of the 94th foot (Connaught Rangers). He was promoted lieutenant-general in November 1851 when he retired. He died at York on 26 July 1853 and was buried at Bishopthorpe. 


@@@@@


doc= 28772


Ambrose William Warren (bap. 1780, d. 1856), engraver, the third son of Bartholomew and Hannah Warren, was baptized on 27 October 1780 at St Andrew's, Holborn. It is likely that he worked and was trained by his brother Charles (who is wrongly described as his father in the 'Dictionary of National Biography'); their plates appear in the same publications. Among his earliest work was a portrait of Sir Roger Curtis, after C. M. Metz, published on 26 June 1802, and plates for Alexander Pope's 'Essay on Man' (1819). Cervantes' 'Don Quixote' (1818), Horace Walpole's 'Castle of Otranto' (with Clara Reeves's 'The Old English Baron', 1817), Lord Byron's 'Poems' (1816), William Ottley's 'Engravings of the Marquis of Stafford's Pictures' (1814-18) and Edward Young's 'Night Thoughts' (1811) are representative and were shown at W. B. Cooke's exhibition of engravings in 1821. He also engraved plates for the Society of Arts 'Transactions' (1816-19) and for the 'Description of the Collection of Ancient Marbles in the British Museum' (1812-45), by T. Combe and others. He married Elizabeth Rebecca Callow on 12 May 1810 at St Pancras Old Church; their daughter Mary Ann was baptized on 13 May 1816 at St Andrew's, Holborn. An Edmund Warren, possibly a son, was present at Ambrose's death. Ambrose Warren's steel plates included two for Walpole's 'Anecdotes of Painting' (1827), many for various editions of Walter Scott's works, the annual 'The Gem' (1830-31), several editions of David Hume and Tobias Smollett's 'History of England' from 1834-6 onwards, and a series of royal portraits from Alfred the Great to George II. His most important single plates are 'The Beggar's Petition', after W. F. Witherington (1827), and 'The New Coat', after David Wilkie (1832). His plates, mostly well engraved, were signed variously 'A. W. Warren', 'A. Warren', or 'Warren'. He died of apoplexy at Orchard Cottage, Enfield Highway, on 24 April 1856, and was described on his death certificate as 'historical engraver'. Engravings by both Warrens are held in the prints and drawings department of the British Museum, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 28773


Warren, Arthur (fl. 1605), poet, is known only through his authorship of a volume of poetry published in 1605, 'The Poore Man's Passions, and Povertie's Patience'. Entered in the Stationers' register on 14 January 1605, it was published in London in 1605 and printed by I[ames] R[oberts]. Warren dedicated the volume to 'his kindest Favourer Maister Robert Quarme' (possibly the Robert Quarme of Woodhouse, Devon, father of Walter Quarme, BA 1615-16, Lincoln College, Oxford). Nothing else is known of Warren, but several nineteenth-century scholars have suggested that he was the 'A. W.' to whom were attributed a variety of poems in the last decades of the sixteenth century, but primarily the eighty-one in Francis Davison's miscellany, 'A Poetical Rhapsody, 1602-1621'. If these poems were written by one person, 'then', as Hyder Rollins said in his edition (1932) of the miscellany, 'one of the greatest poets of the Elizabethan period is still unknown' (Davison, 2.65). However, thanks to Rollins's rigorous analysis it seems most likely that the 'A. W.' poems were by several writers, that Arthur Warren was not one of them, and that 'A. W.' probably stands for 'anonymous writer'. 
It has been claimed that Warren composed his poems while he was imprisoned for debt. While there is no evidence for this, clearly the author is a man of some education living in extreme penury. In any case the two poems confirm that he was not 'one of the greatest poets of the Elizabethan period'. Both poems are as awkwardly phrased as they are monotonous, each obsessively concerned with a single topic. 'The Poore Man's Passions' describes the vast gulf between the heartless rich and hopelessly poor people like himself. 'Povertie's Patience' preaches to the poor that 'patience' produces 'content' and can only be gained by those ascetic enough to renounce all worldly goods. Yet despite their artistic ineptitude these poems merit attention as a literate outcry by someone rarely heard from at first hand in the Jacobean period, one of the 'poor naked wretches' of Shakespeare's 'King Lear'. Warren's poems are not merely a complaint. They have a political agenda: that it is the toil of the poor that makes possible the extravagant, selfish lives of the Jacobean conspicuous consumers: '
Diggers, and Dikers, Drudges, Carters, Swaines, 

... The poorest persons worke thy richest gaines. 

... Coblers, and Curriers, Tinkers, Tanners all 

Support thy state, else would thy fortress fall; 

' and that the rulers should: '
Summon a Parliament... 

To extirpate the roots of misery. 
('Poore Man's Passion', sigs. [B4], [B5'v'])' Warren's words were eerily prophetic of various idealistic programmes like that of Gerrard Winstanley, the mid-century communitarian 'Digger', who argued that 'Rich men receive all they have from labourer's hand' ('The Law of Freedom', 1652). But with the collapse of revolutionary fervour and the restoration of the monarchy those who had naively hoped to level the playing field soon discovered, as Warren foresaw, that like Tantalus: '
what they [the poor] stoop to take, too low doth lie; 

And what they reach to catch, ascends too hie. 
('Poore Man's Passion', sig. [E2])' 



@@@@@


doc= 28774


Warren, Charles (1766/7-1823), engraver, was the eldest son of Bartholomew and Hannah Warren. The family appears to have moved to London before the baptism of David Bartholomew, a younger brother of Charles, on 15 October 1769 at St Martin-in-the-Fields. The name Bartholomew Warren occurs most frequently in Cornwall, which may be Warren's native county. Little is known of his early life, although his obituary in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' mentions engraving on copper calico printing rollers as his earliest employment; he is also thought to have worked for gunsmiths. He married Elizabeth about 1787 (since their daughter Elizabeth was born on 20 March 1788). 
Soon afterwards Warren began a long association with London booksellers, notably Charles Cooke, by engraving plates for popular works; the earliest were portraits of Fox, Pitt, and Thurlow, produced for 'The Senator, or, Clarendon's Parliamentary Chronicle', the first volume of which was issued in 1790. Many editions of literary works carried Warren's engravings in the last decade of the eighteenth century, and from 1803 he engraved for John Sharpe's series of classics. Later he engraved the plates for William Ottley's 'Engravings of the... Marquis of Stafford's Collection of Pictures' (1814-18) and after Robert Smirke for a celebrated edition of Cervantes' 'Don Quixote' (1818). His reputation was made by two plates engraved for John Boydell's edition of his 'Shakspeare' (1803), which probably led to Warren's election -- on the proposal of the mezzotint engraver Valentine Green -- to the Society of Arts on 31 October 1804; he engraved nine frontispiece portraits for the society's 'Transactions' in 1805 and between 1813 and 1821. He was elected a member of the Committee of Polite Arts on 22 March 1805 and served until his death, being one of its two chairmen in 1805-7 and 1822-3. He was also elected a governor of the short-lived Society of Engravers (founded in 1802); it was succeeded by the Artists' Annuity Fund, established in 1810, of which Warren was president from 1812 to 1815. He was also a director and exhibitor of twenty plates at W. B. Cooke's exhibition of engravings in 1821. His style of copper-engraving was well adapted to his subjects and his execution was meticulous. 
After the Plymouth Stock Bank had suffered losses from forgery, Warren was asked to design and execute a vignette for their notes. This resulted in his being requested to give evidence to the committee on forgery, set up by the Society of Arts: here, on 15 April 1818, he supported J. T. Barber Beaumont's campaign to persuade the Bank of England to use steel plates for printing their notes. To demonstrate his views, Warren engraved a head of Minerva on a decarbonized saw blade in May 1818, maintaining that the process of case hardening blocks of steel was unnecessary and potentially damaging. He devoted the next four years to further experiments and, with the aid of his platemaker Richard Hughes, finally produced a satisfactory technique, which was first demonstrated publicly in the frontispiece and engraved title-page for an edition of Philip Doddridge's 'Rise and Progress of Religion' (May 1822). He thus made steel plates acceptable to engravers in general, for which the Society of Arts awarded him their gold medal in 1823. He died before he could receive it, and it was presented to his brother Ambrose by the duke of Sussex in May 1823. Warren was assisted by Samuel Davenport, Thomas Fairland, Joseph Phelps, and Henry Chawner Shenton, who married Warren's daughter Mary Ann on 9 March 1824 at St Pancras Old Church. 
Warren died suddenly of heart disease in the middle of a conversation at East Hill, Wandsworth, on 21 April 1823; he was buried in St Sepulchre Church, Newgate Street, on 1 May. His many friends found him sociable, generous, and of a cheerful disposition, although he was inclined to be improvident. His will, dated 8 September 1816, is a key document which establishes his relationship as brother to both Ambrose William and William Warren. It makes no mention of his wife, who must have predeceased him, but names two daughters, Elizabeth, who married the engraver Luke Clennell in 1809 and died in 1819, and Mary Ann, who alone survived him and inherited most of his property. His brothers were left engravings, a complete set being bequeathed to Ambrose. 




@@@@@


doc= 28775


Warren, Sir Charles (1798-1866), army officer, born at Bangor on 27 October 1798, was the third son of John Warren (1766-1838), dean of Bangor, who was nephew of John Warren, bishop of Bangor. His mother was Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Crooke MD, of Preston, Lancashire. The mathematician John Warren was an elder brother. He entered the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich, but, being offered by the duke of York a commission in the infantry, he was gazetted ensign in the 30th foot on 24 November 1814, and joined the depot at Colchester on 24 January 1815. He commanded a detachment from Ostend in the march of the duke of Wellington's army to Paris after Waterloo, and entered Paris with the allied army. 
In January 1816 Warren embarked for India, and served at Fort St George, Madras, until his return to England in the summer of 1819. He was promoted lieutenant on 13 November 1818. On 17 August 1820 he transferred to the 55th foot. In December 1821 he embarked with his regiment for the Cape of Good Hope, was promoted captain by purchase on 1 August 1822, commanded a detachment of two companies on the Cape frontier from November 1824 to the end of 1825, and returned to England in 1827. During his service at the Cape he rode from Cape Town to Grahamstown, and, among other expeditions into the interior, he journeyed across the Orange and Vaal rivers to Sitlahoo with Mr Glegg of the Madras civil service, who published an account of it at the time. Warren visited the Griqua and BaRolong chiefs and Robert Moffat's mission station near Kuruman. Extracts from his journals were printed in the 'Royal Engineers Journal' in June and July 1884. His notes and sketches were made use of by his son, Lieutenant-Colonel Charles Warren of the Royal Engineers, when reporting on the Bechuana and the Griqua territories fifty years later, in 1876. 
Warren married on 17 April 1830, and, with his wife, Mary Anne (died 20 Jan 1846), daughter of William Hughes of Dublin and his wife, Margaret, embarked for India. He served at Fort St George, Madras, until the end of 1831, when he marched to Tunamalli and Bellary in command of a wing of the regiment. He commanded the 55th in the expedition against the raja of Coorg in April 1834 and was severely wounded. He was promoted major on 21 November 1834, sent to Vellore in 1835 and to Sikandarabad in 1836, and returned to England with his family in 1838. 
On 26 June 1841 Warren sailed for China in command of a detachment; he arrived at Hong Kong in November, fought in the war of 1842, and was mentioned in dispatches. He was promoted brevet lieutenant-colonel on 23 December 1842, and the following day was made a companion in the Order of the Bath. He also received the war medal. After his return to England in August 1844, Warren was promoted regimental lieutenant-colonel to command the 55th regiment on 25 November 1845, and served with it in Ireland during the famine in 1846-7. In March 1851 he accompanied it to Gibraltar, where he served until May 1854, when he took it to Turkey and the Crimea. He commanded the regiment (which formed part of the 1st brigade, 2nd division), was wounded at the battle of the Alma, and was mentioned in dispatches. He commanded his brigade at Inkerman in November 1854, and was again wounded and mentioned in dispatches. He by now had a considerable reputation for bravery, publicly recognized by Lord Raglan, the commander-in-chief in the Crimea. 
Warren was sent to Scutari and then on sick leave, until he was sufficiently recovered to return to the Crimea on 12 July 1855; on the 30th he resumed command of the 1st brigade, 2nd division, and served continuously in the trenches until the fall of Sevastopol, again being wounded. In February 1856 he was given the command of an independent brigade, composed of the 11th hussars, the siege-train, and four battalions of infantry, which he held until June, and in July he returned to England. For his Crimean services he received the medal with clasps for Alma, Inkerman, and Sevastopol, the reward for distinguished military service, the fourth class of the Legion d'honneur, the third class of the Mejidiye, and the Turkish and Sardinian medals. 
On 8 August 1856 Warren was appointed to command a brigade at Malta with the temporary rank of major-general. On 26 October 1858 he was promoted major-general on the establishment of the army. He remained at Malta for five years, and, in the absence of the governor, acted for some time as governor and commander of the forces. He was made a knight commander in the Order of the Bath, military division, on 19 April 1865. 
Charles and Mary Warren had six children, two of whom died young. Warren got married again on 4 October 1859, this time to Mary (died 22 Dec 1860), daughter of George Bethell, rector of Worplesden and vice-provost of Eton College. There were no children from the second marriage. Warren's eldest son, John, served with him in the Crimea, dying of wounds at Scutari. His second son, Charles (aforementioned), had a varied and distinguished military career. Warren died at Monkstown, near Dublin, on 27 October 1866. 
Warren had a natural ability for science and mathematics. His memory was so good that he could retain in his mind all the figures of a long calculation, and could correct and alter those figures at will. He was also a good draughtsman. He occupied his leisure time during the later years of his life in perfecting an instrument which he had invented for the graphic solution of astronomical problems for nautical purposes, and which he had brought to the notice of the Admiralty in 1845. The instrument was for the purpose of approximately determining the latitude from two observations taken before 9 a.m. and at noon, and also of finding the latitude by a south altitude, from the time of day, and of finding the amplitude and azimuth. The invention was considered ingenious, and its principle correct; but its adoption was not recommended for the Royal Navy, in case this induced neglect of even the slight acquaintance with nautical astronomy which officers were then required to possess. 


@@@@@


doc= 28776


Warren, Frederick (1775-1848), naval officer, was born in London in March 1775, the son of Dr Richard Warren (1731-1797), physician to George III, and his wife, Elizabeth, the second daughter and third child of Dr Peter Shaw; he was the elder brother of Pelham Warren. He was admitted to Westminster School on 15 January 1783, and entered the navy in March 1789, on board the 'Adamant', flagship of Sir Richard Hughes on the Halifax station. When the 'Adamant' was paid off in 1792, Warren was sent to the 'Lion' (Captain Erasmus Gower), going out to China. Shortly after his return, on 24 October 1794, he was confirmed lieutenant and appointed to the 'Prince George'. He afterwards served in the 'Jason' on the home station, and in the 'Latona' at Newfoundland, where he was promoted on 10 August 1797 to command the sloop 'Shark'. In 1800 he commanded the 'Fairy' (18 guns) in the West Indies, and on 12 May 1801 was promoted captain. On the renewal of the war in 1803 he commanded the sea fencibles of the Dundee district for three years. He married, in 1804, Mary, only daughter of Rear-Admiral David Laird of Strathmartine House, Dundee; they had children, among whom the eldest son, Richard Laird Warren, died an admiral in 1875. 
In November 1806 Warren was appointed to the frigate 'Daedalus' (32 guns) and took her to the West Indies, where in April 1808 he was moved to the 'Meleager' (36 guns), which was wrecked on Barebush Key, near Port Royal on 30 July 1808. Warren was acquitted of blame, and officially complimented on his exertions after the ship struck. In 1809 he commanded the 'Melpomene' (38 guns) in the Baltic for a few months, attacking Russian shipping off the Finnish coast, and in the fortified port of Reval. On the night of 29-30 May the 'Melpomene' fought in the Belt against about twenty Danish gunboats, which in a calm or light wind were formidable antagonists. At daybreak the wind freshened and the gunboats retired; the 'Melpomene' had lost thirty-four men, killed and wounded, and her hull, masts, and rigging had suffered much damage, but she had saved a valuable convoy. She was shortly afterwards sent to England and sold out of the service as beyond economic repair. 
In December 1809 Warren was appointed to the 'Argo' (44 guns), which he commanded on the Lisbon station and in the Mediterranean for nearly three years. In 1814 he commanded the 'Clarence' (74 guns) in the channel, and from 1825 to 1830 the 'Spartiate' (76 guns). He was promoted rear-admiral on 22 July 1830; from 1831 to 1834 he was commander-in-chief at the Cape of Good Hope, and from 1837 to 1841 admiral-superintendent at Devonport Dockyard, Plymouth. There, according to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', 'Amidst the rival political interests which raged in the borough to the injury of the public service, and which placed the superintendent of the dockyard very often in a difficult position, the gallant admiral, with his masterly tact, was seldom unsuccessful in defeating party intrigues, and seldom failed in having the man selected who was adapted for the place, instead of having the place adapted for the man. ('GM', 546)' He was made vice-admiral on 23 November 1841, and died at his seat, East Court, Cosham, near Portsmouth, on 22 March 1848. 


@@@@@


doc= 28777


Warren, John (1730-1800), bishop of Bangor, was born on 12 May 1730 at Cavendish, Suffolk, the second son of Richard Warren (1681-1748), archdeacon of Suffolk, and Priscilla (died 1774), daughter of John Fenner. His younger brother, Richard Warren (1731-1797), was physician to George III. He was educated for seven years at Bury St Edmunds grammar school, and admitted a sizar of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, on 6 July 1747. On this foundation he was a scholar from 1747 to 1754, and from it he graduated BA as seventh wrangler in 1750; he proceeded MA in 1754 and gained the member's prize in 1753. He was ordained deacon on 17 June 1753, and took priest's orders on 26 May 1754. Warren was then presented to the rectory of Leverington in the Isle of Ely, and became chaplain to Edmund Keene, bishop of Ely, who collated him to the rectory of Teversham in Cambridgeshire. He was appointed to the seventh prebend of Ely on 23 January 1768, and the same day, upon his resigning Teversham, he was appointed to the rectory of Nailwell in Cambridgeshire. He acted for some time as chaplain to Lord Sondes, and later as chaplain and secretary to Matthias Mawson, bishop of Ely. In 1772 he proceeded to the degree of DD in the University of Cambridge. He married, on 12 April 1777, Elizabeth (died 1816), daughter of Henry Southwell of Wisbech, Cambridgeshire, who brought him a considerable fortune. 
Nominated to the bishopric of St David's on 3 August 1779, on the translation of James Yorke to Gloucester, on 15 May 1783 Warren was elected to the see of Bangor on the advancement of John Moore to be archbishop of Canterbury. A strict high-churchman, he was a prelate of the greatest application to business. Warren was described by the historian of St David's diocese as a 'gifted and determined administrator' (Thomas, 66), and his undoubted talents, candour, and integrity clearly recommended themselves to Lord Chancellor Thurlow: indeed, it was said that no one was more in Thurlow's confidence than Warren (Mather, 129, n. 65). 
As this implies, Warren was, in politics, a strong supporter of the government during the Napoleonic wars and he voted for its proposals to suspend habeas corpus in 1794. His support of the government, combined with his attention to detail and well-developed business sense lay behind the fact that he was chairman of committees on private bills in the House of Lords for most of the 1790s (Mather, 143). He was not shy of using his position to defend the interests of his family: he was chosen chairman of the committee when the House of Lords threw out the bill of the Company of Surgeons in 1797. His appointment was no doubt due to the high position his brother occupied in the medical profession. Warren died on 27 January 1800 at his house in George Street, Westminster, and was buried on 10 February in the north aisle of Westminster Abbey. He published, besides various sermons, 'The Duties of the Parochial Clergy' (1785). 


