@@@@@


doc= 28890


Watts, John (1818-1887), educationist and social reformer, was born at Coventry, on 24 March 1818, one of twelve children of James Watts, ribbon weaver. When five years old, scarlet fever left him partially paralysed. He was educated largely at Holy Trinity church school in Coventry, where he came under the influence of the Revd W. F. Hook, and despite strongly non-denominational religious beliefs, subsequently retained his connection with the Church of England. 
Watts began his working life as general assistant, librarian, and assistant secretary of the Coventry Mechanics' Institute. From early 1840 he served as an Owenite social missionary in the east midlands, the Manchester district, and Glasgow. After the curtailment of the Owenite lecturing organization in the spring of 1841, he was eventually, in October 1841, appointed lecturer and teacher at the Manchester Hall of Science. Until abandoning this post in June 1844 and setting up as a tailor, he lectured and debated regularly in Manchester and the surrounding area. In October 1844 he married Catherine Shaw, of Coventry; they had three sons and four daughters. 
In July 1844 Watts obtained a PhD from the University of Giessen for a revision of his lectures on political economy, 'The Facts and Fictions of Political Economists' (1842), which influenced the early economic ideas of Friedrich Engels. Watts flirted briefly with trade unionism in 1850, editing the 'Trades Advocate' for the engineering unions. Subsequently, his lectures (including a paper to the British Association in 1861 which was widely discussed), numerous pamphlets, and extensive newspaper correspondence, concentrated almost exclusively on rigid Cobdenite attacks on trade unionism and strikes. 
In the periods 1844-51 and 1857-62, Watts was involved in a range of social reforms, including the public parks movement and the Manchester Free Public Library scheme (begun on his initiative), which, alongside his championing of an amalgam of Cobdenite economics and Chartist politics, enabled him to become a pivotal figure in the realignment of working-class radicalism in Manchester. He remained a committed Liberal and democrat, and served on the committee of the Manchester National Association for Women's Suffrage. Otherwise, after 1864, despite serving as secretary of the Manchester Reform Club from 1867, he largely stood aloof from politics and committed himself to furthering the two enduring legacies of his Owenism: the amelioration of the conditions of the working classes, and a universal system of national education. 
In February 1851 Watts was appointed the full-time agent of the National Public Schools Association (NPSA), for which he lectured extensively in 1851, before spending considerable time in London in 1852 and 1853 assisting the association's witnesses (of which he himself was one) before the select committee on education in Manchester and Salford. Although thereafter the NPSA campaign quickly faded, Watts remained active in several local efforts to demonstrate the inadequacy of the voluntary system, including the Manchester Education Aid Society. After the 1866 social science congress he took a leading role, especially in drafting the vital twenty-fifth ('Cowper-Temple') clause, in a committee which framed H. A. Bruce's 1868 'Education Bill', the basis for the 'Elementary Education Act' of 1870. From its inception in 1870 until his death Watts was one of the non-sectarian party members of the Manchester school board, being instrumental in the early adoption of the compulsory education clauses and remaining at the forefront of the struggle to extend the board's activities. He fought hard to preserve and extend free educational provision at the Manchester grammar school. As 'Earnest' he led the campaign of 1862-3 to reform the Union of Lancashire and Cheshire Mechanics' Institutes, serving as its chairman from 1872 to 1886. He became a campaigner for scientific and technical education, and was chairman of the Manchester Technical School (which he helped to create out of the Manchester Mechanics' Institute) and secretary of the extension committee of Owens College. 
In 1853 Watts accepted the position as promoter of the People's Provident Assurance Society (later the European), travelling extensively in 1853-4 selling shares and appointing agents. From 1854 to 1857 his directorship required residency in London, after which he returned to Manchester as district agent. The traumatic failure of the European at the end of the 1860s caused a breakdown in Watts's health, and during a period of recuperation in Torquay in the winter of 1866-7, he drafted what became the 1870 'Life Assurance Act'. The failure of the European did not prevent Watts continuing as an insurance broker and commercial arbitrator. 
While living in London, Watts gave vigorous support to the Association for the Repeal of the Taxes on Knowledge, deploying his logical mind to help frame the parliamentary questions with which Thomas Milner-Gibson MP fronted the campaign. He served as sub-treasurer from 1856 and treasurer from 1870. From 1878 until his death he was also treasurer of the travelling tax abolition committee. 
Although he eschewed direct organizational involvement, Watts was an enthusiastic advocate of the co-operative movement. The influential articles entitled 'What is co-operation?', which appeared in the early issues of the 'Co-operative News' (1872-3) and established Watts's position as the leading advocate of the 'federalist position', demonstrate that he never lost his belief in the transformative power of co-operation. Nevertheless, tension remained between the visionary remnants of his Owenism and a more prosaic preoccupation with thrift, and his later newspaper controversies with E. V. Neale (as J. W.) suggest an increasing emphasis on co-operation as a provident mechanism for the accumulation of savings. His concern for this aspect of the movement underpinned his activity on the central relief committee during the Lancashire cotton famine, which provided the impetus for his most substantial work, 'The Facts of the Cotton Famine' (1866). It was also manifested in his tireless support for the Provident Dispensaries movement, which he launched in Manchester in the early 1870s, serving as president from 1878. 
Watts never entirely overcame suspicion of his 'socialist' past, but by dint of what George Jacob Holyoake called his 'Manchester mind, clear, sagacious, persistent, progressive, with a passion for facts' ('Co-operative News', 19 Feb 1887), his calm, reasoned, metallic, platform style, and his capacity for administrative work, he imposed himself on the development of mid-Victorian Manchester, and of universal national education. He died at his home, The Sycamores, Seymour Grove, Old Trafford, Manchester, on 7 February 1887 after an extended illness, and was buried in the parish church of Bowdon. 


@@@@@


doc= 28891


Watts, Richard (c.1529-1579), naval administrator and benefactor, was born at West Peckham, Kent, and migrated to Rochester in or about 1552. In 1547 he was appointed joint purveyor of naval victualling with Edward Baeshe, an appointment which foreshadowed the latter's appointment in June 1550 as general surveyor of victuals for the navy. As surveyor of victuals for Ireland, Watts acted as Baeshe's deputy, and was paid to supply English forces sent to Ireland in 1550 and 1551. His work may explain his move to Rochester, whence supplies were sent to the fleet which was increasingly using the Medway as a safe winter and peacetime anchorage. By a patent dated 26 March 1560 he was appointed paymaster and surveyor of the works at Upnor Castle to erect a blockhouse 'for the savegarde of our Navye'. Saunders attributes the plan and initial design to Sir Richard Lee and the practical supervision to Humfrey Locke, described as surveyor and chief carpenter, with Richard Watts acting as the accounting officer and administrator. His accounts cover the period 1559-64, with a second set covering the period to 1567, when the final payment was made to the 'paynters for paynting the Lyon with the vane and handle of yeon, set upon the toppe of the steis with 16died for one gallon of Oyle and with 9's'. for haulfe a hundrethe of fyne gold' (Saunders, 271). Work on Upnor Castle then ceased until it was decided to improve the fortifications in the vicinity of Chatham in 1599. 
Watts sat in Elizabeth's second parliament, 1563-7, as MP for Rochester and received a visit from the queen during her progress through Surrey and Kent in 1573. The story goes that when at leave-taking the host apologized for the insufficiency of his house, the queen remarked 'satis'. Watts took this as a compliment and named his house on Rochester's Bully Hill 'Satis'. He died on 10 September 1579 and was buried in Rochester Cathedral. In his will, made on 21 or 22 August 1579 and proved at Rochester a month later, he left Satis House to his wife, Marian, for life; afterwards it was to be sold to build and maintain almshouses. However, he failed to make it clear whether the widow and sole executor was to keep Satis if she remarried. In 1586 the corporation claimed the property from her and her second husband, but agreed to a settlement by which they retained possession. According to his will, Watts's charity also provided for the provision of: 'six matrices or flock beds and other good and sufficient furniture... to harbour or lodge in poor travellers or wayfaring men, being no common rogues... the said wayfaring men to harbour therein no longer than one night unless sickness be the farther cause thereof; and those poor folks there dwelling should keep the same sweet and courteously intreat the said poor travellers; and every of the said poor travellers at their first coming in to have fourpence. ('DNB')' The revenue of the charity, originally 20 marks, had risen to $500 a year in 1771 and to $7000 a year in 1859. At this date the charity was remodelled and twenty almsfolk lodged in a new building on the Maidstone road, with an allowance of $30 a year each. The unusual character of the charity attracted the interest of nineteenth-century antiquarians, including Charles Dickens, who urged its reform in the Christmas number of 'Household Words' for 1854. A bust of Watts, copied from one that is said to have been executed during his lifetime, surmounts a monument erected to his memory in 1736 by the corporation at the instance of the then mayor, also named Richard Watts. 


@@@@@


doc= 28892


Watts, Robert (1820-1895), minister of the Presbyterian Church in Ireland and theological writer, was born at Moneylane, near Castlewellan, co. Down, on 10 July 1820, the youngest of fourteen children of a Presbyterian farmer. He was educated at the parish school of Kilmegan, co. Down, and at the Royal Academical Institution, Belfast. In 1848 he went to America, where he graduated at Washington College (now Washington and Lee University), Lexington, Virginia, in 1849 and studied theology at Princeton Theological Seminary under Charles Hodge DD (1797-1878). He organized a Presbyterian mission at Philadelphia in 1852, gathered a congregation in Franklin House Hall, was ordained its pastor in 1853, and obtained the erection in 1856 of Westminster Church for its use. He got into a controversy over Arminianism with Albert Barnes (1798-1870), a Philadelphia Presbyterian of liberal views. On a visit to Ireland he accepted a call to Lower Gloucester Street congregation, Dublin, and was installed there in August 1863. During a previous visit to Ireland in 1853 he had married Margaret, daughter of William Newell of Summerhill, Downpatrick, co. Down. They had two sons and two daughters. The eldest son, Robert Watts, was Presbyterian minister of Kilmacrenan, co. Donegal, and died on 4 December 1889. The two daughters married Presbyterian ministers. 
On the death of John Edgar in 1866, Watts was elected to the chair of systematic theology in the Assembly's College, Belfast. He was a keen theologian, of very conservative views, opposed to the tendencies of the late nineteenth century's so-called higher criticism, and especially to the influence of German exegesis. He studied the then current speculations with some care and in a spirit of uncompromising antagonism. His writings were acceptable to the older minds in his denomination, and were in some measure successful in combating the new theological views. He helped to give the college a reputation for vigorous Calvinism. However, in matters where he considered that no theological interest was involved he was not so conservative; he advocated the use of instrumental music in public worship, though this was against the general sentiment of Irish presbyterians. 
Watts held the chair of moderator of the general assembly from 1879 to 1880 and was a representative at the pan-Presbyterian councils in the 1870s and 1880s. His literary output was extensive. His works often addressed the new forms of criticism and other theological and doctrinal issues. These include: 'The New Apologetic' (1879), 'The Rule of Faith and the Doctrine of Inspiration' (1885), and 'The Sovereignty of God' (1894). He was also a regular contributor to periodicals. After the close of the college session in April 1895, his health completely broke down. He died at College Park, Belfast, on 26 July 1895, and was buried on 29 July in the city cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 28893


Watts, Thomas (1811-1869), librarian, was born in London, in the parish of St Luke's, Old Street, Finsbury, on 28 April 1811. He was one of the three children of Joseph Watts ('c'.1770- 'c'.1835), a bricklayer, originally from Northamptonshire, and his second wife, Sarah Phillips (1773-1857), born in Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire. Thomas was always close to his brother Joshua (1808-1875) and his sister Ann Elizabeth (1815-1880). His father bought the Peerless Pool baths in the City Road, London, about 1805, and built over part of the grounds. As owner of the baths and of houses in the area, he was in comfortable circumstances. Thomas Watts received his education at Linnington's academy, Fountain Place, City Road, where he distinguished himself by his facility in composing essays and verses. 
After leaving school, Watts initially devoted himself to literature. A retentive memory and a natural linguistic aptitude enabled him to learn all the languages of western Europe (including the Celtic ones), as well as the Slavonic languages and Hungarian, and to make some progress with oriental languages. In 1837 he wrote an article on the British Museum ('Mechanics' Magazine', 26, 454-60), which to some extent anticipated Panizzi's subsequent design for the new reading-room surrounded by bookstacks within the interior quadrangle. After being a frequent user of the reading-room for some years, he was engaged as a volunteer to catalogue a small collection of Russian desiderata, purchased by H. H. Baber, the keeper of printed books, at his recommendation. At the invitation of Panizzi, Baber's successor as keeper, Watts became a temporary assistant on 17 January 1838, and was mainly responsible for the removal of the books from Montagu House to the new museum building, designed by Sir Robert Smirke. On 27 November he became a permanent assistant, and in 1839 he was one of the four assistants who helped Panizzi draft the new rules for the catalogue of printed books. His duties until 1857 were twofold: he was the principal agent in the selection of current foreign literature for the museum, although he also gave attention to the acquisition of older books; and he arranged all newly acquired books on the shelves according to his own system of classification when the books were moved from Montagu House. In 1847 he introduced his 'elastic system' of placing books on the shelves, which prevented the interruption of the numerical series when the growth of the collections required the transfer of books within the library. He estimated that between 1838 and 1857 he arranged on the shelves at least 400,000 volumes. 'He appeared', wrote Cowtan, 'never to have forgotten a single book that passed through his hands, and always remembered its exact locality in the library' (Cowtan, 118). With John Winter Jones, he gave great assistance to Panizzi in producing the memorable report of 1845 which showed the inadequacy of the library's stock and the need for an increased grant for purchases, which the Treasury accepted. Of his achievements as a selector of books, especially in the lesser-known European languages, he himself wrote in 1861: 'In Russian, Polish, Hungarian, Danish, and Swedish, with the exception of perhaps fifty volumes, every book that has been purchased by the museum within the last three-and-twenty years has been purchased at my suggestion... every future student of the less-known literatures of Europe will find riches where I found poverty. (British Museum, central archives, CE 4/69, 176)' In 1855, again in advance of his time, he advocated the printing of the catalogue despite the fact that Panizzi was opposed to such a course of action until the revision of the catalogue in manuscript had been completed. The royal commission on the British Museum of 1847-9 had recommended that Watts's services should be rewarded; as a result his salary was increased in 1851 from $215 to $300 per annum, and he was promoted assistant keeper on 17 April 1856. 
When the new reading-room was opened in 1857, Watts was appointed its first superintendent. This led to his relinquishment of his favourite duty of shelving books, but he continued to direct acquisitions: he estimated that between 1851 and 1860 he had ordered 80 thousand Greek, Latin, French, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, German, Dutch, Scandinavian, Slavonic, and Hungarian books and examined 600,000 titles. He had also prepared lists of desiderata in Welsh, Icelandic, and Chinese, as well as a long list of American orders. On 19 August 1866 he succeeded John Winter Jones as keeper of printed books. His short term of office was marked by his determination to unite 'with the best English library in England or the world the best Russian library out of Russia, the best German out of Germany, the best Spanish out of Spain; and for every language from Italian to Icelandic, from Polish to Portuguese. (British Museum, central archives, CE 4/69, 176)' Among other important acquisitions during his tenure of office were large sections of the Mexican libraries collected by Father Fischer (secretary to the emperor Maximilian) and the bookseller Andrade, and the Japanese library of Philipp von Siebold. 
Watts was a warm-hearted and occasionally a warm-tempered man. In spite of some brusquerie and angularity he was popular with his colleagues: in 1867 W. B. Rye referred to his 'usual ursine amiability of temper' (Miller, 'That Noble Cabinet', 155). His inexpressive face and an ungainly figure were alleviated for contemporaries by the charm of his conversation. Watts wrote little. His 'Letter to Antonio Panizzi, Esq.' (1839) exposed the fabrication of the alleged first English newspaper, the 'English Mercurie'. His fine 'Sketch of the History of the Welsh Language and Literature' was privately reprinted in 1861 from Charles Knight's 'English Cyclopaedia', to which he also contributed a very good article upon the British Museum. He also wrote many biographical articles for the same publication, mainly on foreign men of letters, and he was (with his brother Joshua) a leading contributor to the unfinished 'Biographical Dictionary of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge' (1842-4). He frequently contributed articles to a number of periodicals, including the 'Gentleman's Magazine' and 'The Athenaeum'. A valued member of the Philological Society, in January 1852 he read to the society his paper on Cardinal Joseph Mezzofanti, whom he described as 'the greatest linguist the world has ever seen' ('Proceedings of the Philological Society', 5, 1854, 111-25). A subsequent paper 'On the recent history of the Hungarian language' ('Transactions of the Philological Society', 1855, 285-310) won him election to the Hungarian Academy. 
In August 1869, while on holiday with his brother and sister, Watts suffered a slight accident at Bridgnorth, Shropshire, which caused phlebitis of the leg; this led to his death from heart disease at his residence in the British Museum on 9 September 1869. He was interred at Highgate cemetery on 15 September. He never married. 


@@@@@


doc= 28894


Watts, Walter Henry (1776-1842), journalist and artist, was born in the East Indies, the son of a captain in the Royal Navy. He was sent to England at an early age and placed in a school in Cheshire. A talented artist, he initially devoted himself to the study of drawing and painting. In 1808 he was a member of the Society of Associated Artists in Watercolours. He was primarily known as a miniature painter, and from 1808 to 1830 exhibited at the Royal Academy. In 1816 he was appointed miniature painter to Princess Charlotte. 
Watts was unable to earn his living from painting alone, and in 1803 became a parliamentary reporter on the staff of the 'Morning Post', joining the 'Morning Chronicle' in the same capacity about 1813. In 1826 he managed the reporting department of the 'Representative', but returned to the 'Morning Chronicle' in the following year. In 1837 he was co-founder and first chairman of the Newspaper Press Benevolent Association (1837-47), an ultimately unsuccessful organization which aimed at providing pensions for journalists and small grants to assist them in emergencies. Watts also continued to act as a parliamentary reporter for the 'Morning Chronicle' until ill health forced him to retire in 1840. 
Throughout this time Watts wrote and edited fifteen volumes of the 'Annual Biography and Obituary' (1817-31). He also contributed fine art criticism to the 'Literary Gazette', and is credited with the authorship of a rejoinder to Martin Shee's 'Rhymes on Art' (1805). Watts, who never married, died at his lodgings at Earl's Court Terrace, Old Brompton, London, on 4 January 1842. 


@@@@@


doc= 28895


Watts, William (c.1590-1649), Church of England clergyman and author, the son of William Watts, was born in Tibbenham, Norfolk. He attended school at Moulton and was admitted as a sizar to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, in 1606. He graduated BA in 1611 and proceeded MA three years later. He was appointed chaplain of St Sepulchre's, Cambridge, in 1615, was vicar of St Peter's between 1615 and 1617, became chaplain and a fellow of his college in 1616, and was incorporated at Oxford in July 1618. In December 1620 he acted as chaplain to Sir Albertus Morton on his mission to deliver $30,000 to the protestant princes of Germany. In 1624 Watts became vicar of Barwick, Norfolk, and the following year was also appointed rector of St Alban, Wood Street, London, apparently as a result of the patronage he enjoyed from the provost of Eton. In 1626 he resigned his fellowship and married, on 21 February in Canterbury Cathedral, Dorothy Vaughan, the daughter of a Surrey clergyman. 
Watts's first published work, a translation, 'St Augustines Confessions' (1631), was dedicated to Lord Keeper Thomas Coventry's daughter Elizabeth, Lady Hare of Stow, Norfolk. It was, he claimed, 'the hardest taske that ever I yet undertooke' (A5'r'); uncontroversial marginal notes included classical, biblical, and historical references. Between 1632 and 1634 he produced nearly twenty issues of a serial publication, 'The Swedish Intelligencer', which eulogized 'that Caesar and Alexander of our times', King Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden. According to Anthony Wood, Watts's 'Mortification Apostolicall' (1637), dedicated to Sir Henry Wotton, provost of Eton and to a number of its fellows, 'his ever honored patrones', gave great offence to puritans. The continental scholar Gerard Vossius praised Watts's edition of Matthew Paris's 'Accesserunt duorum offarum' (1638). 
Watts was made a prebendary of Wells in 1633 and awarded a DD degree in 1639. In February that year he was appointed a chaplain-extraordinary and in August a chaplain-in-ordinary to the king. He was also serving as chaplain to Lord Arundel, the commander of the invasion of Scotland. On his return to England in 1642 Charles I made Watts chaplain to Prince Rupert, whom he subsequently accompanied in 'all the battles which he fought with the parliamenteers' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 1.383). As a result of his presence in the royalist army, in March 1643 he was removed from the parish of St Alban and his wife and family were temporarily homeless. On 19 May the committee for sequestrations ordered the seizure of his goods, worth about $129; an allowance to his family from their sale was ordered by the House of Commons on 29 June. In 1645 Watts was appointed archdeacon of Wells, but he never took possession of the post. He seems to have held the vicarage of Barwick until 1648. 
Watts wrote a treatise on the surplice, 'The church's linen garment' (Bodl. Oxf., MS Tanner 262), and he may also have written two manuscript accounts of Prince Rupert's exploits during the 1640s, subsequently reproduced in B. E. G. Warburton, 'Memoirs of Prince Rupert and the Cavaliers' (1849). In 1649 he travelled with Rupert's navy to Kinsale in Ireland, where he became ill and died about December that year. He was buried in Kinsale. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 28896


Watts, William (bap. 1753, d. 1851), line-engraver, was baptized on 25 March 1753 at St Leonard, Shoreditch, London, the son of William Watts, master silk weaver in Moorfields, and his wife, Hannah. In 1767, aged fourteen, he was apprenticed to the engraver Edward Rooker. He is said also to have been taught by Paul Sandby: certainly he, like Rooker, became a principal engraver of Sandby's landscapes. Watts took over Rooker's 'Copper Plate Magazine' when Rooker died in 1774 and contributed largely to the series of 150 landscapes that was eventually repackaged and republished by Boydell as 'Sandby's Views'. Watts's own 'Seats of the Nobility and Gentry', which he drew as well as engraved, was published in twenty-one parts between 1779 and 1786. 
In spring 1786 -- owing, as he told subscribers, to poor and declining health -- Watts curtailed the publication, sold the furniture and prints at his house at Kemp's Row, Chelsea, in July, and went to Italy, reaching Naples in September 1786. He returned about a year later to live at Sunbury, Middlesex. Health as well as work may have inspired his journeys to Carmarthen in 1789; to the Hotwells, Bristol in 1790; and in 1791 to Bath, where he spent two years. At Bath he produced a set of twelve views of the principal buildings in Bath and Bristol. 'Thirty-Six Views in Scotland' appeared in two parts, 1791 and 1794. 
A great enthusiast for the French Revolution, Watts went to Paris; there in 1793 copies of some of his views of English country seats were aquatinted and published in colour by Laurent Guyot. He invested much of his money in the French public funds, only to find his property confiscated with that of other British subjects when war broke out. Much dispirited, he returned to work, engraving three of the plates in 'Select Views in London and Westminster' (1800) and sixty-five coloured plates, from drawings by Luigi Mayer, for Sir Robert Ainstie's 'Views in Turkey in Europe and Asia' (1801). This was his last major publication and he retired from business to live at Mill Hill, Middlesex. He was well read, fluent in French and Italian, and his health recovered well from the exertions of the 1780s. 
Watts was unmarried -- his companion 'Mrs Watts' being, as Joseph Farington remarked from time to time, 'a spinster'. He was survived by a natural son, William Watts, and a natural daughter, Mary, who in January 1795 married the historian Sharon Turner. He recovered some of his French investment at the peace in 1815. In 1814 he purchased a small property at Cobham, Surrey, and had been blind for some years when he died there on 7 December 1851. 


@@@@@


doc= 28897


Wauchope, Andrew Gilbert (1846-1899), army officer, born at Niddrie Marischal, Midlothian, on 5 July 1846, was the second son of Andrew Wauchope (1818-1874) of Niddrie and his wife, Frances Maria (died 26 June 1858), daughter of Henry Lloyd of Lloydsburg, co. Tipperary. Sir John Wauchope, the covenanter, was his ancestor. At the age of eleven he was sent to Dr Ellenberger's Pestalozzian school at Worksop, Nottinghamshire, and in June 1858 to Foster's school, Stubbington House, Gosport, to prepare for the navy; there he formed a lasting friendship with Lord Charles Beresford. In 1859 he entered the 'Britannia' as a naval cadet, and on 5 October 1860 was entered as midshipman on the 'St George', where he formed a friendship with Prince Alfred. The 'St George' was not a happy ship, and Wauchope was disgusted by the conduct of some of the officers. He decided to change to the army and obtained his discharge on 3 July 1862, then studied with tutors. 
Wauchope obtained a commission, by purchase, in the 42nd regiment (the Black Watch) on 21 November 1865, was promoted lieutenant on 23 June 1867, and served as adjutant from 1870 to 1873 at Aldershot and Devonport. He served in the Second Anglo-Asante War from 30 November 1873, obtaining special employment with Russell's regiment of Hausa during its advance from the River Pra to Kumasi. He took part in several engagements, was twice wounded, the second time severely, and was mentioned in the dispatches. 
In July 1878, on the annexation of Cyprus, Wauchope was appointed commissioner of the Papho district, where he improved local government and suppressed crime. On his return to England in August 1880 he was made CMG. On 14 September 1878 he was promoted captain. In 1881 he served in the Anglo-Transvaal War, in a staff appointment on the line of communication. In 1882 he served with his regiment in the Egyptian campaign, and was one of the first to enter the trenches at Tell al-Kebir. On 14 March 1884 he was promoted major, and in the eastern Sudan that year served under Sir Gerald Graham as deputy assistant adjutant and quartermaster-general. At the battle of al-Teb he was again severely wounded. He was mentioned in dispatches, and was rewarded on 21 May with a brevet lieutenant-colonelcy. In 1884-5 he served on the Nile expedition, in the river column under Major-General William Earle. At Kirbekan on 11 February 1885 he was again severely wounded. 
After the return of the expedition Wauchope went back to Scotland to recover, and for a time devoted himself to his estates. On the death of his elder brother, Major John Wauchope, on 28 November 1882, he had become laird of the family estates of Niddrie Marischal, Midlothian, and Yetholm, Roxburghshire. Scottish agriculture was depressed, and his wealth came from his Niddrie collieries. He was reportedly one of the richest men in Scotland. On 9 December 1882 Wauchope married at Cambo, Elythea Ruth, daughter of Sir Thomas Erskine, baronet, of Cambo: she 'united great personal beauty with an equal charm of character' (Douglas, 173). Following childbirth, she died on 3 February 1884. They had twin sons. One died in 1887, and the other was mentally handicapped. 
A staunch tory, Wauchope was Unionist candidate for Midlothian, opposing Gladstone in the 1892 general election and reducing Gladstone's majority from 4631 to 690, despite his refusal to support the 'Eight Hours Bill' for miners, of whom there were many in the constituency. Gladstone, however, attributed the result not to Wauchope but to 'the 'Church''. 
Wauchope was a brave, keen professional soldier, devoted to his regiment, and was considerate and paternalist. He paid the fares of his soldiers' wives not on the 'strength', and used to raise his hat to his soldiers' wives 'as if they had been ladies' (Douglas, 166). A Wolseleyite, and effectively one of the younger members of the 'ring', he wrote that Wolseley was 'the biggest man in our service' (ibid., 301). On 21 May 1888 he became colonel, and CB in 1889, and in 1894 he was appointed to command the 2nd battalion, the Black Watch. In October 1893 he married Jean, a daughter of Sir William Muir. They had no children and she survived him. 
Wauchope combined his military duties with civilian activities. He was a benevolent and popular landlord and employer. He denounced the 1894 coal strike but helped the strikers' families. He was a master of foxhounds, a member of the local school board and parish council, an elder of his parish church, and a member of the general assembly of the Church of Scotland. He enjoyed reading Scott and Marryat and disliked Kipling's portrayal of soldiers. He was tall, lean, blue-eyed, red-haired, and clean-shaven, with a 'strangely ascetic face' (Doyle, 154). 
In 1898 Wauchope commanded a brigade in Kitchener's reconquest of the Sudan. He took part in the battles of the Atbara and Omdurman, and on 16 November 1898 was promoted major-general for his services. In April 1899 he received an honorary LLD from Edinburgh, and in June he unsuccessfully contested the South Edinburgh by-election against Arthur Dewar. 
On the outbreak of the South African War in October 1899 Wauchope was appointed to command the 3rd (or Highland) brigade. It formed part of the force under General Lord Methuen for the relief of Kimberley, and Wauchope took part in the engagements of Belmont and Modder River. Methuen ordered the Highland brigade to attack the Boer position at Magersfontein by a night march and dawn attack. He failed to secure adequate reconnaissance or use his observation balloon, so the attackers did not know where the Boer defences were. In the early morning of 11 December Wauchope delayed deployment from quarter-column, and they met intense rifle fire from the concealed Boer trenches. Leading them, Wauchope was shot in the groin and temple and killed. Reportedly, his dying words were, 'Don't blame me for this, lads' (Douglas, 412). He was buried on 13 December 1899 at the township of Modder River, and on 18 December was reinterred at Matjesfontein. 


@@@@@


doc= 28898


Wauchope, Sir John, of Niddrie (1592/3-1682), politician, was the son and heir of Sir Francis Wauchope of Niddrie (died in or before 1632) and his wife, Margaret, daughter of Sir James Sandilands of Slamannan. Wauchope was said to have been fourteen in July 1607 ('Reg. PCS', 1st ser., 14.50). The Wauchope family originated in the borders and had settled at Niddrie Marischal in Edinburghshire by 1404, when Gilbert Wauchope was granted a charter. The estate was forfeited in 1592 after Archibald Wauchope joined Bothwell's rebellion. In 1609 the royal favourite Sir James Sandilands effected its transfer to Sir Francis Wauchope, who was both Archibald's son and his own son-in-law. The debts incurred in the transaction were such that Sir Francis was obliged to leave his family and join the Scots brigade in the Netherlands. 
John Wauchope, 'by his frugal way of living, pay'd the 200,000 merks of cautionry' (Paterson, 29) which had been the price of regaining the family estate, and rebuilt Niddrie House. He succeeded to the family estate at Niddrie in 1632, in August of which year he married Anna, daughter of Sir Andrew Hamilton of Redhouse. They had two sons and two daughters who reached adulthood. 
Wauchope was knighted by Charles I on his visit to Edinburgh in 1633. He was a commissioner to parliament in 1639-41 and in 1643 sat on the committee of war. He was appointed a colonel in June 1644 and in July a commissioner to enforce the provisions of the 'Coal Act'. In furtherance of these appointments he raised a regiment and served under Lord Leven in the siege and storming of Newcastle on 19 October 1644. Within a month he was back in Edinburghshire where he became involved in a dispute over possession of a coal pit from which he was accused of chasing his rival 'with a drawin sword and had killed him therewith if he had not hardlie escaped' ('Reg. PCS', 2nd ser., 8.38). The privy council found the accusation of riot not proven by seven votes to three. 
Wauchope was a commissioner to parliament and sheriff of Edinburghshire in 1649 and in that year again raised a regiment for service against the English. He advanced money for Charles II's expedition to Scotland and, when Cromwell marched to Scotland in 1650, the English army garrisoned Niddrie from where they stripped the copper from the roof. He sat in Charles II's parliaments at Perth and Stirling between June 1651 and June 1652. He was expelled from his lands by the English and obliged to accept for Edinburghshire the English parliament's 'Tender of Union' at Dalkeith. 
Wauchope's first wife having died, on 16 June 1652 he married Jean (died in or after 1692), widow of Sir John Ker of Lochtour and daughter of Sir Thomas Ker of Redden, with whom he had one son. He was fined $2000 under the 'Act of Pardon and Grace' published by General Monck in Edinburgh on 5 May 1654, but the fine was remitted in 1655 after he acted as a commissioner for the cess. 
Wauchope was in London for the coronation of Charles II and in July 1661, at the age of sixty-eight, he joined the privy council of Scotland on which he sat for the following twenty years. He lived to be one of the longest serving members of Charles's government in Scotland, attending meetings into his eighty-ninth year when he was barely able to scratch his signature on the orders in council. He last sat on 20 September 1681, and died at Niddrie the following January. He was buried in Niddrie Chapel. He was succeeded by his son Andrew Wauchope (1633-1711), who converted to Catholicism and sat on the privy council of James VII and II, in consequence of which the chapel at Niddrie was burnt by the Edinburgh mob in 1688. Sir John's second son, John Wauchope, Lord Edmonstone (1633-1709), sat as a lord of session until he was deprived by William III for not taking the test in 1689. 


@@@@@


doc= 28899


Waugh, Alexander (1754-1827), United Secession minister, was born at East Gordon, Berwickshire, on 16 August 1754, the youngest of three children of Thomas Waugh (died 1783), farmer, and his wife, Margaret Johnstone. From his earliest years he was destined for the ministry. After attending the parish school at Gordon he entered the grammar school at Earlston in 1766, from which he progressed to Edinburgh University in 1770, where he showed a particular aptitude for moral philosophy. In the same year Waugh joined a congregation of the Burgher branch of the Secession church at Stichill, and in 1774 he began to study divinity under John Brown (1722-1787) at Haddington. In 1777 he attended, for a session, the classes of Beattie and Campbell at Marischal College, Aberdeen, where he graduated MA the following year. 
Having been licensed at Duns by the presbytery of Edinburgh on 28 June 1779 Waugh briefly supplied for the Wells Street congregation in London, vacant since the death of Archibald Hall (1736-1778). He returned to Scotland and was called by the small congregation of Newtown, Roxburghshire, which had not previously enjoyed a stated ministry, and was ordained there on 30 August 1780. The charge was inconvenient, in that there was no manse and Waugh had to travel some miles to attend to his congregation. Moreover a call from Wells Street was soon received and twice repeated. Waugh transferred there in 1782 and began his ministry in London on 16 June. He married, on 10 August 1786 at Edincrow, Berwickshire, Mary Neill (died 1840), daughter of William Neill and Margaret Henderson of that parish; they had four daughters and six sons. 
Waugh's forty-five-year ministry at Wells Street was characterized by his virtues as a preacher and a pastor. The congregation prospered and the church itself was rebuilt during that time. Waugh worked readily with clergymen of other denominations and was a friend of national establishments. Nowhere was his non-denominational approach more evident than in his support for the London Missionary Society, his most cherished cause and one with which he was involved from its inception in 1795 ['see 'Founders of the London Missionary Society]; for twenty-eight years he served as chairman of its examination committee. He supported a host of other religious and philanthropic bodies, including the British and Foreign Bible Society, the Society in Scotland for Propagating Christian Knowledge, the Scottish Hospital, and Mill Hill Academy. He contributed to the 'Evangelical Magazine' and made missionary tours in England, Ireland, Scotland, and France. He was also instrumental, in 1812, in securing the adoption by his church of an enlarged psalmody. He was honoured with the degree of DD from Marischal College in 1815. 
By nature Waugh was a cheerful, amiable, and kindly man, mild-mannered and free of any contentious tendencies: 'there was not an atom of fixed animosity in his whole composition' (Hay and Belfrage, 66). Though he presented a tall, striking, and apparently robust figure he was dogged by a dropsy-like ailment which at one point became so acute that in 1806 he retired to Scotland for a year. In May 1823 he sustained injuries from a fall when scaffolding gave way during the laying of the foundation stone of the Orphan Asylum, Clapton. The death of his son Alexander (1795-1824), who had followed his father into the ministry of the Secession church, was another blow to him; Alexander had taken the opportunity to pursue his ministry in close proximity to his father as minister of the Scots Church in Mile Lane, London, and it was his 'Sermons, Addresses and Expositions at the Holy Communion' that was published by his father, with a memoir, in 1825. Waugh died at his home in Salisbury Place, London, after a short illness, on 14 December 1827. A large crowd attended his funeral at Bunhill Fields on 22 December. 


@@@@@


doc= 28900


Waugh, Sir Andrew Scott (1810-1878), army officer and surveyor, eldest son of General Gilbert Waugh, military auditor-general at Madras, grandson of Colonel Gilbert Waugh of Gracemount, Midlothian (descended from Waugh of Shaw, standard-bearer at Flodden Field), and nephew of Sir Murray Maxwell of the Royal Navy, was born in India on 3 February 1810. He was educated at Edinburgh high school, and, after passing through Addiscombe in 1827 in half the usual time, came out first of his term and was commissioned lieutenant in the Bengal Engineers on 13 December 1827. After training at Chatham he went to India, arriving there on 25 May 1829. 
Waugh was appointed in 1830 to help build a new foundry at Kashipur. On 13 April 1831 he was appointed adjutant of the Bengal Sappers and Miners, and on 17 July 1832 to the great trigonometrical survey of India under the immediate direction of George Everest, the surveyor-general. Waugh and his friend Lieutenant Thomas Renny (afterwards Major Thomas Renny-Tailyour) were the first engineers on the Indian establishment to join the department as subalterns and to make their careers in it. In 1833 they were sent to Sironj, to carry a series of triangles up one of the meridians fixed by the longitudinal series. They explored the jungle country between Chunar and the sources of the Son and Narbada up to Jubbulpore, and submitted a topographical and geological report to the geographical department of the India Office. 
In November 1834 Waugh joined the headquarters of the surveyor-general at Dehra Dun, to help measure the baseline. In April 1835 he was appointed astronomical assistant for the celestial observations connected with the measurement of the great arc, and at the end of that year he was at Fatehgarh, conducting the rougher series of the great trigonometrical survey. In January 1836 he joined Everest at Saini, to help measure the arc of the meridian extending from Cape Comorin to Dehra Dun, starting with the northern baseline in the Dehra Dun valley, and connecting it with the baseline near Sironj, some 450 miles to the south; and remeasuring the latter in 1837 with the new compensation bars which had been used at Dehra Dun. The operation was so accurate that the difference of length of the Dehra Dun baseline as measured and as deduced by triangulations from Sironj was only 7.2 inches. 
In November 1837 Waugh was appointed to work southwards on the base Pagaro to Jaktipura. The work was completed by March 1838, when he was sent to test the accuracy of the triangulation between Bedar and Takalkhard and to lay out the site of an observatory at Damargidda. In October he began fieldwork with azimuth observations at Damargidda, and, working north with the triangulation, completed the work by April 1839. He shared with Everest the arduous observatory work carried on simultaneously at the stations of Kaliana, Kalianpur, and Damargidda from November 1839 to March 1840, by which the arc of amplitude was determined. In 1841 Waugh was engaged in the remeasurement of the Bedar base. Between 1834 and 1840 he had conducted the Ranghir series of triangles in the North-Western Provinces, and in 1842 he rapidly but accurately carried the triangulation through the malarious Rohilkhand 'terai'. 
At the end of 1843 Everest retired, recommending that Waugh, whose abilities in both the theoretical and practical aspects of survey work he had consistently praised, succeed him as surveyor-general. Although only a subaltern of Royal Engineers, and although he had only eleven years' experience of surveying, Waugh was accordingly appointed from 16 December 1843. In 1844 he married Josephine (died 1866), daughter of Dr William Graham of Edinburgh, and was promoted captain on 14 February of that year. He began his tenure as surveyor-general by carrying out the remaining seven series projected by Everest. These covered some 28,000 square miles and originated from the Calcutta longitudinal series on the 'gridiron system'. The eastern side was formed by the Calcutta meridional series (1844-8), which terminated in another baseline near the foot of the Darjeeling hills. 
Waugh took a leading role in the north-east Himalaya series, connecting the northern end of the meridional series. The line of the country was along the base of the Himalaya 'terai', a malarial submontane tract in which many of his staff died. These operations fixed the positions and heights of seventy-nine of the highest Himalayan peaks in Nepal and Sikkim, including Peak XV, named Mont Everest in 1856 by Waugh. The series was then the longest ever carried between measured bases, being 1690 miles long from Sonakoda to Dehra Dun. 
On 3 December 1847 Waugh was given the local rank of lieutenant-colonel. After completing the South Konkan, the Madras coast series, the South Parisnath, and South Maluncha series, he was free to undertake a system of triangulation to the west of the great arc series over the vast territory, much of it recently acquired, that lay in Sind, the North-Western Provinces, and the Punjab. The Chach base, near Attock, was measured in 1851-2, and the north-west Himalayan series, emanating from the Dehra Dun base, extended to it; and from Sironj the Calcutta great longitudinal series was carried westward to Karachi, closing on another baseline at Karachi, measured in 1854-5 under the surveyor-general's immediate supervision. Waugh was promoted major in the Bengal Engineers on 3 August 1855, and in 1856 the great Indus series was begun, forming the western side of the survey on its completion in 1860. In 1856 Waugh instituted a series of spirit-levelling operations to determine more accurately the heights of the baselines in the interior, beginning in the Indus valley. He was promoted regimental lieutenant-colonel on 20 September 1857, and the same year was awarded the patron's gold medal of the Royal Geographical Society. In 1858 he was elected fellow of the Royal Society. In 1859 the survey of Kashmir under T. G. Montgomerie was completed, earning Waugh, who had supervised it, many congratulations. 
During Waugh's tenure of office he advanced the triangulation of India by 316,000 square miles, and of this 94,000 were topographically surveyed. He was promoted colonel on 18 February 1861, and retired from the service on 12 March following. He received the honorary rank of major-general on 6 August 1861, and in the same year he was knighted. He retired to London where he was a deputy lieutenant of the city for many years, a prominent member of the council of the Royal Geographical Society (and its vice-president from 1867 to 1870), honorary associate of the geographical societies of Berlin and Italy, a fellow of Calcutta University, and an active committee-man of the London Athenaeum. In 1870 he married Cecilia Eliza Adelaide, daughter of Lieutenant-General Thomas Whitehead KCB, of Uplands Hall, Lancashire. He died at his home, 7 Petersham Terrace, Gloucester Road, London, on 21 February 1878, leaving his wife and at least one son from his first marriage. 
The results of Waugh's work while surveyor-general are given in some thirteen volumes and reports deposited in the India Office and in 1861 he published 'Instructions for Topographical Surveying'. He was energetic and enthusiastic, as well as meticulously accurate. He was a distinguished surveyor-general even by comparison with such predecessors as Lambton and Everest. 


@@@@@


doc= 28901


Waugh, Edwin (1817-1890), poet, was born on 29 January 1817 in a house adjoining the Clock Face inn, Toad Lane, Rochdale, Lancashire, the second son of Edward Waugh (1789-1826), shoemaker, and his wife, Elizabeth, daughter of William Howarth, stonemason, and previously the wife of a man named Hawkward. His paternal forebears hailed from prosperous Northumbrian farming stock and his maternal ancestors were zealous Wesleyans and talented musicians. Waugh was taught to read Foxe's book of martyrs, Wesley's 'Hymns', and a compendium of English history by his mother. He attended school in Drake Street, Rochdale, from 1824, subsequently transferring to the national free school, and finally Davenport's Commercial School from 1828. 
The death of his father in 1826, when Waugh was only nine years of age, reduced the family to a subsistence diet of milk and porridge in a Rochdale cellar dwelling. After assisting his mother selling boots in Rochdale market he earned his first wages running errands for a local Wesleyan printer. In 1831 he became an apprentice to Thomas Holden, another Rochdale printer and bookseller. This employment enabled him to develop his love of reading and introduced him to the folklorist John Roby and the antiquary Canon F. R. Raines, who became Waugh's mentor. After serving his apprenticeship he became a journeyman printer, chiefly in the provinces but also for six or seven years in London. He returned to Rochdale in 1844 and re-entered the service of Thomas Holden and played a prominent role in the establishment of a literary institute, editing for three months a manuscript magazine, 'The Incentive'. 
In 1847 Waugh was appointed assistant secretary to the Lancashire Public School Association, which had been recently founded in Manchester to campaign for a national system of unsectarian education. He remained with the association until 1852, during its period of most rapid growth. His new employment allowed him time to develop his literary skills, and he submitted prose accounts of rural rambles to the 'Manchester Examiner and Times'. In 1855 a Manchester bookseller published his 'Lancashire Sketches', which included early examples of his dialect humour. During this period he was introduced by his colleague Frances Espinasse to a literary circle known as the Shandeans and subsequently became one of the founders of the Manchester Literary Club. Meanwhile, having failed to secure appointment as sub-librarian of the Manchester free libraries, he became a commercial traveller for a Manchester printing firm. 
His new literary pursuits and his work in Manchester, however, imposed a considerable strain on Waugh's marriage. He had married Mary Ann Hill on 11 May 1847, shortly before commencing work in Manchester, and she had borne three children. However, they had little in common, and some of the difficulties within the relationship are revealed in an unpublished diary which Waugh kept after his marriage. He was intolerant of her illiteracy, her lack of interest in self-improvement, and 'that repulsive coarseness of deportment which she puts on so frequently to the utter damnation of all that is attractive in her appearance and disposition' and they often brawled in public (Vicinus, 15). Waugh was impetuous by nature, with a reputation as a womanizer. He had fathered a son, for whom he continued to pay maintenance, before their marriage, and about 1850, after Mary Ann had returned to Rochdale, he appears to have taken up with a female barber, variously described as 'a female whiskerando' and 'a mad shaver' (ibid., 14). By 1856 he had separated from Mary Ann and moved in with a well-to-do Irish widow, Mrs Moorhouse, in Strangeways. 
Ironically, during this period of marital upheaval Waugh became known to a wider public for his celebration of family relationships in his dialect poetry and songs. His best known song, 'Come whoam to the childer an' me', initially published in a Manchester newspaper in 1856, ultimately sold more copies than any previously published song. Its commendation of marital faithfulness and its sentimentality appealed to contemporary Victorian society. The 'Saturday Review' pronounced it 'one of the most delicious idylls in the world' (quoted in 'Manchester Examiner and Times') and the song, reprinted as a penny card, was soon being 'hummed all over Lancashire' (Hollingworth, 139). It was also actively promoted by the philanthropist and social reformer Angela Burdett-Coutts, who arranged for the free distribution of some 20,000 copies among the London poor, and in subsequent years was reprinted on calendars, in church bulletins, temperance pamphlets, anthologies, and other newspapers. One modern critic has concluded that 'in a very real sense this poem, with all its faults, put Lancashire dialect poetry on the map' (ibid., 138). Its astonishing success led to the publication of Waugh's 'Poems and Songs' in 1859 and enabled him to become a full-time professional writer in 1860. 
Waugh subsequently published a wide range of dialect songs, tales, and character sketches illustrative of Lancashire life, and also produced accounts of his travels in the Lake District, Scotland, Ireland, and even the Rhineland. His most impressive commissioned work comprised a series of newspaper articles on the impact of the Lancashire cotton famine of 1862. He demonstrated an acute empathetic understanding of poverty and hardship, but has been criticized for his failure to probe complex issues such as unemployment and working conditions in factories and for his lack of sympathy for Chartism and the political aspirations of the working classes. His writing appeared at a time of transition, when the survival of dialect was threatened by the impact of the 1870 'Education Act'. His inspiration was drawn from the smaller Lancashire manufacturing towns and villages on the Yorkshire border, where dialect speech was more pronounced than in the big cities. 'The past, and still more the disappearing present, of this important district', he wrote, 'teem with significant features, which, if caught up and truthfully represented, might perhaps, be useful to the next generation' (Vicinus, 22). Between 1881 and 1883 he published a collective illustrated edition of his works in ten volumes, to which an eleventh volume, containing a second series of poems and songs, was added in 1889. He was often referred to as the Lancashire Burns or the Laureate of Lancashire and praised for his 'wonderful command of native vigorous idiom', his insights into character, and his representation of 'the pathos of human life' ('Manchester Guardian'). His most popular character was Besom Ben, a broom maker living in contentment on the moors of north Lancashire, 'whose wants were simple and his cares were few' (Vicinus, 39). 
To supplement his income Waugh also gave public readings from his works and gained a reputation as a jovial raconteur. He also enjoyed singing traditional and patriotic songs in his distinctive tenor voice; indeed, his friend Ben Brierley maintained that he 'could sing a song as sweetly as any man I have listened to' (Brierley, 9). Photographs and sketches reveal an extrovert personality. He possessed a full head of wavy hair and neatly trimmed beard into old age, and usually sported a bow-tie, jacket, and waistcoat, and one of the many walking sticks from his vast collection. Athletic in his youth, when he had enjoyed racing and wrestling, he remained a keen rambler until his health began to fail in the 1870s. In 1881 Gladstone conferred upon Waugh a civil-list pension of $90 per annum, and in 1887 he was presented with a silver-mounted walking stick, gold pen, and silver pencil case by his friends on the occasion of his seventieth birthday. After undergoing two operations for cancer of the tongue he retired to the coast to convalesce at New Brighton, near Liverpool. He died on 30 April 1890 at his home, The Hollies, Percy Street, Liscard, Cheshire. His body was brought back to Manchester for burial, and thousands followed the cortege through the city, where flags flew at half mast, to St Paul's Church, near his former home on Kersal Moor, where he was buried on 3 May. A contemporary obituary writer in the 'Manchester Guardian' observed that Lancashire had demonstrated 'a peculiar affection for the poet and story-teller who spoke its language and expressed its mind with such fidelity'. Professor Martha Vicinus, writing almost a century after his death, pronounced him the 'leading literary spokesman for the working class of mid-nineteenth-century Lancashire' (Vicinus, 44). 


@@@@@


doc= 28902


Walton, Simon of (d. 1265/6), justice and bishop of Norwich, was probably a native of Walton d'Eiville, Warwickshire. In 1235-6 Master Simon of Walton appears as a plaintiff concerning lands in nearby Tysoe. A trained canon lawyer, his services brought him a pension from Osney Abbey, and he was also employed by the king, from whom he began to receive gifts. In 1242 he was made keeper of the vacant see of Lichfield, and in 1245 he was involved in much administrative work in connection with Henry III's Welsh campaign. 
Walton began a career as an itinerant justice in the midlands and west of England in January 1246, the year in which he received the farm of the royal manor of Feckenham, Worcestershire. Later the king gave him deer for his park of Stock Bradley in the royal forest near Feckenham. From the prior and convent of Worcester, where a Robert of Walton, possibly his brother, was chamberlain, he received in 1253 the rectory of Stoke Prior, Herefordshire, and in 1254 the lease of the manor of Harvington, Worcestershire. The acquisition of property accompanied his rise as a justice. He was the effective leader on one of the two circuits of the eyre in 1254-6, at the end of which he returned as chief justice to the bench of common pleas, on which he had sat for the first time in Michaelmas term 1251. In March 1254 he was allowed the temporary use of the bishop of Carlisle's London house. Finally, in June 1257 he was elected to the bishopric of Norwich, receiving the temporalities of the see on favourable terms. 
Walton remained conspicuously loyal to the king throughout the years of baronial reform and rebellion. In 1259 he was employed in negotiations with the king of France and to adjudicate upon breaches of the truce with the Welsh; and in 1260 he was one of the commission of bishops proposed to settle the private disputes between Simon de Montfort and the king. His ultimate offence in the eyes of the baronial party was his appointment in 1261, along with Boniface, archbishop of Canterbury, and John Mansel, to execute the papal bulls which Henry had procured, enjoining the barons to obey the king and absolving them from their oaths of allegiance to the provisions of Oxford. In 1263 he was forced to flee from his cathedral to the abbey of Bury St Edmunds, a secure refuge since its liberty 'was exceedingly precious in the eyes of the barons' ('Chronicle of Bury St Edmunds', 27). The 'Song of the Barons' called Walton 'the good shepherd of Norwich, who devours the sheep', and cursed anyone 'who left a mite to him, for he knew much about shame' (Aspin, 19-20). The baronial 'custos pacis' for Norfolk was ordered to confiscate his lands, but these were restored to him when he took an oath to support the provisions. He was one of the prelates summoned to London for Simon de Montfort's parliament in January 1265. He did not long enjoy the king's triumph over his enemies in August of that year, for he died 'about the feast of the Circumcision' (1 January), 1266, 'in good old age' ('Ann. mon.', 4. 183). He was buried in Norwich Cathedral; on 18 January the king granted the guardians of the vacant diocese of Norwich the administration of his will. A John of Walton held lands at Bradley, Worcestershire, in 1274-5. 


@@@@@


doc= 28903


Way, Albert (1805-1874), antiquary, born on 23 June 1805, in Bath, and baptized on 23 June 1807 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, Westminster, was the son of Lewis Way (1772-1840), barrister, and Mary Drewe (1780-1848). He was their third child of three sons and six daughters, but his two brothers and one sister died in infancy. Albert suffered from poor health throughout his life. He was privately educated at home in Stansted Park, Sussex, and at the age of seventeen travelled through Europe to Syria with his father. An accurate draughtsman, a good classical scholar, and a linguist with a knowledge of most European languages, Hebrew, and Old English, he matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge in 1824, where he encouraged his contemporary Charles Darwin in insect collecting. He graduated BA in 1829 and proceeded MA in 1834. Like his father, he trained as a barrister and was admitted to the Inner Temple in 1833. However, by 1837 his interest had turned to the study of medieval antiquities; he contributed notes to the Norfolk volume of J. S. Cotman's 'Engravings of Sepulchral Brasses in Norfolk and Suffolk' (1838), and he was elected fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London in 1839. 
In 1840 Way's father died and he inherited sufficient wealth, later augmented by legacies from other relatives, to be able to live off his private income. His first sole publication was based on a paper read to the Society of Antiquaries in 1841 'On an effigy of King Richard Coeur de Lion in the cathedral of Rouen' ('Archaeologia', 29, 1842); his next communication introduced the term palimpsest brasses to the English language ('On palimpsest sepulchral brasses', 'Archaeologia', 30, 1844). In 1842 he was elected the society's director, responsible for its publications and possessions. The publishing of proceedings of meetings was started at his suggestion in 1844. The first volume of his principal work was issued in 1843, his edition of the English-Latin dictionary 'Promptorium parvulorum sive clericorum' ('c'.1440) by Geoffrey the grammarian (Camden Society, 25, 1843; 54, 1853; 89, 1865). Way donated many books to the society's library in his lifetime, and his collection of early dictionaries was later presented to the society by his widow. He helped Sir Samuel Meyrick revise his 'A Critical Inquiry into Antient Armour' for the second enlarged edition of 1844 and contributed many drawings and notes to Henry Shaw's 'Dress and Decoration of the Middle Ages' (1858). Way was meticulous in recording archaeological finds and historical sources but his interpretation of the evidence for the existence of the Pilgrims' Way in medieval times has been disputed. 
As a moderately wealthy gentleman and learned amateur, Way appeared a traditional antiquary, but his interest in the collection, classification, and publication of antiquities made him an important figure in the movement towards a more scientific approach to archaeology. While director, he compiled a classified catalogue to the Society of Antiquaries' museum collections (published 1847) and his interest in medieval seals was aroused by the Prattinton seal casts bequeathed in 1841. He published many articles on the subject and assembled several thousand impressions, which his widow gave to the society to provide the foundation of the largest classified collection of British seal impressions. 
Way purchased a country seat, Wonham Manor, Betchworth, Surrey, in 1840, and was appointed a JP in 1850 and deputy lieutenant for Surrey. On 30 April 1844 he married his cousin Emmeline Stanley (1809-1906), youngest surviving daughter of John Thomas, first Lord Stanley of Alderley. Their only child, Mary Alithea, was born in 1850. He resigned the directorship of the Society of Antiquaries in 1846 because of the difficulty of attending evening meetings after he had given up his London residence; but by then he had become more involved in the (Royal) Archaeological Institute. This was established as a body distinct from the British Archaeological Association largely through his efforts and because of his disagreements with Thomas Wright and Charles Roach Smith. In his memoirs the latter paid tribute to Way's insufficiently acknowledged services to archaeology, but characterized him as extremely cautious. 
Way and Smith were joint honorary secretaries to the original British Archaeological Association between 1843 and 1845, and Way was one of the honorary secretaries to the Archaeological Institute from 1845 to 1868; he organized many of the annual meetings and temporary exhibitions in different parts of the country. He saw the role of the institute as one of promoting the preservation of historic monuments throughout England and providing a forum for the exchange of new ideas. 'The Athenaeum' claimed he did a great deal to encourage local archaeological societies whose formation had been prompted by the two national associations. He edited the 'Archaeological Journal' for many of the first twenty-five years of its publication and contributed seventy-two articles to the first thirty volumes, mostly on medieval costume, jewellery, seals, and documents. With an up-to-date and extensive knowledge of most periods of British archaeology, Way enjoyed the friendship of and corresponded with many leading antiquaries throughout Europe. He was known for privately giving enthusiastic help to others engaged in research. His letters to Sir A. W. Franks and Sir F. Madden are in the British Museum and British Library respectively, and many others have survived. He was a strong advocate for developing the British collections and was a generous donor to the British Museum. 
A man of strong religious principle but of moderate opinions within the Church of England, Way rebuilt the Marboeuf Chapel, founded in Paris by his father for English protestants. He travelled to France and Italy on several occasions for the sake of his health, and withdrew from active involvement with the Archaeological Institute in 1863, although he continued to help with the 'Journal' until 1868. His health deteriorated before he could complete his major catalogue of the duke of Northumberland's antiquities at Alnwick Castle. He died after a lingering illness at Le Trouville, Cannes, on 23 March 1874 and was buried at Betchworth. His collections of prints and drawings were sold at Sothebys on 16 June 1875 and 3 April 1876 and his 'objets d'art' in their sale of 27-9 July 1908; books from his library were sold by Thomas Thorp in March 1907. 


@@@@@


doc= 28904


Way, Sir Gregory Holman Bromley (1776-1844), army officer, born at London on 28 December 1776, was fifth son of Benjamin Way (1740-1808) FRS of Denham Place, Buckinghamshire, MP for Bridport in 1765, and of his wife, Elizabeth Anne (1746-1825), eldest daughter of William Cooke (1711-1797), provost of King's College, Cambridge. Lewis Way (1772-1840) was his elder brother. His grandfather, Lewis Way (died 1771), director of the South Sea Company, the descendant of an old west-country family, first settled in Buckinghamshire. His aunt Abigail was the wife of John Baker Holroyd, first earl of Sheffield. 
Way entered the army as ensign in the 26th (Cameronian) regiment of foot in 1797, was captured by French privateers on his way to his regiment in Canada, and was a prisoner in France for a year before he was exchanged. He was promoted lieutenant in the 35th foot on 3 November 1799, and sailed with it in the expedition under General Pigot on 28 March 1800 for the Mediterranean. Arriving at Malta in June, he took part in the successful siege of Valletta. He returned to England in 1802, was promoted captain in the 35th foot on 13 August 1802, and shortly after was placed on half pay on reduction of that regiment. 
Way was brought in as captain of the 5th foot on 20 January 1803, and, after serving in the Channel Islands, embarked with the 5th in the expedition under Lord Cathcart for the liberation of Hanover in 1805; but he was wrecked off the Texel, and he was taken prisoner by the Dutch. After his exchange he sailed at the end of October 1806 in the expedition, under Major-General Robert Craufurd, which arrived at Monte Video in the beginning of June 1807, joining the force under General John Whitelocke, of which Way was appointed assistant quartermaster-general. At the storming of Buenos Aires, Way led the right wing of the infantry brigade. He returned to England after the disastrous surrender. 
Way was promoted major in the 29th foot on 25 February 1808. He served under Sir Brent Spencer off Cadiz, and with him joined Sir Arthur Wellesley's army, landing in Mondego Bay, Portugal, on 3 August. He took part in the battle of Rolica on 17 August, when, on gaining the plateau with a few men and officers of the 29th, he, when charged by the enemy, was rescued from the bayonet of a French grenadier by General Brenier, and made a prisoner. He was exchanged in time to take part in the operations in Portugal when Sir Arthur Wellesley returned in April 1809. He commanded the light infantry of Brigadier-General R. Stewart's brigade, which led the advance of the British army, and was present in the actions of the passage of the Vouga on 10 May and the heights of Grijon the following day, at the passage of the Douro and capture of Porto on the 12th, and in the subsequent pursuit of Soult's army. 
At the battle of Talavera on the night of 27 July, Way took part with his regiment, under Major-General Hill, in the repulse of the French attack on the heights on the left of the British position. He was at the battle of Busaco on 27 September 1810, and at the battle of Albuera on 16 May 1811, when, on the fall of his lieutenant-colonel, he succeeded to command of the 29th foot during the action. He was himself, in charging with his regiment, shot through the body and his left arm fractured at the shoulder joint by a musket shot. He was promoted brevet lieutenant-colonel on 30 May 1811, and on 4 July was gazetted to command the 29th foot. 
On his return to England in 1812 with the remnants of the 29th, about a hundred effective men, Way by considerable exertion reformed the corps, and embarked for the Peninsula in 1813. In 1814, however, the effect of climate and wounds compelled him to return to England, when he was placed on the half pay list of the 22nd foot. He was knighted the same year, was awarded a $200 wound annuity, and received permission to become knight commander of the Portuguese order of the Tower and Sword. On relinquishing the command of the 29th he was presented by his officers with a valuable piece of plate. 
Way married, on 19 May 1815, Marianne, daughter of John Weyland, of Woodeaton, Oxfordshire, and Woodrising, Norfolk; they had no children. In 1815 Way was made a CB, military division, and was appointed to the staff as deputy adjutant-general in north Britain. He was promoted colonel in the army on 19 July 1821. On the abolition of his staff appointment he was nominated, on 7 November 1822, colonel of the 3rd Royal Veteran battalion, which was disbanded in 1826, when he was placed on half pay. He was promoted major-general on 22 July 1830, and lieutenant-general on 23 November 1841, and was made colonel of the 1st West India regiment on 21 November 1843. He died at Brighton on 19 February 1844, and was buried in the family vault at Denham church, Buckinghamshire. 


@@@@@


doc= 28905


Way, Lewis (1772-1840), religious activist, born on 11 February 1772, was the second son of Benjamin Way (1740-1808) of Denham and his wife, Elizabeth Anne Cooke (1746-1825). He was the elder brother of Sir Gregory Holman Bromley Way (1776-1844). Educated at Eton College, he graduated BA in 1795 and MA in 1798 from Merton College, Oxford, and in 1797 was called to the bar by the Inner Temple. Way married Mary (1780-1848), daughter of Herman Drewe, rector of Comb Raleigh in Devon, on 31 December 1801. They had three sons and six daughters. From 1805 his home was Stanstead Park, near Racton, Sussex. 
From an early age Way was influenced by such evangelical clergymen as Charles Simeon of King's College, Cambridge, and also by members of the Clapham Sect, including William Wilberforce. Following the inheritance of a large legacy from John Way (who was not related, despite bearing the same surname) Lewis Way devoted his fortune, and also his home, to religious works. He was especially active in the London Society for Promoting Christianity amongst the Jews. At one point he allowed a number of young Jewish men, supposedly Christian converts, to lodge at his house, with a view to training them as missionaries. They responded to his kindness by running away with his valuables. It was this incident which lay behind the youthful verse by T. B. Macaulay: '
Each, says the proverb, has his taste. 

'Tis true Marsh loves a controversy, Coates a play, Bennet a felon, Lewis Way a Jew, 

The Jew the silver spoons of Lewis Way. 
(Trevelyan, 1.54)' Lewis Way was made a deacon in 1816 and a Church of England priest the following year. In 1817-18 he made a long journey through the Netherlands, Germany, Poland, and Russia, investigating Jewish communities and worship. On reaching Moscow he had four fascinating audiences with Tsar Alexander I. In 1823 Way made a further trip, to the Holy Land, where he met Lady Hester Stanhope. On his return he established the Marboeuf (English protestant) Chapel in Paris, and devoted his latter years to the idea of establishing a Hebrew college (to train missionaries to the Jews) at Stanstead. This never came to fruition, and Lewis Way died on 23 January 1840 at Barford, Warwickshire. He was the father of the antiquary Albert Way (1805-1874). 


@@@@@


doc= 28906


Waylett, Harriet (1800-1851), actress and singer, was born on 7 February 1800, the daughter of an upholsterer in Bath named Cooke. Her uncle was a member of the Drury Lane company and the actress Sarah West was her cousin. After receiving some instruction in music from the violinist John Loder, she appeared on the Bath stage as Elvina in W. R. Hewetson's 'The Blind Boy', in which she earned praise from both press and public. In the next season she appeared as Leonora in 'The Paddock' and as Madge in 'Love in a Village'. She then went to Bristol and Brighton. In 1818 it was reported that a severe indisposition caused her disappearance from the theatre for about eight months. She returned to the stage at Coventry, where she met and married on 17 June 1819 an actor named Waylett (died 1840), who was described as 'insignificance personified'. The marriage was discordant. It was said that the couple were paired but not matched. In October 1820 they were engaged by the proprietors of the Adelphi, where Harriet was the original Amy Robsart in J. R. Planche's adaptation of 'Kenilworth' and the first Sue to her husband's Primefit in W. T. Moncrieff's 'Tom and Jerry'. In the latter part she was said to have displayed liveliness and mischief. However, husband and wife soon separated, in 1821 or 1822. 
By 1823, during a recess at the Adelphi, Waylett was acting in Birmingham under Alfred Bunn, where she played a multitude of parts. She accompanied Bunn to Drury Lane, where she again appeared as Madge in 'Love in a Village' (4 December 1824). Around this time 'foul insinuations' were made against her and Bunn, and he threatened to prosecute for libel. Mrs Waylett promptly and spiritedly refuted all innuendoes, and the maligning party apologized and bought an expensive ticket for her benefit. At this time too, her husband made a claim for her salary to help him keep his mistress and their child, and she went to Newmarket to confront him. In order to economize she left her London apartment in Tavistock Street for cheaper lodgings and visited her family in Bath. On 14 January 1825 she was Mrs Page in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor' and at the end of the season she went to the Olympic and then to King's Lynn in Norfolk. On 12 May 1825 she made, as Zephyrina in 'The Lady and the Devil', her first appearance at the Haymarket, under D. E. Morris. It was a successful debut, but she was not encouraged by the managers, and after playing many different parts, some original, she went to Dublin. Here she took, at the Hawkins Street Theatre, the part of Phoebe, written especially for her by John Poole in his 'Paul Pry'. She also stood in high favour in Dublin and Cork as a singer. 
After her return from Dublin, Waylett went again to King's Lynn, where local families bestowed gifts upon her. She was then seen at the Haymarket, Drury Lane, the Queen's, the Olympic, Covent Garden, and elsewhere. She sang from the gallery at Drury Lane on 18 April 1831, on the occasion of the dinner of the Friends of the Drury Lane Theatrical Fund, at which the duke of Sussex presided. In the same year she appeared there with success in 'The Ice Witch, or, The Frozen Hand'. In 1832 she was at Vauxhall Gardens for a short period, and appeared in 'Professionals Puzzled' and 'Mystification' at Rayner's New Subscription Room. She became the sole manager at the Strand in 1834. Admission to this theatre was nominally free but actually by payment of 4 's'. an ounce for sweets at a neighbouring shop or by purchasing tickets for the Victoria Theatre, which admitted also to the Strand. It was closed by the lord chamberlain in March 1835. By October 1835 Waylett was again in Hawkins Street, Dublin, where she received $800 and half the proceeds of a benefit for twenty-one nights' performances. Diamonds were given her by a lady at the court. In 1838 she was again back at the Haymarket. Waylett's husband died in 1840 and she soon married George Alexander Lee (1802-1851), a musician and singer, who composed many of her favourite songs. She was known as the Queen of Ballad Singers. She sang at the Marylebone Theatre and at the English Opera House in February 1843. In May she was at the Lyceum. Soon afterwards she was involved in a speculative venture at management in Chester, which failed. Her appearances became infrequent through ill health, and by 1849 she was spoken of as retired. She died in April 1851 after a long illness and was buried in Norwood cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 28907


Waynflete, William (c.1400-1486), bishop of Winchester and founder of Magdalen College, Oxford, was the elder son of Richard Patten (also known as Barbour) of Wainfleet, Lincolnshire, and Margery, daughter of William Brereton of Cheshire and Lincolnshire. Little is known of the Patten family, who were of gentry stock. Richard Patten's younger son, John Waynflete, also entered the church, rising to become dean of Chichester. 
William Waynflete's early career, already obscure, has been further complicated by confusion with a number of near contemporaries of the same name. Nothing is known of his early career before his ordination as acolyte, and then subdeacon, at Holbeck in Lincolnshire in 1425. Clear and unequivocal documentation of his career only begins in June 1430, when he became headmaster of Winchester College. It is likely that Waynflete was educated at Oxford, probably attached to one of the ephemeral halls of the university -- none of the attempts to link him with any of the colleges can be substantiated. There is no record of either his arts degree or subsequent theology degree; the first reference to him as a bachelor of theology dates from September 1443, after he had become provost of Eton College. 
Throughout the 1430s Waynflete taught at Winchester College, where he attracted the attention of Henry Beaufort (died 1447), bishop of Winchester, who presented him to the mastership of the small hospital of St Mary Magdalen near Winchester. Then in 1441, after a visit of Henry VI to Winchester College, Waynflete entered royal service, initially in some undefined role connected with the development of the embryonic royal foundation of Eton College. This move to Eton College marked a vital turning point in his career, bringing him into regular communication with the king and other members of the court circle. In March 1442 he replaced Henry Sever (died 1471) as provost of Eton. In this role he was highly influential in guiding the development of Eton College and King's College, Cambridge, along the lines of William Wykeham's dual foundation of Winchester College and New College, Oxford, and was a prime mover in the making of the 'Amicabilis concordia' (1444) between the four institutions. He also oversaw the school's physical development, an interest he retained after leaving Eton, and from 1467 until his death was a generous patron and benefactor to the college, concentrating his resources on the building and decoration of its chapel. 
In 1447 Waynflete was promoted to the see of Winchester, in succession to his one-time patron, Henry Beaufort. Closely directed by the king, whose letter recommended him as 'a notable clerc and a substantial personne' (Chandler, 299), the cathedral chapter elected Waynflete on 15 April. In a letter from the prior to the pope, advancing the reasons for the convent's choice of prelate, he is described as: 'a man whose discretion, knowledge and blameless way of life are to be commended... in addition his prudence, both in spiritual and secular affairs and his remarkable virtues and abilities will enable him to defend the rights of their church. ('Register of St Swithun', 101)' Consecrated bishop in the incomplete chapel of Eton College on 30 July 1447, his installation in Winchester Cathedral did not take place until January 1449. Waynflete was an unexpected choice to succeed Beaufort at Winchester, the richest see in England, and the fact that he succeeded Beaufort with apparent ease is proof of his considerable skills as a political manoeuvrer. Nevertheless, he was unusual in that his background was that of a schoolmaster, who lacked either experience in government service or previous church preferments (saving the mastership of St Mary Magdalen Hospital). 
Waynflete proved a conscientious bishop. Well supported by his circle of administrators, direction of affairs came clearly from the top. Policies and actions were the result of his personal initiative. His patronage within the diocese shows him favouring particularly Wykehamists and boys he had known at Eton. His proteges were highly educated, a number with theological training; men who were primarily administrators in either the diocesan or educational sphere. Commonly resident in his diocese Waynflete attacked non-residence by others. But in neither parochial affairs nor those of religious houses was he an innovator or reformer. In 1476 the relics of St Swithun were translated to a new shrine in the cathedral, in Waynflete's presence. He gave much attention to the administration of his extensive episcopal estates, thereby sometimes stirring up his tenants against him. In August 1461 his tenants at East Meon seized and imprisoned him, and then petitioned the king for relief from episcopal exactions. Waynflete was responsible for a number of innovations in estate management, in particular the appointment of a professional auditor from 1448, followed in 1454 by a major change in the physical form of the ministers' accounts, from pipe rolls into book form, which greatly facilitated consultation of the accounts. His annual income from his estates was over $4000. 
In 1448 Waynflete set in motion the foundation of Magdalen Hall in Oxford. On 20 August a foundation charter was issued, which established a hall with a president, John Hornley, and fifty graduate scholars. His reasons for establishing Magdalen Hall were set out as the not uncommon ones of wishing to stamp out heresy and provide well-educated and suitable clergy to serve in parishes. Magdalen Hall was refounded as Magdalen College in 1458, and a new charter reserved to the bishop of Winchester complete authority over his foundation -- an authority that Waynflete himself exercised actively until the end of his life. The dedication was a reflection of Waynflete's devotion to St Mary Magdalen, dating from his early promotion to the Winchester hospital dedicated to that saint. Between 1455 and 1486 he purchased or acquired property worth about $600 a year for the endowment of Magdalen College, in addition to the property of the hospital of St John the Baptist, Oxford, which formed the nucleus of the collegiate endowment and which was itself worth about $75 yearly. Waynflete retained control of the purse strings and funded the college directly from several of his temporal estates. His interest extended to the details and progress of collegiate buildings which from 1467 were being constructed on the site, using masons and artisans he employed elsewhere. Nor did Waynflete restrict himself to his own resources. Sir John Fastolf (1380-1489) nominated Waynflete as executor of his will, a trust that both involved him in prolonged controversies on behalf of the Paston family and enabled him to enhance the endowment for Magdalen College. Fastolf had intended a collegiate foundation at Caister in Norfolk, but in 1474 Waynflete, disregarding Fastolf's own stipulations for alternative provision, and aided by a dispensation from Pope Sixtus IV ('r'. 1471-84), diverted the endowment to his own college of Magdalen, where Fastolf was to be commemorated by the establishment of Fastolf fellows. 
In the early 1480s Waynflete appointed a new president, Richard Mayew, and promulgated statutes for his college, enshrining his ideas for the college's development. Administratively the statutes drew on those of William Wykeham (died 1404) for New College, Oxford; innovation came with their educational provisions, in particular with the division of members of the foundation into demys and fellows, and the arrangements for lectureships. The bishop's personal concern with the teaching of grammar was also reflected in his foundation of two grammar schools, one at his birthplace in the mid-1460s, the other attached to the Oxford college -- Magdalen College School, which was flourishing by 1479. In the last years of his life Waynflete was twice successful in bringing his college to the attention of the reigning sovereign; both Edward IV and Richard III visited the college in the company of the bishop, and were lavishly entertained. 
Waynflete was essentially a public rather than a political figure, a man loyal to the person of Henry VI but whose ties with the political interests within the court circle were loose. There is no record that he was ever a royal chaplain, but he had a close personal relationship with the king while at Eton College and afterwards. In the 'King's Will', the document containing the arrangements made by Henry VI for his foundations of Eton College and King's College, Cambridge, Waynflete was given overall responsibility for their implementation, the king referring to 'his high trougth and fervent zele whiche at all tymes he hath hadde and hath unto my weel and which I have founde and proved in hym' (muniments, Eton College, 39/78). 
Political activities were not Waynflete's principal concern, but as bishop of Winchester between 1447 and 1486 he held an important see throughout a period of considerable strife, and in such circumstances he could hardly avoid being caught up in national affairs. Although he was not seen by contemporaries as an undesirable influence on Henry VI, he was closely identified with the Lancastrian monarchy. His most active involvement in politics came during the 1450s. During Cade's revolt in 1450 he was one of the emissaries sent to persuade the rebels to seek pardons, and he later negotiated with them in St Margaret's Church in Southwark, in his own diocese. At Dartford in March 1452, in an atmosphere of growing political tension, Waynflete went with Lord Stourton and Henry, Lord Bourchier (died 1483), in an attempt to dissuade Richard, duke of York (died 1460), from hasty action. In October 1453, following the lapse of Henry VI into insanity, Waynflete baptized the new-born Edward, prince of Wales (died 1471), and on 23 March following he led a delegation to the king seeking advice (without success) as to who should be promoted to the archbishopric of Canterbury and the chancellorship, both vacant since the death of John Kemp on 22 March. As one of the proposed members of the protectorate council headed by the duke of York during Henry's illness, Waynflete expressed a preference for a rota of the bishops nominated as councillors, since, he said, while he was prepared to serve for a period, 'his consyence [concerning his diocesan interests and involvements elsewhere]... wold not suffer hym contynuyaly to serve' (Griffiths, 80). However, council records show he attended frequently, and after Henry VI's recovery, in January 1455, Waynflete was one of the first lords to visit him, according to the Paston letters. 
Waynflete came to the forefront of the royal administration with his appointment as chancellor on 11 October 1456. He remained loyal to Henry VI, so that in 1459 Friar John Brackley wrote to the Pastons concerning him, 'The chauncelere is not good to these lordys [Yorkists] for he feryth the Erle of Marche wil clayme the inheritauns' ('Paston Letters', no. 582). But he tried to counteract the growing enmity between Lancastrians and Yorkists, in particular by organizing a 'love day' in March 1458, and his sermon preached at the opening of the Coventry parliament, on 20 November 1459, only weeks after the battle of Bloreheath (23 September) and the rout of the duke of York and his allies at Ludford Bridge (13 October), on the text, 'Let peace and unity be given unto you', reflects what he saw as the aim of his endeavours whether as bishop or chancellor. Waynflete resigned the chancellorship on 7 July 1460, the day before the battle of Northampton, and then came to an accord with the Yorkists, who now had possession of the king. In November he appointed Humphrey Stafford (died 1469), a supporter of the earl of March, to be constable of the strategically important castle of Taunton, which was owned by the bishops of Winchester. This obtained for him a letter addressed by the new Yorkist administration to Pope Pius II (1458-64), probably intended to protect Waynflete's position against the activities of Francesco Coppini, the papal legate in England. In the politically crucial early months of 1461 he remained detached (or perhaps excluded) from political affairs, residing at his manor in Taunton, but he returned to his Southwark residence in time to attend the coronation of Edward IV on 28 June 1461, at which, according to Jean Waurin, he accepted the new king on behalf of all the prelates, barons, nobles, and commoners. 
Other Lancastrian sympathizers were to be politically active under Edward IV, and his earlier loyalties would have been of little disadvantage to him had Waynflete wished to follow suit. Instead he largely withdrew from politics, although he did attend parliaments and fulfil such necessary public duties as commissioner of the peace and 'ex officio' prelate of the Order of the Garter. At Henry VI's readeption in 1470 Waynflete's role was restricted to escorting the king from his place of imprisonment in the Tower and conducting him to the bishop of London's residence by St Paul's. After Edward IV's return Waynflete was granted a general pardon on 30 May 1471. He was not one of the bishops who suffered a brief imprisonment, and his relationship with Edward IV was subsequently cordial; he acted as godfather to Edward's youngest daughter, Bridget, when she was baptized at Eltham Palace on 11 November 1480. The following year, in September 1481, the king visited Magdalen College. 
Waynflete remained interested in the teaching of grammar throughout his career. In the early 1480s a revolution in grammar teaching began in England, spread by means of the printing press, and partly based on books by contemporary Italian grammarians. Waynflete was the patron of John Anwykyll (died 1487), headmaster of Magdalen College School, and author of the most important of the early grammatical works emanating from Magdalen, 'Compendium totius grammaticae', printed at Oxford in 1483. In a dedicatory preface by Pietro Carmeliano, Waynflete is praised as patron of the work: 'Fame will sing such great praises of you, William, most celebrated father who is now bishop of the church of Winchester, and will celebrate for you as long as the steady pole-star is in its stable axis, for the author John wrote this book at your persuasion, whence your fame will be for ever. (Anwykyll, 1)' Among the several men in Waynflete's household who were interested in humanist studies, Thomas Chaundler (died 1490) stands out as one of the leading English scholars of his day, and Waynflete himself was recognized by his contemporaries as an important figure in English humanistic circles. In the early 1480s Lorenzo da Savona, the leading Italian rhetorician in England at this time, dedicated his 'Triumphus amoris Jesus Christi' (1485) to Waynflete and prefaced it with a eulogy of him. Waynflete was also an active patron of bookbinding. Support for printing can also be seen in his association with the earliest known printed indulgence to be issued by members of the English episcopate ('c'.1479-1483). 
Waynflete was an active patron of building, on an impressive range and scale. He extended the Winchester episcopal palaces at Farnham and Esher, and built a substantial brick grammar school at Wainfleet. In his cathedral church at Winchester he constructed a lavish chantry and may also have been the patron of the magnificent great screen of the cathedral. The nucleus of Magdalen College, Oxford, was designed and completed in his lifetime under his watchful eye. In addition he oversaw the completion of two projects begun by other patrons -- Eton College chapel (including the grisaille frescos) and Tattershall College in Lincolnshire, the latter founded by Ralph, Lord Cromwell (died 1456). Of particular importance was his role in the dissemination of the use of brick in southern England, and he also set an influential example for the later use of brick for domestic purposes. 
Waynflete retained links with his native Lincolnshire throughout his life, although from the late 1420s he never lived there. His kin were still there, and Waynflete's association with the county can be seen in a number of ways throughout his career: as a benefactor to the town of Wainfleet and its inhabitants; as executor to Ralph, Lord Cromwell, and thus the overseer of the completion of Tattershall College; as co-founder of a chantry in Coningsby; and by the promotion of Lincolnshire men within his circle after he became a bishop. 
Waynflete possessed an extensive library, but the titles of few of his books are known. His will does not mention any books, or, indeed, any personal possessions. In 1483 Waynflete had transferred books in cartloads to Magdalen College, Oxford, reputedly 800 volumes in all. Among the few that can be identified in the college library today are two works of Albertus Magnus, a collection of sermons designed to be read in Lent, and a copy written in a humanist hand of Jacobus de Cessolis, 'Liber de ludo scacchorum'. He also possessed a 'Bible', said to have belonged to St Louis of France, which had been bequeathed to him by John Stanbury, bishop of Hereford (died 1474). He had also received a book as a bequest from Sir John Fastolf, and Fastolf's secretary presented him with several books in an unsuccessful attempt to win his patronage, including a copy of Boccaccio's 'De casibus virorum illustrium' and a copy of an English translation of Cicero's 'De senectute'. A member of Waynflete's household may have been responsible for the initial compilation of BL, Add. MS 60577, which includes a poem presented to Waynflete as bishop of Winchester, as well as some Middle English verse and prose, sermons, verse alphabets, medical recipes, and a lapidary. 
William Waynflete measures up well against his contemporaries on the episcopal bench, not least for the range of his interests -- diocesan, educational, architectural, scholarly. His experiences as a schoolmaster dominated his life, for his success at Eton made possible his promotion to the episcopate, and afterwards the resources -- financial, political, and administrative -- placed at his disposal by his position as bishop of Winchester were ploughed back into education. Waynflete's last months were a period of physical decline. In December 1485 he returned from Southwark to Bishops Waltham, Hampshire, and on 26 April 1486 drew up his will, which was conventional in form. He bequeathed his goods for the cost of his funeral and to members of his household, the residue for pious purposes and to relieve the necessities of his college. He died at Bishops Waltham on 11 August 1486. He had already constructed a majestic chantry chapel in Winchester Cathedral, dedicated to his spiritual patron, Mary Magdalen, with a tomb therein waiting to receive his body. The tomb contains an effigy of the bishop and his arms, which included lilies drawn from the arms of Eton College. There is also a representation of the bishop, as a small kneeling figure in episcopal dress, on the tomb of his father, originally in Wainfleet church, now in Magdalen College chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 28908


Weale, John (1791-1862), publisher and writer on architecture, was born in Westminster and began work as an errand-boy to Thomas King, a bookseller of Tavistock Street, Covent Garden, London. Nothing is known of his parentage or life prior to this, but, suffering mistreatment at the hands of King, he subsequently moved to the nearby establishment of George Priestley, a bookseller and publisher at 5 High Street, St Giles-in-the-Fields, and he continued to work for Priestley's widow, Mary, after the former's death about 1812. He was taken into partnership about 1819; while neither of the Priestleys had published extensively, Weale's interest in architecture soon led to a rapid expansion of the firm's activity in this area. Priestley and Weale became one of the leading architectural publishers of the period, although it was not particularly financially successful. Moreover, Weale's evident ability attracted the attention of the pre-eminent architectural bookseller and publisher Isaac Taylor, who instructed his executors to assist Weale in purchasing his business at 59 High Holborn, London, on his death, which occurred in 1834. Weale accepted the offer, and rapidly expanded his business, publishing extensively on all aspects of architecture and engineering. According to his 'Statistical Notices of Works on the Fine and the Constructive Arts' (1859; 2nd edn, 1861), he expended over $200,000 on the production of books during his forty years as a publisher, although not with great profit to himself. 
Weale had a hand in suggesting and improving many of the books he published, and he displayed considerable ability as the author or editor of numerous works on a wide range of architectural and technical subjects. Most noteworthy of his works was the elaborately illustrated and widely praised 'Divers Works of Early Masters in Christian Decoration' (1846), which earned him a gold medal from the king of Belgium in 1847. In addition, his 'Rudimentary Dictionary of Terms used in Architecture, Building, and Engineering' (1849-50) elicited favourable reviews, and reached a fifth edition in 1876. This volume became part of what was arguably Weale's greatest publishing success, namely his 'Rudimentary Series', begun in 1848, which comprised more than 130 scientific and technical works, generally written by eminent men, and usually published at 1's'. per volume. Weale invested over $48,000 in the series during the thirteen years before he sold it to James Sprent Virtue, and the venture was a considerable financial success, with sales of some volumes reaching 40,000 copies by 1854. Weale subsequently published an educational and a classical series in a similar format, these works together constituting an important innovation in cheap educational literature. 
Weale married, on 14 February 1833, Sarah Hollis Isabella Jackson Puttnam (1813-1887), daughter of George Puttnam. He died of bronchitis at his home at 19 Canterbury Villas, Maida Vale, London, on 18 December 1862 and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. The business was continued by his wife for the benefit of their still young family of four daughters and four sons, until 1864, when it was taken over by their second son, James Watt Weale (1843-1877). 


@@@@@


doc= 28909


Wearg, Sir Clement (1686?-1726), lawyer and politician, was born in Kensington, London, the eldest son of Thomas Wearg of the Inner Temple and his wife, Mary Fletcher of Ely. He was baptized at the church of St Botolph, Aldersgate, the parish where his grandfather, Thomas Wearg, a wealthy merchant, lived. He was admitted to Peterhouse, Cambridge, in 1705, and became a student at the Inner Temple on 25 November 1706. In 1711 he was called to the bar; he became a bencher in 1723, a reader in 1724, and treasurer in 1725. 
Wearg was a zealous whig and protestant. In 1722 he contested, without success, the borough of Shaftesbury in Dorset. He acted as the counsel for the crown in the prosecutions of the Jacobites Christopher Layer and Bishop Francis Atterbury, and his replies, made with Thomas Reeve, to Atterbury's defence in court were published in 1723. On 1 October of the same year he married Elizabeth (died 1746), the daughter of Sir James Montagu, chief baron of the exchequer. Following the resignation of Sir Robert Raymond as attorney-general, he was appointed solicitor-general on 3 February 1724. He was knighted three days later, and was returned for the Godolphin parliamentary borough of Helston on 10 March. While solicitor-general, Wearg managed the impeachment of Lord Chancellor Macclesfield (the attorney-general, Sir Philip Yorke, declined to undertake the impeachment, as a friend of Macclesfield), and also gave legal support to Lord Bolingbroke's petition for the restoration of his estates. He died of a violent fever on 6 April 1726 and was buried, in accordance with the request in his will, in the Temple churchyard, under a plain raised tomb, on 12 April. His oratory has been described as that of 'a master of terse and forcible reasoning; and if his life had not been cut short by a premature death he would probably have attained a high judicial position' (Holdsworth, 'Eng. law', 12.460). 
Following Wearg's death, Edmund Curll advertised late in 1726 the publication of six volumes of 'Cases of Impotence and Divorce, by Sir Clement Wearg, Late Solicitor-General'. Curll was attacked for this by 'A. P.', perhaps Alexander Pope, in the 'London Journal' on 12 November 1726, but two days later swore an affidavit that a book published by him in 1715 entitled 'The case of impotency as debated in England, anno 1613, in trial between Robert, earl of Essex, and the Lady Frances Howard' was by Wearg. It was dated from the Inner Temple, 30 October 1714. As Wearg then had chambers in the new court, there might have been some grounds for the controversy. Lady Wearg died on 9 March 1746, and was buried with her husband on 14 March. There were no children from the marriage. 


@@@@@


doc= 28910


Weatherhead, George Hume (1790?-1853), physician, born in Berwickshire, graduated MD at Edinburgh University on 1 August 1816 with a thesis entitled 'De diagnosit inter erysipelas, phlegmonim et erythema'. He was admitted a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians on 27 March 1820. He was a prolific writer on a range of medical and other subjects; in particular he published several works on spas and waters, and on the treatment of fevers. He also wrote 'A Pedestrian Tour through France and Italy' (1834). Weatherhead died from kidney disease at The Cottage, Foots Cray Park, near Bromley, Kent, on 22 June 1853. 


@@@@@


doc= 28911


Weaver, John (d. 1685), politician and government official, is thought to have been born of a family in the north of England. One suggestion is that his father kept an inn; another that his parents, whose names are unknown, were in financial difficulties. Nothing is known of his early years and he first emerged into public life in 1631 when he became a freeman of the borough of Stamford. Subsequently he sat for the town in parliament. It is possible, but not certain, that he had a legal education, since during the 1640s he was appointed judge advocate in the parliamentarian army. He next appeared as a supporter of parliament in the civil war, rising in the eastern association to be its treasurer. In 1645 he took the side of Oliver Cromwell when he attacked the commander of the association, the earl of Manchester. He was said to share Cromwell's religious preferences, being recorded as a zealous supporter of the Independents. Later, however, he was supposed to incline more towards the presbyterians. In 1645 he was elected as a recruiter MP for Stamford. In the ensuing controversies he took the side of the army and opposed those who sued for peace with Charles I. Towards the end of 1648 he was calling for the trial of the king, but when he found himself named to the high court he refused to sit. Nevertheless, he quickly rallied to the new republican regime, returning to the purged House of Commons early in 1649. In parliament he energetically promoted measures designed to achieve religious and moral reform. 
The administrative abilities which Weaver had revealed during the 1640s, together with political alliances with the important, notably Cromwell, brought his appointment as one of the parliamentary commissioners to whom the government of a reconquered Ireland was entrusted in 1649. Among his other services he attracted his brother-in-law, the minister, Samuel Winter, to Dublin, where he was soon installed as provost of Trinity College. Later Weaver wrote a posthumous life of Winter. In the Rump Parliament he also forwarded measures to spread protestantism in Ireland. He acquired permanent Irish links through a marriage into the family of one of the leading merchants of Dublin, Daniel Hutchinson, who also favoured the religious Independents. Weaver was among those MPs who successfully opposed the appointment of John Lambert to be lord deputy in Ireland. This position was in line with his staunch championing of civilian government. But he incurred the hostility of the army in Ireland, and early in 1653 resigned from his Irish office. 
Thereafter Weaver gravitated towards the commonwealthsmen, such as Sir Henry Vane. Returned to parliament in 1654 and 1656, again for Stamford, he was secluded on the second occasion on account of his supposed estrangement from the Cromwellian protectorate. He was suspected of using his residual contacts in Ireland to encourage the opponents there of Cromwell's regime. In 1659, once more member for Stamford, he joined the republicans opposed to Richard Cromwell's government. When the commonwealthsmen briefly returned to power he was included in the council of state in December 1659, and was named to the new commission to govern Ireland. He neither acted as a councillor nor travelled to Dublin to assume the appointment. However, his earlier services had been rewarded with lands in Ireland, some of which he retained after the restoration of Charles II. These gave him an interest in the town of Maryborough, Queen's county, where he -- or his son -- was identified with the sectarian and political opponents of the returned Stuart monarchy. Despite these sympathies he escaped any serious punishment after 1660, and seems to have lived in relative obscurity, mainly in the environs of Stamford. He died in March 1685 probably at North Luffenham, Rutland, where he was buried on the 25th. 


@@@@@


doc= 28912


Weaver, John (1673-1760), dancer and choreographer, the son of John Weaver (died 1701) and his wife, Anne (died 1721), was baptized at the abbey church of Holy Cross, Shrewsbury, Shropshire, on 21 July 1673. His father, who taught dancing to pupils at Shrewsbury School, took his family to Oxford after his son's birth and ran a dancing school and boarding-house in Holywell, under the jurisdiction of the vice-chancellor of the University of Oxford. Weaver spent his early years at Oxford but was educated at Shrewsbury School, presumably as a boarder. He trained as a dancing-master either under his father in Oxford or under Edward Dyer in Shrewsbury. He is recorded as a dancing-master in Milk Street, Shrewsbury, in 1695-6 but appears to have left for London by 1697. From then, until his return to Shrewsbury in 1708, he established a reputation both as a theatrical dancer and as an authority on dance notation. His translations from Feuillet -- 'Orchesography' (1706) and 'A Small Treatise of Time and Cadence in Dancing' (1706) -- and his notation of Isaac's dances -- 'A Collection of Ball-Dances Performed at Court' (1706) and 'The Union' (1707) -- had a significant influence on the development and status of dance in England. During this first period in London he also began his experiments as a choreographer, which have led many dance historians in the twentieth century to see Weaver as 'one of the most far-sighted and important early exponents of 'ballet d'action'' (Ralph, 84). 
By 1702 Weaver had married his first wife, Catherine. They had seven children. The first three were baptized at St Andrew's, Holborn, London. John, who died in infancy, was baptized on 27 December 1702; Elizabeth on 12 August 1704; and Katherine on 19 August 1705 (buried 4 May 1706). The last four were baptized in Shrewsbury, where Weaver had returned to set up a dancing school and to write his influential 'An Essay towards an History of Dancing' (1712). Anne Elizabeth was baptized on 12 March 1708 at St Julian's Church. John, on 11 July 1709; Richard, on 3 November 1710; and Catherine, on 13 September 1712, all at St Chad's Church. Weaver's wife died giving birth and was buried on the same day as their last child was baptized and in the same month as Weaver's 'Essay' was published. The stir caused by its publication, particularly in the pages of 'The Spectator' and 'The Lover', obscures what little is known about Weaver's personal life during these critical years. In 1716 his second wife, Susanna, who was twenty-eight years younger than he, gave birth to the first of their five children. Prisilla was baptized on 31 May 1716 at St Chad's; Dorothy on 20 January 1721 at St Mary's; Anne on 3 May 1722 at St Alkmund's; Susannah on 10 September 1723 at St Alkmund's; and William on 21 June 1728 at St Alkmund's. 
The years that followed Prisilla's birth saw Weaver's second and most creative period as a dancer and choreographer in London. Between March 1717 and April 1721 he composed and directed at Drury Lane three serious dance pantomimes (records of one of these no longer survive) and two grotesque dance pantomimes 'after the manner of the Modern Italians, such as Harlequin, Scaramouch, etc' (J. Weaver, 'The History of the Mimes and Pantomimes', 1728, 45). He danced one of the major roles in all these entertainments, as well as a variety of ordinary stage dances throughout this period. He also gave a series of anatomical lectures to an audience of distinguished dancing-masters, who subscribed to a printed version of them which was published in 1721. These lectures 'are the first attempt to base dancing and dance instruction on the knowledge of the body' (Sachs, 395). Between 27 April 1721 and 16 March 1728 Weaver turned his back on the London stage and re-established his dancing school in Shrewsbury. He lived and taught in Shrewsbury for the rest of his life, and returned to Drury Lane only on three brief occasions. In 1728 and in 1729 he both danced in and directed pantomimes in collaboration with Monsieur Roger, a French Pierrot dancer, while in 1733 he choreographed his last serious entertainment, 'The Judgment of Paris'. This was the only experiment of his in which he did not perform. 
It was Weaver, rather than John Rich, who introduced into England entertainments called pantomimes. In 1703 he staged at Drury Lane, probably in late February or early March, 'The Tavern Bilkers', which he describes as 'the first entertainment that appeared on the English Stage, where the Representation and Story was carried on by Dancing Action and Motion only'. The text does not survive, but it is clear that this was a pantomime that involved 'commedia' characters such as Harlequin and what Weaver terms 'grotesque dancing'. 'The Shipwreck' (1717), 'Harlequin Turned Judge' (1717), and the two comic interludes Weaver composed for 'Perseus and Andromeda' (1728) were also this type of pantomime. Apart from their emphasis on dancing, all of them must have been similar to the rival burlesques that Rich produced at Lincoln's Inn Fields from 1717 to 1726, and that were based on themes and plots associated with Weaver's work. Weaver's serious compositions, however, were of a different type. They were 'attempted in imitation of the pantomimes of the Ancient Greeks and Romans'. 'The Loves of Mars and Venus' (1717) was the most successful with contemporary audiences of these experiments. The published text of its danced action, together with the text of 'Orpheus and Eurydice' (1718) and his publications on dance, establish Weaver as 'the major figure in British dance before the present [twentieth] century' (Ralph, ix). As an innovator he was closer to Fokine than Noverre in his belief that 'there is no dividing line between pantomime and dance' (Cohen, 47). 
In Shrewsbury, Weaver was a respected and respectable figure, 'a little, dapper, cheerful man' (Owen and Blakeway, 2.152, n. 1). His activities and longevity as a dancing-master in the town are remembered with warmth and respect by Dr Burney. In London, however, his reputation was more complex: '
Happy if not a Tavern cou'd be found, 

Or Bawdy-house in fifty Miles around. 

... 

Tho' always getting, he is always poor. 
('The Dancing-Master', 16-17)' How far such satires reflected his character or revealed antipathy to the stage and, in particular, to dance, it is difficult to discern. As a dancer Weaver 'shewed the Passions to great Advantage' (Essex, preface, p. ix). For Richard Steele, he was: '
... corruptor of this present age, 

Who first taught silent sins upon the stage. 
(BL, Add. MS 25391, fol. 3'v')' Weaver died at his home, at the Market Place, Shrewsbury, on 24 September 1760, and was buried in the south aisle of Old St Chad's Church on 28 September. The inscription on his grave, now destroyed, is preserved in BL, Add. MS 21236, fol. 65'b'., and gave his age as ninety. He was in fact eighty-seven. 


@@@@@


doc= 28913


Weaver, Robert (1773-1852), Congregational minister and antiquary, born at Trowbridge, in Wiltshire, on 23 January 1773, was the son of Richard Weaver, clothier, and his wife, Mary. Aiming at the Congregational ministry, he chose study over the tailoring apprenticeship offered by his father, and entered Rotherham Independent college early in 1794, where he resided with the president, Edward Williams (1750-1813). On 15 February 1802 he became pastor at Mansfield in Nottinghamshire, where he remained until his death; he reconstituted the dispersed congregation in 1805, and twice enlarged the place of worship, in 1812 and in 1829. 
Weaver was a keen student of the 'Greek Testament', and taught the subject to residential students. The educational theme was pursued in his publications, particularly 'Education Based on Scriptural Principles, the True Source of Individual and Social Happiness' (1838). Other theological writings included 'A Complete View of Puseyism' (1843), 'Dissent: its Character' (1844), and, in the year of the 'Ecclesiastical Titles Act', 'Popery, Calmly, Closely, and Comprehensively Considered'. (1851). He also took an interest in antiquities, and in 1840 published 'Monumenta antiqua, or, The Stone Monuments of Antiquity yet Remaining in the British Isles', in which he ascribed the remains of pre-Roman times to Phoenician influence and supported his theory by the particulars of similar Canaanite and Jewish monuments given in the 'Bible'. Weaver died at Mansfield on 12 October 1852, and was buried in the ground attached to Mansfield Independent Chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 28914


Weaver, Thomas (1616-1662), poet, was born in Worcester, the son of Thomas Weaver. He matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, on 21 March 1634, graduating BA in 1637 and MA in 1640. He became a chaplain or petty canon at Christ Church Cathedral in 1641, and stayed in Oxford following the outbreak of the civil war. 
As a member of Christ Church in the late 1630s and early 1640s, Weaver was heir to a vibrant and expansive poetic tradition. During the early years of the civil war he wrote most of the lyric poems which appear in the extensive collection now in the Bodleian (MS Rawlinson poet. 211). Weaver's poetry was typical of royalist verse of the early 1640s -- politically engaged, satirical, and witty. He had a modest reputation, and several of his early poems were circulated in Oxford manuscripts. Furthermore, 'Zeal Over-heated', which deals with the comic consequences of a fire in an Oxford puritan merchant's shop, was published as part of John Taylor's 'A Three-Fold Discourse betweene Three Neighbours' (1642). The poem particularly attacks the avaricious and hypocritical character of the puritan and his brother. 
Weaver was ejected from his position at Christ Church Cathedral by the parliamentary visitation in 1648. He may have been imprisoned also at this time: a poem entitled 'A Song in Prison' appears in his manuscript of poetry from the 1640s. This verse asserts: '
no foule offence, 

But Loyaltie unto my King 

Caus'd my Restraint. 

' He fled Oxford, and Anthony Wood says that he 'shifted from place to place and lived upon his wits' (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3.622). His whereabouts until the Restoration are unclear. A verse letter in the Bodleian manuscript 'From Llangiby Castle in Monmouthshire to Sir Evan Lloyd in London' seems to indicate that he was in Wales for a period. He evidently spent much time wandering between loyalist country houses, as there is a poem in the 1640s manuscript written from Lengiby Castle and also a lyric in his 'Songs and Poems' (1654) 'To the Three Incomparable Ladies at K. Castle'. 

'Songs and Poems of Love and Drollery, by T. W.' was dedicated 'To my most obliging friend E. M. Esquire' and the 'Epistle Dedicatory' asserts that 'It was not by my endeavor, but permittance only, that these trifles were preferred to the Press; nor had the perswasions used procured so much from me, but that upon strict Examination, I conceived them to be good for nothing, but to be printed.' The collection includes lyrics, ballads, carols, and pastoral dialogues; the majority of the poems appear in the 1640s manuscript. The poems, which are very political, include 'To Sylvia Going to an Enemies Quarters', 'An Epitaph on Major Owen and Captain Edward Wynne', and 'On Mauricia's Wound which she Received from a Round-Head'. The poem 'Rotundos' mocks the 'pretty tricks' of the roundheads. However, as printed in 1654, the volume betrays a royalist sense of loss: 'For since the late Deluge of Ignorance overflowed this Land, it fares with Books, as with Men; the light and frothy float and flourish, whilst the Grave and Solid sink and perish.' The updated version of 'Zeal Overheated' changes the ending of the ballad as printed in 1642, adopting a more defiant tone: '
God blesse this Land, and keep it Aye 

Against all that oppose: 

And let the Supream head bear sway 

In stead o'th Supream nose. 

' The volume concludes with 'An Epitaph on the Right Honorable the Lord Byron, Buried in France' and the sarcastic 'An Epithalamium, upon the Late Nuptial Act' which attacks the puritan attempts to unify religion and the law: '
Justice and Priesthood by Supreme Decree, 

For mutual helps sake must remarried be. 

' The printing of these poems led to Weaver's being arrested and tried for treason; he was only saved by the judge who, according to Wood, advised the jury to acquit this 'scholar and a man of wit'. 
After the Restoration, Weaver was appointed by Charles II as the excise collector for Liverpool. A petition for the retrieval of moneys paid to '[the late] Thos. Weaver, late collector of customs at Liverpool', probably refers to an old case ('CSP dom.', '1670', 346). Weaver has sometimes been credited with the writing of 'Plantagenets Tragicall Story' which is in fact by Thomas Wincoll (Wing, 'STC', 672). Weaver died in Liverpool on 3 January 1662. 


@@@@@


doc= 28915


Weaver, Thomas (1773-1855), geologist and mining consultant, was born in King Street, Gloucester, the son of Thomas Weaver (died 1805) and his wife, Mary. His father was an important pin manufacturer and, from 1772, a partner in Roe & Co.'s copper company of Macclesfield and Neath Abbey. From 1779 he was also an alderman of Gloucester. 
In 1790 the younger Thomas Weaver entered the Bergakademie at Freiberg, Saxony, where he studied mining and geognosy under Abraham Werner. His contemporaries there included Alexander von Humboldt (1769-1859) and Leopold von Buch (1774-1853). He returned to Gloucester in 1792, and it is likely he attended Thomas Beddoes's geological lectures at Oxford before taking up the management of the Cronbane and Tigrony copper mines in the Wicklow Mountains in 1793. 
The mines were an important source of copper for the elder Thomas Weaver's pin-making -- he had been a proprietor of them since 1787. In September 1795 the discovery of alluvial gold at the foot of Croghan Mountain (south of the mines), caused a gold rush. From 1796 to 1803 Weaver was one of the superintendents of government operations there. (During interruption to mining caused by the uprising of 1798, he acted as a yeomanry officer.) While still manager of the Cronbane mine, in 1805 Weaver published the first English translation of Werner's 'A Treatise on the External Characters of Fossils'. For this work, in 1811, he was elected a member of the Edinburgh-based Wernerian Society. 
In 1812 Weaver's involvement at Cronbane ceased, and that year and in 1813 he applied unsuccessfully for positions in mining and mineralogy at the Royal Dublin Society. In 1817 the Gloucester pin-making firm (now run by his two younger brothers) went bankrupt but by then Weaver's work on the geology of Ireland had begun. In January 1816 he was reportedly 'engaged in a Geognostical map of a great part of Ireland'. In May 1818 he read a paper to the Geological Society in London on the geology of the east of Ireland, which was accompanied by a geological map of the south-east of Ireland, and discussed his involvement in Irish metal mining. 
Weaver moved to Tortworth, Gloucestershire, about 1819, the year in which his second paper, on the geology of part of Gloucestershire and Somerset, was read. It was one of the first studies of what were later recognized as Lower Palaeozoic rocks. Weaver was elected a member of the Geological Society in 1820, having earlier been elected a member of the Royal Irish Academy. Throughout the 1820s he acted as a consultant mining geologist, particularly in Ireland, preparing reports for mining companies on the metalliferous prospects of the Waterford coast (1824) and the Kenmare district (1825). 
In 1825 Weaver read a paper recording the comparatively modern age of the Irish elk, for which he was elected FRS in 1826. This was followed in 1830 by the first of many papers which recorded his part in the controversy over the age of rocks in Devon (which ultimately led to the naming of the Devonian system). Publication of his main contribution to the debate, a paper on geological relations of the south of Ireland, was, however, twice suppressed because many other geologists did not believe his report of fossil plants found in the greywacke, and it appeared only in 1838. In 1831 Weaver went to Mexico where he was a mining consultant for three years, and in 1834 he went on to New York. On his return to Britain he remained active as an author, writing on American rocks in 1836 and 1837, and also on Irish gold workings. In 1836 he made a tour of Scotland. 
By 1841 Weaver was in retirement in London where, a decade later and unmarried, he was living in lodgings in Pimlico. He died at Stafford Place, Pimlico, on 2 July 1855 and was buried in Kensal Green cemetery. Prior to his death he had given many fossils and minerals to the Geological Society and the Yorkshire Philosophical Society. What remained of his large collection was sold at auction that month; the unsold residue is reported to have formed the hard core for a urinal at Bewdley, Worcestershire. 


@@@@@


doc= 28916


Webb, Lydia (1736/7-1793), actress and singer, became one of the most popular actors of comic roles at the Haymarket and Covent Garden theatres. Nothing is known of her parents, nor has her forename been definitively established. 
A Miss Child first appeared at the Norwich theatre on 17 March 1760. She went on to perform in many companies as far apart as Ipswich and Dublin, but, of the early part of her career, most is known about her work at the Theatre Royal, Edinburgh. Here she first appeared in 1772 using the name Mrs Day, but by 1774 she had taken the name of the company member 'Dicky' Webb, and the couple acted there until 1779. Although as Mrs Day she had performed several serious roles at Edinburgh, ageing from Cordelia in 'King Lear' to Gertrude in 'Hamlet', as Mrs Webb she specialized in comedy roles, the most familiar now being Mrs Malaprop in Sheridan's 'The Rivals', Mrs Peachum in John Gay's 'The Beggar's Opera' (1777), Lucy in George Farquhar's 'The Recruiting Officer', Mrs Frail in William Congreve's 'Love for Love', Mrs Hardcastle in Goldsmith's 'She Stoops to Conquer' (1778), and Mrs Candour in Sheridan's 'The School for Scandal' (1779). 
It seems she and her second husband, Richard (Dicky) Webb, adopted a foundling daughter, whom Mrs Webb introduced to the public at the Haymarket Theatre in 1788. This daughter went on to become the second most popular actress of her time in America, after Anne Merry; her reputation there was made initially (from 1793) as Mrs (Thomas) Marshall, and then (from 1800) as Mrs Wilmot. The Webbs may also have had a son, if this was the Master Webb who danced at Covent Garden in 1791 and at the Haymarket in 1792. Mrs Webb first appeared at the Haymarket under the management of the elder George Colman in 1778 and at Covent Garden in 1779, and she worked the summer season at the Haymarket and the winter at Covent Garden until shortly before her death. Her background in playing musical roles and comic eccentricities made her useful to the management, and her skills helped to originate forty-three characters in new plays during these fifteen years. The jollity and generosity of character she shared with her husband must have endeared her to her audience. By 1778 she was already corporeally as large as her reputation was soon to become, for, like her husband, she apparently weighed at least 16 stone. Not only did her size support her stage presence, but also the power and resonance of her voice and clarity of enunciation, and these facts no doubt influenced the choice of Falstaff in 'I Henry IV' as her benefit role in 1786. She was equally adept as a cheesemonger or a queen, and most of her London roles were in now long-since forgotten comedies, comic operas, farces, and musical farces, with the occasional prelude, interlude, and pastoral afterpiece. 
This industrious woman was paid $2 a week in 1779, which rose incrementally to $5 in 1790. Her husband, however, died a debtor in the king's bench prison in July 1784, although they had apparently been living as a family at 15 Bedford Street, Covent Garden, from 1779 until 1782. Never more than a stone's throw from her place of employment, Mrs Webb was selling benefit tickets in 1787 from 22 Broad Court, Bow Street, Covent Garden, and in 1791 she was living at 19 Catherine Street, Strand. She apparently suffered a paralytic stroke, and died 'of a worn out constitution' ('GM', 1147) on 24 November 1793, aged fifty-six. According to the 'Gentleman's Magazine', despite her considerable income from the theatre, 'she was genteelly buried by the Theatrical Fund, and attended respectfully by those gentlemen to the church of St. Paul, Covent-garden' (ibid.); there is no record of her burial there. 


@@@@@


doc= 28917


Webb, Benjamin (1819-1885), ecclesiologist and Church of England clergyman, was born on 28 November 1819, at Addle Hill, Doctors' Commons, London, the eldest son of Benjamin Webb (died 1870), of the firm of Webb & Sons, wheelwrights, of London. On 2 October 1828 he was admitted to St Paul's School under Dr John Sleath, and he went on as an exhibitioner to Trinity College, Cambridge, in October 1838. He graduated BA in 1842 and proceeded MA in 1845. While still a freshman, in May 1839, he was instrumental with J. M. Neale in founding the Cambridge Camden Society. Beresford Hope joined their committee the following year. In 1845 the society moved to London and became the Ecclesiological Society. As secretary, and editor of 'The Ecclesiologist' from 1839 to 1868, Webb played a pivotal role in what came to be known as the Cambridge Movement, an aesthetic equivalent to the theology of the Oxford Movement. The Oxford Tractarians had aimed to revive the theological basis of the authority of the Church of England; the Cambridge ecclesiologists set out to recreate its architectural and liturgical expression. By 1854 a quarter of all Anglican parish churches in England had been 'restored' according to Camdenian rules, by 1873 a third; and the influence of Cambridge ecclesiology was eventually felt in Anglican churches throughout the English-speaking world. 
Webb was ordained deacon in 1842 and priest in 1843, and served as curate first at Kemerton in Gloucestershire (1843-4) under his college tutor, Archdeacon Thorp (first president of the Cambridge Camden Society), and afterwards at Brasted in Kent (1849-51) under William Hodge Mill, who, as regius professor of Hebrew, had encouraged his ecclesiological work at Cambridge, and whose daughter, Maria Elphinstone Mill (died 1904), he married in 1847. Immediately after his marriage, Webb also became (1847-9) curate to William Dodsworth at Christ Church, Albany Street, London. He did not, however, follow Dodsworth to Rome. In 1851 he was presented by Hope to the perpetual curacy of Sheen in Staffordshire, and in 1862 by Lord Palmerston -- again at Hope's instigation -- to the crown living of St Andrew's, Wells Street, London, which he retained to his death. Under his care St Andrew's became celebrated for the musical excellence of its services; it was also distinguished by the efficiency of its parochial schools, confraternities, catechetical classes, and day nursery, the last of these being perhaps the first of its kind in London. 
Webb was appointed by Bishop Jackson of London in 1882 to a prebend in St Paul's Cathedral. From that date until his death he was also editor of the 'Church Quarterly Review'. He had been elected FSA on 26 May 1870. He died at his house, 3 Chandos Street, Cavendish Square, London, on 27 November 1885, and was buried in the churchyard at Aldenham, Hertfordshire. There is a monument by Armstead in the crypt of St Paul's. Webb left $21,529. His youngest son, Clement Webb (1865-1954), became professor of the philosophy of the Christian religion at Oxford University. 
As a tory high-churchman, Webb was known for his moderation. Although an enthusiastic ritualist, often accused of Romanism, he never strayed far from Anglican conventions. 'Rubrics were made for the Church', he used to say, 'not the Church for the Rubrics' ('Saturday Review', 53, 1877, 66-7). In this he differed from J. M. Neale. In Hope's words, Webb 'never wasted himself by the superfluous indulgence of creating otiose change... Neale, with all his genius, was not judicious' ('Saturday Review', 40, 1885, 772). 
In 1841, while still at Cambridge, and working closely with J. M. Neale, Webb was involved in the production of two highly influential pamphlets: 'A Few Words to Church Wardens, Suited to Town and Manufacturing Parishes' and 'A Few Words to Church Builders'. Together Webb and Neale also published a translation of Durandus entitled 'The Symbolism of Churches and Church Ornaments' (1843). Webb's first solo publication, 'Sketches of Continental Ecclesiology, or, Church Notes in Belgium, Germany and Italy' (1848), struck out in a new direction: henceforward models for Camdenian churches, at least in towns, were more likely to be continental than East Anglian. And it was perhaps in this area -- in the prolonged debates about an architectural style suitable for the Victorian age -- that Webb did his most original work. From the 1840s to the 1870s, notably in 'The Ecclesiologist' and the 'Saturday Review', he argued forcibly for modern Gothic: brick-built, polychrome, eclectic; the style in fact of his favourite architect, William Butterfield. He was elected ARIBA in 1878. 
As a Cambridge undergraduate, Webb seems to have been more than a little precious. 'His dress was very peculiar', wrote one contemporary, 'and intended to designate ultra-highchurchmanship'; so much so that he was known as the 'Blessed Benjamin' ('Romilly's Cambridge Diary, 1842-47', ed. M. E. Bury and J. D. Pickles, Cambridgeshire RS, 10, 1994, 208-9). Nevertheless, despite a retiring manner and frequent ill health, he proved himself an able propagandist as well as a learned liturgiologist. 


@@@@@


doc= 28918


Webb, Daniel (c.1719-1798), art critic, born at Maidstown, co. Limerick, was the eldest son of Captain Daniel Webb and his wife, Dorothea Leake of Maidstown Castle. His brother Thomas was dean of Kilmere. Webb matriculated at New College, Oxford, on 13 June 1735. In his first work, 'An Inquiry into the Beauties of Painting' (1760), Webb proposed that taste was a natural sense that recognized the beauty of moral ideas within the constraints of art. His thesis is similar to that of the theorist and painter Anton Raphael Mengs, whom Webb met while in Rome in 1755-6, and whose ideas the antiquarian Winckelmann claimed Webb subsequently plagiarized. Webb's 'Inquiry' was reviewed widely and translated into French (1765) and German (1766). Webb also wrote 'Observations on the Correspondence between Music and Poetry' (1769), which expanded on Samuel Say's theory of music and poetic prosody. Other works include conjectures on the origins of Greek from Chinese. 
Webb was married twice, first to Jane Lloyd and second to Elizabeth Creed, and lived in Maidstown and Bath, where he died on 2 August 1798. He left lands in Ireland and over $12,000 to two friends, property and an annual income to his second wife, his pictures and books to his nephew Daniel James Webb, and $300 to his housekeeper's daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 28919


Webb, Francis (1735-1815), General Baptist minister and writer, was born at Taunton on 18 September 1735, the third son of John Webb and his wife, Mary, daughter and coheir of William Sweet, also of Taunton. Educated privately at Abingdon and at Mr Foot's in Bristol, he entered the dissenting academy at Daventry under Caleb Ashworth in 1753; he finished his theological training under Thomas Amory at Taunton Academy. He became pastor of the General Baptist congregation at Honiton, and was so successful that in September 1758 he moved to the General Baptist chapel in Paul's Alley, London, as assistant to Joseph Burroughs, whom he succeeded as sole pastor in 1761. 
On 31 March 1764, at Wareham, Dorset, Webb married Hannah (1730/31-1822), daughter of William Milner of Poole. In 1766 he resigned his pulpit, publishing two volumes of his sermons (later augmented to four) in the same year. He became deputy searcher at Gravesend at $500 a year, a move an admirer plausibly explained by Webb's having taken a house at a rent greater than his income ('Monthly Repository', 1816, 71). In 1777 he retired to Dorset to pursue a literary career. Above middle height, handsome, and an excellent conversationalist, he entered the circle around Lord Carmarthen, later fifth duke of Leeds, and formed a lifelong friendship with Sir Isaac Heard, Garter king of arms. 
'I love to go to the bottom of things', he wrote to Heard (F. Webb to I. Heard, 10 Oct 1793, Library of Congress), '& write on 'fundamental principles''. His steadfast radical whiggism is displayed in an anonymous pamphlet of 1772, 'Thoughts on the constitutional power and right of the crown in the bestowal of places and pensions', with an appendix containing lists of placemen and pensioners in the House of Commons and of members who had voted for the expulsion of John Wilkes, the seating of Colonel Luttrell, and the commitment of the lord mayor to the Tower. A firm supporter of the American colonists, in 1775 he republished Samuel Johnson's 'Marmor Norfolciense', with a satirical preface contrasting the early, unconcealed Jacobitism of its author with Johnson's support of the crown in the 1770s. The whig/tory overtones in the much-canvassed case of the forged Shakespeare manuscripts put forward by W. H. Ireland may have persuaded Webb to publish, under the pseudonym Philalethes, a pamphlet attesting to the authenticity of the documents in 1796. It may have been his friendship with Heard, who had apparently introduced him to Ireland, that led him to overcome his initial reluctance and support Ireland in print. His support of the French Revolution and an early sympathy with Napoleon (later revised) made him an effective negotiator when he served as secretary to Francis James Jackson in the preliminaries to the peace of Amiens of 1802; he disagreed, however, with some of his fellow diplomats, and left for home, on the pretext of ill health, before the conclusion of the peace. 
In 1770 the General Baptists had fallen into schism, the larger New Connexion turning to evangelicalism, while the Old Connexion remained loyal to the rational religion of mid-century, moving steadily towards the Unitarian end of that spectrum, as did Webb, although he inclined more towards the Arian position on the divinity of Christ than to the fully humanitarian view of the Unitarians. He despised mystery, that 'reproach to human intellect' on which faith too often anchored (F. Webb to I. Heard, 28 Sept 1796, Library of Congress). The foundations of his rational beliefs are clearly set out in the second of his 'Poems on Wisdom, on the Deity, on Genius' (1790), and he eloquently defended religious liberty in 'An Epistle to the Rev. Mr. Kell, with an Ode on Fortitude' (1789): Robert Kell (1761-1843), an Arian, was embroiled with the Trinitarian congregation at Wareham, to which he had gone a year earlier as assistant minister. 
For a time after 1802 Webb lived in Crewkerne, where he attended the Unitarian chapel presided over by William Blake (1773-1821), son and successor of the William Blake (1730-1791) who had been a fellow student at Daventry; later, living near Yeovil, he joined the Unitarian congregation under Samuel Fawcett (1754-1835). He became a member of the Western Unitarian Society, taking the chair at its meeting in Yeovil in 1814. Forced from his Yeovil house, a parsonage, by the Church of England clergyman, he spent his last years in Barrington, Somerset, where he died on 2 August 1815, and was buried in the parish church. 
Delighting in the wit and ingenuity of other poets, Webb displays those qualities in some of his occasional verses, notably in a poem on his first tasting char (F. Webb to I. Heard, 16 Feb 1800, Library of Congress), but his odes, marked by evocations of the sublime, the heightened rhetoric typical of the form, and a parade of classical learning that even his admiring obituarist found at times obscure -- notably in 'Hymn to the Dryads' (1796) and 'Somerset' (1811) -- reveal the limitations of his poetic gift. In Somerset, Webb had early formed a friendship with the painter Giles Hussey, whose theories of proportion and their equivalence to musical harmony found in Webb a willing convert. He published a sketch of Hussey in volume 8 (1814) of John Nichols's 'Literary Anecdotes of the Eighteenth Century', and his last publication, 'Panharmonicon' (1815), restates and expands Hussey's views to incorporate Webb's explication through an all-embracing harmony of the divine intelligence manifested in creation. 


@@@@@


doc= 28920


Webb, Francis Cornelius (1826-1873), physician and medical writer, born in Hoxton Square, London, on 9 April 1826, was the eldest son of William Webb (1780-1831), a cadet of the family of Webb of Odstock Manor, Hampshire, and his second wife, Elizabeth Priscilla (died 1850), daughter of Thomas Massett and widow of Ambrose Holloway. He was educated at King's College School, London, and at Devonport grammar school, where he became a sound classical scholar. On 25 September 1841 he was apprenticed to James Sheppard, a surgeon at Stonehouse, Plymouth, and in 1843 he joined the medical school of University College, London. He was awarded five gold or silver medals for proficiency in different classes. In 1847 he became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons, and in 1849 he proceeded to Edinburgh, graduating MD there in 1850. In 1851 he returned to London and became a licentiate of the Society of Apothecaries. On 10 February 1852 he married Sarah Schroder ('b'. 1828), daughter of Joseph Croucher, of Great James's Street, Buckingham Gate, London; they had twelve children, ten of whom survived their father. 
In 1859 Webb was admitted a member of the Royal College of Physicians, and he was elected a fellow on 31 July 1873. In 1857 he was nominated to the chair of medical jurisprudence in the Grosvenor Place school of medicine, and subsequently he was lecturer on natural history at the Metropolitan School of Dental Science. In 1861 at the Grosvenor Place school Webb delivered the introductory lecture, 'The study of medicine: its dignity and rewards', which was published by request. His first important literary effort was his article 'The sweating sickness in England'; first published in the 'Sanitary Review and Journal of Public Health' for July 1857, it was afterwards republished separately. Webb next wrote 'An historical account of gaol fever', read before the Epidemiological Society on 6 July 1857 and printed in its 'Transactions'. In 1858 his essay 'Metropolitan hygiene of the past' appeared in 'Sanitary Review'; it was published in the January issue and was reprinted separately in the same year; it comprised a brief survey of the sanitary conditions of London from the time of the Norman conquest until the nineteenth century. When Hunter's work on teeth was published in the 'Dental Review', Webb contributed notes to the text, embodying results of contemporary research on the subject which were designed to bring Hunter's work up to date. 'Hunter's Natural History of the Human Teeth', with notes by Webb and R. T. Hulme, appeared in 1865. 
A few years later Webb became one of the editors of the 'Medical Times and Gazette', and for the last years of his life he was editor-in-chief. He was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries on 22 May 1856, of the Linnean Society on 21 January 1858, and of other learned bodies. He was an accomplished musician, and took an interest in literature, art, and philosophy. 
On 23 December 1873, having spent a busy day correcting proofs and preparing the 'Medical Times and Gazette' for press, Webb had a hurried dinner before returning home to 22 Woburn Place, Russell Square, to help arrange a party planned for that evening. He had suffered from heart trouble for some time, and early the following morning he began to complain of chest pains; he died the same day, 24 December 1873, at home; he was buried in Highgate cemetery. A fund was started to help support his widow and ten children, who were aged between four and twenty-one, as most of the money from his life insurance had to be used to pay debts incurred in bringing up his children. The appeal raised over $2000 for the family. 


@@@@@


doc= 28921


Webbe, George (b. 1581, d. in or before 1642), Church of Ireland bishop of Limerick, was born in 1581, the third son of Hugh Webbe, rector of Bromham, Wiltshire. He entered University College, Oxford, in April 1598, and migrated to Corpus Christi College as a scholar. He was admitted BA in February 1602 and MA in June 1605. Soon after he was inducted as vicar of Steeple Ashton, Wiltshire, on 15 May 1605, seemingly on the presentation of the earl of Pembroke. He married some time before the birth of his son Theophilus in 1607. Webbe kept a grammar school at Steeple Ashton and also at Bath, where he was rector of St Peter and St Paul from 1621 to 1634, when his son succeeded him. Appointed a chaplain to James VI and I before 1621, he was made DD in 1623. 
Webbe was a man of strict life and conversation, and a distinguished preacher, both in his parish, at Paul's Cross, and at court; the portrait of him by Thomas Slater catches him unawares 'As he in Pulpit did discharge his place' (AH, frontispiece and sonnet, in G. Webbe, 'The Practice of Quietness', 1705). 'God's Controversie with England' (1609), his first sermon at Paul's Cross, 'the chiefest Watchtower in the land' (sig. A3'v') has been seen as within the Jacobean tradition of exposition of 'Hosea', as established by John Downame in his 1608 lectures, using that prophet to explore God's relations with England. It also reflected Webbe's close association with the likes of Richard Rogers, William Perkins, and Richard Greenham, with whom he later published one of the most successful early Stuart handbooks of devotion, 'A Garden of Spirituall Flowers', in 1616; some thirty imprints and editions appeared by 1630. Webbe's own popularity as a preacher can be gauged from the 1613 epithalamion homily he dedicated to Princess Elizabeth, 'The Bride Royall, or, The Spirituall Marriage between Christ and his Church' (1613) and in six other Steeple Ashton sermons, gathered in 1610 as 'A Poesie of Spirituall Flowers'. Convinced that 'experience sheweth how little preaching profiteth where catechising is neglected', he published 'A Brief Exposition of the Principles of the Christian Religion' (1612), a catechism for the primary use of his parishioners (sig. A2'v'). His 'Catalogus protestantium, or, The Protestants Kalendar' (1624) surveyed 'the protestants religion long before Luthers daies' in the light of the Spanish match. He enjoyed the friendship of the lord chief justice, Sir Henry Hobart, to whom he dedicated his most popular series of sermons, 'The Practice of Quietness', in June 1615. It ran to six editions before Webbe expanded it in 1638. 
Charles I, with Archbishop Laud's approval, selected Webbe for promotion to the bench at the age of fifty-three. On the death of his fellow Wiltshireman Francis Gough he was nominated bishop of Limerick, despite the support of the archbishop of Armagh and the lords justices for the dean, George Andrews (later bishop of Ferns and Leighlin). William Prynne later used Webbe's appointment as part of his attack on Laud for allegedly usurping the royal prerogative. He was consecrated in St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin, on 18 December 1634. Eight days earlier Lord Deputy Wentworth had put pressure on the convocation of the Church of Ireland to accept the 'Thirty-Nine Articles' and the 1604 canons of the Church of England (proceedings challenged by George Andrews). With the outbreak of the 1641 rising Webbe was imprisoned by insurgent sympathizers within the city and had died of prison fever at Limerick Castle, by 22 June 1642. He was buried in St Munchin's churchyard, but apparently his remains were dug up twenty-four hours later by persons hoping to find jewels, then reinterred in the same place. He was succeeded, on 7 April 1643, by another Englishman, Robert Sibthorp, bishop of Kilfenora, whom the Irish bishops had unsuccessfully petitioned Charles to make bishop of Ossory in 1640. 


@@@@@


doc= 28922


Webb, John (1611-1672), architect, was born in Little Britain, Smithfield, London, the son of a gentleman of a Somerset family who had, according to Webb's own son James, 'had some Crosses in the World' (Pritchard, 139). The relative lateness and short duration of his formal education, at Merchant Taylors' School (1625-8), where he 'attained a competent perfection in all schole learning' (Pritchard, 140), suggest that the family fortunes could not have been great. 
According to his own statement, made in 1660, Webb was 'brought up by his unckle Mr Inigo Jones [the surveyor of the king's works, with whom he went to live in 1628] upon his late Majestyes comand in the study of Architecture, as well that wch relates to building as for Masques, Tryumphs and the like' (Bold, 'John Webb: Architectural Theory', 181). As Jones's pupil, Webb received the thorough training in classical architecture which equipped him to embark upon his own successful career, although following the interregnum he was denied the achievement of the highest office in the royal works which had been intended for him by Jones and King Charles I. On Jones's death in 1652, Webb inherited his books and drawings, while his wife, Anne, Jones's first cousin once removed and his principal legatee, received an inheritance which enabled the Webbs to purchase property in Butleigh, Somerset, and thus allowed them to re-establish the family in that county. Webb was not only Jones's executor and the chronicler of his career, but also displayed a more than filial sense of obligation and gratitude, and seems to have cast himself as the promoter of Jones's reputation, to the extent that he was still regarded, nine years after his master's death, as 'Inigo Jone's man' ('Diary of John Evelyn', 430). 
Webb's own absence of self-promotion, coupled with the misattribution of his works to Inigo Jones in Colen Campbell's 'Vitruvius Britannicus' (1715-25) and William Kent's 'Designs of Inigo Jones' (1727), has in the past contributed to the underestimation of the extent and value of a body of work of considerable significance. He was the author of about 500 surviving drawings, with almost thirty architectural commissions to his name, numerous theatre designs, and three books. When he unsuccessfully petitioned King Charles II in 1660 for the surveyorship of the royal works, 'whereunto yor Royall father designed him & to that end only ordered his education', he recalled his '30 yeares study' and that there were 'scarce any of the greate Nobility or eminent gentry of England but he hath done service for' (Bold, 'John Webb: Architectural Theory', 181-2). Frustrated by the absence of royal works in the 1640s and 1650s, he took the new architectural language of the Caroline court to the country in a series of notable domestic projects, in which he bridged the gap between the school of Inigo Jones and that of Wren. 
Webb had made strenuous efforts in the royalist cause during the civil war: he was imprisoned after taking $500 to the king at Beverley in 1642, lent to him by Jones, 'sewed up in his waistcoate'; he sent to the king at Oxford the designs of all the fortifications around London and how they might be overcome; and he attended the king again in 1647-8, when he received his optimistic command to design a palace at Whitehall (Bold, 'John Webb: Architectural Theory', 181-2). But it was probably disadvantageous to his future preferment that he worked in the later 1640s and 1650s for parliamentary soldiers and for figures active in support of the Commonwealth, as well as for royalists. Having received a practical and theoretical training in architecture and in stage design from Inigo Jones -- he had worked alongside Jones as clerk and draughtsman on the rebuilding of old St Paul's Cathedral in the 1630s, as well as on the court masques during the same period -- Webb embarked on his first significant independent designs at Hale Lodge, Hampshire (1638), for John Penruddock, and Maiden Bradley, Wiltshire ('c'.1644-50) for the parliamentary colonel Edmund Ludlow. It is possible that neither of these was built, but they are known through Webb's drawings and are significant in demonstrating an approach to design which was to be characteristic of his practice. The designs show him drawing on the precedents of work by Inigo Jones and Palladio, using them as a basis for further experimentation with alternative room shapes, the placement of stairs, and circulation. The choice of direction offered by the interconnecting rooms in the Maiden Bradley design, a feature typical of the Palladian villa, would have offered a freedom of circulation unusual in the English house of the mid-seventeenth century. 
In being published in the eighteenth century as the works of Jones, many of Webb's major house designs provided, along with the actual works of the master, exemplars for eighteenth-century English neo-Palladianism. The engravings tended to be based on Webb's own surviving drawings, which included his own designs and his presentation drawings of designs by Jones, which perhaps he had made with publication in mind. Later authors had difficulty in distinguishing between them, a problem compounded by the fact that the houses themselves often did not exist in the planned form. For example, at Belvoir Castle belonging to the earl and countess of Rutland, for which he produced designs in the 1650s for what might have become the first great neo-Palladian mansion in England sixty years before Colen Campbell's Wanstead, Webb had to confine himself to rebuilding the house to its existing ground-plan (1655-68). He retained some of the Tudor building in his remodelling, but succeeded in incorporating a grand Imperial staircase (of three parallel flights within an open well) which provided a triumphal approach to the great dining-room on the first floor. For the fourth duke of Lennox and Richmond at Cobham Hall, Kent, and for the fourth earl of Pembroke at Durham House, London, Webb had also supplied grand schemes for palatial rebuildings in the 1640s. Neither of these was carried out, and both remained unpublished, but aspects of the designs were to resurface first at Belvoir, then in his unbuilt schemes for Whitehall Palace. All of these designs confirm Webb's use of precedent -- not only the designs of Jones and Palladio, but also those of the latter's follower Scamozzi -- and his putting into practice of his training in theory: at Belvoir he drew on his earlier studies of the form of the ancient Roman house, as reconstructed by Palladio. He did not follow his sources slavishly, but drew lessons from them, arriving through the process of drawing -- which was habitual to him -- at his own distinct formulation. The results may be best appreciated by considering the only two houses which remarkably, in view of the extent of his practice, he was able to design and build from start to finish: Gunnersbury House, Middlesex ('c'.1658-63, for Sir John Maynard; dem. 1800-01), and Amesbury Abbey, Wiltshire ('c'.1659-64, for the marquess of Hertford; rebuilt after 1834). 
Gunnersbury, which appeared in Campbell's 'Vitruvius Britannicus' and was owned from 1762 until 1786 by Princess Amelia, the third daughter of King George II, was the fashionable suburban villa 'par excellence', recognized in the eighteenth century as a house of archetypal importance. In its planning Webb contrived to combine a central sequence of public spaces with groups of interconnecting private rooms, indicative of a new impetus in English architecture towards spatial separation and the provision of privacy. A processional route led from a columned entrance hall via an Imperial staircase to a coved first-floor saloon of double-cube form, and a loggia which afforded views south towards Surrey and the River Thames. Such a sequence, of unprecedented classical grandeur in English architecture, had not met with unqualified approval in the seventeenth century: Webb's reliance on classical and Renaissance precedents had been criticized by both Sir Roger Pratt and Roger North, both of whom found the poor lighting of the hall and saloon a drawback in the design. 
At Amesbury, which appeared in both Campbell's and Kent's publications, Webb achieved a more sophisticated synthesis in a composition whose 'uncommon granduer ['sic']', according to the architect C. R. Cockerell, who visited in 1823, 'fills & occupies the mind' (Harris, 'Cockerell', 7). By positioning the hall and first-floor saloon across the front of the house, rather than transversely, as they had been placed at Gunnersbury, and providing short corridors through the centre of the house between the suites of private rooms, Webb was able to achieve an economical balance between well-lit public spaces and discrete but accessible private ones. The staircase, an extraordinary contrivance, rose through two storeys, with the ingenious oval service stair rising in the central newel. This feature, particularly admired by Cockerell, and copied in designs by both Sir William Chambers (at Roehampton, Surrey, 1760-68) and James Paine (at Belford Hall, Northumberland, 1754-6) was perhaps more of an architectural conceit than a practical solution to problems of circulation. Although appearing elegant in planning terms, it perhaps did not achieve the same significant division between householders and servants at Amesbury as Webb had achieved between public and private spaces in his layout of the rooms. 
Webb's most substantial surviving domestic works are the sequence of staterooms at Wilton House, Wiltshire, and a wing at Lamport Hall, Northamptonshire. The dating and authorship of the work at Wilton has been the subject of some debate, but the evidence of both documentation and drawings suggests that Webb was at work here for the fourth and fifth earls of Pembroke on two occasions. In the late 1630s, as a young man, he appears to have assisted Inigo Jones in designing ceilings and doors for a new south range, the building of which was overseen by Isaac de Caus; following a major fire in 1647, a dated drawing of 1649 indicates his responsibility for the remodelling of the distinctive towers and for the lavish, francophile redecoration of the Single Cube and Double Cube rooms. Here his innovative substitution of deeply coved ceilings for the flat ceilings destroyed in the fire provided rich fields for painted decoration. The naturalistic carving of the overmantels throughout the sequence of staterooms, and the liberal deployment of exuberant swags and garlands in the panelling of the walls make Wilton, despite some later alterations, the supreme surviving example of the Caroline grand style. 
At Lamport Hall, built for Sir Justinian Isham in 1654-7, Webb provided a new wing, attached to an older house, which had the appearance of a free-standing small villa. The house has since been remodelled and extended, but Webb's wing survives in all its essentials. In a compact amalgamation of one- and two-storey spaces he supplied the newly married Isham with a handsome 'High Roome', now known as the Music Hall, and two further ground-floor rooms with bedchambers above. The most distinctive interior feature, the powerfully modelled chimneypiece and overmantel, is comparable with Webb's surviving work at nearby Drayton House, Northamptonshire (1653), for the second earl of Peterborough, and at Wilton. Lamport's significance rests not only on its being a rare survival but also on its unusually rich documentation. A substantial number of Webb's letters to Isham survive, with a large body of drawings, together with a further group of letters from the contractor and the mason which chronicle the progress of the building work for the benefit of the royalist client who in 1655 was detained in St James's Palace. At this early period in the development of the architectural profession the letters offer insights into architectural practice and the design process. Webb stands revealed, here as elsewhere, as a man with clear ideas on what he wants to achieve but is fundamentally pragmatic: 'smale things must give way to great' (Bold, 'John Webb and the Lamport Recinct', 55). He was not able to convince Isham in 1654 of the desirability of building a portico: although, being a critical user of his sources, he was aware that Palladio was indulging in special pleading in arguing that porticoes were used on the houses of the ancients after the model of temples, he had nevertheless recommended one to Isham as 'a great ornament & much usefull', engaging in some special pleading himself by seeking to reassure his patron that 'it shall not appeare temple like' (Gotch, 568). He succeeded the following year in building the first projecting temple front on an English country house at The Vyne, Hampshire, for the parliamentarian Chaloner Chute MP. 
Notwithstanding his success in domestic practice, Webb's chief professional hopes lay in the royal works. He had worked with Inigo Jones in the 1630s on designs for Somerset House, producing drawings of Jones's two grand, unbuilt designs for a new Strand front, and in 1661-4 he built the handsome arcaded river-front building for the dowager Queen Henrietta Maria which survived until Sir William Chambers's rebuilding of 1776-96. Again following Jones, Webb worked for twenty-five years on a succession of unrealized designs for a new Whitehall Palace and, after the Restoration, was employed on the designing of a new royal palace at Greenwich. At the request of the council of state he had prepared Whitehall against the king's return in 1660, spending over $8000. His petitions to King Charles II for the surveyorship in 1660 and 1669 made clear both his experience and his expectation of preferment, but he was disadvantaged through having no official post to reclaim, having been employed as deputy by Inigo Jones himself, rather than by King Charles I. He was passed over on both occasions, first in favour of Sir John Denham, described by John Evelyn as 'a better Poet than Architect' ('Diary of John Evelyn', 430), then, more justifiably in favour of Christopher Wren. He received some consolation in 1666 in being appointed 'Surveyor Assistant unto Sir John Denham' ('CSP dom.', '1666-7', 286) at Greenwich at a fee of $200 per year, payable from the commencement of work in January 1664. 
The experience gained by Webb in producing a succession of designs for Whitehall Palace was fundamental to the success of his design for Greenwich. Although only one block, the King Charles building, of a projected three-range palace was built, it illustrates how far Webb's architecture had developed from its Jonesian beginnings. The early Whitehall drawings by Jones, in common with his schemes for Somerset House, were composed of an accumulation of small units, so although the overall size of the proposed buildings was considerable, the scale was not. Webb, first in his Whitehall schemes, then emphatically at Greenwich, demonstrated a command of the large units as well as the mastery of detail which characterize the baroque palace. The King Charles building, given vertical emphasis by the giant order at the centre and ends which balances the strong horizontals of string course and rustication, represented the culmination of Webb's prolonged investigation of the possibilities of the classical language of architecture. He was again drawing on the work of Palladio and Scamozzi but now, in his full maturity as an architect, fully assimilating his sources and deploying them to new and more dramatic ends. Regrettably, the King Charles building was left uncompleted and boarded up in 1670, and it stood empty for over twenty years until it was converted by Christopher Wren to become the first block of the Royal Hospital for Seamen. Webb's drawings for the interior, which show details of the decoration proposed for all of the main staterooms, give an idea of what might have been if the royal finances had permitted completion. The coved ceilings, with inset rectangular panels, and the francophile swags and garlands, recall Wilton, although at Greenwich the degree of naturalism in the carving appears still more advanced for its date. 
At Greenwich, as he had done in his country house designs and in his one institutional building, the short-lived Physicians' College, London (1651-3; destroyed in the great fire, 1666), Webb employed his characteristic composite capitals, combining the lion and unicorn from the royal arms with the acanthus leaves of the Corinthian order. He appears to have intended to publish a 'Book of Capitols', for which he prepared a number of finished drawings of heraldic and mythological capitals, 'in tender and worke for sundry Noblemen and persons of Quality in England' (RIBA BAL, and Chatsworth Album 26, no. 125). There were Italian and Jonesian precedents for such emblematic designs, but those by Webb were of particular significance since many of them were carried out. They might appear to have been fanciful, but in view of what can be gleaned of Webb's seriousness of purpose in architecture, it is more likely that they were designed to carry a significant message. In 1669, towards the end of his architectural career, Webb entered the debate on the identification of the language spoken by Adam by publishing 'An historical essay endeavouring a probability that the language of the empire of China is the primitive language'. An expanded essay, written in response to criticism of the first, survives in manuscript. Just as he had sought in architecture to draw on the example of antiquity, mediated by Palladio and Jones, so in the consideration of language he looked for evidence of unsullied antiquity and purity. For Webb Chinese characters, uncorrupted by the effects of foreign contact and understood by 200 million people, expressed concepts in a language of antiquity, simplicity, and generality. It is probable that he regarded his composite capitals in the same way, as vehicles for the communication of ideal conceptions. 
Webb's enthusiasm for the investigation and explanation of origins was demonstrated throughout his career. Writing as if in the person of Inigo Jones, Webb published in 1655 'The most Notable Antiquity of Great Britain, Vulgarly called Stone-Heng', based on Jones's theory that the monument was built as a Roman temple of the Tuscan order, open to the sky, dedicated to the god Coelus, the heaven. Following the publication in 1663 of 'Chorea gigantum', in which Dr Walter Charleton attributed Stonehenge to the Danes, Webb sought to defend Jones's unprecedented explanation in 'A Vindication of Stone Heng Restored' (1665), in which he presented a vindication of Jones's argument and provided an invaluable account of the character, life, and work of 'the Vitruvius of his age': 'What was truly meant by the Art of Design was scarcely known in this Kingdom, until he... brought it in use and esteem among us here' ('Vindication', 125). The seal would have been set on this revolution wrought by Jones and built upon by Webb if he had succeeded in publishing the large corpus of theoretical drawings, embracing the classical orders, temples and churches, the ancient and modern house, and miscellaneous urban buildings which he made, probably, between about 1635 and about 1650. Although he failed to publish, Webb was fully aware of the significance of his own and Jones's legacy of drawings and books, and bequeathed them to his son William with the instruction to 'keepe them intire together without selling or imbezzling any of them' (TNA: PRO, PROB 11/340/145), but the Webb family fortunes did not long survive his death in 1672 and dispersal of his collections was under way within three years. The large part of the collection which is now divided between Chatsworth House and the British Architectural Library was in the possession of Lord Burlington in the 1720s, augmented in 1740 by the acquisition of Webb's Greenwich drawings. The collection was to play a fundamental part in Burlington's promotion of the neo-Palladian style. The remainder of the principal corpus of Jones/Webb drawings and Jones's library was acquired by Dr George Clarke, who bequeathed it to Worcester College, Oxford, in 1736. 
Webb died at Butleigh on 30 October 1672 and was buried there in the parish church on 4 November. Although at the time of his death he was regarded as a wealthy man, his wife, Anne, and their eight children (James, William, Henry, Katherine, Elizabeth, Martha, Rebecca, and Anne) received a complicated inheritance, with mortgages on the property at Butleigh and financial obligations to the family of the previous owner. A great deal of time, money, and effort was spent on the ensuing litigation; the property finally passed from the family upon the death of Webb's great-granddaughter Catherine in 1738. 
John Webb saw himself as heir to a great tradition: he analysed and interpreted the historical reconstructions of Palladio and Scamozzi and he learned directly from the instruction and example of Inigo Jones; by the 1650s he had become an architect of considerable consequence in his own right. At a time when the practice of architecture in England was in its early stages as a profession, he was the consummate professional, providing an architecture which was rooted in the classical tradition but wholly applicable to contemporary requirements. His success was clearly demonstrated by the number of commissions which he received, from both sides of the political divide of his uncertain times, and the skill with which he fulfilled them. Amesbury Abbey, Gunnersbury House, the monumental King Charles building, and the interiors of Wilton House were among the outstanding pieces of architecture of seventeenth-century England. After his death, Webb's designs stood as an example not only to Wren at Greenwich but also to the neo-Palladian architects of the eighteenth century, and still later to the architects of the Edwardian baroque. The continuing relevance of his work for these later generations confirms the high importance of his place in English architectural history. 


@@@@@


doc= 28923


Webb, Sir John (1772-1852), surgeon and medical administrator, was born at Cork on 25 October 1772, the son of John Webb of Woodland Hill, Staffordshire, afterwards of Dublin, and his wife, Ann, daughter of Thomas Heath. He graduated at Trinity College, Dublin, in 1793, and it was stated that he had the MD, but of what university is not known. He entered the Army Medical Service in the 53rd regiment in March 1794 and rose through the ranks to become director-general of the ordnance medical department at Woolwich on 1 August 1813. During these years he travelled widely and saw active service in Flanders, the West Indies, The Helder, in the Mediterranean and Egypt, in the Baltic, where he was at the siege of Copenhagen, and at Walcheren. Webb received the silver war medal with one clasp, and the sultan's gold medal for Egypt; he was knighted in 1821, principally for having volunteered to stay with the troops at Alexandria when plague broke out among them. This circumstance led him to collect materials for his 'Narrative of facts relative to the repeated appearance, propagation, and extinction of the plague among the troops employed in the conquest and occupation of Egypt' (1801-3). He was appointed a knight commander of the Royal Guelphic Order of Hanover in 1832, and made CB in 1850, when he retired on full pay. 
Webb married, in 1814, Jane Theodosia, eldest daughter of Samuel Brandram of Lee Grove, Kent; she and their sons, the Revd John Moss Webb ('b'. 1815), the Revd Theodosius Webb ('b'. 1817), and their daughter, Sophia Barnes Webb 
(Mrs Parratt; 'b'. 1819)
, survived him. Webb became a member of the Royal College of Surgeons of London in 1817 and was made a fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons of England on 11 December 1843, one of the first batch of 300 fellows created at that date. He was for many years a magistrate and deputy lieutenant for the county of Kent. He died on 16 September 1852 at his home, Chatham Lodge, Woolwich, and was buried on 22 September in St Thomas's Church, Woolwich. 


@@@@@


doc= 28924


Webb, John (1776-1869), Church of England clergyman and antiquary, the eldest son of William Webb (1738-1791) of Castle Street, London, a member of the family of Webb of Odstock, Wiltshire, and his wife, Ann (1747/8-1849), the daughter and coheir of James Sise, medical officer to the Aldgate dispensary, was born on 28 March 1776. His father, who was of independent means, was an able linguist, mathematician, and political writer. John Webb was admitted to St Paul's School, London, on 28 July 1785, and was captain of the school in 1794-5. In 1795 he proceeded to Wadham College, Oxford, as Pauline exhibitioner; he graduated BA on 21 March 1798 and proceeded MA on 3 November 1802. He married Sarah Harding (1776-1849), niece of Judd Harding of Solihull, Warwickshire; they had two children, Thomas William Webb and Sarah, who died in infancy. 
In 1800 Webb was ordained to the curacy of Ravenstone in Leicestershire. He was subsequently curate of Ripple, Worcestershire, and of Ross, Herefordshire, and lecturer of St Martin's, with the chapelry of St Bartholomew, Birmingham. He became perpetual curate of Waterfall in Staffordshire in September 1801; he was a minor canon of the cathedral of Worcester, with the rectory of St Clement's in that city, from February 1811. In January 1812 he became rector of Tretire with Michaelchurch, Herefordshire (in the gift of Guy's Hospital); in 1857 he rebuilt the church of Tretire at his own cost. From January 1822 he was a minor canon of the cathedral of Gloucester, and vicar of St John's, Cardiff (in the gift of the dean and chapter of Gloucester), which he held with Tretire until Christmas of 1863. 
Webb was a keen antiquary; he was elected a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in 1819. Learned in Latin and Norman-French, he was a talented palaeographer. He contributed several papers to 'Archaeologia', and also published works on Gloucester Abbey and Cathedral. He edited 'A Roll of the Household Expenses of Richard de Swinfield' (2 parts, 1853-4), which was probably his most significant work. At his death he left unfinished an edition of the 'Military Memoir of Colonel John Birch' for the Camden Society; it was completed by his son and published in 1873. 'Memorials of the Civil War... as it Affected Herefordshire', which he also left unfinished, was published in 1879 by his son. 
Webb also wrote poetry; some verses by him in the manner of Henry Howard, earl of Surrey, imitated the Tudor poet's style so convincingly that G. F. Nott included them in his seminal edition of Surrey's poetry. Also interested in music, Webb adapted Etienne-Nicholas Mehul's oratorio 'Joseph' and part of Haydn's 'Seasons' for the Birmingham musical festival. He wrote the words for the oratorio 'David', composed by his friend Chevalier Newkomm and first performed in 1834 at the Birmingham musical festival. He prepared a similar foundation for a libretto of Mendelssohn's projected but unaccomplished oratorio 'The Hebrew Mother'. Webb died at Hardwick vicarage near Hay, Herefordshire, his son's residence, on 18 February 1869. 


@@@@@


doc= 28925


Webb, John Richmond (1667-1724), army officer, was born at Rodbourne Cheney, Wiltshire, on 26 December 1667, the third, but second surviving, son of Colonel Edmund Richmond alias Webb ('c'.1639-1705) and his first wife, Jane (1649-1669), daughter of John Smith of Tidworth, Hampshire, and previously of St Mary Aldermanbury, London. His family had acquired the name 'Richmond alias Webb' from the marriage of William Richmond to Alice Webb about 1430 and this form was typically used in family legal documents including Webb's own will. The family had owned the manor of Rodbourne Cheney since the reign of Edward VI. 
Webb's father had served as a colonel of a Wiltshire militia regiment from 1680 to 1688 and was elected eight times, between 1679 and 1695, as MP for Cricklade, Wiltshire, and then three times in 1701-2 for the nearby borough of Ludgershall. In 1683 Edmund became gentleman usher to Prince George of Denmark on his marriage to the future Queen Anne. In 1684 Charles II pardoned Edmund and his cousin Henry St John, father of the first Viscount Bolingbroke, following the death of Sir William Estcourt in a duel. Edmund Richmond alias Webb commanded his militia regiment during Monmouth's rising in June and July 1685, but later that year lost his local and militia offices and was temporarily unseated in parliament. His court and political connections served as the basis for his two surviving sons' careers. The elder son, Thomas Richmond alias Webb (1662/3-1731), was educated at the Middle Temple and called to the bar in 1689, served as recorder at Devizes (1697-1707), clerk of alienations, solicitor to Prince George ('c'.1692-1708), and serjeant-at-law of the Middle Temple (1705-31). He was elected MP for Calne in 1685, for Cricklade in 1702, and for Devizes in 1710. 
Webb commented that he had served in the army since the age of sixteen. This would place his entry into military service during the last few days of 1683 or in 1684 and clearly differentiates him from a John Webb who had served in Virginia before being promoted to lieutenant in the first guards under Marlborough in the Low Countries in 1691. On 2 August 1685 he received a commission as cornet in the Queen's regiment of dragoon guards (later, the 3rd hussars). On 20 November 1688 at Wincanton he was one of the 120 horsemen under Patrick Sarsfield who encountered a party of 25 soldiers from the prince of Orange's Anglo-Dutch brigade. Webb was seriously wounded in the engagement. On 29 November he was promoted to captain, replacing Captain Thomas Pownall in the Queen's regiment of dragoons. He remained in the army following the revolution, and on 1 April 1689 was posted as captain of the 1st foot guards. On 3 February 1690 he married Henrietta (died 1711), daughter and coheir of Sir John Borlase and widow of Sir Richard Ashley (died 1687) of Everley, Wiltshire. The couple had seven children. In 1692 he purchased the land and building that would become the nucleus for his future Wiltshire estate at Ludgershall. 
In June 1693 Webb was promoted to lieutenant-colonel of foot and, two and a half years later, undoubtedly assisted by his father's connections, he became colonel of Princess Anne's (8th) regiment of foot, a post he retained until 1715. In January 1695 he entered parliament as MP for Ludgershall, for which he was returned successively in twelve elections until 1713. Although duelling was banned, army officers were continually involved in such incidents during the reign of William III. Like his father, John Webb was not immune to the impulse and, in 1697, both he and his opponent, Captain Mardike, seriously wounded one another in a duel. After serving in England for the entire period of the Nine Years' War, Webb's regiment was ordered to Ireland in February 1698. Webb arrived in Dublin in early March and remained in Ireland for more than three years, until he and his regiment moved to the Netherlands in June 1701. 
During the first campaign in the War of the Spanish Succession, Webb served under Marlborough in the combined Anglo-Dutch field army during the offensive against the towns along the River Meuse, distinguishing himself at the storming of Venlo in September 1702. On his return to England following the frustrating campaign of 1703, he was promoted to brigadier (1 January 1704). While sitting in parliament in this period Webb, it became clear, had joined his kinsman Henry St John (later Viscount Bolingbroke) in the political camp of Robert Harley. The following summer, after a long wait for favourable weather at Harwich to get back to the Low Countries for the 1704 campaigning season, Webb with two other general officers, John, Baron Cutts, and Richard Ingoldsby, carried money for the army, travelled to Frankfurt, and then joined Marlborough in the camp at Burgheim on 15 July. On 13 August Webb was with the troops that encircled the Bavarian village of Blindheim (Blenheim) and prevented the French force in the village from escaping across the Danube. In the following year he distinguished himself in battle when Marlborough forced the lines of Brabant near Heylissem and Elixhem on 17-18 July 1705. During the next campaign Webb commanded in the left centre of the English lines at the battle of Ramillies on 23 May 1706. In September, when the Dutch promoted several of their brigadiers for the action at Ramillies, Marlborough successfully persuaded Queen Anne to promote both Webb, as the army's senior brigadier, and John Campbell, second duke of Argyll, to the rank of major-general, and to backdate their commissions to 1 June. 
In March 1708, on the news of James Stuart's attempt to invade Scotland, Webb's regiment was one of those embarked at Ostend and sent to Tynemouth. Not landed, they lay off the coast for several weeks and then returned to Ostend. On 11 July Webb participated in the battle of Oudenarde and in the weeks after the battle was one of the commanders in the force of twelve battalions that raided Picardy. Near Lens, Webb's detachment encountered a French force of eight hundred cavalry and pursued them into the town. An anonymous poet described the events in 322 lines of couplet verse that included a single reference to Webb, 'like Paris handsome, and like Hector brave' ('The Battel of Audenard: a Poem', l. 257). 
Early in September Webb was recalled to take part in the siege of Lille. The French were bringing in reinforcements to threaten the allied communication lines, and supplies for the besieging forces were running low. The only available route for allied supplies was the road from Ostend. A convoy of some 700 or 800 wagons, filled with two weeks of supplies, including substantial quantities of powder and shot, left Ostend on 28 September 1708, escorted by 2500 men. Webb was assigned, with a force of some 4000 men drawn from the British, Dutch, Prussian, Hanoverian, and Danish armies and three squadrons of dragoons, to cover the convoy as it passed through Brabant. As the wagons reached Koekelare, Webb learned that French forces under the comte de Lamothe, based at Bruges with some 22,000 men, had been sighted a mile and a half to the east at Ichtegem. Webb advanced towards the convoy and, accompanied by Count Nassau-Woudenberg and 150 cavalry, he personally reconnoitred and selected an advantageous position where he could intercept Lamothe's force, at least twice the size of his own. Close to the castle of Wijnendale, 15 miles from Ostend, Webb positioned ten battalions in three lines across an opening on a wooded slope, with one regiment posted in the coppice to the left, two additional platoons nearby facing the plain, and seven platoons placed in the wood to the right. He had barely finished this placement when Lamothe approached and opened fire. The French had marched to within fifteen paces of the allied right flank when the battalions that Webb had hidden in the wood opened fire and forced the French left wing into its centre. Despite hostile fire from Prussian forces the French continued onwards, driving two allied regiments into confusion, but, with support from Albemarle's regiment of Swiss, Webb and Count Nassau were able to gain enough time to bring three more regiments to bear. With such deep support, the French tried again to penetrate the allied line, but the allied troops were able to advance and force the two French wings into their centre; the confusion thus created forced the French to retire, but the allies continued to fire at long range. Major-General William Cadogan arrived on the scene shortly after the engagement began, but Webb declined his offer to charge the enemy with his two squadrons of horse, thinking they would be too much at risk when the enemy was protecting its retreat with its own horse. Corporal Matthew Bishop, who had fought with Webb in his own regiment, later recalled that Webb 'was an old and experienced general and a man that knew every part of the country, without which he could not have known how to dispose of his men. And this plainly appears from his beautiful disposition of his troops. ('Life and Adventures', 189)' When the two-hour battle of Wijnendale was over, the allies had lost 912 killed and wounded to an estimated 3000 or 4000 French. The allied army maintained its position on the field until two the following morning, and so the convoy was able to pass. 
Having witnessed the victory Cadogan returned to Marlborough with the news and Marlborough immediately sent his congratulations to Webb, writing on 29 September 1708 that this success 'must be attributed chiefly to your good conduct and resolution' ('The Letters and Dispatches of John Churchill, First Duke of Marlborough, from 1702 to 1712', ed. G. Murray, 1845, 4.424). In reporting the victory to Godolphin, Marlborough wrote: 'Webb and Cadogan have on this occasion as they always do, behaved themselves extremely well. The success of this vigorous action is in a good measure owing to them. If they had not succeeded, and our convoy had been lost, the consequence must have been the raising the siege the next day. ('Marlborough-Godolphin Correspondence', 2.1106)' Marlborough's choice of words, while well intentioned, seemed to give equal credit to Cadogan, and appeared in the 'London Gazette'. Outraged, Webb immediately protested and requested that Marlborough send him to London to report in person on his victory to Anne. Agreeable, Marlborough privately advised Godolphin 'that when she has a position this winter, he [Webb] may be sure of being a lieutenant-general, which really this action makes his due' (ibid., 2.1117). On 18 October Anne received Webb with warm approval at Kensington and the following day he reported to Godolphin at Newmarket. During his visit to London, Webb provided his own detailed account of the battle to the 'London Gazette' (23 September 1708). In conversation with Godolphin he made it clear that he would not return to the Low Countries without his commission as lieutenant-general in hand. Dismayed that the country would lose Webb's military talent for the remainder of the campaign, and also that the incident might fuel the rising political criticism of Marlborough, Godolphin suggested that he be promised the first available governorship. Captain Robert Parker reflected: 'Webb very deservedly acquired great honour and reputation by the gallant action; but then he spoiled it all by making it the subject of his conversation on all occasions. This should have been left to fame, which seldom fails to give the hero his due praise, and does him infinitely greater honour than his own vain boasting. (Chandler, 80)' The tory politicians and writers seized upon Webb's situation. In December 1708 Sir Thomas Hanmer moved the thanks of the Commons for Webb and was amply seconded by William Bromley. This honour for Webb, as Godolphin clearly saw, was 'not so much out of any real kindness to him, but that one of their [party political] leaders might take the handle to show as much malice as he could to [Marlborough]' ('Marlborough-Godolphin Correspondence', 2.1175). Malicious gossip mongers and political hacks even went so far as to suggest that a jealous Marlborough had offered a bribe payable if the enemy had captured the allied convoy. 
Promoted to lieutenant-general on 1 January 1709, Webb became the only tory general MP among the twenty-one officers who became major-general or lieutenant-general in the period May 1707 to January 1709; in contrast, six generals, who were sitting whig MPs, were promoted. Webb returned to the Low Countries and, in March, the queen granted him a pension of $1000 per year for ninety-nine years from Post Office funds during her own lifetime, until such time as the government could provide him a governorship or other appointment. At the battle of Malpalquet in September 1709 Webb was initially reported killed but was, in fact, very seriously wounded, and disabled for the remainder of his life. 
Webb continued to believe that Marlborough had tried to deny him credit for the victory at Wijnendale and strongly supported the duke's tory critics. During the summer of 1710 it was reported that he contemplated standing for parliament in Westminster, against the whig general James Stanhope. In August 1710, however, the new government under Robert Harley offered him the post of captain and governor of the Isle of Wight, a position that he held until 1715. 
In parliament during January 1711 Webb carried on the whig proposal, echoed in parliament since December 1707, that British forces in Spain should be strengthened by sending the best and most experienced regiments from the Netherlands. His views on this occasion, however, were not seconded. One of Jonathan Swift's 'Letters to Stella', dated 11 April 1711, reports that Webb had come to call. 'He goes with a crutch and a stick, yet was forced to come up two pair of stairs' ('Prose Works', 2.160). On 27 June 1711 Webb's wife, Henrietta, died; she was buried at Ludgershall, where he had just begun to enlarge the original Biddesden House, including a heraldic carving on its curved pediment and classic trophies of arms over the pediments. He also installed a church bell that had been taken at Lille and laid out the trees and bushes as they had been at Wijnendale. Concerned about his future, Webb proposed several alternatives to Harley, now earl of Oxford, to regularize his financial position, including the governorship of Chelsea College or the colonelcy of the Coldstream Guards. Webb's career survived Marlborough's dismissal, and on 11 June 1712, six months after James Butler, second duke of Ormond, was appointed Marlborough's successor, he was commissioned lieutenant-general and commander-in-chief of all land forces in England. The meaning of this appointment raises questions, since Richard Savage, fourth Earl Rivers, was appointed in the following week as commander-in-chief in Britain during Ormond's absence abroad, and Webb's appointment is recorded only in the non-regimental commissions and not, as would be expected, among general officers' commissions. It appears to be a subordinate appointment under Rivers, restricted to England. 
In the parliamentary election of 1713 Webb was returned for both Ludgershall in Wiltshire and Newport, Isle of Wight, and he chose the governor's prerogative to sit for the Isle of Wight until the election of 1715. At about this point Webb shifted his political allegiance from Oxford back to his cousin, Bolingbroke, as those two political leaders fought for political supremacy. With the fall in tory fortunes that followed the death of Queen Anne in 1714, Webb was removed as governor of the Isle of Wight and colonel of the 8th foot. However, he was returned to sit for Ludgershall between 1715 and 1724. In November 1718 Webb made his most memorable statement in parliament -- one that is sometimes referenced as the basis for providing parliament with documents written only in English. When the secretary of state, James Craggs, laid the texts of newly concluded treaties before the house, some of which were in Latin, an objection was heard. Defending himself, Craggs replied that Latin should not be a language strange to any member of the Commons, whereupon Webb stood up. He declared that: 'he was not ashamed of his ignorance; that he was never brought up in a University but in the Army ever since he was 16 and had never looked in a grammar since and that he did not understand one word that was read and therefore insisted that they should be turned into English and not be forced to vote for what they did not know. (Hugh Thomas to the duke of Mar, 13 Nov 1718, 'Stuart Papers', 7.568)' On 20 May 1720 Webb married Anne Skeates, 'nee' Borlase, a widow and the sister of his first wife, with whom he had been living for some time. They had three children together, in addition to his previous seven. The first two, Catherine (1716-1730) and Frances (1717-1777), had been born before the marriage; their son, John Richmond Webb (1721-1766), was later of Lincoln's Inn and MP for Bossiney and justice for Glamorgan, Brecon, and Radnor. During the trial of Christopher Layer in November 1722 Webb's name came up in connection with a Jacobite association called 'Burford's'. Not long afterwards Webb retired from political life. He died on 5 September 1724 at Biddesden House and was buried, at his direction, in the nearby parish church of Ludgershall, next to his first wife. His widow later married Henry Fowke or Fookes. She died a widow in April 1737 and was buried next to Webb. 
Webb's image in literature and history owes much to a collateral family connection. A distant cousin, Colonel Richmond Webb (1715-1785), has a monument in the east transept of Westminster Abbey. In 1776 Colonel Richmond Webb's daughter, Amelia (1758-1810), married William Makepeace Thackeray (1749-1813), the grandfather of the author of the same name. Thackeray was very proud of his Webb family connections and used family information in at least two of his novels. His grandmother Amelia Webb provided the model for Emmy's godmother in 'Vanity Fair', and the 'History of Henry Esmond' is the fictional account of an officer who was gazetted to Webb's regiment as a lieutenant in 1704 and served under him in several campaigns. The picture that Thackeray penned of Webb in part 2, chapter 15 of 'Henry Esmond' was the principal reminder of Webb's military career in the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Drawing on a variety of sources, Thackeray dramatically coloured the image of Marlborough's calculated personal animosity in his description of Webb's resentment at Marlborough's official report on Wijnendale published in the 'Gazette'. 


@@@@@


doc= 28926


Webb, Jonas (1796-1862), stock breeder, was born on 10 November 1796 at Great Thurlow in Suffolk, the second son in the family of nine children of Samuel Webb, who later moved to Streetly Hall, West Wickham, in Cambridgeshire. Webb began farming on a 1000 acre farm at Babraham, near Cambridge, in 1822. Following experiments he carried out with his father, he decided against the native Norfolk breed of sheep and devoted himself to the breeding of Southdowns, which were then relatively rare in the area. He bought sheep from John Ellman of Glynde, in Sussex, and worked to produce his own improved strain, with a better fleece quality and earlier maturity. This had a permanent influence on the breed, which was sometimes called the Cambridge Down. After the death of Ellman in 1832, Webb became the leading Southdown breeder. At full strength, his flock numbered 2400. The Babraham Southdown was exported to Spain, France, and Germany, and also to Australia and America. 
Webb first exhibited at the second country meeting of the Royal Agricultural Society of England, held at Cambridge in 1840, where he won two prizes for his Southdown ewes. This success was followed up at nearly every subsequent annual meeting at which he exhibited, until at Canterbury in 1860 he took all of the six prizes offered by the society for rams, and he sold the first prize ram, 'Canterbury', for 250 guineas. He had great success with the Shearling rams that he exhibited at the Paris Universal Exhibition in 1855, for which he received a gold medal of the first class. Webb presented a ram to Emperor Napoleon III after the latter had admired his exhibits, and he received a present of a large silver candelabra in return. 
During the last two years of Webb's life the Babraham flocks were sold, with 1406 sheep fetching $16,646 at auction in 1861, but Webb continued to breed cattle successfully. His herd of shorthorns, begun in 1838 when he bought animals from Lord Spencer and Lord Ducie, was mentioned by M. Trehonnais in 1859 as the most important shorthorn herd then existing, and one which few other breeders had surpassed in beauty and perfection. At the Royal Agricultural Society's show held at Battersea in 1862, after the dispersion of his flock of Southdowns, Webb's shorthorn bull calf 'First Fruit' gained the gold medal as the best male animal in the shorthorn class. 
Webb died at 7 Peas Hill, Cambridge on 10 November 1862, five days after the death of his wife. He was buried at Babraham on the 14th. He left four sons and five daughters. A statue of Webb was put up in the corn exchange in Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 28927


Webb, Matthew (1848-1883), swimmer, was born on 18 January 1848 at Dawley, Shropshire, one of a family of twelve children of Matthew Webb (1813-1876), a country doctor, and his wife, Sarah. By the age of eight he had learned to swim in the River Severn below Ironbridge, and shortly afterwards he saved the life of his younger brother, who almost drowned when attempting to swim across the river. At the age of twelve, inspired by W. H. G. Kingston's sea tale 'Old Jack', he joined the mercantile training ship 'Conway' in the Mersey. Another cadet there remarked of Webb: 'We thought very little of him as a swimmer, but admired his staying powers. He could swim for an hour without putting his foot to the floor, though in a race he was nowhere' (Elderwick, 8). His first opponent was a Newfoundland dog, whose master boasted of its extraordinary stamina in the water. Webb backed himself against it. He continued floating happily in a choppy sea for over an hour until the dog swam exhausted back to its master's boat. 
Webb then entered the merchant navy, where he made his mark and displayed his contempt for danger with some resolute and lone swims in various parts of the world. He submerged into the Suez Canal to release some hawsers, recovered off Natal some wrecked cargo in heavy surf, and dived through huge waves in the Atlantic in a forlorn attempt to rescue a passenger, for which he was awarded the first Stanhope gold medal in 1874. By this time he had grown into a man of herculean build, with a wrestler's body that was particularly strong 'in the loins and legs'. 
Early in 1875 Webb was briefly captain of the 'Emerald of Liverpool'. A newspaper report of an unsuccessful attempt to swim the English Channel prompted him to abandon the navy and concentrate on swimming it himself. No one had ever succeeded and it was generally considered impossible at the time. Webb trained solidly along the south coast while the journalist Robert Patrick Watson, who accompanied him in a small boat, grew tired of watching his 'slow, methodical, but perfect, breaststroke, and the magnificent sweep of his ponderous legs' ('Memoirs of Robert Patrick Watson', 1899, 113). On 12 August 1875 he made his first attempt, but rough seas forced him to give up at midnight when over half-way there, in consideration not for himself but for those in the boat, as the waves were pouring over the sides. 
Twelve days later Webb tried again. At 1 p.m. he dived off the Admiralty pier, Dover, wearing a red silk costume. He kept up a slow and steady pace. The crew of a French steamer came up on deck and gazed in astonishment. When the 'Maid of Kent' passed by at night, the passengers cheered as a red light was held over the stern to enable them to watch the swimmer. They roared him on with some verses of 'Rule Britannia'. Seven miles from the French coast the tide changed and he seemed to be driven backwards, but eventually he landed after twenty-two hours in the water. The varying currents had forced him to swim over 40 miles. He quickly recovered, however, and merely felt a peculiar sensation in his limbs 'similar to that after the first day of the cricket season'. 
Webb's triumphant return to London brought business to a close at the stock exchange, and bonfires illuminated the valleys of his native Shropshire. He then embarked on a lecture tour round the country, but he never made much money, and had the reputation of being generous to a fault. Poverty forced him to return to swimming. He took part in endurance races, and sailed to America to challenge Boynton, a coastguard who had 'swum' the channel before him, albeit equipped with a rubber suit and paddle. Although Boynton retained this equipment for the race, Webb still won. On his return to England Webb floated for up to sixty hours in various tanks in front of queuing spectators, but a race with a Dr Jennings at Hollingworth Lake, Lancashire, on 1 October 1881, marked the turning point of his career. After it, Webb was so exhausted that he could hardly be pulled from the water. 'His career from now on had a downward tendency', wrote Watson. 'He had almost played his last card' (Elderwick, 97). 
Once again Webb was almost destitute, and he now had a young family to provide for, having married Madeleine Kate Chaddock on 27 April 1880. As a final gesture he resolved to swim downriver below the Niagara Falls, perhaps the most dangerous stretch of water in the world. Three miles below the falls the river rushes violently down a narrow gorge into a deep depression in the cliffside. On emerging from the depression it forms a whirlpool a quarter of a mile wide, surrounded by jagged rocks. Webb was warned by his friends and doctors that he was no longer in his prime, but it was evidently a topic he chose to avoid. Above all, he dreaded a quiet life. 
Webb sailed to America in 1883 with his wife, son, and daughter of seven months. He spent some days training off Nantucket beach, while his family remained ignorant of his intentions, then travelled alone to Niagara. He reckoned $10,000 was at stake. The date was fixed for 21 July, but was postponed to enable railway companies to expand their travel arrangements: over ten thousand spectators were expected. At 4 p.m. on 24 July Webb was rowed out into midstream. He dived into the river and was instantly gripped by the force of the current. He was seen heading for the whirlpool, then abruptly he threw up his arms and was drawn under. His last words to the boatman had been: 'If I die, they will do something for my wife' (Williams, 8). Some days later his body was found by fishermen. His skull had been cracked by the submarine rocks around the whirlpool, and the red silk costume that he had worn for his channel swim was torn to shreds. He was buried in the Oakwood cemetery at the edge of the falls, in a heart-shaped plot of ground known as the Stranger's Rest. 


@@@@@


doc= 28928


Webb, Philip Barker (1793-1854), traveller and natural historian, was born on 10 July 1793 at Milford House, near Godalming, Surrey, the eldest son in a family of three sons and three daughters of Captain Philip Smith Webb (1764-1799) and his wife, Hannah (died 1853) daughter of Sir Robert Barker bt. He was a great-grandson of the lawyer and politician Philip Carteret Webb. He was educated firstly at a private boys' school, then at Harrow School and at Christ Church, Oxford, matriculating on 17 October 1811. At Christ Church, William Buckland inspired him with a taste for geology. In 1812 he entered Lincoln's Inn and in 1815 he graduated as BA, but after the death of his father put him in command of a handsome fortune he at once began to satisfy his desire to travel, for which he had equipped himself by a study of Italian and Spanish while at Oxford. 
Webb visited Vienna, where he made the acquaintance of the Italian Chevalier Alberto Parolini of Bassano (1788-1867), who was of the same age, class, wealth, and tastes as himself, and had studied botany and geology under Giovanni Battista Brocchi (1772-1826). Webb stayed with Parolini at Bassano, and Parolini returned his visit at Milford in 1817, when they planned a joint expedition to the East. In the meantime Webb paid a short visit to Sweden, visiting Goteborg, Uppsala, and Stockholm, and going as far as lat. 61 degree N. 
The winter of 1817-18 Webb spent at Naples with his mother and two of his sisters. From Naples he and Parolini started their tour in April 1819 by way of Otranto, Corfu, Patras, and Athens, to the Cyclades, Constantinople, and the Troad (the plain of Troy), returning by Smyrna and Malta to Sicily. Webb, who was well versed in Homer and Strabo, carefully studied the topography of the Troad and came to conclusions very different from those propounded by Le Chevalier in his 'Voyage de la Troade dans 1785 et 1789'. He published his views in 1821 as 'Osservazioni intorno allo stato antico e presente dell'agro Trojano', which was expanded in 1844 into 'Topographie de la Troade ancienne et moderne'. This work showed much antiquarian and geological erudition. He rediscovered the River Scamander and Simois, and settled some other important points in Homeric geography. 
In 1821 Webb returned to England and spent some time at Milford, managing his estate and collecting many interesting plants in his garden. In July 1825 he visited the entomologist Leon Dufour at St Sever, and after wintering in the south of France, made a year's tour of the eastern and southern coasts of Spain, collecting birds, fish, shells, and especially plants, a tour afterwards described in his 'Iter Hispaniense' (1838) and 'Otia Hispanica' (1839, enlarged ed. 1853). In April 1827 he went from Gibraltar to Tangier, and, though he found it impossible to get far into the interior, made a short exploration of Jebel Beni-Hosmar and Jebel Darsa, mountains near Tetuan, the flora of which was then entirely unknown. In June 1827 he left Gibraltar for Lisbon and devoted the remainder of the year to a journey on horseback through Portugal, the botanical results of which were included in his 'Iter Hispaniense', though his many geological and mineralogical notes, including a geological map of the Lisbon basin, made in conjunction with Louis da Silva Mouzinho d'Albuquerque, remain unpublished. 
In May 1828 Webb left Lisbon for Madeira, where he spent some months botanizing, and in the following September went on to Tenerife, intending to proceed to Brazil. At Tenerife his Spanish assistant resigned and his place was taken by Sabin Berthelot (1794-1880), a young Frenchman who had already spent eight years in the island and who had formed a herbarium. Webb remained nearly two years in the Canary Islands, visiting with him Lanzarote, Fuerteventura, Gran Canaria, and Palma. They studied and collected the plants, birds, fish, shells, and insects, examined the rocks, analysed the waters, made climatological observations, and neglected nothing which could help towards a complete natural history and geography of the archipelago. In August 1830 Webb and Berthelot embarked at Santa Cruz, and, being kept out of France by cholera and revolution, went by way of the coast of Algeria to Nice, and thence to Geneva and Montpellier. In June 1833 they established themselves in Paris, at a house on the Champs Elysees, where Webb assembled a good library and a herbarium finer than any private collection in France save that of Delessert. In preparing their great work 'Histoire naturelle des iles Canaries' (3 vols., 1836-50, plus folio atlas), Webb reserved to himself most of the geology and botany and the description of the mammals, while Berthelot contributed the ethnography, the history of the conquest and of the relations of the islanders with the Moors and with America, and the geography. The services of A. Valenciennes were secured for the description of the fish; of Alcide d'Orbigny for the molluscs; of C. G. A. Brulle, P. H. Lucas, and P. J. M. Macquart for the insects; of F. L. P. Gervais for the reptiles; and of A. Moquin-Tandon for the birds. Articles were also contributed by J. D. Hooker, Alphonse de Candolle, Jacques Gay, Parlatore, and others. The atlas included 441 plates by the best artists obtainable. 
After having spent fourteen years over the preparation of this work, travelling only between Milford and Paris, Webb wished to visit Tunis and Egypt to solve some botanical problems left unsettled by Vahl and Desfontaines, but was twice prevented by indifferent health and the news of unsatisfactory political and sanitary conditions of those countries. In January 1848 he travelled to Florence and Rome and devoted two years to collecting Italian plants. He had a pleasant time in Italy: at Rome he made the acquaintance of the Countess Elizabeth Mazzanti-Fiorini, the cryptogamist, the only woman, he said, whom he had ever met who loved botany passionately; and at Florence he was specially attracted by the botanical gallery of the museum, then under the care of his friend Parlatore, to which he planned to bequeath his library and herbaria. It was there that, in the winter of 1848-9, he prepared his 'Fragmenta florulae Aethiopico-Aegyptiacae', which, however, was not published until 1854 owing to the Tuscan revolution of 1849. 
After six weeks at Bagneres-de-Luchon, where he had been ordered to take the waters, in the summer of 1850 Webb revisited Spain to put some finishing touches to 'Otia Hispanica' and to visit his friend Graells, director of the museum and garden at Madrid. He had recently been given the order of Charles III by Queen Isabella, and on the occasion of this visit was elected corresponding member of the Academy of Sciences at Madrid. 
In 1851 he returned to England, and in August, with his nephew, Godfrey Webb, visited Ireland, and, having received suggestions from his friend the botanist John Ball, explored the west coast from Cork to Killarney, Dingle, Tralee, Limerick, Galway, Roundstone, and the Aranmore Islands, the home of an interesting offshoot of the Iberian flora which he so well knew. After a year devoted to a synopsis of the flora of the Canaries, which he did not live to finish, and a second futile attempt to start for Tunis in the autumn of 1852, Webb again visited Italy and his friend Parolini, but was recalled to England by the death of his mother in 1853. In May 1854 he started for Geneva to visit his younger brother, Admiral Webb, but at Paris was seized with gout; although he recovered sufficiently to be able to superintend on crutches the classification of his library by Moquin-Tandon, he died on 31 August 1854. He was buried in a mausoleum which he had built in the churchyard of Milford. The whole of his fine botanical library, collections, and herbarium, which by this time included the herbaria of Philippe Mercier, Desfontaines, La Billardiere, Pavon, and Gustave de Montbret, together with complete sets of the plants collected by N. Wallich, R. Wight, G. Gardner, and Schimper, he bequeathed, with an endowment for their maintenance, to the Grand Duke Leopold II of Tuscany. Webb's executors lost a law suit to declare his will invalid, and the collections finally arrived in Florence in 1855, where they are housed at the Institute of Botany. 
Webb was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 25 March 1824. He was also a fellow of the Linnean Society (1818), Society of Arts, and Geological Society. Besides the works already mentioned he was the author of seventeen papers, mainly on botany, published between 1833 and 1852. Nine of these appeared in the 'Annales des Sciences Naturelles'. His most important paper was perhaps his 'Spicilegia Gorgonea', a determination of the plants of the Cape Verde Islands, prefixed to W. J. Hooker's 'Niger Flora' (1849). 


@@@@@


doc= 28929


Webb, Philip Carteret (1702-1770), barrister and antiquary, was born at Devizes in Wiltshire on 14 August 1702. His father was Daniel Webb. His mother is unknown; nor is there any record of his schooling. From such obscure beginnings he surfaces in London, being admitted attorney-at-law on 20 June 1724. He practised in Old Jewry, then Budge Row, before settling in Great Queen Street, Lincoln's Inn Fields. On 18 December 1727 he was admitted at the Middle Temple, and on 8 April 1741 at Lincoln's Inn. On 22 November 1730 he married Susanna Lodington (died 1756), the daughter of Benjamin Lodington, consul at Tripoli. They had three children, two of whom died in infancy; the surviving child was also called Philip Carteret Webb (died 1793). 
Webb was a legal beaver, and early gained the reputation for knowledge of records and constitutional precedents which would make him such a valued servant of government. It was enhanced by such publications as 'Observations on the Course of Proceedings in the Admiralty Courts' (1747) and 'Short but True State of Facts Relative to the Jew Bill' (1753). In this period the law, soon to be defined by Blackstone in his magisterial 'Commentaries' (1765-9), was held in highest respect and permeated the business of parliament. An expert with the ambition and stamina to take on political cases would not lack for employment. After the defeat of the Jacobite rising of 1745 Webb was influential as solicitor in the trials of the prisoners. He was the author of 'Remarks on the Pretender's Declaration and Commission' (1745), and the subsequent 'Remarks on the Pretender's Eldest Son's Second Declaration' (1745). His patron, Lord Chancellor Hardwicke, made him secretary of bankrupts in the court of chancery; he retained the post until 1766. 
In 1748 Webb purchased the estate of Busbridge, which gave him influence in the nearby burgage borough of Haslemere. 'That sink-hole of a borough' (W. Cobbett, 'Rural Rides', ed. J. P. Cobbett, 2 vols., 1853, 1.97) was Cobbett's later verdict on Haslemere, whose venal electors Webb represented in parliament from 1754 to 1768. His first election inspired Dr King's ballad of 'The Cow of Haslemere' which had eight calves, for each of which a vote for Webb was claimed. Webb may seem more of a civil servant than a politician but the distinction was not then so readily recognized: most senior civil servants sat in the Commons and there were numerous legal placemen. In December 1756 he was made joint solicitor to the Treasury and he held that office until June 1765. When he caused a row by toasting the unpopular Lord Bute -- 'my master' -- at a public dinner, his whig friend Lord Hardwicke defended him: it was 'natural for the Sollicitor of the Treasury to toast the head of it' (Namier, 38). With his reputation as a government workhorse, and the 'Old Bailey' manner that went down badly in the Commons, he might still have escaped political historians' notice had it not been for his involvement in the Wilkes affair, when he was a prime agent in the ministry's proceedings. He then earned the scorn of Horace Walpole, who described him as 'a most villainous tool and agent in any iniquity' ('Letters of Horace Walpole', 1.277). 
It was required of Webb to counsel ministers and devise tactics in a situation where the law was uncertain and the political implications, especially regarding a possibly improper use of the royal prerogative, were sinister. After the publication of the crudely xenophobic number 45 of the 'North Briton', he, along with Robert Wood, the under-secretary of state, attended the seizure of Wilkes's papers on 30 April 1763, on the instruction of lords Halifax and Egremont and was armed with a general warrant which ordered the arrest of all concerned with the publication of the 'North Briton'. The papers included the salacious 'Essay on Woman' which had been privately printed for Wilkes and which ministers would use to discredit him. When the legality of general warrants was challenged, Webb had printed, privately and anonymously, a volume of 'Copies taken from the records of the court of king's bench, the office-books of the secretaries of state, of warrants issued by secretaries of state'. He followed it up with some 'Observations' on the discharge of Wilkes from the Tower. 
When an action was brought against Wood for seizing Wilkes's papers, Webb, as a witness, swore that, while in the house, 'he had no key in his hand'. For this, on 22 May 1764, he was tried for perjury before Lord Mansfield, with a special jury, and was acquitted. The general warrants issue was used by opposition politicians to identify parliamentary lawyers as agents of a new absolutism. In the resulting furore Webb found himself in the front line, the object of a political vendetta. A parliamentary motion was proposed in November 1768 for the return of all moneys paid to him for prosecutions but was refused. When he was charged, on 31 January 1769, with having bribed an informer against Wilkes, his counsel pleaded that he was now blind and of impaired mind: the motion was defeated, but in a way that left an impression of past chicanery and offered Webb little comfort. 
Antiquarian friends who met regularly at the Young Devil tavern in Fleet Street, later in the courtyard of Burlington House, knowing Webb to be a cultivated man, would not have recognized the 'dirty wretch' and 'sorry knave' described by Horace Walpole ('Letters of Horace Walpole', 2.332, 38.316). Webb was elected FSA on 26 November 1747 and FRS on 9 November 1749. In 1751 he assisted in obtaining the charter of incorporation for the Society of Antiquaries. He was a scholarly investigator of the past and read several papers to the society, including 'A short account of Danegeld' (April 1756) and 'A short account of Domesday Book, with a view to its publication' (December 1755). He surely enjoyed exposing as forgery a record of an oath allegedly taken by Henry II before the pope after the murder of Becket (April 1756). After having written 'An account of a copper table with two inscriptions, Greek and Latin, discovered in 1732 near Heraclea' (April 1755), he presented the table to the king of Spain and received in return a valuable diamond ring. He was also a serious collector and was rich enough to buy ambitiously. He purchased a third of the great collection of manuscripts of Sir Julius Caesar, now among the Lansdowne manuscripts in the British Museum. He sold to the House of Lords thirty manuscript volumes of the rolls of parliament. Susanna Webb died at Bath on 12 March 1756, aged forty-five, and, following her wishes, she was buried with their two children in a cave at Busbridge. They were afterwards disinterred and placed in a vault in Godalming church. On 21 August 1758 Webb married Rhoda Cotes ('bap'. 1731), from Dodington in Cheshire. They had no children. He died at Busbridge Hall on 22 June 1770 and was buried in Godalming church, where a monument to him and to his first wife was erected. His great library was sold over the course of sixteen days in February and March 1771. His most valuable coins and medals were acquired by Matthew Duane; the rest of his collection, together with his ancient marbles and bronzes, were sold in 1771. His widow married, on 5 September 1771, Edward Bever of Farnham. In 1775 she sold Busbridge. Webb's memorial there was the forest of oak trees, for planting which, in 1758, he had received the silver medal of the Society of Arts. In this way he had conformed to what society expected of a gentleman. 


@@@@@


doc= 28930


Webb, Thomas William (1806-1885), astronomer, was born on 14 December 1806 at Ross-on-Wye, Herefordshire, the second child of John Webb (1776-1869), a clergyman and antiquarian, and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Harding (1776-1849). His sister Anne Frances died, aged seven, in May 1807. Webb's childhood was spent mainly in Ross and Gloucester, where his father served at the cathedral. He was educated by his father, and lived with his parents in Tretire, Herefordshire, from 1812 until his marriage. 
Webb was a competent draftsman and a precise and detailed observer. In his first notebook he recorded careful observations of spiders, but his interest soon moved to astronomy. He went to Magdalen Hall, Oxford, where he matriculated on 8 March 1826 and received his BA degree with honours in mathematics on 2 June 1830. He took his MA and was elected a member of the British Association in Oxford in 1832. After being ordained deacon at Hereford Cathedral on 1 August 1830 he was appointed curate at Pencoyd, Herefordshire; he was ordained priest on 6 August 1831. For twenty-five years he served conscientiously in several parishes north of Ross-on-Wye, and as curate to his father. He was musical, played the organ, and installed the first instrument at St Weonard's in 1840. Webb was a minor canon and librarian of Gloucester Cathedral from 1844 to 1849 and a prebendary of Hereford Cathedral from 1882. In December 1856 he was invited to be vicar of Hardwick, a new parish near Hay-on-Wye, which he served attentively until his death. 
Webb was a gentle man who possessed a wry sense of humour. He was shy, and when young used shorthand in his diary to disguise his unremarkable encounters with young ladies. At Troy House, Monmouth, he met Henrietta Montagu Wyatt (died 1884), the daughter of the duke of Beaufort's agent; they were married at Mitcheltroy on 16 May 1843. Though the couple remained childless, they enjoyed long visits from nephews and nieces. Henrietta painted in watercolours and oils, and occasionally supplemented her husband's astronomical work. 
As a young man Webb spent many hours making specula for his home-made telescopes. He became an expert in optics. From 1852 to 1866 he mainly used a Tully 33/4 inch refractor. Later he borrowed or purchased an Alvan Clark refractor (1859) and reflectors by With. He was elected to the Royal Astronomical Society in 1852. His observational work was concerned principally with the moon, double stars and nebula, meteors, and comets, as meticulously recorded in a series of surviving notebooks, covering various periods from 1825 to 1874, and including a number on natural phenomena. He served on the British Association's moon committee, and was active in the Selenographical Society. 
The Webbs entertained a wide circle of friends, including the diarist Francis Kilvert and the astronomers Espin, Ranyard, and Sadler. Young astronomers enjoyed Webb's generous and prolific correspondence. Webb edited and completed his father's books on the civil war in Herefordshire and the military memoirs of Colonel John Birch. He also collected many details of local and oral history. He wrote articles in several popular periodicals, including 'Nature', 'Knowledge', and the 'English Mechanic'; in the last he contributed a regular column answering readers' astronomical queries. He also lectured at both the Ladies' College and working men's club in Cheltenham. He privately published 'The Earth a Globe' (1865), a rebuttal of the flat earth theory of Samuel Burley. 
Webb's charming and inexpensive 'Celestial Objects for Common Telescopes' (1859) brought him enduring fame among the growing number of amateur astronomers. It ran to three editions during his lifetime, and the sixth edition of 1917 was reprinted in 1962. Whereas Admiral W. H. Smyth's expensive two-volume 'Bedford Catalogue' (1844) was aimed at gentlemen able to obtain and house 5 inch refractors, Webb described all Smyth's double stars and nebulae within reach of a portable 31/2 inch telescope. 
Webb died from a disease of the bladder at Hardwick vicarage on 19 May 1885 and was buried at Mitcheltroy. His obituary in the 'Hereford Times' stated that he had 'probably induced more amateurs to interest themselves in the study of astronomy than any other man of his generation' (11 June 1885). 


@@@@@


doc= 28931


Webbe, Edward (b. 1553/4), soldier and adventurer, son of Richard Webbe, 'master gunner of England' (Webbe, 'Travailes', 17), was born at St Katharine by the Tower, London. Nothing is known of his mother. 'A simple man voide of learning' (ibid., 29), at the age of twelve Webbe was placed by his father in the service of Captain Anthony Jenkinson, ambassador to Russia, who sailed from England on his third voyage to that region on 4 May 1566. As Jenkinson's personal attendant, Webbe served in and about Moscow, eventually returning with him to England in 1568. 
In 1570 Webbe sailed in the 'Hart', under Captain William Borough, for Narva, in the Gulf of Finland and was in Moscow on 24 May 1571, when it was burnt by the Crimean Tartars. Though he escaped, he was subsequently captured by the Tartars and enslaved. With seven other Englishmen Webbe was transported to Caffa in the Crimea. According to his 'Rare and most wonderful thinges which Edward Webbe an Englishman borne, hath seene and passed in his troublesome travailes', he was held there for five years before being ransomed for the sum of 300 crowns. However, this seems to have been something of an exaggeration, for he also claims to have been at Tunis in October 1572, when it was taken from the Turks. He was then serving under Don John of Austria, and it is while in the forces of the Christian commander that he is first described as being of the rank of master gunner. 
Some months later Webbe, on board the 'Henry', was captured by the Turks off the coast of Leghorn. Transported to Constantinople, Webbe became a galley slave, in which capacity he says he served for six years. Eventually, 'constrained for want of victualles' (Webbe, 'Travailes', 20), he fought for the Turks as a gunner and accompanied the Turkish army on their campaign to Persia. Though the balance of Webbe's travels during his period as a slave cannot be independently confirmed, he states that he was in Calabria, Damascus, Cairo, Goa, Bethlehem, Jerusalem, and in a place which he identifies as 'the land of Prester John' (ibid., 24). According to Webbe, this was a place located within 18 degree (1080 miles) of the equator. Given the rest of his itinerary, it is not likely that this was Ethiopia, the site more usually associated with this semi-legendary potentate in the sixteenth century. Finally, though, Webbe returned to Constantinople, where in 1588 he was one of twenty captives ransomed through the intercession of William Harborne, the English ambassador. 
On his way back to England, Webbe was arrested and tried as a heretic through the machinations of an unidentified English friar resident in Padua. But, he records, the charge was not substantiated and he was freed. For reasons which are unclear, Webbe turned south from Padua to Rome, where he fell foul of the English cardinal William Allen. Though he was examined many times and abused by the English college of the city, Webbe records that the pope intervened directly and set him at liberty. 
Continuing to Naples, Webbe was denounced as an English spy by a Genoese. Confined to a dark dungeon, enduring periodic torture for twenty-five days, he refused to implicate himself. As a result, he languished in gaol for another seven months before the viceroy, upon instruction from the king of Spain, recommended that Webbe be made a gunner and given an allowance of 35 crowns a month. A short time after this, he was able to escape in the 'Grace' with the collusion of its captain, Nicholas Nottingham. However, while Webbe notes that in May 1589 he set foot in England for the first time in thirteen years, this again may be something of an exaggeration, for on 8 April 1587 one Mr Webbe was consulted by John Popham, the attorney-general, about the market for English cloth in Muscovy and the possibility of expanding English trade in that region. 
In November 1589 Webbe journeyed to France and was made chief master gunner by Henri IV, in whose service he fought at the battle of Ivry on 14 March 1590. However, Webbe records that some French gunners, jealous of his skill, tried to poison him. He was pulled back from the brink of death only by the intervention of the king's physician, who cured him with a potion made from unicorn's horn. After his return to England a short time later, he took lodgings at Blackwall, where on 19 May 1590 he completed his account of his travails. On 14 January 1592 Webbe was made a cannonier for life, receiving a fee of 10's'. per diem. Nothing further is known of his life. 


@@@@@


doc= 28932


Webbe, Joseph (d. c.1630), linguist and physician, was said to be from Dorset when, as a Roman Catholic, he visited the English College at Rome in 1600. Details of his parentage and of the date and place of his birth are unknown but he was perhaps related to the old Catholic family of Webb in Canford Magna, Dorset, who sent their children abroad to Catholic seminaries and convents for their education. Webbe, having obtained a foreign doctorate, returned to the English College at Rome on 12 November 1603 and, since no date of departure is recorded, he may have stayed there for some time. By 1612 he had obtained two doctorates, both noted on the title-page of his 'Minae coelestes' (1612) as 'Phi.' and 'Me.D.'. This text consists largely of a set of tables which list, according to astrological predictions, the most unlucky days in 1612 for dealing with various diseases. The second degree was obtained at Padua and Webbe probably studied at Bologna as well, since one of the dedicatees of 'Minae' is G. Antonio Magino, a distinguished mathematician whom Webbe describes as a most celebrated teacher at Bologna. 
Webbe's association with Italy continued at least until 1614, when he published in Florence what he describes, in 'Usus et authoritas' (1626, preface), as his 'universal tables' (now lost but probably similar to those in 'Minae coelestes'). Thereafter his name occurs in English contexts, first in 1616, when he was a candidate for a licence to practise medicine, which the Royal College of Physicians agreed to award subject to his obtaining incorporation at either Oxford or Cambridge University. In 1626 the college noted that he had failed to do so, though he may have practised illegally since an anti-Catholic contemporary includes him in a list of 'popish Physicians'. However, he made a living teaching languages by his own unique method at his house in Black and White Court in the Old Bailey. His system interested Samuel Hartlib, who instigated a debate on its merits between Webbe and another schoolmaster, William Brookes; the relevant correspondence is preserved in British Library, Sloane MS 1466. Having published a translation of Cicero's 'Familiar Epistles' in 1620 Webbe set out on his major project of language teaching, using his new methods in works published between 1626 and 1629. But eventually he admitted that his 'gaping Grave' was 'calling' him (J. Webbe, 'Andria', 1629, sig. PP 4'r') and he died soon afterwards, possibly in financial difficulties, without achieving his goal of publishing in his new format all of Terence's comedies. 
Webbe contributed to the development of language teaching and of linguistic thought generally in three respects. The first of these was in his strong support of, and reasoned arguments for, the teaching of any language by the 'direct' method, in which students learned Latin, for example, by imitating phrases from classical authors; he strongly opposed the alternative method of first learning paradigms on which students constructed their own sentences. Such a debate was not uncommon in the sixteenth century, one participant being Georgius Haloinus Cominius ('c'.1473-1536), a Belgian scholar whose 'De restauratione linguae latinae' (1533) Webbe frequently cites. Webbe's most important contribution to this discussion was to design and publish relevant textbooks, for the production of which he solicited financial support from subscribers. He explained his ideas in 'An Appeale to Truth, in the Controversie, betweene Art, & Use' (1622), where 'art' refers to grammar and 'use' to the usage of the learned; he also pleaded for parliament's support in 'A Petition' (1623), which led to the grant in 1626 of a patent giving him the monopoly of teaching languages by his method for thirty-one years. His textbooks, which gave both the original Latin and Webbe's translation, were designed with the use of various typographical devices to enable students to see at a glance the links between the Latin phrases and their English equivalents. His system became progressively more complicated, beginning with 'Lessons and Exercises out of Cicero' (1627) and ending with two comedies by Terence, 'Eunuchus' and 'Andria' (1629). Webbe also published a dictionary of phrases from Ovid, with which students could form new sentences and verses in imitation of the Latin original. 
Webbe's second contribution to linguistic thought was to draw attention to the difficulties involved in translation, such as those that related to word order and idiomatic usage. His third contribution was an analysis, preserved in Sloane MS 1466, of the nature of language acquisition. In this work he sees the child's acquisition of language as an automatic reaction in an appropriate context, where the child learns the meaning of the word drink, for example, when he is given a pot to drink from, and he compares this situation to a dog's reaction to the sound of a bell. The dog, 'once hearinge the bell and presently feeling the lash, will never after heare the bell, but will runne away barking or crying, out of a memory of the former punishment' (Salmon, 'Problems', 9). 
Webbe's work was highly valued by younger contemporaries, such as the eminent schoolmaster Thomas Hayne (died 1645), and later by John Webster (1611-1682), who argued that if only Webbe's method had been followed it would have been an 'incredible advantage to the whole nation' (J. Webster, 'Examination of Academies', 1654, 3). He has also been praised by more recent scholars, such as Foster Watson, who describes the 'Petition' as an 'outstanding educational document' (F. Watson, 'The English Grammar Schools to 1660', 1908, 285-6); but his method ultimately failed because it was superseded, from about 1630, by the internationally known and admired language teaching system of J. A. Comenius. 


@@@@@


doc= 28933


Webbe, Samuel, the elder (1740-1816), church musician and composer, was born in London on 7 October 1740, the son of well-to-do parents. Before he was a year old his father took up a government appointment in Minorca, but he died before his wife and family could join him there. Thereafter the family's financial situation was straitened, and Webbe's mother was obliged to curtail his education and apprentice him at the age of eleven to a cabinet-maker for a period of seven years. Within a year of the expiry of his articles Webbe turned his attention to music, at the same time also embarking on a vigorous programme of self-education. He successively applied himself to Latin, French, and Italian, and later also acquired a competent knowledge of German, Greek, and Hebrew; he is said also to have excelled in fencing and dancing. When later asked by Charles Butler how he managed to acquire so much additional knowledge in an already busy life, he replied that it was by 'a rigid observance of two rules: never to let a bit or scrap of time, pass unemployed, and, whatever, he did, to fix his whole mind upon it' (Butler, 2.356). Through the music publisher Peter Welcker, for whom he undertook work as a copyist, he met Charles Barbandt, the organist of the Bavarian embassy chapel, and became his pupil, and it may have been at this time that he converted to Roman Catholicism. By the time he was twenty-five he had become a teacher of music. On 30 May 1763 he married Anne Plumb; of the eight children of the marriage, born between 1764 and 1775, his eldest son Samuel Webbe also became a musician. He became a member of the Royal Society of Musicians in 1770. 
In addition to teaching Webbe was also becoming established as a bass singer in London's pleasure gardens and theatres. By the summer of 1767 he was appearing at Marylebone Gardens, and later in the same year also sang in the chorus at Covent Garden. He is included as a chorus member in the account books for Drury Lane in 1776 and 1778, and can probably be identified as the 'Webb' who was director of the chorus at the King's Theatre in 1785. He also composed for and sang at Vauxhall Gardens. 
Early in his career Webbe established a reputation as a composer of glees, and rapidly became the leading exponent of his age in this genre. His first collection of vocal part music appeared about 1764. In 1776 he won his first prize medal from the Catch Club for his canon 'O that I had wings', and won a further twenty-six medals between then and 1793. He became a member of the Catch Club in 1771, and became its secretary in 1794 on the death of Edmund Thomas Warren, resigning in 1812. On the foundation of the Glee Club in 1787 he was appointed its librarian; his most celebrated glee, 'Glorious Apollo', was performed at the beginning of every meeting during the club's history. He was also a member of the Anacreontic Society and the Concentores Sodales, two other glee clubs. Seventy-three of his glees appeared in nine volumes he published himself, a further twenty-five were included in Warren's collection, and many more were published in his lifetime and afterwards in other collections. 
Webbe was also the most important and influential English Roman Catholic church composer of his generation. At one time or another he was involved with the music of all the principal foreign embassy chapels, which were at this time the main centres for Roman Catholic worship in London. In the late 1760s he was at the Bavarian embassy chapel, probably initially as Barbandt's assistant and later as his successor. In October 1775, following the death of George Paxton, he became organist of the Sardinian embassy chapel, and from 1776 was simultaneously organist of the Portuguese embassy chapel. At the Sardinian chapel he offered free instruction on Friday evenings 'to such young gentlemen as present themselves to learn church music' ('Laity's Directory', 1793), and numbered among his pupils John Danby, Charles Knyvett the younger, Vincent Novello, and probably Samuel Wesley. His masses and other church music compositions, written in a predominantly simple and straightforward style, were an important part of the repertory of the embassy chapels from the early 1770s. Many of them were subsequently published in 'A Collection of Sacred Music, as used in the Chapel of the King of Sardinia' ('c'.1785), 'A Collection of Masses' (1792), and 'A Collection of Motets and Antiphons' (1792), and continued in widespread use in Roman Catholic churches until well into the nineteenth century. He is best-known to present-day congregations for his hymn tune 'Melcombe', originally composed as a setting of 'O salutaris hostia', but now usually sung to the words of John Keble's hymn 'New every morning is the love'. 
Little is known of Webbe's activities in the last years of his life. By 1808 he appears to have been in reduced circumstances, probably as a result of declining health. In March of that year R. J. S. Stevens recorded that he had organized a subscription among Webbe's friends and had collected $115. A benefit concert consisting entirely of his own music was organized for him on 30 May of that year under the patronage of the prince of Wales, the dukes of Cumberland and Cambridge, and the other members of the Catch Club, and raised $450. Two further benefits were held on 13 April 1809 and 18 April 1814. 
During his last years Webbe was confined to his apartments in 1 Great Square, Gray's Inn; by this time he had given up composition and chiefly amused himself by playing chess with a friend. He died at home on 25 May 1816 and was buried in the churchyard of St Pancras Old Church. His extensive library of books and music was sold at White's on 4 July 1816 and on two successive days. 
Webbe was widely respected by his friends and professional colleagues. His obituary notice stressed the affection in which he was held, the wide range of his learning and accomplishments, and his unaffected manner. Although little is known of his life outside music, it is clear that he had an extensive range of interests, including an involvement in radical politics and membership of the London Corresponding Society. 


@@@@@


doc= 28934


Webbe, Samuel, the younger (1768-1843), musician and composer, was born on 15 October 1768 in London, the fourth child and the eldest of the three sons of the seven children of the musician Samuel Webbe the elder (1740-1816) and his wife, Anne Plumb. His first musical education was from his father, who as the leading figure in Roman Catholic church music in London introduced him at an early age to the music of the embassy chapels and to other Catholic musicians. He may also have studied with Muzio Clementi. His early professional career was as a singer and a performer on the violin, oboe, and trumpet. He took part as a tenor in the Handel commemoration concerts in 1784, and sang in the chorus in the Academy of Ancient Music concerts in the 1787-8 season. 
Webbe followed in his father's footsteps as a Roman Catholic church musician, and by the time of his election to membership of the Royal Society of Musicians in 1791 he was already organist of the Bavarian Chapel. Like his father he was also a successful composer of glees and catches; his numerous published compositions also include piano and organ music, and church music for both the Roman Catholic and Anglican rites. Either he or his father was the composer of the operatic farce 'The Speechless Wife', performed at Covent Garden on 22 May 1794. It is probable that he and his father were also active in radical politics in the 1790s as members of the London Corresponding Society. 
About 1798 Webbe moved to Liverpool, where he became organist of the Unitarian chapel, Paradise Street. On 7 October 1803 he married Diana Smith (died 1843) at St John's Church, Old Haymarket, Liverpool; they had at least three children. One of their daughters, Louisa, married the writer on music Edward Holmes in 1857. Their son 
Little is known of Samuel Webbe's activities in Liverpool. In 1810 or 1811, for reasons perhaps connected with the advancing years and failing health of his father, he returned to London and resumed his musical career there. He was active in the earliest years of the Philharmonic Society: he was one of its thirty original members at its foundation in February 1813, was a director for the 1815-16 and 1817-18 seasons, and played an active part in the autumn of 1815 in the negotiations with the Professional Concert about a possible merger of the two bodies. In 1817 he visited Dublin to observe the controversial system of piano teaching practised by Johann Bernhard Logier (1777-1846), in which pupils were taught in groups using Logier's patent chiroplast, a device for holding the hands in the correct position while playing. On his return to London he set up his own academy according to Logier's principles. A demonstration of the system to members of the Philharmonic Society led to a lengthy and acrimonious public dispute: Logier was accused of charlatanry and Webbe's own integrity was called into question. He eventually resigned from the society in December 1817. 
While in London, Webbe continued his career as a Roman Catholic church musician in the position of organist to the Spanish embassy chapel. In the late 1820s he returned to Liverpool, where he was successively organist of St Andrew's, Renshaw Street, St Nicholas's, and St Patrick's Chapel, Toxteth. He moved back to London in 1840 and died at Park Cottage, Hammersmith, on 25 November 1843. His wife had died a few weeks earlier. 


@@@@@


doc= 28935


Webbe, William (fl. 1566?-1591), author, is known chiefly for his 'A discourse of English poetrie, together with the authors judgment, touching the reformation of our English verse', published in 1586; little is known of his life. A letter by Webbe addressed to Robert Wilmott, prefacing the latter's 1591 printed edition of an Inner Temple play, 'Tancred and Gismund', implies that Webbe was present at its performance before the queen, probably in 1566. He is probably the William Webbe who graduated BA from St John's College, Cambridge, in 1572/3, in the same year as Edmund Spenser, although from a different college. In 'A Discourse', Webbe draws extensively and admiringly upon 'The Shepheardes Calendar' (published anonymously in 1579) and demonstrates that he knows the identity of its author. He refers admiringly to the discussion of quantitative metres in the correspondence between Spenser and Gabriel Harvey which appeared as 'Three Proper and Wittie Familiar Letters' and 'Two other Very Commendable Letters' in 1580. However, 'A Discourse' does not suggest any intimate acquaintance between Webbe and Spenser or Harvey. 
Webbe's 'Discourse' yields some clues about his career. It is dedicated to 'my verie good Master, Ma. Edward Suliard, Esquire' who resided at Flemyngs, a large house in the parish of Runwell, in the hundred of Chelmsford, Essex. Webbe indicates that he was employed as tutor to Sulyard's two sons, Edward and Thomas, and refers on a number of occasions to his manuscript translation into quantitative verse of the 'Georgics' which he presented to Sulyard. By 1591, the date of his letter to Wilmott, Webbe was living, possibly also as a tutor, at Pirgo, in the parish of Havering atte Bower, Essex, a house owned by Henry Grey, a relative by marriage of the Sulyards. 'Tancred and Gismund' was partly dedicated by Wilmott to Lady Anne Grey, wife of Henry Grey. Nothing further is known of Webbe's life. 
In his dedication to Edward Sulyard, Webbe describes himself as a scholar 'never acquainted with the learned Muses' ('Discourse', 15). While this should be understood as a modest disclaimer, it does convey the limitations of Webbe's treatise. His enthusiasm for applying the rules of classical quantitative metres to the writing of a 'reformed' English verse should be understood in the context of contemporary scholarly attitudes. In 'The Scholemaster' (1570), Roger Ascham scorned 'barbarous and rude Ryming' and advocated 'trew versifying' in English, that is, unrhymed verse written to classical metrical rules (Smith, 1.29-30). Ascham's view was shared by many for whom classical models formed the sole standard and rhyming verse was the product of mere ignorance and laziness. Webbe shared these views, but was more discriminating about contemporary verse. He parodied the technique of popular ballads: 'an Alehouse song of five or sixe score verses, hobbling uppon some tune of a Northern Jigge, or Robyn hoode... and there withal an A to make a jerke in the ende' (Smith, 1.246; see also 'Handefull', 100-01). On the other hand, in a survey of English verse, he cited with approval any contemporary rhyming verse that demonstrated learnedness or laid claim to moral seriousness, above all, Edmund Spenser whose 'Shepheardes Calendar' would, were it not for the imperfectness of English, rival Virgil and Theocritus in skill (Smith, 1.263). 
A small black-lettered tract entitled 'The Touchstone of Wittes', chiefly compiled, with some slender additions, from William Webbe's 'Discourse of English Poetry', and written by Edward Hake, was reported by Thomas Warton in the eighteenth century, but no copy is known to be extant. 


@@@@@


doc= 28936


Webber, John (1751-1793), landscape and portrait painter, was born in London on 6 October 1751, the second and probably oldest surviving of six children of Abraham Waber (1715-1780), a Swiss sculptor from Bern, Switzerland, who moved to London in the early 1740s, Anglicized his name, and married Mary Quant, a London girl, in 1744. In 1757 straitened circumstances led to Webber's dispatch to Bern, where he was raised by his unmarried aunt Rosina with the family of a celebrated 'ebeniste', Mathaus Funk, whose household she ran after the death in 1750 of Funk's wife Maria, another Waber sister. Rosina recognized his talent and his artistic education was also financially supported by the Bern merchants' corporation, of which the Wabers had been members from 1544. In 1767 Webber was apprenticed to Johann Ludwig Aberli (1723-1786), a leading Swiss topographical artist, who trained him in landscape watercolour drawing and may have introduced him to oils. In 1770 he left to study painting at the Academie Royale in Paris and with an introduction to the engraver, teacher, and art scholar Jean-Georges Wille (1715-1808), from whom he gained additional skills in recording scenes of rural life. In 1775 Webber returned to London and on 8 April enrolled as a student in the Royal Academy Schools. He also painted portraits and mythological subjects, the latter as house decorations for an unnamed architect who encouraged him to submit works for the Royal Academy exhibition in 1776. Two were views near Paris: one was entitled 'Portrait of an Artist', possibly a drawing of his sculptor brother, Henry. These impressed Daniel Solander, botanist on Captain Cook's first Pacific voyage (1768-71), who sought him out and recommended him to the Admiralty as draughtsman for Cook's impending third voyage in the 'Resolution' and 'Discovery'. 
Webber was appointed at 100 guineas a year on 24 June 1776 and on 12 July he sailed from Plymouth in Cook's 'Resolution'. His fame largely rests on his fine topographical and ethnographic work from the voyage, planned with Cook and with publication in view. Guided by the surgeon, William Anderson, he also drew natural history subjects (as did William Ellis, surgeon's mate and the other active draughtsman). He returned in October 1780, after Cook's and Anderson's deaths, with over 200 drawings and some twenty portraits in oils, showed a large selection to George III, and was reappointed by the Admiralty at $250 a year to redraw and direct the engraving of sixty-one plates, plus unsigned coastal views, in the official account. It appeared in June 1784 as 'A Voyage to the Pacific Ocean...' (3 vols, ed. J. Douglas). Webber also painted other views for the Admiralty, his last payment being in July 1785. He also published two sets of voyage prints; four aquatints made by Marie Catherina Prestel (1787-88: one repeating his own etching of 1786), and sixteen soft-ground etchings by himself (1788-92) of which more were probably intended. The latter were pioneering, both in the medium used and as an artist's rather than publisher's selection. Reissued in aquatint from about 1808 as 'Views in the South Seas', they continued to sell into the 1820s. 
In 1785 Webber also assisted his older friend P.-J. de Loutherbourg in designing scenery and costumes for the celebrated pantomime 'Omai, or, A Trip Round the World' at the Theatre Royal, Covent Garden. Webber resumed exhibiting at the Royal Academy in 1784, with two China Sea views and 'A party from... 'Resolution'... shooting sea-horses ['walrus']... 1778'. In 1785 his first South Seas exhibit was a portrait of the Society Islands beauty Poetua, together with views of Macau and Krakatoa. These, except the China Sea pictures of 1784, are all in the National Maritime Museum (Admiralty House collection). All twenty-two exhibits from 1784 to 1787 were subjects from Cook's voyages, with seven more voyage subjects (to 1791) among the twenty-five pictures he exhibited from 1788 to 1792. A portrait excepted (1789), the rest were landscapes in Britain, France, the French and Swiss Alps and around Lake Como, resulting from tours probably encouraged by his artist friends Joseph Farington, Thomas Hearne, and the engraver William Byrne, another Wille pupil who made plates for all three official Cook voyage accounts. In 1786 Webber went to south Wales. In 1787 he visited Wille in Paris, then Lyons, Geneva, northern Italy, and the Alps, and his relations in Bern. In 1788 he returned to south Wales, possibly with the natural historian William Day, who accompanied him to Derbyshire in 1789. In 1790 and 1791 he revisited south and north Wales. He also sketched in the Lake District, possibly in Scotland, in the Isle of Wight and southern England (1792), and continued to paint portraits. Webber was lively, well-liked and professionally successful. He gained the approval and recommendation of Reynolds as a draughtsman ('c'.1781-1785), and was elected an associate of the Royal Academy in 1785 and Royal Academician in 1791. He died unmarried at his home, 312 Oxford Street, London -- where he had moved in 1784 from 3 Bolsover Street -- on 29 April 1793, of kidney disease, and left an estate of nearly $5000, with bequests to Swiss family members, servants, and friends, including Farington (one of his executors), Hearne, and Day. Webber had earlier presented his own South Seas ethnographic collection (101 items) to the Library of Bern, where it arrived in 1791. Much of his estate passed to his sculptor brother Henry (1754-1826), a pupil of John Bacon the elder. He also attended the Royal Academy Schools, was a Royal Academy silver and gold medallist in 1774 and 1779 (exh. 1775-6 and 1779), worked extensively for Josiah Wedgwood, and carved Garrick's monument in Westminster Abbey (1795-7). 
All John Webber's known voyage work was catalogued by R. Joppien and B. Smith (1988), including his portraits of Cook. The half-length portrait of 1782, then privately owned, is now in the National Portrait Gallery of Australia, Canberra; the original bust length, painted at Cape Town in 1776, is in the National Portrait Gallery, London, and a small full length, painted in or after 1780, in the Museum of New Zealand / Te Papa Tongarewa, Wellington, New Zealand. A fourth, painted for the Tahitian chief Tu, no longer survives; a fifth, credibly attributed and also not recorded in 1988, is in a private American collection. A portrait of Webber by Johann Daniel Mottet (1812), from a contemporary miniature, is in the Historisches Museum, Bern, which also now holds his ethnographic collection (Joppien and Smith, pl. 202). 


@@@@@


doc= 28937


Weber, Henry William (1783-1818), literary scholar and secretary, was born on 22 September 1783 at St Petersburg, the second of three children of H. W. Weber (died 1786), merchant and commissioner for trade, and Dorothy Foster (died 1816), relative of Henry Lord Holland and niece of Joseph Foster-Barham MP. Weber's father was a native of Neustadt, Westphalia, and a member of the Moravian Brethren community in St Petersburg. Most of Weber's German and English relatives belonged to the Moravian communities at Herrnhut in Saxony and at Bedford and Fulneck near Leeds in England. 
In 1795 Weber was briefly enrolled at an elite Moravian boarding-school at Uhyst in Saxony, before the family left Germany for England in 1797. In 1803-4 he enrolled in medicine at the University of Edinburgh, continuing his studies at the University of Halle in 1805 and the University of Jena in 1806. After the university at Jena was temporarily closed in 1806 following the defeat of the Prussian army by Napoleonic forces, he returned to Edinburgh to study. From 1807 to 1814 he worked as an amanuensis and secretary, primarily for Sir Walter Scott, and it was during this period that Weber's literary and scholarly career flourished, with all his published works dating from these years. 
Scott described Weber as 'a man of very superior attainments, an excellent linguist and geographer, and a remarkable antiquary' ('DNB'). He was widely read in medieval romance literature, both British and European, and had personally studied more than three-quarters of the fifty-six Middle English romances known about 1800 (Gamerschlag, 212). In 1808 he published an edition of 'The Battle of Floddon Field: a Poem of the Sixteenth Century', celebrating a historical event that Scott recounted in the sixth canto of 'Marmion' (1808). This was followed by his 'Metrical Romances of the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Centuries', with introduction, notes, and glossary (3 vols., 1810), described by Southey as 'admirably edited' ('Selections from the Letters', 2.308) and considered by modern scholars as Weber's major work (Mitchell, 8-10). 
Weber's next publication, 'Dramatic Works of John Ford', with introduction and explanatory notes (2 vols., 1811), was not of such high quality and aroused a storm of angry comment, including pamphlets by Octavius Gilchrist, G. D. Whittington, and the Revd John Mitford. The criticism stemmed from the fact that Weber was not skilled in early modern English literature and had not collated the early editions of the plays. Similar problems beset his 'Works of Beaumont and Fletcher', with introduction and explanatory notes (14 vols., 1812), which Scott, whose own annotated edition had supplied the most valuable notes, acknowledged to have been 'carelessly done'. However, Dyce, in his 'Works of Beaumont and Fletcher' (1843, 1.iii) considered it as 'on the whole the best edition of the dramatists which had yet appeared'. 
Weber's next publication was 'Tales of the East; comprising the most popular romances of oriental origin and the best imitations by European authors' (3 vols., 1812). He also edited 'A Genealogical History of the Earldom of Sutherland' in 1813. In 1814, in collaboration with Robert Jamieson, Weber produced another significant work of scholarship in 'Illustrations of Northern Antiquities from the Earlier Teutonic and Scandinavian Romances'. At one time the two scholars had intended to establish a new periodical devoted to 'ancient Romance and Antiquities in general' (H. Weber to F. Douce, 31 Jan 1810), but lack of support forced them to compromise on this one-volume collection of medieval European romances, illuminated by interpretative essays. Scott contributed an abstract of the Old Icelandic 'Eyrbyggja saga', taken from Thorkelin's Latin edition and translation of 1787. Weber's contribution to the volume included a historical sketch of medieval Germanic poetry and romance and English summary translations of 'Das Nibelungenlied' and 'Das Heldenbuch'. His essay on medieval romance in Germany and Scandinavia was one of the sources of Scott's later 'Essay on romance' (1824). 
Scott's attitude to Weber seems to have been ambivalent; he described him as 'an excellent and affectionate creature' but 'a violent Jacobin', and Scott admitted he used to taunt him about his political views. He also wrote that Weber was 'afflicted with partial insanity especially if he used strong liquors' ('Journal', 110). The Scott family, with whom Weber often dined, liked his appearance and manners, and enjoyed his conversation. In early 1814, however, Weber apparently suffered a breakdown while resident in Scott's household, which brought his career as the latter's secretary to an abrupt end. At the close of a day's work in the same room as his employer, he suddenly appeared to become mentally disturbed, produced a pair of loaded pistols, and challenged Scott to a duel. Scott managed to calm Weber down, even to the point of inviting him to dine with the family that evening. Surreptitiously, however, he had made arrangements for Weber to be restrained and straitjacketed. After this the two men never again met, although they corresponded, but Scott apparently made a substantial contribution to Weber's support in the mental asylums in which he spent a good part of the rest of his life. This breakdown was apparently in part a consequence of what Weber called a 'fever', which may have come on after a strenuous walking tour of the highlands, for which he had been hired to act as a guide for a rich Jamaican named Johnstone. The two men had become very drunk at the duke of Sutherland's Dunrobin Castle, an incident that is likely to have embarrassed Scott and caused him to restrict Weber's drinking in what was probably a humiliating way, further contributing to his eventual breakdown. 
In March 1814 Weber returned with his mother to the Moravian community at Fulneck. He later accompanied his sister and her children to London, doubtless with the intention of working in libraries there, but, despite his family connections, Weber was unable to secure any regular employment, and he eventually returned to Fulneck and then to York. The loss of his mother in 1816 compounded his mental and physical deterioration, and on 17 October 1816 he was admitted to the York Lunatic Asylum. There he died on 25 March 1818 of an epileptic attack after suffering prolonged atrophy and dementia. 


@@@@@


doc= 28938


Weber, (Carl Emil) Otto (1832-1888), painter and engraver, was born on 17 October 1832 in Berlin, son of Wilhelm Weber, a merchant of that city, and his wife, Henrietta. He studied under the animal painter Carl Steffeck and was much influenced by Eugen Kruger, another animal painter, from Dusseldorf. He settled in Paris where he worked under the neo-classicist Thomas Couture. His reputation was made by his skilful paintings in oil and watercolour of landscapes and animals; these were much admired and fetched high prices. In 1864 he exhibited at the Paris Salon for the first time, winning a medal in that year and again in 1869. 
On the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War in 1870 Weber left France for Milan and Rome, where he lived for two years. In 1872 he moved to London where, in a studio at Brignall House, Greville Road, St John's Wood, he had stables and could work from live animals as models. He exhibited regularly at the Royal Academy between 1874 and his death, and in 1876 he was elected an associate of the Society of Painters in Water Colours. He also became a member of the Institute of Painters in Oil Colours. For Queen Victoria, Weber painted a portrait of Prince Christian Victor (exh. RA, 1874) and two of her Skye terriers (exh. RA, 1876; Royal Collection). Probably his best picture was 'The First Snow on the Alp', now in the Melbourne Gallery, New South Wales. Weber travelled in the south and west of England, in the Scottish highlands (1876-7), in north-west France and Italy (1877-8). He died at 32 Great Ormond Street, Queen Square, Holborn, London, after a long illness, on 23 December 1888. On 20 May 1889 more than sixty of his remaining finished pictures and studies were sold at Christies. 


@@@@@


doc= 28939


Webster, Alexander (1707-1784), Church of Scotland minister, was born in Edinburgh, the son of 
Alexander Webster attended the high school in Edinburgh. In 1733 he was licensed as a preacher by the presbytery of Haddington and was appointed assistant and successor to Allan Logan, minister of Culross, who died that September. In June 1737 he was translated to the Tolbooth Church, Edinburgh, where he became a popular preacher. In 1737 he married Mary Erskine (1715-1766), the daughter of Lieutenant-Colonel John Erskine and his third wife, Euphemia Cochrane. They had six sons and one daughter, Ann, who married Captain Eyre Robert Mingay in 1777. Webster's wife's elder sister, Euphemia, was the mother of James Boswell and Webster his uncle; he and his children formed an important part of Boswell's social circle and are frequently mentioned in Boswell's journals. 
In the early 1740s Webster played a leading role in supporting the Cambuslang revival, a spiritual awakening which began in the parish of Cambuslang, near Glasgow, and spread through much of western and central Scotland. In 1742 he published an important pamphlet, 'Divine influence the true spring of the extraordinary work of Cambuslang and other places in the west of Scotland', in which he argued that the conversions were a result of the influence of the Holy Spirit. In the same year Webster prepared a scheme for a provision for the widows and children of the ministers of the Church of Scotland, which he presented to the general assembly. In 1743 an act of parliament enabled the general assembly to raise money and establish the fund. Although he was largely responsible for initiating the fund which provided annuities, the actuarial basis of the scheme was largely the work of a colleague who shared Webster's interest in mathematics and demography, the Revd Robert Wallace. 
Webster is remembered as the author of an early and respected private census of Scotland. In 1755 Lord President Robert Dundas, upon the instigation of the government, commissioned Webster to obtain figures on the population of Scotland providing information in three main areas: an alphabetical list of parishes showing the extent, patrons, stipends, and population in each case; a list of shires in Scotland detailing parishes, ministers, population, and numbers of Roman Catholics and men able to fight; and an estimate of the age structure of Scottish subjects in yearly age groups. Because of Webster's position within the church, his initiation of the fund for widows, and the fact that he was acting on behalf of the government, parish ministers throughout Scotland complied with his requests for specific information. He published the results of his study in 'An account of the number of people in Scotland in the year one thousand seven hundred and fifty-five' (1755). 
Webster was a leader of the popular party within the Church of Scotland in opposition to the more liberal faction, the moderates. He showed his conservative and evangelical stance in his sermon 'Supernatural Religion the Only Sure Hope of Sinners', preached on 12 January 1741 and published later that year in which he argued for divine revelation against the arguments raised by rationalists and deists. He was also a devoted Hanoverian. After the Jacobite defeat at the battle of Culloden he preached two sermons in the Tolbooth Church on the occasion of Thanksgiving, 23 June 1746, published later that year as 'Heathens Professing Judaism, when the Fear of the Jews Fell upon them', dedicated 'To all those whose concern for the Welfare of our Jerusalem, and Zeal for the British Israel, commenced Before the Battle of Culloden'. Using 'Esther' as his text, he compared the Jews' deliverance with Mordecai and Esther's rescue of the Jews from Hamon to the revolution of 1688 and the Hanoverian succession. By adopting the language of British liberty and by de-emphasizing the rhetoric of the covenant, Webster signalled a break with the orthodox Presbyterian past and 'set a pattern for the next generation of evangelical political preaching' (Landsman, 203). In 1748 Webster was appointed to serve as chaplain to Frederick, prince of Wales, and on 24 May 1753 he was elected moderator of the general assembly. On 24 November 1760, he obtained the degree of DD from Edinburgh University. In the following month he was a member of a deputation sent by the general assembly to present an address to George III on his succession to the throne. He retired from the Tolbooth Church and became administer of the widows' fund in 1771, when he was also made one of his majesty's chaplains in ordinary for Scotland. 
Webster was a convivial companion who loved his claret, a fondness for which earned him the nickname Dr Bonum Magnum. In 1773, when Samuel Johnson visited Scotland, Boswell noted in his journal: 'At supper we had Dr. Alexander Webster, who, though not learned, had such a knowledge of mankind, such a fund of information and entertainment, so clear a head and such accommodating manners, that Dr. Johnson found him a very agreeable companion. ('Boswell's Tour', 32)' Webster died on 25 January 1784 in his home at the foot of Webster's Close on the south side of Castle Hill, Edinburgh, leaving his property to his daughter Ann and her children, even though two of his sons were still living. He was buried in the city's Greyfriars churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 28940


Webster, (Julia) Augusta (1837-1894), poet, was born on 30 January 1837 at Poole, Dorset, one of the six children of Vice-Admiral George Davies RN (1800-1876) and his wife, Julia Hume (1803-1897), fourth daughter of Joseph Hume (1767-1844), clerk at Somerset House, London, who was of mixed English, Scottish, and French extraction and claimed descent from the Humes of Polwarth, Berwickshire. Augusta's literary interests may well have stemmed from her mother's family; Lamb, Hazlitt, and Godwin were intimate friends of her grandfather Joseph and regular guests at his London home in Bayswater. He was the author of two publications, one a blank-verse translation (1812) of Dante's 'Inferno' and the other 'A Search into the Old Testament' (1841). 
Augusta's father was born in the parish of Cuthbert, Wells, Somerset, and joined the Royal Navy at the age of thirteen. He was distinguished for his bravery at sea, having performed many dramatic rescues involving feats such as jumping overboard to save drowning comrades. Described as 'a perfect and noble specimen of the British sailor' and 'in his unpretending way, a hero' (Watts-Dunton, 355), his honest and generous character may have shaped the strong humanitarian side in Augusta's work. From her father she also inherited a passionate love of the sea, apparent in her poetry, having spent her childhood years living by the water. 
Until 1851 the family moved up and down the coast of England, for some time living on the brigantine HMS 'Griper' in Chichester harbour, Sussex. They resided from 1844 to 1848 in Banff Castle in Scotland, Augusta attending school in the town, and then moved to Penzance on the Cornish coast. In 1851 they finally moved inland to Cambridge when George Davies accepted the post of chief constable for Cambridgeshire, to which Huntingdonshire was added in 1857. 
In Cambridge, Augusta became known as 'one of the brilliant daughters of Admiral Davies' (Watts-Dunton, 355). She read widely, learned Italian and Spanish, and travelled to Paris and Geneva where she became proficient in French. She liked painting and was a pupil at the new Cambridge School of Art, which opened its doors in 1858 to an inaugural speech given by Ruskin. She enrolled at the South Kensington Art School in London, but here ran into terrible trouble for a spirited attempt at whistling. This resulted in her being expelled from the school, which 'almost dashed the prospects of women art students for ever' (Strachey, 96), so controversial was institutionalized education for women at the time. 
Augusta learned Latin and Greek, apparently to help a younger brother with his schoolwork. She later published two skilled literal translations from the Greek, Aeschylus' 'Prometheus Bound' (1866) and Euripides' 'Medea' (1868), which achieved critical recognition when women were still largely excluded from the classics. At least two of her siblings shared her academic disposition. In 1864 her elder sister Louisa married the Cambridge mathematician Isaac Todhunter. Her younger brother Gerald Stanley Davies (1845-1927), was for many years a master at Charterhouse School, his own school since the age of ten. He later became master of the Charterhouse in London, of which he produced a learned and authoritative history (1921). He also wrote and published widely on art and sports. 
Augusta's early publications, which include two volumes of verse ('Blanche Lisle', 1860; 'Lilian Gray', 1864), the novel 'Lesley's Guardians' (1864), and the prose article 'The Brissons' ('Macmillan's Magazine', 1860), were published under the male pseudonym Cecil Home. It was only after her marriage to Thomas Webster (1832-1913), fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, on 10 December 1863 that she gained the confidence to use her own name. During the next seven years she enjoyed the greatest popularity she would ever achieve as a poet with 'Dramatic Studies' (1866), 'A Woman Sold' (1867), and 'Portraits' (1870), of which the last volume ran into three editions that same year. These works contain a series of dramatic monologues, in part inspired by Robert Browning. Several of the characters who speak out are women, and their concerns reflect the feminist interests which Augusta was developing by now. 
On 14 November 1864 Augusta gave birth to her only child, Margaret (1864-1936). She lived in Cambridge with her husband and daughter until 1870, when she persuaded her husband to give up his law practice and move to London. Here she was introduced to literary circles by the critic Theodore Watts-Dunton, who constantly supported and reviewed her work. She worked as reviewer for 'The Athenaeum' and during the 1870s wrote articles on a wide variety of subjects for 'The Examiner', later collected in the self-deprecatingly entitled 'A Housewife's Opinions' (1878). Her poetry at this period includes a Chinese tale in verse, 'Yu-Pe-Ya's Lute' (1872), and 'A Book of Rhyme' (1884), which contains an innovative attempt to adapt Italian 'rispetti' to English verse. She began a sonnet sequence, 'Mother and Daughter' (1895), left uncompleted, and wrote a novel for children, 'Daffodil and the Croaxaxicans' (1884). She also wrote four plays, notably 'In a Day' (1882) and 'The Sentence' (1887). The former was performed as a matinee at Terry's Theatre in London in May 1890, with her daughter -- as 'Davies' Webster -- playing the female lead. 
During the 1870s and 1880s Augusta participated in a number of conferences on feminist causes and proved herself a talented public speaker. She was twice elected head of the Chelsea division of the London school board and worked hard for the improvement of women's education. She suffered from ill health for most of her adult life, struck by frequent attacks of pleurisy and on occasion obliged to winter in Italy. She died on 5 September 1894 at her home, Springfield, Kew Gardens Road, Kew, London, and was buried on 8 September in the west cemetery of Highgate cemetery, Middlesex. She was survived by her husband. 
Webster's poetry, with its strong social concerns, was largely put aside by the aesthetes of the 'fin de siecle' and entirely forgotten by the modernists. Late twentieth-century criticism led to a revival of interest in her verse, and her place in the history of poetry now seems secured. She deserves recognition as one of the foremost Victorian women poets. 


@@@@@


doc= 28941


Webster, Benjamin (1798-1882), actor and theatre manager, was born in Bath on 3 September 1798. His father, Benjamin Nottingham Webster ('c'.1760-1836), whose middle name the younger Webster also sometimes used, came from Sheffield. The father, through whom Webster claimed descent from Sir George Buck or Buc, was at one time a musical 'composer' and pantomimist; he married Elizabeth Moon of Leeds, joined the army, served in the West Indies, was engaged in Bath in organizing volunteer forces, and settled there as a dancing and fencing master. Benjamin Webster senior married three times and had twelve offspring. Apart from 'Ben' and Frederick Vestris (1802-1878), who became stage-manager of the Haymarket Theatre, Clara Webster, a ballerina, was the most theatrically distinguished. She died in 1843 at Drury Lane after her dress caught fire on stage. 
After receiving some education at Dr Barber's naval academy in Bath, Webster had to abandon the chances of a promised commission as a midshipman from the duchess of York on his mother's death. He made his first appearance on the stage as a dancer in 1809 and assisted his father in his occupations. In 1815, however, he ran away from home, and obtained from the younger Watson at Cheltenham an engagement at 25 shillings a week to play Harlequin, small speaking parts, and second violin in the orchestra. He began his career as an actor as Thessalus in 'Alexander the Great' at Warwick in 1818, and also played at Lichfield and Walsall races. He then joined in a sharing scheme with a manager called 'Irish' Wilson, who fitted up a barn at Bromsgrove, where Webster (announced, with no apparent claim, as from the Theatre Royal, Dublin) doubled the parts of Sir Charles Cropland and Stephen Harrowby in Colman's 'The Poor Gentleman', danced a hornpipe, and played in his own dress, and with a head chalked to look like grey hair, Plainway in James Kenney's 'Raising the Wind'. He then went as Harlequin to the Theatre Royal, Belfast, under Montague Talbot, acted in Londonderry and Limerick, and joined the Dublin company to play with it in Cork as Harlequin. 
After appearing in Manchester and Liverpool Webster went to London, and played on 11 May 1818 a smuggler in 'Trial by Battle', the opening entertainment of the Coburg Theatre, later the Old Vic. According to a speech he made at a complimentary dinner given to him at the Freemasons' Tavern on 24 February 1864, he had at this time (in fact, in 1821) married a widow, Sophie West (1794-1835), with a family of children. Webster became ballet master and walking gentleman at Richmond, then leader of the band at Croydon, which led to his engagement as dancer and walking gentleman under Beverley at the Tottenham Street Theatre, called many names before it became the Prince of Wales's. After a period at the English Opera House (the Lyceum), he accepted from Elliston an engagement at Drury Lane, where he appeared on 28 November 1820 as Almagro in 'Pizarro', and at Christmas played Pantaloon. At the end of the 1821-2 season he joined Alfred Bunn's company at Birmingham, where he was seen in low-comedy parts, then acted at Sheffield, Newcastle, and Chester. He was re-engaged by Elliston for three seasons at Drury Lane in 1823 at more favourable rates than previously, but he also sought to consolidate his financial position by opening a newspaper and bookshop near the theatre. This was to become the base for a later play-publishing venture, the series 'Webster's Acting National Drama'. 
During a revival of 'Measure for Measure' on 1 May 1824, John Harley, who played Pompey, was taken ill, and Webster took the part, and was promoted to the first green room, a significant rise in status. In this year he was the first Tuditanus in Sheridan Knowles's 'Caius Gracchus', and in 1825 the first Erni in 'William Tell' by the same author. Although he gained some recognition, he was kept back by Elliston. The 'Theatrical Inquisitor' of 1826 'blamed the Drury Lane management for stifling a valuable talent'. 
It was about this time that Webster began writing plays, mostly short comic pieces and farces. Some thirty-eight of these are listed in 'English Drama of the Nineteenth Century' (1985). Throughout the 1820s and 1830s Webster played regularly at Drury Lane and at the Haymarket, where he made his first appearance in 1829. At the same time he worked for other theatres as a playwright and stage-manager. In 1832 he was with Madame Vestris at the fashionable Olympic, where he played in Dance's 'Kill or Cure' and in an adaptation by himself of 'L'homme de soixante ans'. In the same year he managed the City Theatre in Cripplegate for a short season in association with Harriet Waylett. This experience gave him a taste for management, sharpened by the fact that conditions for actors at the patent houses had deteriorated under the tyranny of Alfred Bunn, who was by 1833 in charge of both Covent Garden and Drury Lane. Webster resorted to the Haymarket, where, in 1835, he and J. B. Buckstone were greatly praised for their performances as Dogberry and Verges in an otherwise disappointing production of 'Much Ado About Nothing', with Charles Kemble as Benedick. 
In 1835 Sophie West Webster gave birth to a son, Benjamin, but she died several months later. Shortly afterwards Webster married Harriet Ireland (1816-1862), who bore him a son, William, in 1836 and a daughter, Harriette, in 1838. In 1836 his father died. 
In the following year Webster undertook the management of the Haymarket Theatre, which had a 'summer licence' for the presentation of legitimate drama. He was proud that he began the venture supported solely by his own earnings and was not beholden to any financial backers. The advantage of the Haymarket in comparison with the patent houses of Drury Lane and Covent Garden was that it was small enough to allow the audience both to hear the actors and to see subtle changes in facial expression, so that the management did not have to rely on lavish and costly spectacle to attract the crowds. In an age when visual extravagances were 'de rigueur', Webster was criticized for his lack of interest in decoration, but it is to his credit that during his management he chose to present the highest standards of acting and writing that were available at the time. 
From the first season, when Webster, with considerable bravado, successfully persuaded 'the eminent tragedian' W. C. Macready to appear in his company, the Haymarket became known as the actors' theatre, which unashamedly operated a 'star' system. Macready and his stage partner, Helen Faucit, appeared regularly, as did Mr and Mrs Charles Kean, the Keeleys, Louisa Nisbett, Julia Glover, Mary Warner, J. L. Toole, and Webster's friend and fellow comedian Buckstone. Madame Vestris and Charles Matthews found there a refuge from bankruptcy and the insults of the patent holders, and another welcome visitor was the American actress Charlotte Cushman. Three distinguished performers of the later nineteenth century were given their London debuts by Webster: Tyrone Power, Samuel Phelps (later a rival manager at Sadler's Wells), and G. B. Shaw's favourite actor, Barry Sullivan. Acting standards were extremely high and Webster never fell into the managerial pitfall of casting himself in roles more suited to members of a brilliant company. He paid high salaries and, perhaps most importantly, seemed to have the knack of keeping his temperamental geniuses in order, if not always in good humour. 
A further notable feature of Webster's Haymarket which encouraged the best of contemporary acting talent to join him was his serious commitment to the presentation of good new plays. At a time when the guardians of the 'national drama' were frequently reduced to presenting animal and freak shows, crude melodrama, and adaptations by hack writers from the trivia of the Parisian stage, Webster actively encouraged contemporary playwrights and men of letters to submit work to him. Sadly, his great playwriting competition in 1843, when a prize of $500 was offered for the best comedy, was a disaster, in that the winning piece, 'Quid pro quo' by Catherine Gore, selected by a panel of distinguished judges including Charles Kemble, was booed from the stage, but there were a number of notable successes. 

'The Bridal', Sheridan Knowles's adaptation of Beaumont and Fletcher's 'The Maid's Tragedy', an excellent vehicle for Macready, consolidated the first season. Webster's faith in Bulwer-Lytton was vindicated by the success of 'Money' in 1840, which had Macready in the leading role of Evelyn, Helen Faucit as Clara Douglas, and Webster in the comic part of Graves. Another nineteenth-century classic, 'Masks and Faces' (1852), by Charles Reade and Tom Taylor, had Mary Ann Stirling in the leading part of Peg Woffington and Webster as the impoverished author Triplet, regarded by many as his finest performance. 
At a time when playwrights were frequently exploited by actors and managers, Webster was highly respected for his fair dealings, particularly his willingness to offer advances on scripts (or even 'treatments') rather than delay payment until the piece's success was assured. The young Dion Boucicault was one such beneficiary. His 'Love by Proxy', 'Alma Mater', and 'Curiosities of Literature' were all premiered under Webster's management. By the time Webster left the Haymarket he claimed, no doubt with justification, to have spent over $30,000 in encouraging dramatic writing. 
The repertory of the Haymarket was distinguished largely by contemporary comedy, supplemented from time to time by farces by Buckstone and by Webster himself, but an innovatory excursion into the presentation of Shakespeare was made with the production of 'The Taming of the Shrew' in 1844. Under the guidance of the antiquary J. R. Planche, the play was presented in full, including the prologue, and the main action took place in the Lord's bedroom incorporating the basic features of an Elizabethan stage. The actors wore Elizabethan costume. On closer inspection this presentation owed more to the decorative aesthetic of Victorian 'mise-en-scene' than to the Shakespearian architectural and emblematic stage, but it may be seen as an interesting precursor to the reforms of William Poel some forty years later. 
Webster's improvements to the Haymarket were not restricted to raising the standards of the repertory and the performances. As he remarked in his farewell speech in 1853, he had spent some $12,000 in redesigning and refurbishing the auditorium: the angular balcony was replaced by an elegantly curved circle, the seats in the pit were backed, orchestra stalls were introduced, the proscenium arch was widened by 11 feet and remodelled, gas lighting was installed and a centre chandelier given to the proprietors, 'and behind the curtain money has not been spared to render the stage as perfect for dramatic representation as its limited means will furnish'. 
In 1844 Webster had acquired the lease of the Adelphi, which he passed over to his long-term companion, the dancer Celine Celeste (Madame Celeste), who had appeared in the 1838-9 season at the Haymarket. In 1853 he joined her at the Adelphi and handed over the Haymarket lease to his old friend Buckstone. Webster gave Buckstone a valuable legacy. Even before the passing in 1843 of the 'Theatre Regulation Act', which broke the monopoly of Covent Garden and Drury Lane, he had played his part in the growing respectability of the stage, presenting a series of dramatic entertainments before the queen at Windsor in 1848-9. He provided regular employment for both established actors and those at the beginning of their careers in good working conditions and in plays which exploited their talents. He had initiated touring with the entire company during the short time when the Haymarket was 'dark', another means of keeping the company together. A presentation by members of the company marked the extent of their appreciation of his achievement. 
The new joint management of the Adelphi began in 1853 with Mack Lemon's farce 'Mr Webster at Home'. Webster played Falstaff in a revival of 'The Merry Wives of Windsor' in the same year. Early successes included 'Two Loves and a Life' by Taylor and Reade (1854), Boucicault's 'Janet Pride' (1855), and Taylor's 'Helping Hand' (1855). Celeste won acclaim for her performance as a Watteauesque Harlequin. She was the first woman to attempt the part. 
In 1859, in the new Royal Adelphi Theatre, erected on the site of the old house, Webster played Penn Holder, one of his greatest parts, in his own adaptation 'One Touch of Nature', and in the same year he was the original Robert Landry in Watts Phillips's 'The Dead Heart'. This was a period of considerable controversy for Webster. Relations with Celeste became strained, leading to the severance of the partnership. 'The Dead Heart' was thought by some to be plagiarized from Dickens's 'A Tale of Two Cities', or vice versa, and the old friends Webster and Dickens were (thankfully temporarily) estranged. Webster's financial problems were exploited, somewhat opportunistically, by his former protege Boucicault, who, after his brilliant successes in America, returned to England with his three masterpieces, 'The Colleen Bawn', 'Arragh-na-Pogue', and 'The Octoroon'. These were presented at the Royal Adelphi, but only on condition that their author had control of the theatre's artistic policy, leaving Webster as little more than a front-of-house manager. 'The Colleen Bawn' (1860) was one of Queen Victoria's favourite plays; it ran for more than 230 performances in London and won acclaim in the provinces. But Webster, although he remained active in the Royal Adelphi management until 1872, never again exerted the managerial control he had previously enjoyed. A subsequent partnership with Chatterton failed on the grounds of his associate's extravagance. 
On 1 November 1869 Webster opened as lessee of the Princess's Theatre, which he had long owned, playing in Byron's 'The Prompter's Box', and in April 1873 he played his last new role, Rodin the Jesuit in 'The Wandering Jew', adapted by Leopold Lewis. 
In the 1860s Webster was closely associated with a philanthropic venture, the establishment of a royal dramatic college to provide funds and accommodation for elderly and infirm members of the profession. There was also talk of building a training school for actors, necessitated by the demise of the provincial stock companies. Both schemes were attempts to raise the social respectability of the theatrical profession. Webster promised stone for the building from his quarries in Wales, but neither scheme was implemented and his ownership of the Welsh quarries has never been proved. 
In 1874 Webster was given his farewell benefit at Drury Lane. The piece was 'The School for Scandal', and all the principal living actors took part. Helen Faucit came out of retirement to play Lady Teazle, there was a recitation by the new star Henry Irving, and Mary Ann Keeley, a stalwart of the Haymarket comedy team, presented the cheque for $2000, reputedly the largest sum ever to be raised by a Drury Lane benefit. Webster's last performance was for the benefit of his friend Buckstone, in 1877. The part was Graves in the production of 'Masks and Faces' by the Bancroft management at the Prince of Wales's Theatre. 
On his seventy-ninth birthday Webster remarried. The bride was 26-year-old Eleanor Phillips, who some months later bore him a son. Neither was mentioned in contemporary obituaries and biographies. Webster, nicknamed the Nestor of the Stage, died at his home, 3 Church Side, Kennington, Lambeth, on 8 July 1882. 
Webster left two sons connected with the stage. Ben Webster the younger wrote the one-act farce 'Behind Time' for the Adelphi in 1865; seven other farces or adaptations from the French came from his pen between that date and 1873. John Webster, his stepson, a juvenile star whose success did not last, played about 1837 and 1838 at Covent Garden, the Haymarket, the St James's, and the Adelphi. Webster's daughter Harriette married Sir Edward Lawson, bt, proprietor and editor of the 'Daily Telegraph'. Benjamin Webster, his grandson, was a well-known actor in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century. Together with his wife, Dame May Whitty, he acted in many of the plays of the 'new drama' movement in London and in the repertory movement in the provinces. Their daughter, Margaret (Peggy) Webster, born in 1905, was an actress and director who found much success in the United States. Her book about the Webster dynasty, 'The Same Only Different' (1969), is the most authoritative source on this distinguished theatrical family. 
In his line as a character actor Webster stood foremost in his day. His greatest characters were Richard Pride, Robert Landry, Penn Holder, Triplet, Graves, Tartuffe, and Rodin in 'The Wandering Jew'. He was happiest in characters in which serious purpose, puritanical fervour, and grim resolution were shown, and had not indeed more comedy than would serve like light points in a picture to indicate the gloom. He was a spirited manager so far as the engagement of good actors and the encouragement of playwrights was concerned, but was out of tune with the times in respect of stage mounting and the employment of supernumeraries. Any assessment of his career must nevertheless acknowledge that, however ephemeral his performances and however trivial his own dramatic writings, he was a theatre manager of vision and integrity keeping alive the English dramatic tradition at a time when it was sorely pressed. 


@@@@@


doc= 28942


James Webster (1658/9-1720), Church of Scotland minister, and his third wife, Agnes, daughter of Alexander Menzies of Culter in Lanarkshire. Alexander's father studied at St Andrews University but left the university without taking his MA degree. He joined the covenanters and was twice imprisoned for his religious opinions. In 1688 he was appointed Presbyterian minister of Liberton (near Edinburgh), and was translated first to Whitekirk in 1691 and then in 1693 to the collegiate church, Edinburgh, where he remained for the rest of his life. He gained some notoriety by opposing the union with England and by attempting to preserve orthodoxy in the Church of Scotland. James Webster was three times married, first to Margaret Keir (died 1698), second to Mary Stewart, and finally, in September 1703, to Agnes Menzies. He died on 18 May 1720. 


@@@@@


doc= 28943


Webster, John (1578x80-1638?), poet and playwright, was born in London, the son of John Webster ('c'.1550-1614/15) and Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Coates, blacksmith, of St Giles Cripplegate. The parish records of St Sepulchre, Newgate, where the family lived, were destroyed in the great fire of London, but surviving documentary sources indicate that there were at least five children of the marriage, which took place on 4 November 1577. That John Webster the younger, as he is referred to in documents of the time, was the first son is suggested by the fact that he was given his father's name, but since this cannot be proved his birth cannot be dated more precisely than 1578-80. 
John Webster the elder, probably a Londoner, spent his entire working life in the parish of St Sepulchre, where in Cow Lane, Smithfield, he both lived and ran a thriving business, building and hiring out coaches and wagons. He also became a prominent member of the Guild of Merchant Taylors, to which coach makers, with no guild of their own, were admitted on the grounds of community of interest, there being 'a close and obvious connection between tailors, who made trappings for funerals, plays and pageants, and the men who provided hearses for coffins' (Edmond, 'In search of John Webster', 1621). 
Though the school's records for the period are incomplete, John Webster the younger presumably attended Merchant Taylors' School, where he would have remained until the age of sixteen or seventeen -- between 1594 and 1598 -- after which it seems likely that he spent one or perhaps two years at the New Inn, one of the inns of chancery, in preparation for admission to the inns of court, since an entry in the records of the Middle Temple, dated 1 August 1598, notes the admission to the society of 'Magister Johannes Webster nuper de Novo Hospitio generosus, filius et heres apparens Johannis Webster de London generosi' ('Master John Webster, formerly of the New Inn, gentleman, son and heir apparent of John Webster of London, gentleman'). Webster may have intended practising law, but young men of means often lived and studied at one of the inns with no intention of doing so, and it is even possible that he was sent to the Middle Temple 'to qualify him for helping with large mercantile ventures, and for dealing with distinguished customers' (Bradbrook, 4). If so, then it may be assumed that subsequently John Webster the younger ran the office, while his father and brother Edward, also a qualified coach builder, ran the works. 
Such involvement in the family business would explain how Webster made a living, given his slowness of composition. It may also help to explain that slowness, if office duties occupied a good deal of his time. Henry Fitzgeffrey's famous jibe about 'Crabbed ('Websterio') / The 'Play-wright', 'Cart-wright'' (Fitzgeffrey, sig. F6'v'-F7'r') is generally assumed to be a cut at Webster's family connections, but may allude more precisely to the fact that the dramatist was himself actively engaged in the running of the business in Cow Lane. Also germane, perhaps, is Webster's decision (in June 1615) to claim membership of the Merchant Taylors by patrimony. This is generally assumed to be associated with the death of his father, at some time between April 1614 and February 1615. But there would be added point to the dramatist's application for membership of the Merchant Taylors were he actively involved in the coach building business. 
But whether or not Webster intended taking up the law, it seems, from the knowledge that he displays in his plays and the frequency with which they include trial scenes, that some time, at least, was spent in legal study. Acrid portraits of the lawyer in 'The White Devil', Contilupo and Sanitonella in 'The Devil's Law-Case', and the Orator in 'Appius and Virginia' make it at least possible that, like the dramatist John Marston, who was living (but not, it seems, studying) at the Middle Temple at the same period, the young Webster grew disenchanted with the law and turned to a less lucrative but more appealing profession. 
The first evidence of Webster's writing for the stage is an entry in Philip Henslowe's diary for 22 May 1602, noting a payment of $5 'unto antoney monday & mihell drayton webester & the Rest mydelton in earneste of A Boocke called 'sesers ffalle'' ('Henslowe Papers', 201). A week later a further $3 was paid to 'Thomas dickers drayton myddellton & Webester & mondaye in fulle paymente for ther playe called 'too shapes'' (ibid., 202). The entries are taken to refer to the same play, now lost. Written for the Admiral's Men, it presumably dealt with the life and death of Julius Caesar. 
Further evidence of Webster's dramatic activity comes from a series of entries in Henslowe's diary made later in the same year. In October a team comprising Henry Chettle, Thomas Dekker, Thomas Heywood, Webster, and 'mr smythe' were paid a total of $5 16's'. for two parts of 'A playe called 'Ladey Jane'' ('Henslowe Papers', 218), while in November Henslowe paid the same group (minus 'smythe') $7 for 'A playe called 'cryssmas comes but once A yeare'' (ibid., 219). Webster, it seems, was serving an apprenticeship as part of a team in which professionals like Dekker and Heywood took the lead. 'Caesar's Fall' and 'Christmas Comes but Once a Year' were presumably potboilers, but like the two parts of 'Lady Jane', which it is generally agreed survive in corrupted form as 'Sir Thomas Wyatt', served to initiate Webster into writing for the theatre. 
Regular entries in Henslowe's diary cease in March 1603, and there is no surviving evidence of Webster's dramatic activity until 1604, when his name is linked with that of Marston on the title-page of the third edition of the latter's 'The Malcontent'. What is meant by the words 'Augmented by Marston. With the additions played by the Kings Maiesties servants. Written by Ihon Webster' has long been debated, but it is now generally agreed, as by Hunter and by Lake (1981), that Webster wrote not only the induction but also additional material involving the clown, Passarello. Providing a comic scenario both for the delicate task of justifying the 'theft' of 'The Malcontent' from the boys' company, the Children of the Chapel Royal, by whom it was first played, and for explaining the reasons for the 'additions', Webster displays considerable skill. 
Later in 1604 there appeared 'Westward Ho', the first of two city comedies written by Dekker and Webster for the Children of Paul's. A racy account of London middle-class culture, it gave rise within months to a kindred piece by Marston, George Chapman, and Ben Jonson -- 'Eastward Ho' -- in the prologue to which the dramatists refer to 'that which is opposed to ours in title' as 'good, and better cannot be'. Both 'Westward Ho' and the more strongly satirical 'Northward Ho', written by Dekker and Webster in 1605, were highly popular and frequently performed. 
A gap of five years separates the publication in 1607 of the 'Ho' plays and 'Sir Thomas Wyatt' and the appearance of Webster's first tragedy, 'The White Devil'. Such a hiatus invites speculation, even though Webster admitted, in 'To the reader', that he 'was a long time in finishing this tragedy'. It is possible, of course, that Webster was working on his tragedy over the entire five years, but two other explanations for the silence are possible. One is domestic and financial, relating to his marriage, which may have forced him to put most of his time and energy into earning a living, perhaps in his father's business. The second, particularly intriguing, derives from the discovery in 1985 of the Melbourne manuscript, a 144-line fragment of a play on the subject of Alessandro de' Medici, duke of Florence -- a fragment of which Antony Hammond and Doreen del Vecchio consider Webster more likely to be the author than any other known Jacobean dramatist, and which they date, tentatively, early in the period 1605-30. It is thus possible that in the five years between 'Northward Ho' and 'The White Devil' Webster did some work, at least, on a tragedy which he either abandoned or never felt happy to acknowledge or offer for performance. 
While the details of Webster's literary activity between 1605 and 1612 are uncertain, significant moments in his personal life during those years can be established. His marriage, on 18 March 1606, took place not at St Sepulchre's, nor in the parish of his bride, Sara Peniall ('bap'. 1589), but at St Mary's in Islington, then a village outside London (M. Edmond, 'Webster's wife', 'TLS', 24 Oct 1980). The reason for this, and for marrying, by special licence, during Lent, is to be found in the fact that fewer than two months later Sara Webster gave birth to their first child, John, baptized on 8 May 1606 at St Dunstan-in-the-West, Fleet Street, 'out of Simon Penials sadler' (M. Eccles, 'John Webster', 'TLS', 21 Jan 1977; M. Edmond, 'John Webster', 'TLS', 11 March 1977). That other children were born to John and Sara Webster is clear from the will of Margery Pate, who in 1617 left 20's'. each to their son John and his sisters, Elizabeth and Sara, and 40's'. to 'the rest of Websters Children' (Edmond, 'In search of John Webster', 1622). 

'The White Devil' was first performed by Queen Anne's Men at the Red Bull in Clerkenwell, probably early in 1612. In an address 'To my loving, and Loved Friends and Fellowes, the Queenes Maiesties Servants', prefacing his 'If this be not a Good Play, the Devil is in it', Webster's friend and collaborator Dekker had wished the company a ''Faire' and 'Fortunate Day' to your 'Next New-Play' (for the 'Makers-sake' and your 'Owne')'. That the ''Next New-Play'' was 'The White Devil' is clear from Webster's echoing, in his address 'To the reader', Dekker's wish for a ''Full', 'Free', and 'Knowing Auditor''. The audience, however, was unappreciative, as is clear from Webster's acerbic comment that 'most of the people that come to that Play-house, resemble those ignorant asses (who visiting Stationers shoppes their use is not to inquire for good bookes, but new bookes)' ('The White Devil', 'To the reader'). Yet such a reception should not have been surprising, given the unsophisticated fare generally staged at the Red Bull (Gurr, 218). To an audience perhaps anticipating a more direct and literal handling of the diabolic, as by Dekker in 'If this be not a Good Play', the complexity and sophistication of 'The White Devil' would have come as a shock (A. Leggatt, 'The failure of 'The White Devil'', 'Jacobean Public Theatre', 1992, 123-9). 
As Hammond notes, Vittoria Corombona, Webster's 'white devil', 'marks a new departure in Jacobean drama, a heroine... thoroughly corrupt, but with whom it is impossible not to sympathize' (Hammond, 292). In a male-dominated world, she manipulates those around her (and particularly the infatuated Duke Brachiano) in order to attain, at least for a time, freedom of action. Her dominance, dramatically, is demonstrated in three great scenes, 'the Arraignment of Vittoria', in which she defends herself against charges of immorality (but manages to convince an audience, and many critics, that she is actually on trial for her life), the quarrel with Brachiano in the House of Convertites, to which she has been confined, and the last scene, where she faces death with immense and memorable courage. 
Sharing that death scene, equally memorably, is Vittoria's brother Flamineo, whose courage, wit, and resourcefulness match his sister's. The classic Jacobean malcontent, as Brachiano's secretary he promotes the liaison with Vittoria with an eye to his own advancement, murdering his brother-in-law to clear the way for Brachiano and Vittoria to marry. In doing so he displays a moral insouciance which, as his hopes of advancement fade after he murders his brother, is seen to mask uncertainty and a vestigial remorse. 
Webster probably began work on his second tragedy, 'The Duchess of Malfi', soon after the completion of 'The White Devil', but in November 1612 set the new play aside to compose 'A Monumental Column', commemorating the death, on the 6th of that month, of Henry, prince of Wales. Webster's elegy, published with those of Heywood and Cyril Tourneur, was entered in the Stationers' register on Christmas day 1612, and in it the poet excuses his 'worthlesse lines' on the grounds that 'I hasted, till I had this tribute paid / Unto his grave' (lines 310-11). Haste may also explain Webster's extensive reuse of material in his half-finished tragedy, but parallels -- as between the experiences of Bosola and Webster's account, in the elegy of: '

'Sorrow' that long had liv'd in banishment, 

Tug'd at the oare in 'Gallies'

(lines 162-3)' -- suggest that 'A Monumental Column' embodies views important to Webster and given utterance also in 'The Duchess of Malfi'. Webster evidently felt deeply the death of a prince of whom much was hoped, but his elegy remains, as Hammond remarks, 'obstinately earthbound: the brilliance and originality of Webster's imagery seemingly deserts him in the formal couplets of this poem' (Hammond, 293). 
By general consent Webster's masterpiece, 'The Duchess of Malfi' was first performed before 16 December 1614, when William Ostler, the first Antonio, died. Mindful, presumably, of the poor reception of 'The White Devil' at the Red Bull, Webster had offered his second tragedy to the King's Men. The outcome seems to have been a happy one, with 'The Duchess of Malfi' well received by the more sophisticated audience at the Blackfriars (Gurr, 220) and, later, at the second Globe. 
The Duchess herself is one of the greatest of tragic heroines, and her struggle, in the face of opposition from her brothers, Ferdinand and the Cardinal, to live a life true to her feelings is given memorable expression in verse as brilliant as that of 'The White Devil', but within a dramatic structure clearer and less convoluted than that of the earlier tragedy. Her brothers are also brilliantly portrayed, Ferdinand volatile, obsessive, and perhaps driven by an incestuous passion for his sister, and the Cardinal cold, ruthless, and concerned above all with family honour, while Bosola, their spy in the Duchess's household, is a compelling portrait of a man divided within himself, serving evil, yet drawn to admire and sympathize with the Duchess, whom he is employed to torment and finally to kill. 
The Duchess's death scene is the most celebrated in Webster, and one of the greatest in Jacobean drama. Separated from her husband, Antonio, and her children, tormented by madmen introduced by Ferdinand, and then tested to the limits of endurance by the disguised Bosola, the Duchess passes from pride of rank ('I am Duchesse of 'Malfy' still'; IV.ii, line 131) through stoic endurance to Christian humility, kneeling in acceptance of death, since '
heaven gates are not so highly arch'd 

As Princes pallaces, they that enter there 

Must go upon their knees 
(IV.ii, lines 219-21)' Such transcendence is followed by retribution as Ferdinand sinks into madness and the Cardinal into cowardice, while Bosola, who kills both, dies 'In a mist' (V.v, line 93), still a divided soul, unaware of how much he has done, wittingly or unwittingly, to assist the Duchess to reach spiritual peace. 
Webster's next surviving play, 'The Devil's Law-Case', was probably completed about 1618, but it seems that in the interval there appeared another, now lost, entitled 'Guise'. Lists of printed plays dating from 1656-71 disagree as to its genre, but Samuel Sheppard, writing 'c'.1650, speaks of Webster's 'three noble tragedies' (Forker, 460), and it seems safe to assume that the lost work was a tragedy. Since in his dedication of 'The Devil's Law-Case' to Sir Thomas Finch Webster himself linked 'Guise' with 'The White Devil' and 'The Duchess of Malfi', a work of considerable importance has presumably been lost. 
Early in 1614, a few months after the author's death in the Tower of London, there appeared one of Jacobean England's bestsellers, Sir Thomas Overbury's 'The Wife'. A second edition of the poem later that year was accompanied by twenty-two 'Characters' written ''by' [Overbury] 'himselfe and other' learned gentlemen his friends'. By the eleventh edition, in 1622, the twenty-two characters (brief generalized sketches of personality and occupational types) had become eighty-three, of which thirty-two, added in the sixth edition (1615), were by Webster. It is generally accepted, also, that Webster edited the sixth edition, as he may have edited the four which preceded it, and the suggestion (Forker, 122) that Webster perhaps acted as Overbury's literary executor and gathered together the original collection of characters, then circulating in manuscript, is plausible, since it is highly likely that Webster had known Overbury since their days at the Middle Temple, which the latter also entered in 1598. 
Some of Webster's characters, such as 'An Excellent Actor' and 'A Franklin', describe idealized figures, but the majority are, like 'An Ordinary Widow', satiric in tone. A similar tone pervades 'The Devil's Law-Case', written probably for performance by the Queen's Men at their new private theatre, the Cockpit in Drury Lane. A tragicomedy, in which theatricality and contrivance co-exist with near tragic elements, 'The Devil's Law-Case' has the characteristic Websterian bite, particularly in the figure of the merchant, Romelio, a bourgeois reworking of the malcontents of the two great tragedies, Flamineo and Bosola. The leading women in the play, Romelio's sister, Jolenta, and their mother, Leonora, lack the stature or magnetism of Vittoria and the Duchess, but there is power none the less in Leonora's admission to her waiting woman that: '
we have growne old together, 

As many Ladies and their women doe, 

With talking nothing, and with doing lesse: 

We have spent our life in that which least concernes life, 

Only in putting on our clothes 
(III.iii, lines 419-22)' 

The last of Webster's major plays, 'The Devil's Law-Case' is also the last, it seems, that he wrote unaided. Why he wrote only in collaboration in his later years is unclear, though in general the plays suggest fitful artistic inspiration. The first of the collaborative works, 'Anything for a Quiet Life', was written 'c'.1621. The title-page of the only edition (1662) of this city comedy attributes it to Thomas Middleton, but all the evidence, including computer-aided linguistic testing, points to collaboration and to Webster's authorship of perhaps 45 per cent of the play (D. J. Lake, 'The Canon of Thomas Middleton's Plays', 1975, 175-84; M. P. Jackson, 'Studies in Attribution: Middleton and Shakespeare', 1979, 142-4). Paid little attention by Middleton or Webster scholars, 'Anything for a Quiet Life' is an uneven work, with several strong scenes, but overall the weakest of Webster's late collaborations. 
1624 was a busy year for Webster. In the spring and early summer he was at work on 'A Cure for a Cuckold', which the master of the revels, Sir Henry Herbert, licensed on 26 July ('Control and Censorship', 153). Herbert gives Webster as sole author, but the only edition (1661) also credits William Rowley, while it may be that Heywood too had a hand in the tragicomedy (Gray; Jackson, 'Late Webster'). Webster wrote, it seems, the major scenes in the main plot, involving the couples, Lessingham and Clare and Annabel and Bonvile, and Rowley was responsible for the fine comic subplot, featuring the seaman, Compass, of what is generally agreed to be the best of Webster's late collaborative work. 
Later in 1624 Webster and Rowley joined Dekker and Ford in writing the now lost 'A Late Murther of the Son upon the Mother, or, Keep the Widow Waking'. The play dramatized two recent scandals: Nathaniel Tindall's murder of his mother and the tricking into matrimony of an elderly widow, Anne Elsdon, by an unscrupulous fortune-hunter. Mistress Elsdon was resident in the parish of St Sepulchre, and her son-in-law, Benjamin Garfield, the son of a friend and fellow councilman of John Webster the elder, instigated legal proceedings to prevent further performances of 'Keep the Widow Waking'. It is through legal records that the available knowledge of the play has been established (C. J. Sisson, 'Lost Plays of Shakespeare's Age', 1936, 80-124). 
Webster's other project in 1624 was the lord mayor's pageant, 'Monuments of Honour'. Written at the behest of the Merchant Taylors' Company to celebrate the election of one of its own, Sir John Gore, it is one of the most elaborate civic pageants of which records survive. The Merchant Taylors spent over $1000 on it, of which $270 was paid to 'Iohn Webster the Poet' and three others, John Terry, William Patten, and George Lovett, who built 'all the land & water shewes' (Forker, 9). A major feature of 'Monuments of Honour' is a 'show' called 'The Monument of Gratitude', which features and eulogizes the dead Henry, prince of Wales. 
The following year, 1625, brought yet another collaboration, with Webster joining (linguistic evidence suggests) with Ford and Philip Massinger to complete 'The Fair Maid of the Inn', a tragicomedy on which John Fletcher (perhaps with Massinger) was working before Fletcher's death of the plague in August, Webster writing nearly half of the play (C. Hoy, 'The shares of Fletcher and his collaborators in the Beaumont and Fletcher canon', 'Studies in Bibliography', 13, 1960, 100-08). And Webster seems again to have collaborated (here with Heywood) on what is generally agreed to be his last play, the tragedy 'Appius and Virginia', although the title-page of 1654 credits him alone; Webster was, however, responsible for well over half of the play (Jackson, 'John Webster and Thomas Heywood'). Treating the story of Virginius, the Roman general who killed his daughter Virginia to prevent her dishonour at the hands of the corrupt decemvir Appius, 'Appius and Virginia' exhibits a classical austerity, emphasizing the Roman virtues of duty and honour and the priority of public over private claims upon the individual. It also seems to provide a vehicle for criticism of the duke of Buckingham, the deeply unpopular favourite of King Charles I ('Works', 2). 
The dating of 'Appius and Virginia' is in doubt, despite general agreement that it is probably Webster's last work. Apparently topical references have been adduced in support of a date of about 1624-6. A plausible chronology of Webster's last plays is thus 1624 for 'A Cure for a Cuckold', 'Keep the Widow Waking', and 'Monuments of Honour', 1625 for 'The Fair Maid of the Inn', and 1626-7 for 'Appius and Virginia'. 
After the characters, Webster published no further non-dramatic prose, unless, as has been suggested (Forker, ix), he was the ''I. W.' Gent.' who wrote 'A Speedie Post' (1625), a collection of specimen letters 'for the helpe of such as are desirous to learne to write letters'. Nor, after 'A Monumental Column', did he produce significant non-dramatic verse, the most intriguing being verses in Latin and English accompanying an engraving of King James I and his family. In its original form this must predate the king's death in March 1625, but the only surviving copy is a version altered after October 1633 to take account of the birth of the first four of Charles I's children, as well as the death of James himself. Whatever their historical interest, however, the verses are undistinguished. Throughout his writing career, it is by his plays that John Webster must be judged. 
It is not known when Webster died. Heywood's reference to him in the past tense in 'Hierarchie of the Blessed Angels' (licensed 7 November 1634) suggests that he was by then dead. But since Dekker and Middleton, both dead, are referred to in the present tense, little weight can be attached to this. Nor is it clear what significance is to be attached to William Hemminges's facetious allusion, in 1632, to the refusal of 'webster's brother' to 'lend a Coach' for the funeral of Thomas Randolph's finger because: '
he swore thay all weare hired to Convey 

the Malfy dutches sadly on her way 
('William Hemminge's Elegy on Randolph's Finger', ed. C. G. Moore-Smith, 1923, 12)' Forker (p. 58) believes that such a jest would be inappropriate were the dramatist dead, and particularly if recently so, whereas Bradbrook (p. 194) takes it to imply that the dramatist was now dead and his brother Edward head of the family. 
Where John Webster died and where he was buried are also unknown. If he still lived in Nag's Head Lane, by St Sepulchre's Church, as he did shortly after his marriage, then he was presumably buried there, with his parents, brother, and sister-in-law. But an entry in the parish register of St James, Clerkenwell, stating that 'John Webster was buried' on 3 March 1638 may quite plausibly refer to the dramatist. For the parish of St James adjoined that of St Sepulchre, and it was there that both Dekker and Rowley were buried. There would be nothing surprising in Webster, in his last years, living close to old friends and colleagues. 
Of Webster's personality we know little, yet can infer a good deal, particularly from the dedications and addresses prefacing 'The White Devil', 'A Monumental Column', 'The Devil's Law-Case', and 'Monuments of Honour'. The impression they create is of a man assertive of his own worth yet thin-skinned and sensitive to criticism. It is a personality recognizable, travestied, in Fitzgeffrey's malicious portrait of 'Crabbed ('Websterio') / The 'Play-wright', 'Cart-wright'', a portrait which lampoons Webster's slowness in composition: '
Was ever man so mangl'd with a Poem? 

See how he drawes his mouth awry of late, 

How he scrubs: wrings his wrests: scratches his Pate 

' and as a critic: '
Heer's not a word 'cursively' I have 'Writ', 

But hee'l 'Industriously' examine it. 

And in some 12. monthes hence (or there 'about') 

Set in a shamefull sheete, my errors 'out'. 

But what care I it 'will' be so obscure, 

That none shall understand him (I am sure.) 
(Fitzgeffrey, sig. F6'v'-F7'r')' Other aspects of his personality, however, belie the epithet 'crabbed'. There is evidence, for instance, of his good relationship with the companies which performed his plays in his praise of the cast of 'The White Devil', and particularly Richard Perkins, almost certainly the first Flamineo, and in his inclusion of a cast list in the 1623 quarto of 'The Duchess of Malfi' (both 'firsts' by an English dramatist). Equally, he is generous, in the prefatory address to 'The White Devil', in his praise of his fellows Chapman, Jonson, Francis Beaumont, Fletcher, Shakespeare, Heywood, and Dekker, and he worked harmoniously, so far as can be established, with a range of dramatists from the first rate, such as Middleton and Ford, to the mediocre, like Munday and Chettle. Moreover, as the dedicatory poems to 'The Duchess of Malfi' attest, he enjoyed the friendship and esteem of such men as Middleton, Ford, and Rowley. 
Of the social circles in which Webster moved next to nothing is known, though some details can be inferred. Through his family he would have had a wide range of acquaintance, at least, among the wealthier citizens of London, while his sojourn at the inns of court would have brought him into contact with lawyers and writers such as Marston and Overbury. Among fellow dramatists, he seems to have maintained the longest and closest relationships with Heywood and with Dekker, to whom in 1613 John Webster the elder lent $40, a sum which the chronically insolvent Dekker had difficulty in repaying. With Shakespeare, however, as with Chapman, Jonson, Beaumont, and Fletcher, Webster seems, despite his approbation, to have had little contact, this perhaps because, 'The Duchess of Malfi' apart, he worked almost exclusively with Queen Anne's Men rather than the King's Men. 
Critically, Webster has been the centre of disagreement more profound than that over any of his fellow dramatists, with his status as a great poet conceded but his dramaturgy and his vision of life fiercely criticized (T. S. Eliot, 'Collected Essays', 1951, 117, describing him as 'an interesting example of a very great literary and dramatic genius directed towards chaos') and equally fiercely defended. After the 1960s, however, the nature of the debate changed, the issue no longer being whether Webster had a coherent world vision but what that vision might be, and equally, acknowledging their existence, what the structural principles underlying Webster's two great tragedies are. In the 1960s there was a tendency to see Webster as a proto-existentialist, but since then he has been viewed in more strictly Jacobean terms, debate about his world vision centring on whether he is a providentialist, albeit with doubts and anxieties (P. B. Murray, 'A Study of John Webster', 1969; T. McAlindon, 'English Renaissance Tragedy', 1986), or a Renaissance sceptic, interrogating the traditional providential view of the world (J. Dollimore, 'Radical Tragedy', 1984). Likewise, analysis of a range of features in 'The White Devil' and 'The Duchess of Malfi' from imagery to emblems and from symbolism to staging has revealed that structures earlier decried as 'a gothic aggregation' (J. R. Brown, in Hunter and Hunter, 241) or 'broken-backed' (W. Archer, in Hunter and Hunter, 95) are organized according to principles just as rigorous as those governing the well-made play, but involving circularity, parallelism, and repetition rather than a strictly linear and narrative-based development ('Works', ed. Gunby and others, 1.57-81, 381-407; C. Luckyj, 'A Winter's Snake', 1989). Seminal in respect of this revised understanding is I.-S. Ekeblad's article 'The 'impure art' of John Webster' ('Review of English Studies', 9, 1958, 253-67). 
The greatly increased critical attention devoted to Webster has been matched (indeed stimulated) by a greatly increased number of productions of his two great tragedies. Highly acclaimed London productions of 'The Duchess of Malfi' (1945) and 'The White Devil' (1947) marked the beginning of regular commercial exposure. Great actors such as Robert Helpman, John Gielgud, Eric Porter, Bob Hoskins, and Ian McKellen have brought distinction to the roles of Ferdinand, Bosola, and Flamineo, but the most memorable performances have on the whole been by the great women actors, including Peggy Ashcroft, Margaret Rawlings, Glenda Jackson, Helen Mirren, Judi Dench, Eileen Atkins, Juliet Stevenson, and Harriet Walter, who have played the Duchess and Vittoria. In general, indeed, productions have been measured by the success of the female leads, reinforcing on the stage the impression which 'The White Devil' and 'The Duchess of Malfi' create in the study: that the tragedies revolve around the two female figures after whom they are named. 
'Webster was much possessed by death'; so, famously, wrote T. S. Eliot in 'Whispers of Immortality' ('Collected Poems, 1909-62', 1963, 55). So indeed he was, and the death scenes of Vittoria and her brother Flamineo and of the Duchess are intensely moving. But Webster was much possessed also by life, and by what Catherine Belsey has described as 'the problem of how to survive in a corrupt world' ('Emblem and antithesis in 'The Duchess of Malfi'', 'Renaissance Drama', 11, 1980, 133). His vision of that world and the struggle to live a life of integrity within it matures and mellows as he moves from the almost unrelieved darkness of 'The White Devil', where Vittoria, Flamineo, and her lover, Brachiano, perish without ever emerging from the mist which is Webster's standard metaphor for moral and spiritual disorientation, through 'The Duchess of Malfi', where the darkness which envelops Bosola and the Duchess's brothers is relieved by her progression from pride to humility and from despair to faith, to 'The Devil's Law-Case', where the plots of Romelio and his mother Leonora are foiled and they are rescued from evil by the efforts of the law (in the person of Ariosto) and the church (the Capuchin), to share in the play's (just) comic outcome. 
Compared with those of contemporaries such as Shakespeare, Middleton, Fletcher, and Massinger, Webster's dramatic output is small. Of the fifteen or so plays in which he had a hand, four are lost, and a fifth -- the Melbourne manuscript, if his -- is a fragment, while a further seven are collaborative. And though of these four (the two 'Ho' plays, 'A Cure for a Cuckold', and 'Appius and Virginia') deserve better than their long-standing stage neglect, it is by the two great tragedies and 'The Devil's Law-Case' that Webster must ultimately be judged. The last of these has gained critical attention but lacks stage exposure, there having been only three commercial productions since the seventeenth century. But with 'The White Devil' and 'The Duchess of Malfi' firmly established in the commercial repertory, Webster's reputation as the greatest English tragic writer for the stage after Shakespeare seems assured. The famous lines in these tragedies -- 'I am Duchesse of 'Malfy' still', 'Cover her face: Mine eyes dazell: she di'd yong' ('The Duchess of Malfi', IV.ii, line 251), and '
My soule, like to a ship in a blacke storme, 

Is driven I know not whither 
('The White Devil', V.vi, lines 243-4)' -- which so caught the imagination of nineteenth-century critics like Lamb and Swinburne, resonate still, but not in isolation. Rather, they are to be seen as moments of transcendence in highly subtle and coherent works of art, in which all the resources of poetic drama are directed towards the embodiment of a complex and powerful vision of human existence. 


@@@@@


doc= 28944


Webster, John (1611-1682), schoolmaster and polemicist, was born on 3 February 1611 at Thornton on the Hill in the parish of Coxwold, Yorkshire, the son of Edward Webster. Claims that he was a student at Cambridge appear to be without foundation. In the early 1630s he studied chemistry under the Hungarian Johannes Banfi Hunyades (1576-1646), chemist to the earl of Pembroke, living in Whitechapel. Chemistry and medicine, together with teaching, were to be his lifelong occupations. In 1632 he was ordained as a minister by Thomas Morton, bishop of Durham, and was appointed curate to the parish of Kildwick, near Skipton, in Yorkshire. In 1637 Webster was deprived of his living, possibly for his sympathies with the Grindletonians, a radical sect which originated in his part of the Yorkshire dales. As curate of Kildwick, he detected a case of imposture connected with accusations of witchcraft. 
In 1643 Webster was appointed master of the grammar school of Clitheroe and from 1660 to 1662 served as governor in the same school. He left his post for two periods: in 1647, when he was intruded as minister in the village of Mitton, apparently with no income from the parish, and in 1648, when he served as surgeon in the parliamentary regiment of Colonel Shuttleworth. In 1649 he was admitted as a Clitheroe burgess and, with the exception of a short stay in London in 1653, he spent the rest of his life at Clitheroe. 
Webster's importance rests on his participation in the debates concerning the reconstruction of religious and social life during the Commonwealth. In sermons delivered in London at All Hallows, Lombard Street, and at Whitehall, in June 1653, he attacked the idea of a professional clergy, claiming that ministers were not created by the university or by the civil magistrate, whose powers in spiritual affairs he firmly opposed. A member of no sect, he advocated the right of free interpretation of the scriptures and unambiguously denied that human learning could have any role in ensuring grace and redemption. In his sermons he dealt with two themes which were to be developed in his subsequent works, the criticism of traditional learning and the view that the Devil is no physical agent. He maintained that the biblical references to the Devil are to be interpreted as a synonym of the depraved condition of the human soul. 
In October 1653, together with William Erbery (whose works he edited in 1658), and John Cardell, who acted as moderator, Webster took part in a dispute at All Hallows on the question of who ordered ministers. The opposite side comprised a Presbyterian, an Independent, and a Baptist. According to the report published by the 'Mercurius Politicus' of 13-20 October 1653, the dispute was particularly lively, but Webster found this report false and somewhat offensive. The anonymous author of the report had stated that Webster and his associates wanted to 'knock down Learning and the Ministry'. Webster replied that he was not 'an enemy to humane, or acquired learning, as it is considered in natural, civil, artificial, or moral respect, but as it is considered in a theological respect' ('The Picture of Mercurius Politicus', 1653, 6). Religious toleration and opposition to an established state-supported church are reasserted in 'The Saints Guide' and in 'The Judgement Set, and the Bookes Opened' (1654), the latter being a collection of his sermons. His views were attacked in G. W[ither]., 'The Modern States-Man' (1654), a work advocating the benefits of human learning for the understanding of the sacred text. 
The reform of learning is the topic of Webster's controversial 'Academiarum examen' (1654), which was dedicated to Major-General John Lambert, to whom he had sent a draft of the work a few years before its publication. In the dedicatory epistle (dated 21 October 1653) he attacked Episcopalians, Presbyterians, and Independents alike, and declared that he was no recipient of tithes or state payment. He went on to launch a fierce attack on the English universities, both for their claim to provide the training for the clergy and for their scholastic curricula. He put forward his own plan, which was generally Baconian in its inspiration and aims, but also relied on a wide spectrum of more recent philosophical writings. 
The reformed universities, according to Webster, had to promote experimental and utilitarian learning, which should include alchemy and natural magic, which he vindicated against the impostors' misuse. His philosophical views, as expressed in his project of reform, are eclectic: besides Baconianism and Helmontian iatrochemistry, he also supported the theosophy of Fludd and Boehme, and the atomism of Digby and Gassendi. Along with Van Helmont, he attacked the Aristotelians' overestimate of human reason and stressed the role of divine illumination as the foundation of true learning. Although he himself knew and taught Hebrew and Greek, he dismissed the study of languages as useless to the understanding of the scriptures, which, he claimed, could only be achieved by the aid of the Spirit of God. On the other hand, he maintained that the search for natural languages and the study of the Paracelsian doctrine of signatures were to be included in the reformed curricula. 

'Academiarum examen' aroused vehement reaction from the Oxford academics John Wilkins and Seth Ward, and from the Presbyterian writer Thomas Hall. Ward published his reply to Webster, 'Vindiciae academiarum' (1654), anonymously, but the introduction was written by Wilkins. According to Wilkins and Ward, Webster was ignorant both of the sciences he wanted to promote, and of the actual state of the universities he wanted to reform. The universities, they maintained, were no longer dominated by Aristotelianism, but had already adopted the new experimental philosophy. In addition, they criticized Webster for having contaminated the 'sound' experimental philosophy with alchemy, astrology, cabbala, Rosicrucianism, and magic. Wilkins also engaged himself in a defence of academic teaching for the training of ministers. Hall, in his 'Histrio-Mastix: a Whip for Webster' (1654), denounced Webster (whom he mistook for the homonymous dramatist) as a leveller, a familist, and a magician. 
Although he was licensed as a medical practitioner by the archbishop of York in 1661, Webster was already successfully practising medicine in the early 1650s. In 1654 he was paid the considerable sum of $42 by a Henry Waite for a three-year medical apprenticeship to him. Webster's life at Clitheroe was rather prosperous. He had acquired substantial property, much of it land sequestered from royalists. He was able to purchase apparatus for his chemical investigations, and a substantial number of books, which, at the time of his death, reached approximately 1660 volumes. A somewhat litigious man, he was engaged in disputes and conflicts for many years. In 1654 he had a dispute with Thomas Jolly, an Independent minister. On 2 November 1657 Webster appealed to John Lambert for assistance in a suit brought against him by one Robert Inman, who was claiming compensation for the loss of an animal requisitioned by Webster during the second civil war. In 1658, as a result of a judicial inquiry, he was arrested and had his books and papers confiscated. 
In 1657 Webster became in-bailiff of Clitheroe, a post he held from October 1657 to October 1659, then in 1665 and again in 1675. It is apparent that his appointment as a bailiff was opposed by, among others, Roger Keynon, Thomas Alston, and Edmund Robinson, on the grounds that Webster was guilty of political and legal abuses, heretic opinions, and lax morals. 
Webster's attacks on the state church and its clergy, on ceremonies, and on the universities which trained the clergy, had much in common with the Quakers' views. An undated letter in Friends' House in London shows that Thomas Lowson tried to persuade Webster to join the Quakers. However, in the late 1650s disillusionment and disappointment over the fate of the English revolution seemed to prevail in Webster's mind. In his introduction to the 'Testimony of William Erbery' (1658) he expressed his pessimistic view along these lines: 'the restitution of all things is yet afarr off; the Saints running from Mountain to Hill, is rather an exchange of one bondage for another then any reall redemption from the Ancient yoke'. 
After the Restoration, Webster's behaviour seems to have been inspired by loyalty to the new regime. In 1661 he voted for Ambrose Pudsay, the royalist candidate to the Cavalier Parliament. His appointment as magistrate for Clitheroe in 1665 was possible because he conformed to the restored church. In the dedicatory epistle of his 'Metallographia' (addressed to Prince Rupert) he referred to the Royal Society as 'one of the happy fruits of His Majesties blessed and miraculous Restoration' ('Metallographia', 1671). In the 'Displaying of Supposed Witchcraft' (1677) he styled the Quakers as fanatics and rebuked those who pretended to be guided by the Spirit in their own interpretations of the scriptures. It is apparent that in the 1670s his religious views underwent a substantial change and his previous radicalism was abandoned. None the less, he restated his opposition to the notion that human reason could be of some help in interpreting the scriptures. 
Webster married, on 6 November 1667, Elizabeth ('b'. 1627), daughter of Roger Aspinall of Clitheroe. They had no children. His wife survived him and was married to the Revd William Bankes of Mitton for twenty years. Webster's life at Clitheroe was isolated, though not entirely separated from the world of learning. He was able to pursue his chemical and mineralogical studies and was aware of the latest news in science and philosophy both in England and on the continent. He corresponded with a number of natural philosophers and is very likely to have been responsible for 'The Last Will and Testament of Basil Valentine', an English translation which was published in 1670. 

'The Metallographia, or, An History of Metals' is Webster's major scientific achievement. (The book was dated 1671, though it may have been published during the previous two years.) As attested by internal evidence, the work, containing references to a huge volume of alchemical, chemical, and mineralogical literature, was completed after 1666. Webster's professed end was that of stimulating metallurgical knowledge and the exploitation of mines in England. The work, however, deals with a wide range of topics, including a vindication of the ancient origins of alchemical knowledge, the generation of metals, their use in medicine and their transmutation. Helmontian chemical views are strictly linked with the corpuscular theory of matter, which is mainly based on the works of Robert Boyle. The 'Metallographia' had a noticeable impact on the world of learning. It was reviewed in the 'Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society' of 1670 and in the 'Journal des Scavans' of 1678. John Beale praised it in a letter to Henry Oldenburg of January 1671, while D. G. Morhof ('De metallorum transmutatione', 1673) dismissed it as scarcely original. Webster's proficiency in chemistry was extolled by a Durham schoolmaster, Peter Nelson, in a letter to Oldenburg of 25 March 1671, where he spoke of him as 'a man of more than ordinary acuteness and very fit for your Correspondence' ('Correspondence of Henry Oldenburg', 7.535). With a few exceptions, historians now recognize Webster's 'Metallographia' as a valuable contribution to seventeenth-century science of metals. 
Webster's last work was 'The Displaying of Supposed Witchcraft' (1677), a criticism of the traditional demonology. It is apparent that material for it had been collected for several decades and the work was completed by 1674, but initially it failed to gain an imprimatur, apparently because of opposition from the ecclesiastical authorities. Webster had asked for the support of his friend and correspondent Martin Lister, to whom he sent a draft of the work in 1674. He also sent a copy to the Royal Society, which was forwarded by Oldenburg to Hooke, who read it on 19 March 1675. In the event, 'The Displaying of Supposed Witchcraft' was published in 1677 with the imprimatur of the society's vice-president, Sir Jonas Moore, dated 29 June 1676, and was dedicated to the justices of the peace in the West Riding of Yorkshire. The work, which opens with a vindication of freedom in philosophical matters, is aimed at answering the arguments in favour of the existence of witchcraft held by Meric Casaubon and by Joseph Glanvill. Although he denied that demons have a pure spiritual nature, Webster stated that men can only have mental, not physical, contact with the Devil. He maintains that what is commonly taken as a sign of possession is to be imputed to melancholy, imposture, or ignorance. Having denied the Devil's capacity to intervene in the natural world, Webster engages in a vindication of natural magic, which is largely indebted to Van Helmont's arguments. 'The Displaying of Supposed Witchcraft' was attacked by Glanvill and by Henry More ('Sadducismus triumphatus... with a Letter of Dr. H. More', 1681), who asserted the real existence of witches. Webster's demonological views were also attacked by Benjamin Camfield, a Leicester cleric, who accused him of denying the existence of spiritual substances ('A Theological Discourse... also an Appendix Containing some Reflexions upon Mr. Websters Displaying...', 1678). 
Webster died at Clitheroe on 18 June 1682 and was buried there on 21 June 1682. In his will, which he made in January 1680, he left his goods to his wife, Elizabeth, and after her death to his nephews Edward Webster, John Webster, and Richard Webster, and 40's'. to the poor of Grindleton. His will mentions chirurgical and chemical instruments, as well as his library. An epitaph written by himself is in the parish church of Clitheroe. 


@@@@@


doc= 28945


Webster, Thomas (1772-1844), geologist, was born on 11 February 1772, probably in Kirkwall, Orkney, the only son of Alexander Webster (died 'c'.1780) and his wife, Mary ('b'. 1733), daughter of Thomas Baikie, chief Presbyterian minister in Kirkwall, and his third wife, Elizabeth Traill. A natural artist, he was educated at Kirkwall grammar school and by private tutors, and then, from 1785 to about 1789, attended lectures at Aberdeen University. There he assisted Professor Patrick Copland (1749-1822), a popularizer of science. After two years as a tutor in Dublin, he received private architectural training in London and from October 1793 studied architecture, art, and draughtsmanship at the Royal Academy. 
While working as an architect Webster taught building workers scientific principles relevant to their trade. Count Rumford, hearing of this, asked him to establish an artisans' school in the newly founded Royal Institution, to which Webster agreed, hoping to further his career. From 14 September 1799 until 26 April 1802, as the poorly paid clerk of works and clerk, he supervised the building work, designed and built the lecture theatre and chemistry laboratory, assisted the lecturers, and developed Rumford's theories concerning the heating, ventilation, and lighting of buildings. However, for political reasons, his widely praised technical school, begun in 1801, was soon closed. Rather than returning to architecture, Webster chose the more independent and then lucrative occupation of landscape painting in watercolours. Additionally he resumed teaching and compiled introductory textbooks. His revised and enlarged edition of J. Imison's 'Elements of Science and Art' (1804) ran to further revised editions (1808, 1822). Also during this period, he assisted with geological field sketches and illustrations, and realized that geology offered scope for his accomplishments. 
During 1811-13, on a geological commission in the Isle of Wight and Dorset for Henry Charles Englefield (1752-1822), Webster made the first geological map of the region and elucidated the Mesozoic-Tertiary stratigraphy and structural geology of the Hampshire and London basins. His major paper on the Freshwater formations in the Isle of Wight (1814), published in the 'Transactions of the Geological Society', and his earlier-written illustrated descriptive letters in Englefield's 'Picturesque Beauties of the Isle of Wight' (1816) were highly regarded and established his geological career. Seven further papers followed (1821-9), including four on the Mesozoic stratigraphy of southern England. 
Webster was an early member (1809), later fellow, of the Geological Society. From 1812 until 1827 he was its part-time (in reality, full-time) curator, librarian, and draughtsman; he was later also house secretary. Additionally he was draughtsman for the society's 'Geological map of England and Wales' (1820). From July 1827, after failing to gain improved remuneration and terms of employment, he lived by public lecturing on geology, consultancy work, geological illustration, and commissioned writing, including compilation of 'An Encyclopaedia of Domestic Economy' (1844). 
From 1841 Webster was professor of geology at University College, London. The income from his post was minimal and, by then in poor health, he existed mainly on the charity of geological colleagues and an annual state pension of $50 for services to geology. He died of bronchitis, 'apparently in straitened circumstances' ('GM'), on 26 December 1844 at his lodgings at 41 Middlesex Street (now Maple Street), St Marylebone; he was buried at Highgate cemetery on 2 January 1845. Although at his death Webster was still highly regarded as a geologist, his reputation was based largely on his earliest research. Significantly this was funded by a patron; thereafter lack of the means and time to pursue further major research prevented him from building on his early achievement and denied him a continuing role in the elucidation of British geology. 


@@@@@


doc= 28946


Webster, Thomas (1810-1875), barrister, was born in Oakington, Cambridgeshire, on 16 October 1810, the eldest son of Thomas Webster, vicar of Oakington. From Charterhouse he proceeded to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA as fourteenth wrangler in 1832 and MA in 1835. He was secretary to the Institution of Civil Engineers from 1837 to 1839 and honorary secretary until 1841. In that year he was called to the bar at Lincoln's Inn, and joined the northern circuit. 
Webster soon acquired a large practice in connection with scientific cases, and for many years was recognized as a leading authority on patent law. His 'Reports and Notes of Cases on Letters Patent for Inventions' (1844) was for many years the chief textbook on the subject. It was largely due to his efforts that the 'Patent Law Amendment Act' of 1852 was passed, an act by which numerous abuses that had grown up round the ancient system of granting patents were swept away and the cost of a patent was greatly reduced. 
Webster had also a considerable parliamentary practice. He was one of the counsel engaged for Birkenhead in contests respecting the Liverpool and Mersey docks and published two texts which became standard works of reference concerning the Mersey. He was for long an active member of the governing body of the Society of Arts. He was in the chair at the meeting of the society in 1845 when the first proposal was made for holding the Great Exhibition of 1851, and formed one of the first committee appointed to organize it. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1847, and in 1865 he was appointed one of her majesty's counsel. 
Webster was twice married: first in 1839 to Elizabeth (died 1848), eldest daughter of Richard Calthrop of Swineshead Abbey, Lincolnshire; and second to Mary Frances, daughter of Joseph Cookworthy MD of Plymouth. With his first wife he had three sons and two daughters; with his second wife he had one son and one daughter. His second son was Richard Everard Webster, first Viscount Alverstone, Conservative attorney-general and lord chief justice. 
Webster died at his London home, 97 Ladbroke Road, Notting Hill, on 3 June 1875. 


@@@@@


doc= 28947


Webster, Thomas (1800-1886), genre painter, was born on 20 March 1800 in Ranelagh Street, Pimlico, London, the son of a member of George III's household. In his youth he was trained as a chorister at St George's Chapel, Windsor, and at the Chapel Royal, St James's, London, but he preferred art to music and entered the Royal Academy Schools in 1821, where he won a gold medal in 1825. In the course of a long and successful career he exhibited eighty-three works at the Royal Academy (1823-79), thirty-nine at the British Institution (1824-44), and eight at the Society of British Artists (1825-34). He was elected an ARA in 1840 and an RA in 1846. He also contributed illustrations to the Etching Club's 'Deserted Village' (1841), 'Songs of Shakespeare' (1843), and 'Etch'd Thoughts' (1844). His genre paintings were very popular and reached a wide general public in the form of steel-engravings. 
Although his earliest exhibited paintings were portraits, such as 'Mr Robinson and Family' (exh. RA, 1823), Webster soon received acclaim for a scene of playful children, 'Rebels Shooting a Prisoner' (exh. Society of British Artists, 1827). The following year he continued the amusing narrative with 'Rebels Defeated' (exh. Society of British Artists, 1828). Such pendants became an especially popular feature of his career, as seen, for example, in 'Going into School' and 'Coming out of School' (both exh. RA, 1836), 'Going to the Fair' and 'Returning from the Fair' (both exh. British Institution, 1838; Victoria and Albert Museum, London), and 'The Frown' and 'The Joke, or, 'The Smile'' (both exh. RA, 1841; Guildhall Art Gallery, London). The latter were especially popular 'before and after' scenes which depicted a row of rustic schoolboys exchanging miserable expressions for giggling demeanours in companion paintings. Webster's production was characterized by such anecdotal childhood scenes, which were skilfully composed, highly detailed, and informed with a keen observation of human nature. Popular literature was often the inspiration. Lines from Oliver Goldsmith's 'Deserted Village' accompanied 'The Frown' and 'The Joke'; other works made reference to Charles Dickens, Charles Lamb, Shakespeare, William Shenstone, or Wordsworth. Indeed, a small painting for Dickens illustrating a school scene in his 'Nicholas Nickleby', entitled 'The Interior Economy of Dotheboys Hall' (exh. 1848; Fogg Art Museum, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts), earned Webster the nickname 'Do-the-Boys' Webster. One of his most famous paintings, 'A Village Choir' (exh. RA, 1847; Victoria and Albert Museum, London), was exhibited with a lengthy quotation from Washington Irving's 'The Sketch Book' (1820): it depicted an array of rustic villagers of different classes, genders, and ages gathered together in a church choir, singing and playing assorted musical instruments with great gusto and earnestness. It was just this kind of reassuring image of tranquil and contented country life, unruffled by class or economic divisions, which pleased the Victorian public by ignoring the real transformations overtaking the newly industrialized and increasingly urban society. Even contemporaries recognized the fictive nature of Webster's idyllic scenes: a writer in the 'Art Journal' in 1855 described 'Good Night' (exh. RA, 1846; City of Bristol Museum and Art Gallery) as: 'a subject representing the interior of a rural cottage, occupied by the family of an honest yeoman, one of the class... among the extinct races, a victim to the Moloch of wealth; but we cannot stop to lament his decay, -- besides, we should get political, and perhaps angry, which would be out of place and unseemly here. ('Art Journal', 295)' Webster's works were not 'unseemly', as Richard Muther explained: 'Webster's rustics, children, and schoolmasters are the citizens of an ideal planet... [where] all of the agricultural labourers were quite content with their lot. No one ever quarreled with his landlord, or sat in a public-house and let his family starve. (Muther, 2.88)' Although the children were occasionally unruly, they displayed only true British pluck, the vital spirit necessary for building the British empire. As the 'Art Union' declared in 1839 with regard to the boys in Webster's 'Football' (exh. RA, 1839), their 'spirit of rivalry' would later be brought to bear on 'more important purposes in after life' ('Art Union', 69-70). 
William Mulready's earlier paintings of pugnacious boys had garnered similar comments and served as models for Webster's works. For years (1833-56) the two artists lived near each other in London in the suburban area of Kensington and Bayswater: Webster on The Mall, Kensington Gravel Pits, and Mulready just a short distance away. This semi-rural neighbourhood provided a suitable setting for their paintings. Both looked back to Dutch and Flemish seventeenth-century examples by David Teniers, Jan Steen, and Adriaen van Ostade -- though their work was cleansed of what was perceived as the earlier artists' often vulgar foreign tone. Indeed, it was the sense that Webster's subjects were 'indigenous to the English soil' ('Art Journal', 1855, 293) which ensured their immense popularity. His paintings were purchased by a new breed of middle-class collector (Elhanan Bicknell, John Chapman, Joseph Gillott, John Sheepshanks, Robert Vernon, and William Wells, among others) who brought a nationalistic fervour to their patronage of contemporary British art. 
In 1857 Webster moved to the village of Cranbrook, Kent, and became the informal leader of the Cranbrook colony, a group of younger artists who shared his interest in scenes of rural life and childhood. Although he sent fewer paintings to the London exhibitions in later years (he became an honorary retired RA in 1876), their subjects and style remained virtually unchanged. His long and satisfactory life was nicely summed up in the lines attached to his late self-portrait (exh. RA, 1878): 'As the sweet afterglow lights up the western skies, so is my evening bright with fond memories'. His first wife, Betsy, died on 27 January 1859 at the age of fifty-nine; another spouse, Ellen, survived him. Thomas Webster died on 23 September 1886 at Cranbrook; a memorial to him by the sculptor Hamo Thornycroft was erected in St Dunstan's Church in Cranbrook. The largest collection of his works is in the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 28948


Webster, William (1689-1758), Church of England clergyman and theological writer, was born at Cove in Suffolk in December 1689, the son of Richard Webster ('bur'. 1722) and his wife, Jane, daughter of Anthony Sparrow (1612-1685), bishop of Norwich. His father was a nonjuring clergyman, who afterwards submitted and became vicar of Poslingford in Suffolk. Webster was educated at school in Beccles under Mr Leeds, and was admitted to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, on 2 March 1708. He graduated BA in 1712, MA in 1716, and DD in 1732. He was ordained deacon on 24 June 1713 as curate of Depden in Suffolk, and priest on 26 February 1716 as curate of St Dunstan-in-the-West, London. He edited the manuscript life of General Monck written by Thomas Skinner (1629/30-1679) and published it in 1723 with his own preface vindicating Monck's character. He followed this with 'The Clergy's Right of Maintenance Vindicated from Scripture and Reason' (1726; 2nd edn, 1727), and two translations of French works: Louis Maimbourg's history of Arianism, and Richard Simon's edition of the 'New Testament'. 
After leaving St Dunstan's in 1731, Webster was appointed in August 1732 to the curacy of St Clement Eastcheap, and in February 1732 was presented to the rectory of Depden. On 16 December 1732, under the pseudonym of 'Richard Hooker of the Inner Temple', he began to edit a periodical entitled the 'Weekly Miscellany', which continued until 27 June 1741. Nicknamed 'Old Mother Hooker's Journal', the 'Miscellany' was 'a lively mouthpiece' for high-churchmen and nonjurors and it 'poured out defiant Jeremiads against the spirit of the age' (Walsh and Taylor, 33). It attracted most attention for the attacks made in its columns on William Warburton's 'Divine Legation of Moses'. Webster's contributions to the controversy were republished under the title of 'Remarks on the Divine Legation' [1739]. They earned him a place in Alexander Pope's 'Dunciad', in a passage (bk 2, l. 258) in which Webster was coupled with George Whitefield, who had also criticized Warburton. 
In 1740 Webster published a pamphlet on the woollen manufactory based on information supplied by a merchant in the trade, and entitled 'The Consequences of Trade to the Wealth and Strength of any Nation, by a Draper of London'. It sold well and went into a fifth edition in 1741, the same year as Webster wrote a refutation of his own arguments, published under the pseudonym Andrew Freeport as 'The Draper Confuted'. 
In July 1740 Webster was instituted to the vicarages of Ware and Thundridge and South Mimms in Hertfordshire, which he retained until his death, resigning his rectory and curacy. In later life he fell into considerable poverty, and after vainly petitioning the archbishops and bishops for charity and publishing a treatise on church preferment, he appealed to the public in 'A Plain Narrative of Facts, or, The Author's Case Fairly and Candidly Stated' (1758). 
Webster was a voluminous writer, chiefly on theological subjects, and published a volume of tracts, sermons, and addresses in 1745. His 'Casuistical Essay on Anger and Forgiveness' (1750) won compliments from Christopher Smart in his seventh ode. Unmarried, Webster died at Ware on 4 December 1758. 


@@@@@


doc= 28949


Weckherlin, Georg Rudolph (1584-1653), government official and poet, was born in Stuttgart on 15 September 1584, the fifth of eleven children, and one of ten sons of Johannes Weckherlin the younger (died 1610), a bureaucrat in the service of Baden-Wurttemberg, and his wife, Ursula Sadeler. The family were deeply pious Lutherans. Weckherlin was counted as a gentleman in a Westminster census of 1635 and in April 1639 was granted English arms on the basis of his family's armigerous status in Stuttgart. Educated at the Padagogium zu Stuttgart, in 1599 he matriculated in the faculty of law at the University of Tubingen. He studied languages at both school and university, where his studies were inclined more toward politics than the finer points of the law. 
By 1606 Weckherlin was employed in a Wurttemberg embassy to France, and between 1607 and 1615 spent about three years in diplomatic missions to England. During these trips he met Elizabeth (died 1645), daughter of Francis Raworth, town clerk of Dover. They were married in England on 13 September 1616 and then travelled to Wurttemberg, where Elizabeth soon gave birth to their two children, Ralph and Elizabeth. Weckherlin and both children were naturalized English citizens in 1630 by letters patent. 
In 1616 Weckherlin was appointed secretary interpreter and court historiographer to the duke of Wurttemberg. In the same year he participated in arranging the festivities associated with the baptism of the duke's eldest son, and published a description of the events, in German, blending verse with prose. He followed this with an English version, 'Triumphall Shews Set Forth Lately in Stutgart' (1616). A similar work followed in 1618 associated with the ducal baptism and wedding. Then in 1618-19 he published two volumes of 'Oden und Gesange' ('Odes and Songs') embracing a considerable range of verse forms. In 1619 he was back in England apparently on a mission from the princes of the union, and the following year joined the Bohemian court-in-exile at Heidelberg. He seems to have worked in England on behalf of the Palatines in the early 1620s, although by his own account he was employed by Sir Edward Conway, secretary of state, from November 1625. On Conway's personal staff as opposed to holding an official crown appointment, he continued in the employ of each of Conway's successors until 1640. He was appointed secretary interpreter for the German tongue in 1631 and deputy secretary interpreter for the French tongue not long afterwards. His duties involved acting as a cryptographer as well as dealing with diplomatic correspondence and translation work. The secretary of state, Sir John Coke, old and infirm toward the end of his tenure, allowed Weckherlin to perform a large part of his duties, including application of the signet and privy seals, to the envy of fellow bureaucrats, who complained of Weckherlin's 'dexterity' at cutting them out, with the loss of their fees. Many of these duties brought Weckherlin into close, informal contact with Charles I, and he became attached to the king's entourage, travelling with him at almost all times and assisting the king with personal tasks, such as writing poetry. 
In 1627 Weckherlin was given oversight of the pre-publication licensing of news for the press, soon expanded to include history and 'matters of state'. The only item he is known to have prohibited was Sir Robert Filmer's 'Patriarcha', presented for a licence in 1632. Weckherlin had personal ties to the publishing business through his brother-in-law, Robert Raworth, a London printer, and his patent to print Latin school books, obtained in 1631 to reward him in part for his service, for which he had been badly paid. His role as licenser, and his support of his brother-in-law in the face of official censure, brought him into conflict with Archbishop Laud, who vigorously exercised the church's authority in oversight of the press and apparently tried to have Weckherlin removed from his post in the 1630s. Weckherlin, who had a long memory of all slights dealt to him, later testified at Laud's trial as a witness for the prosecution. 
Though Weckherlin had performed the duties of secretary for the Latin tongue since 1625 he was never formally appointed to the position, nor paid its wages. When Sir Henry Vane became secretary in 1640, Weckherlin hoped he would receive 'some small fruit of the great toil & labours I have undergone in all foreign affairs, which afford no benefit nor comfort at all', but the king asked only that Weckherlin continue in the same capacity in Vane's service (TNA: PRO, SP 16/444/53). Weckherlin continued to write government letters after Vane's dismissal late in 1641. Despite his personal relationship with the king, which apparently endured to some degree, and with Sir Edward Nicholas, Weckherlin did not join the royalist cause. His creation as MA of Cambridge University in 1642 may have been intended to serve as reward or as an enticement. He later wrote that he had served the Long Parliament since 1642, and in February 1644 was employed by its committee of both kingdoms. Designated secretary for foreign affairs he performed the same sorts of duties he had in service to successive secretaries of state. He continued to work with codes and ciphers and helped decipher and prepare for publication Charles I's sensitive private correspondence and papers of the king's secretary of state, George, Lord Digby, captured at the battle of Naseby. In 1647 he was appointed secretary for foreign languages to the committee. 
In these years Weckherlin rejoiced in his eleven grandchildren, the children of his daughter Elizabeth and her husband, William Trumbull, of Easthampstead Park, Berkshire, where Weckherlin taught French and Latin to one of his grandsons, William, a future secretary of state. But his beloved wife died in 1645, while his son, Ralph, went to fight in the king's army and subsequently into exile with the royal court, not to return to England until after the Restoration. Weckherlin continued to complain of small reward for a large amount of work and made repeated attempts to collect wages and arrears over the course of the 1640s. All of these blows, added to his own ill health due to gout and circulatory problems, the execution of the king, and the reorganization of the government, caused him to leave his post by March 1649 when he was replaced by another poet and Latin scholar, John Milton. But by March 1652 Milton had substantially lost his sight and the council of state recalled Weckherlin to assist with foreign affairs. This reappointment was short-lived, however, as Weckherlin died in office, some time between 27 January and 21 February 1653. 
Weckherlin worked long and hard in the service of his adopted country, sacrificing his health and his greatest source of happiness -- spending time with his family -- in the process. At the same time he attained the standing of a considerable poet, well recognized by his contemporaries, especially the German-speaking emigre community in London, as well as by modern scholars. He is credited with pioneering the vernacular form of German verse in the seventeenth century and has been considered one of the most notable German poets of the period, prior to Martin Opitz. He wrote sonnets in Italian and English, but despite living for many years in England continued to write most of his poetry in German and published his works in German-speaking areas, for example the volume of poems shepherded through the Elsevier press in Leiden by his friend Theodore Haak in 1641. Expanded in 1648, it contained a notable lament for Gustavus Adolphus, a rallying call to protestant Germany, and spiritual poems. He also wrote masques, at least one in English. Weckherlin's papers passed to his daughter's family and are to be found in the Trumbull papers in the British Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 28950


Weddell, James (1787-1834), navigator, was the younger son of an upholsterer of Dalserf, near Lanark, who had settled in London and there married Sarah Pease, a Quaker. James is said to have been born on 24 August 1787 in Ostend, where the family had removed because of the father's poor health, but his birth there has proved untraceable and he himself gave his place of birth as Massachusetts when he entered the navy in 1810. His father died soon after James's birth, leaving his family with little money. In 1796 James joined his elder brother Charles who was in the Royal Navy in the 'Swan' at Yarmouth; and after this he was at sea, first on a coasting vessel (probably a collier), and later on a frigate, to which he was sent in irons after having struck his captain. Suggestions that this frigate was the 'Rainbow' are probably wrong. In 1810 he entered the navy again on the 'Rainbow', and was rated first a seaman and then a midshipman, before his discharge in December 1810 on his promotion by warrant to acting master in the 'Firefly'. He eagerly grasped opportunities for study and taught himself navigation. In December 1811 he was moved to the 'Thalia', and, on her return to England and being paid off, he was on 21 October 1812 promoted master of the 'Hope'. A few months later he was moved to the brig 'Avon' with Commander, later Admiral of the Fleet, Sir George Sartorius, who in 1839 described Weddell as 'one of the most efficient and trustworthy officers I have met'. The 'Avon' was paid off in March 1814, and after this he served on the sloop 'Espoir', the frigate 'Cydnus', and then the 'Pactolus'. 
The peace left Weddell on half pay for three years before he accepted command of the 'Jane', a brig of 160 tons belonging to Messrs Strachan and Gavin of Leith, for a sealing voyage to the Antarctic. No record is extant of the voyage, which lasted from 1819 until 1821, but Weddell seems to have visited the South Shetland Islands and is credited with having discovered the South Orkneys. The voyage was not profitable, but Weddell persuaded James Strachan to fit out the 'Jane' again and to purchase the cutter 'Beaufoy' for a further voyage which set off on 17 September 1822, searching for fur seals. Weddell reached the Falklands, the South Shetlands, South Georgia, and the South Orkneys, and reached latitude 74 degree 15", the southernmost latitude then achieved. He returned home in July 1824 and in 1825 published 'A Voyage towards the South Pole', which was recognized as of considerable importance for its account of the voyage and its survey of the South Shetlands where names such as Boyd's Strait, Duff's Strait, and Sartorius Island recalled the captains with whom Weddell had served. An enlarged edition and a German translation appeared in 1827, in which year Weddell was elected fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh. 
Weddell's later life was marked with misfortune. In 1829 he was trading in Buenos Aires in the 'Jane', but was forced to abandon her in the Azores on the return journey as she was taking in water. He and his crew embarked as passengers on a ship bound for England, but narrowly escaped death when she was shipwrecked. In 1830 he sailed as master of the 'Eliza', reaching Hobart, Tasmania, in May 1831, where he met and helped fellow Antarctic explorer John Biscoe. Weddell had transported an alleged escaped convict, Richard Brown, to Hobart, but when Brown cleared his name, he sued Weddell for having transported him against his will. In poor health and penniless since his shipwreck, Weddell died, unmarried, on 9 September 1834, at 16 Norfolk Street, Strand, London, and was buried at St Clement Danes churchyard. 
P. G. Dodd described Weddell in earlier life as tall and strongly built, energetic in company, but melancholy when alone (Savours, 156). William Jerdan suggested that his heart lay in exploration, not commerce, and he seems to have taken hard the misfortunes which lack of means put in his path. Weddell Island and the Weddell Sea in the Antarctic are lasting memorials to his achievements. 


@@@@@


doc= 28951


Weddell, John (c.1583-1639/40), sea captain, first came to notice in 1617 when the directors of the East India Company appointed him to a position of responsibility as master's mate aboard the 'Dragon'. He achieved prominence five years later at the age of thirty-eight, when English naval forces helped the Persians to take Hormoz. The directors appointed him to be the joint commander, with Robert Blythe, of a squadron of nine ships which sailed for Jask in Persia, and onwards to Surat. His arrival coincided with negotiations between Edward Moxon, chief merchant in Persia, and Shah Abbas (1587-1629) for a joint attack on Hormoz. In June 1621 they finalized an agreement in principle which they put into effect in January 1622, when Weddell and Blythe arrived in the Persian Gulf. 
The agreement was a product of long-standing tensions between the Portuguese and Persians in the Persian Gulf as well as the desire of the English to supplant the Portuguese in Asian trade. Hormoz was an island city of 40,000 inhabitants at the mouth of the Persian Gulf. Together with Goa, Malacca, and Macau, it was one of the most important Portuguese possessions. Abbas had already laid siege to the city in 1602, 1608, and 1616, and recaptured nearby Gombroon in 1615. Beginning in 1616, the East India Company, with the encouragement of Sir Thomas Roe as well as the endeavours of Robert and Anthony Sherley, had begun to trade with Persia. Co-operation with Abbas in the attack was to result in additional trading privileges and receipts from the customs revenues at Gombroon. 
With the assistance of the English, the attack on Hormoz proceeded swiftly and with success. The Persians provided 10,000 troops under Imam Quli Bey, the shah of Shiraz, and the English provided four ships under the command of Weddell and Blythe. The immediate pretence for war was the fortifications the new Portuguese commander Ruy Freire had constructed on the neighbouring island of Qishm. His five galleons were unable to retain control of the sea around the two islands, however, and in January 1622 Weddell laid siege to Qishm and took it. Two weeks later, with support from Weddell's ships, troops under Imam Quli Bey stormed the city. Only the fortress held out for two months longer, falling in April. Trade had been destroyed and the city depopulated; or, as one English observer pithily put it a year later, 'Hormuz is become a ruined heap' (Steensgaard, 346). 
The war between the English, often in alliance with the Dutch, and the Portuguese resumed two years later. Weddell returned in 1624 to England with a squadron and departed later that year again for Surat. On his return to the Indian Ocean he found that a new Portuguese commander, Nun Alvarez Botelho, had arrived with a squadron of eight galleons and threatened trade in the Persian Gulf. With the encouragement of Abbas, Weddell sailed to the gulf in command of eight ships and four pinnaces, half of them Dutch. Over the first three days of February 1625, off Gombroon, the two squadrons joined in a fierce battle, and the Portuguese withdrew with heavier losses. On the last day alone Weddell's crew fired around a thousand shot: 'at sunset we were so faint and weary', he wrote, 'that our men began to drop down for very faintness' (Foster, 3.81). Thereafter the intensity of the war diminished, although rancour and acts of brutality continued. Weddell organized and led another Anglo-Dutch expedition when Ruy Freire captured an English vessel, the 'Lion', and killed all those aboard except one. Searching for the Portuguese in the Persian Gulf did not lead to battle, and the murders went unrevenged. 
When, in 1627, Weddell returned to England, he joined the navy and participated in the war against France. He began as the captain of the 'Rainbow' and, within a year, became a vice-admiral. The duke of Buckingham first commended his skill in command when the 'Rainbow' ran aground and Weddell successfully refloated the ship. Weddell then commanded a small squadron sent to gain intelligence of French preparations at Le Havre and fought at the battle off the Ile de Re. In January 1628, during a royal visit to Southampton, Buckingham presented him to Charles I. As of February 1628, however, Weddell had yet to receive his full wages, and it may have been monetary considerations which led him to return to the service of the East India Company. 
In April 1629 Weddell commanded a squadron of five ships, bearing capital worth $208,000 provided by a special subscription for trade to Surat and Persia. He had been given the title of captain-general of the company ships, but the war against the Portuguese had quieted substantially. On two occasions Weddell skirmished with Portuguese galleons, but the viceroy had committed most of his resources to relieving Malacca from an attack by the king of Achin. He returned in April 1631 to England, and in 1632 departed again in command of five ships, with capital of $146,000 raised by subscriptions to the third joint stock. 
On his return to England in 1634, however, long-standing tensions between Weddell and the directors of the company resulted in an open impasse. His dissatisfaction with the terms and conditions of company service had in 1627 already been apparent. In February of that year he admitted to having conducted a private trade in commodities, acknowledged the public censure of the directors, but remained convinced that 'upon consideration of his services they would think he deserved better'. In April 1631, nevertheless, he had again been publicly censured for conducting a private trade. And these tensions came to a head when, in January 1633, a freak accident led to the loss of two ships and, as captain-general, he was held partly responsible. When leaving Surat the captain of the 'Swallow' had fired a salute in contravention of standing orders; the ship had caught fire and sailed into the flagship, 'Charles', while Weddell was ashore. Despite support from the president of Surat, William Methwold, and others that he could not be held culpable, the directors ordered Weddell home for questioning. He later explained his indignation in a letter to Methwold: 'If fines and undeserved reproaches, instead of remuneration for honest services be the East India Company's favours and honours (as nowadays they are) we pray God keep both you and us from such indulgences' (Foster, 5.317). 
Two developments enabled Weddell to act on his disaffection and to help found a trading organization, the Courteen Association, to compete with the East India Company. First, Methwold had negotiated a truce in January 1634 with the viceroy of Goa, which offered the possibility that trade might be expanded to the Malabar coast and Macau, areas controlled by the Portuguese. Second, a group of adventurers led by Endymion Porter who were well connected at court had, in 1633 and 1634, obtained royal commissions for privateering ventures in the Indian Ocean, and now wanted to exploit the new possibilities for trade. They were able to win the considerable financial backing of Sir William Courteen; and the new Courteen Association received a royal commission to trade in areas under Portuguese authority. 
Between 1636 and his death in 1639 or 1640 at the age of fifty-six, Weddell directed negotiations for the association and commanded their first squadron to Asia. With four ships -- the 'Dragon', 'Sun', 'Planter', and 'Catherine' -- two pinnaces, and capital valued at $120,000, he left England in April 1636 for Goa. Sailing with Weddell were many others, including the diarist Peter Mundy, who shared his disaffection. Noted the directors of the existing company, 'there is not one of them but have had his bringing up, maintenance and preferment by us and our service' (Foster, 5.260). After arriving in October, Weddell negotiated over three months an agreement with the viceroy to trade in Portuguese Asia, although details of it were not published, and ambiguity about the specific terms was later to cause difficulties. He established a first factory in February 1637 on the Malabar coast at Bhatkal and a second at Achin. From there he sent back the 'Planter' bearing 150,000 lb of pepper as well as benzoin, cinnamon, gum lac, cassia fistula (the fruit of the pudding pipe tree), and calicoes. In May he sailed for Malacca and Macau, where he arrived at the end of June. 
After initial difficulties, by a mixture of force and negotiation Weddell traded for a valuable cargo. The ostensible reason for the governor of Macau refusing him permission to trade was that confirmation of the commercial agreement had yet to be received from the viceroy; but Weddell came to believe, as Mundy recorded, that 'they kept the main cause to themselves which was that our coming would quickly eat them out of all trade' (Temple, 175). Weddell then sought to establish contact with Chinese merchants directly at Canton (Guangzhou). He encountered conflicting interests and actions among Chinese officials as he sailed cautiously up the Canton River. Local officials and militias who controlled forts along the river, perhaps with the encouragement of the Portuguese, intermittently resisted the advance of the ships, particularly at Anunghoy (Yaniangxie), and Weddell fought a number of skirmishes with them. Cantonese officials welcomed the trade, however, and invited his three chief merchants to the city. In August and September 1637 these merchants bought a rich cargo, including at least 500 to 600 tons of sugar, gold, raw silk, green ginger, China roots, musk, porcelain, and silk stuffs such as damasks, satins, grograms, and tafiettas. Even the provisions they bought, which were inexpensive according to Mundy, suggested exotic wealth, and included crabs, porpoises, geese, duck, pears, chestnuts, dried 'leeches' (probably lychees), oranges, and grapefruit. Weddell departed in November and four months later he arrived on the Malabar coast, where he found the factory at Bhatkal abandoned and re-established it. He sailed with the 'Dragon' and 'Catherine' for Masulipatam (where the East India Company had a factory) to buy fine cloth, and returned to Bhatkal before going to Cannanore in late November 1638, just before the homeward voyage. 'We conceive', wrote factors in Masulipatam, 'never Englishmen were ever richlier laden than they are now with goods' (Foster, 6.74). 
On the return journey in 1639 Weddell and the two ships disappeared in uncertain circumstances. Rumours circulated afterwards that a Dutch fleet had captured and sunk them, putting the scene of the action, according to different accounts, off Malacca, Ceylon, or Mauritius. According to a Scot who claimed to have been aboard one of the ships, after being entertained by a Dutch captain Weddell had been thrown overboard and the ships seized. A more likely cause of his disappearance, however, was shipwreck in severe storms off the Cape of Good Hope, which other English captains reported experiencing in December 1639 and January 1640. 
Most judgements of Weddell, written by colleagues in India to the directors of the company, were unequivocal in their respect for his abilities and attributes. Chief among them, according to Methwold, were valour and resolution. 'The care of his charge, especially at sea, submits to no man you ever employed' (Foster, 5.67). Thomas Russell, a predecessor as president of Surat, wrote that he possessed 'discretion joined with valour, among your sea [captains] hath not his fellow' (Foster, 4.48). In public life this discretion gave way to pugnacious and often impetuous actions, whether in protesting or circumventing the strictures of company directors, or overcoming by violence the intransigence of Portuguese or Chinese officials. Weddell was at pains, however, to dispel the image that he acted chiefly for his own gain, particularly at the time of his break with the company: 'blame us not', he wrote to Methwold, 'nor brand us with the title of mercenaries, if, being commanded upon a lawful and honest design, we have embraced a better master's better pay' (Foster, 5.317). 
In May 1643 William Courteen, the son of the original financier of the association, received letters of administration in which officials declared Weddell dead 'in partibus transmarinis' and intestate. A son, Jeremy, and a daughter, Elizabeth, the wife of Edward Wye, survived Weddell's wife, Frances, 'nee' Churry (died 1656), whom he had married in 1614; another son, John, died young. Frances bequeathed to Elizabeth a portrait of Weddell which, for lack of any further evidence, must be presumed lost. 


@@@@@


doc= 28952


Alexander Wedderburn (bap. 1581), was also a Latin scholar of some renown. He was baptized at Aberdeen on 3 September 1581; he appears to have received part of his education in England before matriculating as a bursar of Marischal College on 29 January 1623, after a successful petition by his brothers David and William secured his place. He was responsible for the preparation of 'Persius enucleatus, sive, Commentarius exactissimus et maxime perspicuus in Persium, poetarum omnium difficillimum', which was subsequently published in Amsterdam in 1664. He was probably the author of 'Radii Augustiniani sive praecupuae S. P. Augustin in s. scripture locus annotationes', published in 1652. It is not known when he died or whether he married and raised a family. 


@@@@@


doc= 28953


Wedderburn, Sir Alexander, of Blackness (1610-1676), politician, was born on 22 March 1610, the eldest son of James Wedderburn (1589-1627), town clerk of Dundee, and Margaret, daughter of James Goldman, a Dundee merchant. Sir Peter Wedderburn, a future lord of session, was his younger brother. In 1628 Alexander Wedderburn married Matilda, daughter of James Fletcher, provost of Dundee; they had five sons and six daughters. Their second son, James (1649-1696), was the grandfather of the Jacobite Sir John Wedderburn. 
Wedderburn was educated for the law and was admitted advocate; but upon the death of his uncle Alexander of Kingennie, whose son was then a minor, he was appointed town clerk of Dundee in 1633, and held the office until 1675. He received a tack of the customs of Dundee from Charles I in 1639, and in 1640 was granted an annual pension of $100 out of the customs, ratified in 1664. In September 1640 he was appointed one of the eight Scots commissioners to arrange the treaty of Ripon. He was knighted in 1642 and received a grant of the lands of Blackness in Forfarshire, which were later incorporated into a free barony. 
Wedderburn represented Dundee in the Scottish parliament from 1644 to 1647 and from 1648 to 1651, and served in the protectorate parliaments of 1654 and 1656. He served on numerous committees of the estates, including the committees of war for 1645-7 and 1651. At the Restoration in 1661 he was appointed one of the commissioners for regulating weights and measures. He died on 18 November 1676. 


@@@@@


doc= 28954


Wedderburn, Alexander, first earl of Rosslyn (1733-1805), lord chancellor, was born on 13 February 1733, probably in Edinburgh, the eldest of three children of Peter Wedderburn (died 1756), advocate, and latterly judge, and his wife, Janet, daughter of David Ogilvie, an officer in a regiment of dragoons. Although his family owned a small estate outside Haddington called Chesterhall, it had long been associated with the legal profession in Scotland; his great-grandfather was Sir Peter Wedderburn (1616-1679), a lord of the court of session under the title of Lord Gosford. His father had difficulty building a legal practice, and became secretary to the board of excise in Scotland. It was only a year before his death that he was elevated to the court of session as Lord Chesterhall. According to John Ramsay of Ochtertyre, Wedderburn's father derived most of his ideas 'upon most subjects' from England, 'where, it is believed, he either received part of his education or spent part of his youth' ('Scotland and Scotsmen', 1.139). Ramsay suspected that Peter Wedderburn had spent some time at the inns of court in London as preparation for possible practice before the court of exchequer in Scotland, which had been created in 1707 to deal with revenue cases. Ramsay also remarked that Wedderburn's father spoke 'proper English' at a time when the literati of Scotland were more concerned with the written language than its pronunciation, and that 'his manner of breeding [educating] his eldest son, the Lord Chancellor, was exceeding admired at the time' (ibid., 1.148). Ramsay also stated that Wedderburn's father was not only episcopalian but a member of the Church of England, attending the chapel in Edinburgh endowed by one of the English judges of the court of exchequer to provide public worship for Anglicans. 
Wedderburn was educated at the famous burgh school kept at Dalkeith, Edinburghshire, by James Barclay, whose alumni included the historian and Church of Scotland minister William Robertson as a predecessor and the politician Henry Dundas at a later date. He matriculated at the University of Edinburgh at the age of thirteen early in 1746, before the last Jacobite rising in Scotland had come to an end. He did not take a degree, but at this time made the acquaintance of many of the leading figures of what is now called the Scottish Enlightenment. He attended the lectures Adam Smith presented on language and rhetoric in Edinburgh in 1748 and became a lifelong friend of Smith. He was known to David Hume who at that time was keeper of the Advocates' Library, and made the acquaintance of William Robertson, who with Hume was embarking on a career as a historian. He read law with those teaching it at Edinburgh, particularly John Erskine, author of 'The Institutes of the Law of Scotland'. He also began to consider the possibility of practising in England, and with his father's approval was admitted to the Inner Temple in London on 8 May 1753 and began to visit that metropolis annually. He was admitted to the Faculty of Advocates in Edinburgh in 1754 and began to practise in Edinburgh. 
It was at this time that Edinburgh experienced a remarkable resurgence of club life supported by its professional middle class of lawyers, doctors, ministers, and professors, with the support of the Scottish gentry who still treated Edinburgh as a national centre of social life and culture. Of these clubs perhaps the most famous was the Select Society founded in 1754, whose members included Hume, Robertson, Smith, and many other prominent members of Edinburgh civic society. Wedderburn was called to the chair of the first meeting at the age of twenty-one. The following year he took a leading role in the publication of the 'first' 'Edinburgh Review', a short-lived periodical which preceded its more famous successor by more than half a century. The intention was to review every publication originating in Scotland, and the preface to the first of the two issues which did appear is one of Wedderburn's few known publications. It was in effect a manifesto for a programme of social, economic, and cultural improvement in Scotland. Wedderburn stated that the journal's purpose was to establish 'the progressive state of learning in the country' ('Edinburgh Review', 1755, i-iv). 
Through the Select Society Wedderburn met a number of Robertson's fellow ministers in the Church of Scotland, including John Home, who were just beginning to operate self-consciously as a 'moderate party' within the church, and in particular in its general assembly, where Wedderburn was selected as a lay elder for the parish of Inverkeithing and later Dunfermline. As such he took the lead in general assembly debates over whether David Hume could be called before the general assembly as a heretic. Wedderburn, Robertson, and the moderate party were successful in persuading the assembly that as Hume was no longer a member of the Church of Scotland, its general assembly had no authority over him. Later that year Wedderburn was part of the group which encouraged John Home to allow the public performance in Edinburgh of his play 'Douglas', and in 1757 Wedderburn argued unsuccessfully against attempts in the general assembly to forbid ministers of the Church of Scotland to attend theatrical productions. 
This period of intense activity in Edinburgh by Wedderburn famously came to an end in August 1757 when he clashed before the bar of the court of session with the notoriously Jacobite, Scots-speaking dean of the Faculty of Advocates, Alexander Lockhart. The younger man allowed all his impatience at the weight of tradition at the bar and in Scotland generally to express itself in language directed at Lockhart and eventually at the bench itself. On being required to retract and apologize, Wedderburn took off his gown, laid it before the astonished judges, bowed, and left the court. That night he departed for London and the Inner Temple. 
Wedderburn's struggle to establish himself in English practice was a difficult one, and at a time of pervasive English mistrust of Scots on the make, the transition from representing Anglicization as cultural improvement in Scotland to making professional progress as a Scottish lawyer and politician in England marked Wedderburn for life. Through his friendship with John Home, however, Wedderburn was introduced to the third earl of Bute and with his patronage was successful eventually in obtaining a Scottish seat, Ayr burghs, in parliament after the election of 1761. By 1763, with Bute's help, he was made king's counsel. He shocked lawyers on the northern circuit by appearing there in search of business in 1764. It was as a result of this foray that he met and subsequently married his first wife, on 31 December 1767, Betty Anne (died 1781), only child and heir of John Dawson and Elizabeth Taylor of Morley, Yorkshire, 'with whom he Got $10,000' according to his friend Alexander Carlyle ('Autobiography', ed. Burton, 230). By this time he had become principal legal adviser to Robert Clive on his return from India. This connection enabled him to defy the government of the day and speak in the Commons in support of Wilkes in 1769, and led to his move to a Shropshire seat, Bishop's Castle, in parliament under Clive's patronage. A year later he made his peace with the North ministry and became solicitor-general. He became a valued government speaker in the House of Commons during the difficult years of the American War of Independence and used his position to put pressure on Lord North to advance his legal career. He was made attorney-general in 1778 and in 1780 became chief justice of the court of common pleas and a peer as Baron Loughborough. His first wife died on 15 February 1781, and on 12 September 1782 he married Charlotte Courtenay (1751-1825/6), fourth and youngest daughter of William Courtenay, first Viscount Courtenay (1710-1762), of Powderham Castle and Frances Frich (1721-1761). He had remarked in a letter of 5 September 1782 to a friend regarding his future wife that 'She is not a beauty, nor a wit, nor a fortune, neither does she profess any talents; but she has a good figure, a great deal of countenance, a very right understanding, and an exceedingly pleasant temper' (GEC, 'Peerage', 11.174 n.). Their only child, William, died in infancy. 
Throughout the 1780s Wedderburn was associated with the opposition whigs, having entered their camp via the Fox-North coalition, during which he held office as first commissioner of the great seal from April to December 1783. His hopes of becoming lord chancellor were dashed by the failure of the coalition and the political success of the younger Pitt. His great rival legally and politically at this time was Edward Thurlow, who held the chancellorship as a member of Pitt's government. The outbreak of the French Revolution led to a chain of events in which Wedderburn once again revolved politically and came to join Pitt's wartime cabinet, eventually bringing William Bentinck, third duke of Portland, and other moderate opposition whigs in his wake. The initiator of negotiations was Wedderburn's fellow Scot Henry Dundas, who was anxious to identify a candidate to replace Thurlow as the latter became increasingly unreliable in his support of government measures in the House of Lords. When Thurlow was dismissed as chancellor in 1792 the great seal again went into commission. The imminence of war between France and Britain made it easier for Wedderburn to justify his latest political conversion and the gratification of his ambition. He became lord chancellor at the end of January 1793. 
Wedderburn as lord chancellor followed Thurlow in identifying himself as the king's representative in the cabinet. Consequently he was not an ideal colleague in that he was capable of discussing cabinet business with the monarch without consulting fellow members of the ministry. For many years this was not a major problem but at the time when union with Ireland was undertaken and Catholic emancipation was proposed by Pitt as its corollary, Wedderburn, a past advocate of Roman Catholic relief as a member of North's ministry in 1779 and 1780, appears to have encouraged the king in the belief that by approving Catholic emancipation he would be violating the terms of his coronation oath. Wedderburn did not foresee that the issue would lead to the end of Pitt's ministry and his replacement by Henry Addington as a known opponent of emancipation. Neither had he realized that it would lead to his own removal as lord chancellor. This he found hard to accept or even believe, apparently continuing to attend cabinet after he had given up the seals until he was told not to do so. As a consolation for his loss he was created earl of Rosslyn on 21 April 1801, with his nephew, James St Clair Erskine, the son of his sister Janet Wedderburn and Sir Henry Erskine, named as heir to the title. He died less than four years later on 2 January 1805 at Baylis, Stoke Poges, Buckinghamshire, and was buried in St Paul's Cathedral on 12 January. 
Wedderburn's place in British political history has not been viewed by many as a positive one. Early in his career he was referred to in 'The Letters of Junius' as having 'something about him which even treachery cannot trust' (GEC, 'Peerage', 11.174 n.) and biographers of Pitt have been stern in their disapproval. His friend Alexander Carlyle, who had met him in his early days as a young lawyer in Edinburgh, referred to Wedderburn ambiguously in several asides in his memoirs, recalling that when he first met Wedderburn in 1757 with a friend he 'open'd himself to us, as much as he was capable of Doing to any body' ('Autobiography', ed. Burton, 166). At another point, referring to a visit from Wedderburn, he stated that 'my friend Wedderburn Seldom Did any thing without a Reason' (ibid., 207). In an entry for 1764, Carlyle recalled Wedderburn's conversation as 'stiff and pompous', and his general demeanour while on circuit at Newcastle one of 'Self-conceit' (ibid., 230). 
Wedderburn was a man of great application who attained considerable credit as a public speaker in the law courts and in parliament. No one ever described him as a great lawyer in the abstract sense, but he served as a judge in England for more than twenty years without discredit, and it could be argued that his Scottish training in civil law gave him a useful perspective in equity cases that was not available to those schooled exclusively in the English common law tradition. His early break with his Edinburgh education and upbringing and the need to pursue his career in what was in effect a foreign country, clearly influenced his political conduct in England and encouraged him in the development of a cold, detached public manner that contrasted with a private personality that could be warm, kindly, and charming. His insistence on securing the reversion of his peerage to the son of his beloved sister Janet indicated that he saw his essential loyalties as belonging to family just as in his political career he saw himself as personally loyal to George III as king rather than to a political party or an individual politician. 


@@@@@


doc= 28955


Wedderburn, David (bap. 1580, d. 1646), poet and Latin grammarian, was baptized in the parish church of Aberdeen on 2 January 1580, the eldest son of William Wedderburn (1550?-1620), a burgess of the town, and Marjorie Annand. There is some confusion as to where Wedderburn completed his education. Although Marischal College, Aberdeen, appears to be the strongest contender, it is possible that he matriculated at the University of St Andrews during the period 1598-1600. He was appointed as a master in the grammar school of Aberdeen in April 1602 but resigned his post the following year with the intention of pursuing a clerical vocation. For reasons unknown he appears to have abandoned this aim and returned in 1603 to his teaching post in the grammar school, where he remained until failing health compelled him to resign the rectorship in 1640. He married twice. On 30 April 1611 he married Janet Johnstone, with whom he had a son who was baptized on 25 March 1612 but whose name went unrecorded in the parish register of Aberdeen. Janet died on 29 October 1613 and was buried in the church of St Nicholas, Aberdeen, where Wedderburn had a monument erected in her memory. On 25 October the next year he married Bathia Mowat, with whom he had two sons and five daughters. 
Wedderburn was granted a professorship and taught humanities in Marischal College after the death of Gilbert Gray in 1614. A complaint from the civic authorities, however, forced him to resign this charge ten years later in order that he might focus solely on raising standards in the grammar school. In February 1628 he successfully petitioned the town council to have Andrew Howat appointed to teach arithmetic in the grammar school. In July of that same year and 'for the godlie and vertuous educatioun and teaching of the youth in pietie, gude letters, and gude maneres' ('Extracts from the Records of the Burgh of Aberdeen, 1625-1642'), Alexander Fraser was added to the teaching staff after an anonymous benefactor bequeathed 500 merks for that purpose. Wedderburn's own annual salary was boosted by 80 merks in September 1629. On resigning his post in 1640 he received a pension of 200 merks in recognition of his service to education in the burgh. 
Wedderburn was a Latin poet and scholar of notable distinction. In 1612, after the premature death of Prince Henry, he composed 'In obitum summae spei principis Henrici, Jacobi VI', which was printed by Andrew Hart the following year. In 1617 the town council of Aberdeen paid him 500 merks for the compilation of 'Invictissimo et potentissimo monarchae Jacobi VI, Britanniae magnae' and 'Propempticon charitum Abredonionsium', which were read to King James at Falkland Palace on 19 May 1617. On 6 February 1620 Wedderburn was made poet laureate of Aberdeen, for which he received an annual sum of 80 merks from the city magistrates. On 14 August that same year he was awarded the freedom of the city. It was probably at the prompting of the town council that he produced a Latin poem on the death of the king in 1625, entitled 'Abredonia atrata sub obitum serenissimi et potentissimi monarchae Jacobi VI', which was printed by Edward Raban. 
In 1633 Wedderburn composed 'Vivat rex' on the visit of Charles I to Scotland. In 1635 he also contributed to the 'Funerals', a series of verses produced in memory of Patrick Forbes, the late bishop of Aberdeen. In 1641 he composed six Latin elegies on the death of his old schoolfriend and fellow classicist Arthur Johnstone. These were later reprinted in 1731 in the 'Poetarum Scotorum musae sacrae'. He produced a similar obituary in celebration of the life of George Jameson in 1644. Between 1643 and 1644 Wedderburn further compiled two volumes containing 300 moral epigrams and several elegies. Eight of his Latin poems are to be found in the 'Delitiae poetarum Scotorum' compiled by Sir John Scot of Scotstarvit in 1637. 
In spite of his prodigious output and reputation as a poet, Wedderburn was probably best known for his 'Short Introduction to Grammar', for which he received payment of $100 Scots from the town council of Aberdeen. This work, which was to become a standard text on Latin in grammar schools throughout Scotland, was first published in 1632 and later reprinted several times; it was on its account that he was given the freedom of Dundee on 20 May 1632 'in erudiendo juventutem'. His 'Institutiones grammaticae' and 'Vocabula', first published in 1633 and 1636 respectively, were similarly reprinted for the benefit of future generations of young Scots. In 2006 a new translation of 'Vocabula' gained attention for its early description of the game of football. Wedderburn died in Aberdeen, probably on 23 October 1646. He was buried in St Nicholas's Church there. 
Wedderburn's younger brother, 
More is known of the chequered career of 
In 1633 Wedderburn was inducted minister of Bethelnie (also named Old Meldrum) parish church in Aberdeenshire, and was officially presented to this charge by Charles I on 22 June 1636. He was a member of the famous general assemblies of 1638 and 1639 which abrogated Erastian episcopacy and re-established presbyterianism in the Church of Scotland. He was deposed for fornication in 1642 but was fully restored to the ministry by the general assembly of August the following year. Nevertheless he had to be censured and suspended yet again since on 2 November 1648 the presbytery of Aberdeen reinstated him to the pastorate. At an unknown date his first wife died, and on 22 November 1649 he married Agnes Howisone. He was subsequently, on 21 October 1651, called to the charge of Strathdon or Innernochtie, where he remained until his death at Strathdon at some date between 19 April 1659 and 19 April 1660. 


@@@@@


doc= 28956


Wedderburn, James (c.1495-1553), reformer and poet, was born in Dundee, the eldest son of James Wedderburn (died 1514?), merchant 'at the West Kirk stile' in Dundee, and Janet Barrie. He matriculated at St Andrews University in 1514 and studied under Gavin Logie, a leading reformer of the time. He left the university without taking his bachelor's degree and travelled to France, where he worked as a merchant in Rouen and Dieppe. It is possible that he was the same James Wedderburn who some time before 1528 married Janet Forrester of Nevay, daughter of David Forrester, and had three children with her. 
On his return to Dundee, Wedderburn took religious instruction from James Hewat, a Dominican friar who strengthened James's reforming convictions. James had two plays performed in the burgh in 1539-40, though there are no extant texts of these. 'The Beheading of Johne the Baptist', a tragedy, was staged at the West Port in Dundee, and 'The Historie of Dyonisius the Tyrant', a comedy, was staged at the burgh playfield. Both plays strongly attacked Roman Catholicism. 
It was probably around this time that Wedderburn began composing poems that promoted protestant doctrine and denounced Roman Catholic corruption. These, along with works by his brothers John ['see below'] and Robert ['see below'], were to form a substantial part of the collection now generally known as 'The Gude and Godlie Ballatis' but titled, in the 1578 edition, 'Ane Compendious Buik of Godlie and Spirituall Songs'. The collection is made up of translations of scripture into Scots, satirical pieces, and adaptations of popular song which turn them to the service of the reformers in promoting protestant doctrine and attacking Roman Catholic corruption. The title-page of the 1578 edition announces that it contains 'an augmentation of sundrie gude and godlie Ballates not contenit in the first edition'. The only known previous edition is from 1567, but this contains only five pieces fewer than the 1578 edition. It is thus probable that an earlier edition existed, but no trace of it has been found. Topical allusions in some of the songs indicate that they were composed about 1540, and they may have been circulated in pamphlet form in the 1540s. The collection undoubtedly includes pieces not by the Wedderburn brothers, and exactly which poems were composed by which brother is unclear. 
There are only five extant copies of the four known early editions of the Wedderburns' collection. These were published in 1567, 1578, 1600, and 1621, an indication of the influence and continuing popularity of the 'Ballatis' in post-Reformation Scotland. As Helena Shire has noted, while the collection's adaptations of popular song aim at displacing these secular pieces, they have in fact helped to preserve many from oblivion (Shire, 33). In 1540 James Wedderburn was delated to James V for having counterfeited the conjuring of a ghost. This alluded to a similar summoning enacted at Kinghorn by one Friar Walter Laing, who had been confessor to the king. James Wedderburn fled to France to avoid arrest and once more took up commerce in Rouen and Dieppe. Other Scottish merchants at Dieppe informed the bishop at Rouen that Wedderburn had been declared a heretic in Scotland, but no action was taken. He remained at Rouen and Dieppe until his death, which appears to have been in 1553, since in this year his son, John (died November 1569), was declared his heir. On his deathbed James is reported to have said to his son 'We have beene acting our part in the theater: you are to succeed; see that you act your part faithfullie!' (Calderwood, 1.142). 
His brother 
In 1538-9 John Wedderburn fled to the continent after being accused and convicted of heresy, though it is unclear whether or not he actually stood trial. A king's messenger was sent to Dundee in 1538-9 to search his goods, suggesting that the trial and flight took place in early 1539. His possessions were seized by the crown and passed on to his youngest brother, Henry, for a small payment. Wedderburn took shelter in Wittenberg, an important protestant centre, where he encountered both Martin Luther and Philip Melanchthon. It is possible that the name Joannes Scotus entered in Wittenberg University's register in 1539 refers to John Wedderburn. The time he spent in Wittenberg suggests that he is responsible for the many poems in 'The Gude and Godlie Ballatis' that are based on German sources and on Luther's verses. 
John Wedderburn returned to Dundee in early 1543, after the death of James V, when the appointment of the supposedly pro-Reformation James Hamilton, earl of Arran, as regent gave the reformers hope that the authorities were now prepared to show greater tolerance towards protestantism. Wedderburn joined with a Dundee printer, John Scot, in publishing pro-Reformation works, these probably being the earliest editions of the works contained in 'The Gude and Godlie Ballatis'. Later in 1543 an act of privy council was issued declaring that printers should destroy any slanderous ballads and works of condemned heretics. John Scot was ordered to be arrested, no doubt largely because of his role in disseminating the 'Ballatis', but the order was not carried out. In 1546, presumably as a result of the state's renewed attempts to suppress pro-Reformation writings, Wedderburn was forced to flee to England for his own safety, and he remained there until his death in 1556. 
Another brother, 


@@@@@


doc= 28957


Wedderburn, James (1585-1639), bishop of Dunblane, was born in Dundee, the second son of John Wedderburn, a Dundee mariner and shipowner, and his wife, Margaret Lindsay, and grandson of James Wedderburn (1495?-1553), the protestant sympathizer and dramatist. Although the extant records reveal nothing of his early education, he was sufficiently qualified to matriculate at the University of St Andrews in 1604. He graduated MA four years later. Like many of his contemporaries Wedderburn chose to further his studies outside Scotland, most probably at Cambridge University. While in England he was tutor to the children of the French classical scholar Isaac Casaubon. Wedderburn was instituted minister of Harston parish church in Cambridgeshire in 1615, but his incumbency was of a relatively short duration. He returned to Scotland in 1617 to take up the prestigious post of professor of divinity at St Mary's College, St Andrews. At some point prior to January 1623 the degree of doctor was duly conferred upon him. While Wedderburn was evidently an extremely able and learned divine, his appointment at St Andrews had more to do with his Anglican sympathies than his academic qualifications and suitability for the post. It was no coincidence that his elevation to the professorship coincided with the crown's attempt to reform the university on an Anglican template. Nevertheless, animosity towards Wedderburn's Arminian theology and his strong advocacy of Anglican practice in Scotland probably accounted for his decision to quit his post after nine years. 
In February 1626 Wedderburn took up a new charge at Compton parish church within the diocese of Winchester. Later that same year he was also made a canon of Ely Cathedral. Further preferment followed when, on 12 September 1628, Charles I presented him to the vicarage of Mildenhall in the diocese of Norwich, and on 26 May 1631 he was made a prebendary of Whitchurch in the bishopric of Bath and Wells. 
After returning to Scotland, under the auspices of William Laud, archbishop of Canterbury, Wedderburn was appointed dean of the Chapel Royal, Stirling, in October 1635. On 11 February 1636 he was finally elevated to the episcopate when he succeeded Adam Bellenden as bishop of Dunblane. Wedderburn is best remembered for his contribution to and involvement in the introduction of the highly controversial Scottish prayer book of 1637. Although Wedderburn rejected many of the central tenets of Tridentine Roman Catholicism, he believed that the reformers had been too hasty in leaving the Roman fold. His advocacy of the re-unification of Western Christendom, encapsulated in his 'Notes' and 'A treaty on reconciliation', some of which were published in Robert Baillie's 'A Large Supplement of the Canterburian Self-Conviction' (1641), gained him few admirers in Scotland. He fled Scotland in the wake of the covenanting revolution and was deposed along with his fellow bishops by the Glasgow assembly in December 1638. He died, unmarried, at Canterbury on 23 September 1639 and was buried in the chapel of the Virgin Mary in the cathedral there. 


@@@@@


doc= 28958


John Wedderburn (c.1505-1556), the second son of James Wedderburn and Janet Barrie, was born in Dundee. He was incorporated in 1525 into the pedagogium (later St Mary's College) at St Andrews University when Patrick Hamilton and George Buchanan were residing there and John Major was lecturing in theology. He may have studied earlier at St Leonard's College under Gavin Logie. Wedderburn graduated BA in 1526 and MA in 1528. He returned to Dundee to join the priesthood, and he too received religious instruction from the Dominican James Hewat. In 1532 he is mentioned as chaplain of St Matthew's Chapel in Dundee. 


@@@@@


doc= 28959


Wedderburn, Sir John (1599-1679), physician, was the fifth son of Alexander Wedderburn (1561-1626) of Kingennie, and Helen, daughter of Alexander Ramsay of Brachmont in Fife, and was born at Dundee. Alexander was the second town clerk of Dundee, representative in the Scottish parliament, and one of the commissioners for union between England and Scotland. John Wedderburn matriculated at St Andrews University in 1615, graduated in 1618, and was professor of philosophy there in 1620-30. Having chosen the medical profession and become 'a gentleman of known learning and vast experience' (Wood, 93), he was appointed physician to the king and obtained a pension of $2000 Scots from Charles I, which was confirmed to him by Charles II. Following family example, Wedderburn studied medicine on the continent, and was with Prince Charles in the Netherlands. On 9 April 1646 he was incorporated DM of Oxford University upon the recommendation of the chancellor. On 14 December 1649 he was admitted a licentiate of the College of Physicians. He acquired a large fortune, and was so generous to his two nephews that one, Sir Alexander Wedderburn, acquired the estate of Blackness, while the other, Sir Peter Wedderburn, bought Gosford in Haddingtonshire in 1659. Wedderburn was knighted between January 1661 and April 1663. Infirmity and old age compelled his partial retirement to Gosford in 1662. There he was still sought for his hospitality, advice, and conversation. He died there in July 1679 and was probably buried in the churchyard of Aberlady, Haddingtonshire. He was unmarried. By his will he bequeathed his extensive and valuable library to St Leonard's College, St Andrews University, of which he was regent. 


@@@@@


doc= 28960


Wedderburn, Sir John, fifth baronet (1704-1746), Jacobite army officer, son of Sir Alexander Wedderburn, fourth baronet (1675-1741), and Katherine, daughter of John Scott, was born on 4 August 1704. After his father was deprived of the clerkship of Dundee in 1717, the family fell on hard times and began selling off parts of the estate, although Wedderburn worked as a factor on the Forfar estates of the duke of Douglas. In 1724 he married Jean, daughter of John Fullerton of that ilk, and they had seven surviving children. He succeeded to the baronetcy on his father's death in September 1741, but had to sell part of his estate that year for debts. In 1745 he collected excise for the rebels in Perth and Forfar, as well as joining as a volunteer in Lord Ogilvy's regiment, serving at Falkirk, Stirling, and Culloden, where he was captured on 16 April 1746. His eldest son, John, who served as a standard-bearer, escaped to France with the help of relatives. 
Held at Inverness, Wedderburn was transported on the 'Exeter' to London's new gaol at Southwark, where he was tried for treason on 4 November 1746. Although he claimed that he had been forced out and his property stolen by the rebels -- and presented witnesses to that effect -- the justices ruled that his collection of the excise tax for rebel use, attested by receipts signed by him, sufficed as the overt action needed to prove treason. When he was found guilty, his estate of Blackness, Forfarshire, and his title were forfeited, and he was sentenced to death. Before his execution he wrote to his wife, instructing her to raise their children in the Church of England and in loyalty to the Jacobite cause, and to Charles Edward Stuart, entrusting his family to the Pretender's care. He was executed by hanging on Kennington Common on 28 November 1746. 


@@@@@


doc= 28961


Wedderburn, Sir Peter, Lord Gosford (c.1616-1679), judge and politician, was the third and youngest son of James Wedderburn (1589-1627), town clerk of Dundee, and Margaret, daughter of James Goldman, merchant of Dundee, and a younger brother of Sir Alexander Wedderburn. He was educated at St Andrews University, graduating MA in 1636. He was admitted advocate on 19 January 1642, beginning a successful legal career. He represented Dundee, becoming 'town's agent' in 1648 and a burgess in February 1657. The covenanting revolution and the Cromwellian period acted as a temporary brake on his career, his royalist sympathies leading to a brief imprisonment in 1645 and fines under Cromwell's 'Act of Grace' of 1654. 
The Restoration, however, led to preferment and public service. On 28 August 1660 Wedderburn was appointed clerk to the privy council and keeper to the signet. In January 1661 he was knighted and the same month began a long parliamentary career as commissioner for Haddingtonshire, representing the shire in parliaments and conventions of estates until 1674, and sitting on various important committees. On 17 June 1668 he became an ordinary lord of session, taking the title Lord Gosford after his estates at Haddington. At the same time he resigned as clerk of the privy council to concentrate on his legal duties. While in the early 1660s he was allied to secretary of state Lauderdale against the earl of Middleton, Wedderburn was largely removed from the subsequent political tension that dogged the Lauderdale administration. 
Wedderburn's collection of the decisions of the court of session from 1 June 1668 until July 1677 was considered authoritative. No ordinary judge, Mackenzie of Rosehaugh described him as a judge 'whose deeds were prompted by truthfulness, and whose law was directed by justice and sympathy' (Wedderburn, 1.364), and his surviving portrait reflects a mood of integrity. He married three times: first, on 1 February 1649, Christian Gibson, with whom he had a son who died young; second, on 20 October 1653, Agnes, daughter of John Dickson of Heartrie, with whom he had five sons and four daughters; and third, on 15 June 1677, Elizabeth Goldman, with whom he had no children. He was succeeded by his sons John (died 1688) and Peter (died 1746), who took the name of Halkett. His will and testament has not survived but he was a wealthy man. Though his estates at Gosford, Haddingtonshire, were purchased in 1659 with the help of his uncle Sir John Wedderburn, physician to Charles I, from 1660 he went on to acquire numerous properties in the counties of Haddingtonshire, Renfrewshire, Forfarshire, and Edinburghshire. He died at Gosford on 11 November 1679. 


@@@@@


doc= 28962


Robert Wedderburn (c.1510-1555x60), the third son of James Wedderburn and Janet Barrie, was born in Dundee, and also attended St Andrews University. Having entered St Leonard's College in 1526 he graduated BA in 1529 and MA in 1530, with his name listed at the head of the roll of graduates. In 1528 he was granted the reversion of St Katherine's Chapel in Dundee, despite being under age. In the mid-1530s he came under suspicion of heresy and fled to Paris, where he attended the university. He may also have spent some time with his brother John at Wittenberg in the 1540s, a suggestion given credence by the fact that on his return journey to Scotland in 1546 he embarked at Frankfurt an der Oder. Crawford relates that when Robert was journeying back to Scotland and his ship had put in on the coast of Norway, a dispute arose between the Roman Catholic and protestant passengers, which led Robert and his fellow reformers to burn Cardinal David Beaton in effigy. Beaton was assassinated in St Andrews that same day. Robert succeeded his uncle, John Barry, as vicar of Dundee in 1546. He remained in this post until his death, in Dundee, some time between 1555 and 1560. With Isobel Lovell he had two illegitimate sons, David and Robert, who were declared legitimate in 1552-3. Isobel Lovell married David Cant in 1560 and had died by 1587. It has been suggested that Robert Wedderburn was the author of 'The Complaynt of Scotland' (1548), but that work's positive attitudes towards the established church make it unlikely that the ascription is accurate. 


@@@@@


doc= 28963


William Wedderburn (c.1582-1659/60), Church of Scotland minister. He taught alongside his eldest brother, David, in the grammar school at Aberdeen in 1616/17 before his appointment as a regent in Marischal College shortly afterwards. He had burgess status conferred on him by the town of Aberdeen on 25 October 1623. On 10 June the following year he married Margaret Tullidelph, with whom he had a son, William. 


@@@@@


doc= 28964


Wedge, John Helder (1793-1872), surveyor and politician in Tasmania, was born at Shudy Camps, near Linton, Cambridgeshire, on 27 February 1793, the second son of Charles Wedge (1747?-1842), a surveyor, and his wife, Elizabeth. John worked with his older brother, Edward, on a Lincolnshire farm, but agricultural depression induced them to think of emigrating. His father had trained him as a surveyor and in 1823 obtained for him an appointment in Van Diemen's Land, where he arrived the following April with Edward and his family. He helped Edward in saw-milling and farming ventures and trained his nephews, Charles Wedge and John Darke, as surveyors, while investigating former frauds in the survey department and, as an energetic and resourceful bushman, undertaking exploring expeditions in difficult parts of the colony. His report on the land grant to the Van Diemen's Land Company led to its increase from 250,000 to 350,000 acres, but his recommendation to reserve land at Emu Bay for a township was disregarded, though it was the only site suitable for a port not already in the company's possession. 
On his arrival Wedge had been granted 1500 acres (Leighlands) near Perth and soon became friendly with John Batman; like him he wanted more land for his sheep and in 1835 was glad to join the Port Phillip Association, formed to 'buy' grazing land from the Port Phillip Aborigines. When Batman reported in June a successful 'purchase', Wedge drew the maps needed to support its claims, resigned from the survey department, and in August crossed to Port Phillip, the first of the partners to do so, landing near its entrance at the association's base at Indented Head on the Bellarine peninsula. He explored the area to the south-west (he later published his 'Narrative' in the proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society), and then went to the River Yarra, where on 2 September he found the party financed by J. P. Fawkner encamped on land which he claimed (mistakenly) that Batman had 'bought'. He reached agreement with this group, and moved the association's 'headquarters' to the site, but before the imperial government's decision on its claims was known he sold his interest in it to his partners. For two years he frequently visited Port Phillip: he bought two city blocks in 1837 and shared a 'run' with his relatives at Werribee, selling out (for $18,000) only in 1854 after floods destroyed the homestead and drowned Edward, his wife, and unmarried daughter. 
In December 1837 Wedge had returned to England, when he presented a collection of birds, animals, and ethnological specimens to the museum at Saffron Walden. He farmed in Suffolk, and protested to the Colonial Office about the treatment of both the Port Phillip Association and the Aborigines at Port Phillip. After his father died in 1842, he returned to Van Diemen's Land, becoming engaged aboard ship to Maria Medland Wills, of Dartmouth, Devon, the governess to Bishop Francis Russell Nixon's six children. They were married in St David's Cathedral, Hobart, on 28 December 1843; tragically Maria died in childbirth the following November. 
A devout Anglican, Wedge remained a friend and adviser to the bishop, who asked him to manage the church lands at Bishopsbourne. He was elected to the legislative council in 1855, where he led protests against maladministration in the convict department and helped to settle the question of state aid to religion. 
Described in the 'Hobart Mercury' by one of his successors, the surveyor J. E. Calder, as 'a high-minded gentleman who never thought a mean thought and was incapable of doing a dirty action', Wedge resided for many years at Leighlands, but in 1865 he moved to property at Medlands, on the River Forth, where he died on 22 November 1872. He was buried in Perth cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 28965


Wedgwood, Hensleigh (1803-1891), philologist, was born on 22 January 1803 at Gunville, Dorset, the fourth and youngest son of Josiah Wedgwood of Maer Hall, Staffordshire, and Elizabeth Allen of Cresselly, Pembrokeshire. He was also the grandson of Josiah Wedgwood (1730-1795), master potter. Hensleigh Wedgwood was educated at Rugby School. He matriculated from St John's College, Cambridge, and graduated from Christ's College BA in 1824 and MA in 1828. He took a high mathematical degree (1824), and in the classical tripos, initiated the same year, he came last, giving rise to the title 'the wooden wedge' by which the classical equivalent of the mathematical wooden spoon continued to be known for sixty years. After leaving Cambridge he read for the chancery bar, and qualified as a barrister in 1828, but never practised. He was a fellow of Christ's College from 1829 to 1830. On 10 January 1832 he married Frances Emma, the daughter of Sir James Mackintosh; they had six children, the eldest of whom was the writer (Frances) Julia Wedgwood. 
In 1831 Wedgwood was appointed police magistrate at Union Hall, Southwark. This led to the most characteristic action of his life. In 1837, having become convinced that the administration of oaths was inconsistent with the commands of the 'New Testament', he resigned his office, in spite of the protests of his friends. He stated his decision to his father in the memorable words: 'I think it very possible that it may be lawful for a man to take a judicial oath, but I feel that it is not lawful for me, and there is no use in letting $800 a year persuade one's conscience.' In 1838 the loss of income was partially recovered by his appointment to the post of registrar of metropolitan carriages, which he held until its abolition in 1849.Wedgwood's career as a scholar began with two small, interesting treatises, 'The Principles of Geometrical Demonstration' (1844) and 'On the Development of the Understanding' (1848); the keen interest in psychology that inspired them was the decisive factor in his pursuance of the philological studies by which he first became well known. One of the original members of the Philological Society (founded 18 May 1842), in 1857 he published his 'Dictionary of English Etymology', a work far in advance of all its predecessors, displaying an extraordinary command of linguistic material and considerable insight, but marred by imperfect acquaintance with recent discoveries in philology. Much attention, and initial criticism, was excited by the elaborate introduction, in which he energetically combated the theory, then recently advanced by Professor Max Muller, that language originated in a series of ultimate and irresoluble roots, spontaneously created by primitive man as expressions for his ultimate and irresoluble ideas. Wedgwood himself regarded language as the elaborated imitation of natural sounds, but onomatopoeia proved to be too limited and subjective a notion to provide the complete explanation he sought, despite his ingenious arguments and illustrations. Two years later his theory was placed in a new context by the publication of 'The Origin of Species' by his cousin Charles Darwin. When in 1881 Professor Skeat completed his 'Etymological Dictionary', Wedgwood was among its ablest critics; his 'Contested Etymologies' (1882) deservedly exercised a considerable and mainly beneficial effect upon the dictionary's second edition. 
In his last years Wedgwood became a confirmed spiritualist and contributed to the periodical 'Light'. Personally he was a man of extreme modesty. His reputation came unsought, and he lived to welcome the final triumph of the movement for the remission of the compulsory oath, a movement in which his own early efforts were forgotten. He died on 2 June 1891 at his house at 94 Gower Street, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 28966


Wedgwood, Josiah (1730-1795), master potter, was born in Burslem, Staffordshire, probably on 12 July 1730, the date on which his baptism was registered at St John's Church in that parish. He was the thirteenth and youngest child of Thomas Wedgwood (1687-1739) and his wife, Mary, 'nee' Stringer (died 1766), of Churchyard Pottery. The Wedgwood family had a long connection with Staffordshire pottery, starting with Josiah's great-great-grandfather, Gilbert Wedgwood, who is recorded as working a small pottery in Burslem towards the end of the seventeenth century. No trace has been found of any wares made by Thomas Wedgwood and it is probable that, like other potters, he supplemented his small income from it by farming a smallholding on the same land. 
Scarcely anything is known of Josiah's childhood. He was brought up in the thatched Churchyard house and pottery, which Thomas Wedgwood had inherited from his father, and began his education at about the age of six, walking the 7 miles round trip to attend a small school in Newcastle under Lyme. His mother was the daughter of the Unitarian minister at Newcastle under Lyme, and she brought up her children in the same faith. Josiah's father died in 1739, bequeathing the small family business to his eldest son, Thomas, and on 11 November 1744 Josiah was apprenticed for five years to his brother at the Churchyard works to learn the 'Art of Throwing and Handleing' (Reilly, 'Wedgwood', 1.26-7). The terms of the contract are significant because the difficult art of throwing was the most highly rated of all the potter's skills and only those expected to become master potters served such an apprenticeship. 
At an early stage of his indenture, probably about 1745 or 1746, Josiah suffered a severe attack of smallpox which left his right knee permanently weakened, and he was unable without assistance to work the 'kick-wheel' that provided the motive power of the thrower's wheel. 
Josiah nevertheless acquired considerable skill as a thrower and completed his apprenticeship. He continued to work for his brother until 1752, when he formed a partnership with John Harrison and Thomas Alders of Cliff Bank, Stoke-on-Trent. Two years later he was taken into partnership by Thomas Whieldon, one of the most respected potters in England, at his factory at Fenton Vivian, near Stoke. According to his experiment book, Wedgwood's work with Whieldon was largely concerned with the improvement of ceramic bodies, glazes, colours, and shapes, and it is clear that his efforts were directed principally towards the development of lead-glazed, cream-coloured earthenware ('creamware') and the creation and improvement of coloured glazes. He wrote later of this period: 'I saw the field was spacious, and the soil so good, as to promise an ample recompence to any one who should labour diligently in its cultivation' (Wedgwood MS 29-19121). 
In 1759 Wedgwood left Whieldon to become an independent potter, renting the Ivy House works for $15 a year and hiring his cousin, Thomas Wedgwood, as journeyman. By 1765 Thomas was Josiah's principal assistant and a year later he was taken into partnership with a one-eighth share of the profits. This partnership, which was limited to the production of 'useful' wares (generally, tablewares), lasted until 1788. 
Little evidence exists of the wares produced at the Ivy House works, but they almost certainly included typical Staffordshire pottery of the period for which there was an established market: salt-glazed stoneware, redware, and earthenware decorated with glazes in imitation of agate, marbling, and tortoiseshell. To these Wedgwood would have been anxious to add ware decorated with his fine green and yellow glazes, perfected in March 1759 and 1760, and his first cauliflower and pineapple shapes probably date from this period. His most important development, however, was the further improvement of his creamware body and in September 1761 a small quantity of this was bought from him by John Sadler of Liverpool, probably for experiments in transfer-printed decoration. The first delivery of Sadler's printed decoration on Wedgwood's creamware was made in March 1762. From 1762 Sadler and his partner Guy Green decorated increasingly large quantities of Wedgwood's creamware, which was sent to Liverpool for the purpose, and this valuable business, which grew rapidly in worth from $30 a month in 1763 to $650 a month in 1771, continued at least until 1795. 
Wedgwood's success with these early wares enabled him, by the beginning of 1763, to move to the larger Brick House ('Bell') works. The change coincided with his decision to commission supplies of salt-glazed wares (which he ceased to produce in his own factory), moulded shapes, and large quantities of biscuit (unglazed) wares from William Greatbatch, a former employee of Whieldon's, who had set up his own pottery. 
In the spring of 1762, while on a visit to Liverpool, Wedgwood fell and damaged his vulnerable right knee. Confined to his bed he was attended by Dr Matthew Turner, who introduced his patient to Thomas Bentley, a cultivated man, already experienced in commerce, who had acquired both classical learning and a knowledge of French and Italian. The two men found that their personalities were both compatible and complementary, and they began a friendship which was the foundation of one of the foremost manufacturing partnerships in industrial history. In Wedgwood's letters to Bentley, more than 1000 of which have been preserved, there has survived a remarkably full and lively account of their intimate association, which was to last for more than eighteen years. Bentley's replies, all but a few of them now lost, were described by Wedgwood as 'my Magazines, Reviews, Chronicles, & I had allmost said my 'Bible'' (Wedgwood MS 25-18256, September 1769). 
From the start Wedgwood demonstrated an initiative unique among potters of his time, and he was usually the first to adopt or adapt innovative aids and techniques. An important example was the engine-turning lathe, primarily a metalworking tool, the use of which he introduced to pottery in 1763. 
On 25 January 1764 Wedgwood married Sarah (1734-1815), the daughter of his kinsman Richard Wedgwood, a prosperous merchant and the eldest brother of Thomas and John Wedgwood of the Big House, Burslem, from whom Josiah had rented the Ivy House works five years earlier. Sarah was a substantial heiress and brought with her a considerable dowry, said to have been $4000, which came under Wedgwood's control. It was a love match, successfully negotiated in spite of initial opposition from her father, and there is ample evidence that the marriage was a happy one. Sarah was intelligent, shrewd, and well educated -- better, in fact, than her husband -- and they shared a broad sense of humour and a strong sense of family duty. In the first years of their marriage, she helped Josiah with his work, learning the codes and formulae in which he recorded his experiments, keeping accounts, and giving practical advice on shapes and decoration. 
In 1765 Wedgwood opened his first London showrooms in Charles Street, off Grosvenor Square, and in June he received a commission to make an elaborate tea service in green and gold creamware for Queen Charlotte. In the following year he was officially appointed potter to her majesty and his creamware was renamed 'Queen's ware'. 
In 1766 Wedgwood bought for $3000 the Ridgehouse estate of some 350 acres, situated between Burslem, Hanley, and Newcastle under Lyme, and built there a factory which he named Etruria. A crucial advantage of the location of the factory was its position in the path of the projected Trent and Mersey Canal, in the promotion of which Wedgwood played an active part. He was also a leader in the fight for turnpike roads to improve communications between the Staffordshire potteries, London, and Liverpool. 
Bentley, meanwhile, had formed a partnership in Liverpool with Samuel Boardman and, starting in 1764, had built up a solid and expanding trade in Wedgwood wares, much of which he shipped to America and the West Indies. In February 1767, after fourteen months of persuasion and discussion, Bentley agreed to become Wedgwood's partner in the manufacture of ornamental wares, for which the Etruria factory was to be designed. This project was threatened when, in April 1768, Wedgwood 'over walk'd & over work'd' his right knee (Wedgwood MS 17760, 30 April 1768); four weeks later, his leg was amputated, without anaesthetic, in his own house, by a local surgeon. By the third week of June, Wedgwood was sufficiently recovered to visit his Burslem factory and the Etruria site, and shortly afterwards he was fitted with the first of the wooden legs which he wore for the rest of his life. 
The Wedgwood and Bentley partnership books were opened in November 1768, and the Etruria factory was officially inaugurated on 13 June 1769, a date commemorated by the production of six 'First Day's Vases' thrown by Wedgwood on a wheel turned by Bentley. Products of the new partnership included cameos, medallions, tablets for chimney pieces, and library busts in Wedgwood's refined black stoneware which he called black basaltes. Far more important were the ornamental vases, an innovation in English pottery, formerly thought fine enough only for tableware. By the end of 1768 Wedgwood had three types of vases in production: creamware, often enriched with gilding; 'variegated', in imitation of natural stones such as agate, marble, porphyry, and lapis lazuli; and black basaltes, ornamented in bas-relief or, from 1769, painted in imitation of Greek and Roman red-figure vases. He told Bentley that it was his modest intention to become 'Vase Maker General to the Universe' (Wedgwood MS 25-18240, 1 May 1769). By August 1772 he already had 'upwards of 100 Good Forms of Vases' (Wedgwood MS 25-18392, 23 Aug 1772), most of them copied or adapted from shapes illustrated in books of engravings but disguised by altered ornament or added decoration. 
The display of Wedgwood's vases in the Wedgwood and Bentley London showrooms, which moved in 1768 to larger premises in Great Newport Street, created a new fashion -- a 'violent Vase Madness' (Wedgwood MS 25-18314, 2 Aug 1770), which, by its sudden success, revealed serious flaws in the management of the partnership. Wedgwood was heavily in debt. Although profits for both partnerships were satisfactory, failure to regulate production had led to a vast accumulation of stock and a serious lack of ready cash, classic symptoms of uncontrolled expansion with insufficient capital resources. The pricing of ornamental wares was haphazard, production runs were often too short to be economical, and the lack of a costing system had allowed the wasteful use of labour and materials to go unnoticed. Wedgwood responded to the threat to the business by planning production and creating a 'price book of workmanship', one of the first essays in cost accounting in the history of manufacturing (Reilly, 'Josiah Wedgwood', 112-14). 
It was not only the products of the Etruria factory that were innovative: the layout of the factory and the management techniques employed there were exceptionally advanced, and the finished estate included an elegant house, Etruria Hall, for the Wedgwood family, and housing for many of the workers. Wedgwood insisted on strict factory discipline but he subsidized an early form of sick-benefit scheme, and conditions for work at Etruria compared favourably with those to be found anywhere in Europe. Originally intended for the production of ornamental wares only, the plan of the factory was extended in 1767 to embrace the Queen's ware 'useful' wares, the production of which was moved from the Brick House works in 1772. 
Queen Charlotte's patronage of Wedgwood's creamware was followed by orders for tableware from the king and many of the nobility. In 1770 Wedgwood received his first order from Empress Catherine II of Russia. Three years later she commissioned a large Queen's ware dinner and dessert service of nearly 1000 pieces for the Chesmensky Palace, familiarly known as La Grenouilliere (the frog marsh). The 'Frog' service, then the largest ever ordered from a British potter, was decorated with hand-painted landscapes and a frog emblem at Wedgwood's Chelsea decorating studio, supervised by Bentley. Its completion in 1774 marked the removal of the firm's London showrooms from Great Newport Street to even larger premises in Greek Street, where the service was displayed, by invitation, to the public. This great service is now permanently exhibited at the Hermitage Museum, St Petersburg. 
Wedgwood's Queen's ware, the most influential development in the history of British pottery, achieved almost a monopoly of the high-quality earthenware tableware market in Europe. It was widely imitated, notably in France ('faience-fine', 'faience anglaise'), Germany ('Steingut'), and Italy ('terraglia'), and by the end of the century the manufacture of the traditional European tin-glazed earthenware had virtually ceased. 
From 1772 it was Wedgwood's policy to mark everything made at Etruria. He was the first earthenware potter consistently to mark his goods and the first ever to use his own name, which was impressed in the clay. He and Bentley undertook market research, cultivating influential patrons (several of whom permitted him to copy objects in their private collections), enlisting the help of ambassadors, and taking pains to produce wares suited to specific markets. In 1771-2, in a daring and ultimately successful experiment in inertia selling, unsolicited parcels of ware were sent to many of the noble houses of Germany in the hope of attracting orders and advertising the quality of the goods. Between 1773 and 1787 Wedgwood issued illustrated catalogues of his Queen's ware and ornamental wares, the later editions being published in French, German, and Dutch translations. 
Design played an important part in Wedgwood's success and he owed to Bentley his conversion to the neo-classical style, which he applied to his Queen's ware tablewares as he did to his ornamental wares at a time when all other pottery and porcelain manufacturers were dedicated to the rococo. 
Wedgwood became a master potter at a time when it was the ambition of almost every potter in Europe to make porcelain. His commonplace book shows that he was well informed about porcelain manufacture, but he was also aware of the crippling losses associated with it and the failure of many of the English factories which had made it. In 1775 he led the potters when they successfully contested the renewal of Richard Champion's patent for the exclusive use of Cornish clay and china stone, but he failed in his attempt to establish a 'Public Experimental Work' in co-operation with other leading Staffordshire potters for the manufacture of 'an useful white porcelain body' (Reilly, 'Josiah Wedgwood', 311-12). 
By that time Wedgwood was well advanced with his long and arduous series of more than 5000 recorded experiments which culminated in his invention of jasper, but it was not until November 1777 that he was able to assure Bentley that he could make it 'with as much facility & certainty' as the black basaltes (Wedgwood MS 25-18790, 3 Nov 1777). The most significant ceramic invention since that of porcelain by the Chinese nearly a thousand years earlier, jasper was an original white stoneware body which was capable of being stained by metallic oxides and ornamented in bas-relief to produce the two-colour appearance of cameos. It was perfectly suited to neo-classical decoration, and the colours that Wedgwood chose for his new medallions, plaques, and tablets for chimney pieces were intended to complement those most fashionable in interior decoration. It was no coincidence that they closely matched some of those used by Robert Adam. Wedgwood developed advanced ornamenting techniques to produce in jasper an enormous variety of ornamental wares from buttons to vases, and his cameos were mounted in metal as jewellery or as ornament for boxes, cabinets, and clocks. 
The smaller designs for Wedgwood's bas-relief ornaments were cast or copied from antique gems, often borrowed from the collections of such patrons as the duke of Marlborough and Sir Watkin Williams Wynn. Portraits of 'Illustrious Moderns', of which Wedgwood produced more than 300 as jasper medallions, and larger reliefs, were modelled for him by professional sculptors and modellers, including the younger John Flaxman and Joachim Smith in London, or by William Hackwood, employed at Etruria for sixty-three years. After Bentley's death in 1780 Wedgwood extended his range of commissioned models, setting up a studio in Rome. There Italian sculptors, supervised by Flaxman and Henry Webber, were employed to adapt subjects from the antique, buying work from London modellers and using designs in the Romantic style from three gifted amateur artists, Lady Diana Beauclerk, Lady Templetown, and Emma Crewe. 
From 1781 Wedgwood was able to make jasper vases, for several of which Flaxman also provided bas-relief ornaments, and it was Flaxman who in February 1785 drew Wedgwood's attention to the Portland vase. In 1786 Wedgwood obtained permission to copy it in jasper. Work on the vase continued for more than three years before he was able to send the first perfect copy to his friend, Dr Erasmus Darwin, who later included a description of it in 'The Botanic Garden' (1791), with an illustration engraved by William Blake. Wedgwood's jasper Portland vase was exhibited in London in May 1790 and copies were sold by subscription. Fine 'first edition' vases rank among the greatest technical achievements of European pottery and they provided a triumphant finale to Wedgwood's career. 
In 1782 Wedgwood had worked on a method for improving the accuracy of firing pottery. His new instrument for measuring heat in the kilns, a form of thermoscope, was called a 'pyrometer', and he read the first of four papers describing his invention to the Royal Society in May of that year. He was elected fellow of the Royal Society in 1783. In March 1786 he was elected fellow of the Society of Antiquaries and in October of the same year fellow of the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce. 
Wedgwood's interest in the arts was undoubtedly stimulated by his long friendship with Bentley and by his association with patrons whose collections he was invited to visit. In 1780 George Stubbs, at whose request Wedgwood had made some large earthenware tablets for the artist to paint on, was his guest at Etruria. Stubbs stayed for several months, making sketches for a large painting on panel of the Wedgwood family, painting portraits on Wedgwood's ceramic plaques of Josiah and Sarah and on panel of her father, Richard, and modelling two large bas-reliefs for reproduction in jasper and black basaltes. Portraits of both Josiah and Sarah Wedgwood were painted by Sir Joshua Reynolds in 1784, and in 1785 Wedgwood bought three paintings from Joseph Wright of Derby. As the Reynolds portrait shows, Wedgwood's features were undistinguished and his dress unostentatious; but the jaw is firm and the grey-blue eyes show humour as well as resolution. The subject's high colour may be evidence of his fondness for red meat, porter, and fortified wines. Profile portraits of Wedgwood, modelled by Joachim Smith and William Hackwood, were reproduced in jasper. 
Wedgwood's geological explorations in search of raw materials, and his chemical experiments in their use, often required the superior scientific knowledge and experience of his friends. After Bentley his closest friend was Dr Erasmus Darwin, Sarah Wedgwood's 'favourite Esculapius' (Wedgwood MS 25-18430, 26 Dec 1772), who attended the family whenever serious illness threatened and who inoculated the Wedgwood children against smallpox. Darwin was a member of the Lunar Society of Birmingham. Wedgwood's membership is disputed but it is certain that he attended meetings of the society, where he met Joseph Priestley, James Watt, William Withering, and other members, as well as distinguished visiting speakers. From about 1779 Wedgwood freely supplied Priestley and other scientists with chemical wares for their experiments, and in 1791 he offered Priestley a home at Etruria after the Birmingham riots in which his house and laboratory were destroyed. Matthew Boulton, also a member of the society and famous for his manufacture of metalwork of the highest quality, was for many years a friendly rival whom Wedgwood described as 'very ingenious, philosophical & agreeable' (Wedgwood MS 25-18147, 23 May 1767). 
Of the seven children of Josiah and Sarah Wedgwood born between 1765 and 1778, two died young: their second son, Richard, who lived less than a year, and their youngest daughter, Mary Ann, who was retarded and suffered from fits and died at the age of eight. The eldest child, Susannah, Josiah's favourite, was to marry Erasmus Darwin's son, Robert; their fifth child was the naturalist Charles Darwin. The three surviving sons, John, Josiah, and Tom ['see 'Wedgwood, Thomas], were educated privately before going on to Edinburgh University. All received training in the pottery business but in 1779 Wedgwood confided to Bentley that he expected his eldest son to be 'settled as a gentleman farmer' while Josiah (II) and Tom were to be 'potters & partners in trade' (Wedgwood MS 26-18946, 19 Dec 1779). Despite Bentley's warnings Wedgwood indulged his children and was especially patient with his sons. Although privately he hoped that all three might follow him in the firm, he told them that they should 'judge for themselves before they engaged in it' (Wedgwood MS W/M 32, 17 June 1793). Wedgwood's cousin Thomas, his partner in the manufacture of 'useful' wares, left the firm in 1788 and died shortly afterwards, leaving Wedgwood in sole control. Only Wedgwood's nephew, Tom Byerley, to whom he had entrusted the London showrooms after Bentley's death, combined sufficient experience in the business with a genuine desire to share the burden. 
In 1790 Wedgwood nevertheless took his three sons and his nephew into partnership and began progressively to retire from active control; but his plan 'to ease myself of increasing care in the decline of life' (Wedgwood MS W/M 32, 17 June 1793) was frustrated by the resignation of both his eldest and his youngest sons from their partnerships in 1793. Tom, the cleverest of the brothers, was later to be known as one of the pioneers of photography. 
Wedgwood's political sympathies were generally whig and towards the end of his life he found more time for activity in this area. He founded the General Chamber of Manufacturers of Great Britain, acting as spokesman for the pottery industry in opposition to Pitt's proposed commercial treaty with Ireland, and as adviser to William Eden in negotiations for the French commercial treaty of 1786. His enthusiasm for the French Revolution was less public and less sustained than his belief in the American cause in 1776; but he was unequivocal in his championship of the campaign for abolition of the slave trade, becoming a committee member of an anti-slavery society, distributing pamphlets, and issuing a jasper cameo depicting a kneeling slave in chains. 
In November 1794 Wedgwood's health began to fail and he took several weeks away from the potteries, leaving the management of Etruria in the hands of his second son. Erasmus Darwin was consulted and Wedgwood appeared to recover, but a few weeks later his face swelled and he suffered acute pain in the jaw, attributed to a decayed tooth. The surgeon summoned to extract it discovered 'signs of mortification' and Darwin decided that nothing could be done. Wedgwood's condition deteriorated rapidly and he became unconscious. He died, probably from cancer of the jaw, on 3 January 1795, at Etruria Hall. He was buried on the 6th in the parish church of Stoke-on-Trent. Seven years later a marble memorial tablet commissioned by his sons was installed there. The portrait, carved in high relief by John Flaxman, was considered a good likeness and the inscription bore a suitable tribute, but the tablet is remarkable for the date, 'August 1730', given for Wedgwood's birth, suggesting that the present-day ignorance of his early life was shared by his family. Wedgwood's will was proved on 2 July 1795. He had made substantial gifts to his children during his lifetime but the total value of his estate nevertheless approached $500,000. 
Josiah Wedgwood belonged to the fourth generation of a family of potters whose traditional occupation continued through another five generations. No other family business is recorded as surviving in unbroken succession for so long. The reason for its survival is plain: the strength of its foundations. Wedgwood was the most innovative of English potters and, in his time, the most enlightened. As he told his young cousin, Ralph Wedgwood, 'Everything gives way to experiment' (Reilly, 'Josiah Wedgwood', 311). Gladstone paid tribute to him in 1863 as 'the greatest man who ever, in any age or country, applied himself to the important work of uniting art with industry' (Reilly, 'Wedgwood', 1.16). Wedgwood himself might have preferred the less fulsome appreciation inscribed on his monument: 'He converted a rude and inconsiderable Manufactory into an elegant Art and An important part of the National Commerce'. 


@@@@@


doc= 28967


Wedgwood, Thomas (1771-1805), chemist, was born at Etruria Hall, Staffordshire, on 14 May 1771, the third and youngest surviving son of the potter Josiah Wedgwood (1730-1795) and his wife and cousin, Sarah Wedgwood (1734-1815). Together with his brother Jos, Tom was sent to school in Bolton when six years old. He was a precocious child, but also a frail one. He was educated almost entirely at home. He spent a few terms at Edinburgh University between 1787 and 1789, and while there met the mathematician and natural philosopher John Leslie, whom he subsequently invited to Etruria to help in the laboratory and to teach him and his brother Josiah mathematics and natural philosophy. 
Wedgwood's father had determined that 'Jos and Tom [would] be potters, and partners in trade. Tom to be the traveller and negotiator, and Jos the manufacturer' (Wedgwood, 74). For a very short while Tom worked energetically at the potteries. In April 1792, when almost twenty-one, he had a nervous breakdown, experiencing exhaustion, depression, severe headaches, and trouble with his eyesight. He gave up his philosophical (scientific) pursuits, and, on the advice of Erasmus Darwin, sought a change of scene. His father sent him to Paris to celebrate the third anniversary of the fall of the Bastille, from which he returned even more depressed. His health worsened, and in April 1793 he resigned his partnership in the firm. Subsequently a new partnership agreement was drawn up in which he and his brother Jos took more of the profits. He expected to take on responsibilities again when his health allowed. Meanwhile he took an interest in medical science, and helped to spread information about vaccination against smallpox. 
On his father's death in 1795 Wedgwood inherited a considerable fortune which enabled him to travel extensively in vain search of a cure, and also enabled him to contribute funds personally to literary, medical, and scientific men of genius. He went on a five-month walking tour in Germany, after which he awarded an annuity of $150 to Leslie. He then consulted Erasmus Darwin's son Robert, who advised him to seek other medical opinion. As a result he moved to Bristol, where he consulted the radical physician Thomas Beddoes. In 1798 Beddoes opened his Pneumatic Institution, to which Wedgwood donated $1000, writing that 'the attempt must be successful in part if it only goes to show that airs are not efficacious in medicine' (Litchfield, 35). He met the tanner Thomas Poole and, through him, Samuel Taylor Coleridge, to whom he gave a pension of $75 a year. In 1797 Wedgwood went to Penzance for its mild climate and there renewed a friendship with Gregory Watt, son of James Watt. Through Watt he met Humphry Davy, who was soon to work in Beddoes's institution; Wedgwood took part in the trials and breathed nitrous oxide there. 
Still vainly travelling in search of health Wedgwood went to the West Indies in 1800. Back in England he attended Davy's lectures at the Royal Institution, experienced a brief bout of health, and in Davy's laboratory resumed his experiments on 'silver pictures', which he published in 1802 as 'An account of a method of copying paintings upon glass, and of making profiles by the agency of light upon nitrate of silver, invented by T. Wedgwood, esq., with observations by H. Davy' ('Journal of the Royal Institution', 170-74). He showed that a copy or a silhouette of any object could be obtained when its shadow was thrown on a piece of white paper or leather which had been moistened with a solution of silver nitrate. In a similar manner a silhouette of a picture painted on glass could be obtained by placing the glass in the light of the sun upon the sensitized surface. His goal was to obtain silver pictures of the image produced in a camera obscura, but he failed, since no effect could be obtained in any moderate time. Davy, however, found that he was successful in obtaining images of small objects projected by a solar microscope. But he could not fix the image. As Davy noted, 'nothing but a method of preventing the unshaded parts of the delineation from being coloured by exposure to the day, is wanting to render the process as useful as it is elegant' (Litchfield, 194). Thus Wedgwood had tackled the project of using the chemical action of light for making pictures -- that is, of photography -- but did not discover a practical photographic process. 
Wedgwood's illness returned with severe depressions. He left London for a continental tour in May 1802 and returned to England in September in worse health. During the alarm of invasion by the French in 1803 and 1804 he equipped at his own expense a corps of volunteers raised in the country round Ullswater. He visited Coleridge and Wordsworth in the Lake District. Restless and ever moving, he died at Eastbury Park, Dorset, which he owned, on 10 July 1805. 
Wordsworth said that Wedgwood produced in him 'an expression of sublimity beyond what I ever experienced from the appearance of any other human being' (Litchfield, 127). Coleridge noted in him a fine and ever watchful sense of beauty, united with the most patient accuracy in experimental research. Humphry Davy found his opinions 'a secret treasure' (Treneer, 48). Sydney Smith said that he knew 'no man who appears to have made such an impression on his friends' ('DNB'), and his friends included many of the leading literary and scientific figures of his day. 
Wedgwood's only writings are two papers on the 'Production of light from different bodies, by heat and by attrition' ('PTRS', 82, 1792, 28-47; 270-82), read before the Royal Society of London in 1791 and 1792, in which we find the earliest suggestion of the general law that all bodies become red hot at the same temperature. 


@@@@@


doc= 28968


Weedall, Henry (1788-1859), Roman Catholic priest and college head, was born in London on 6 September 1788, the son of a doctor. He was educated at Sedgley Park School in Staffordshire (1794-1804) and chosen by Bishop John Milner, vicar apostolic of the midland district, to transfer to Oscott College in 1804. He was one of only six students for the priesthood in residence when Milner took direct control in 1808. Ordained on 6 April 1814 he became the first Oscott student to join the staff of the college, where he taught classics and theology; he was made vice-president and succeeded Thomas Walsh as president in 1826. Diminutive in stature, he was never robust in health and suffered from poor eyesight and severe headaches (possibly migraine). Even in his portrait as college president he is shown wearing spectacles. Despite his physical weakness he worked closely with Bishop Walsh to enhance the intellectual and spiritual stature of Oscott. Two years abroad renewed his strength and he returned in 1832 full of plans to rebuild the college. He bought a new site in 1833 and masterminded an ambitious project modelled on an Oxford college; it was finally completed by A. W. Pugin. The buildings were finished in 1838, and in 1839 Weedall achieved affiliation for the college to London University. Oscott was one of the first Catholic colleges to be affiliated, and Weedall regarded this as the climax of his work of consolidation and expansion. 
By 1840 Nicholas Wiseman was the rising star in English Catholicism and Walsh wanted him as coadjutor in the midland district, using Oscott as a platform. In a curiously callous move, Weedall was removed from Oscott after thirty-six years as student, professor, and president to make room for Wiseman. Weedall was nominated as vicar apostolic of the northern district, despite being weak in health and, as Walsh wrote, of 'so anxious a mind' that he was most unsuitable for the episcopal role. Weedall was desperate to escape the appointment and vocal opposition from a section of the northern clergy gave him the opportunity. He actually encouraged them to make clear their dislike of his nomination, and they gladly helped him to renounce it. The pope's direct intervention freed Weedall, and he returned triumphantly from Rome only to find Wiseman safely installed in Oscott. For a time Weedall was head of the preparatory school at Old Oscott but in 1843 left for the mission at Leamington Spa. 
At the restoration of the hierarchy in 1850 Weedall was appointed provost of the chapter of the new diocese of Birmingham. William Ullathorne, Walsh's successor, had turned to Weedall in frustration at the poor government of Oscott in the late 1840s. As early as 1848 Ullathorne was convinced that Weedall's influence would restore the confidence of the midland clergy in Oscott. In Weedall's own view, there had been 'too much of splash and dash', to the detriment of the college's reputation. Ullathorne pressed Weedall to return in the role of general overseer, to which finally he agreed in 1853, the year in which he also hosted the first Westminster synod. The last six years of his life were spent as president of Oscott; under Ullathorne's influence he gradually steered the college in the direction of a Tridentine seminary, separating lay and clerical education, and restoring its 'sober ecclesiastical character'. Weedall died at Oscott on 7 November 1859 and was buried in the chantry. He had been the admired orator on many similar occasions, including the funerals of Bishop Walsh and the earl of Shrewsbury; his own eulogy was preached by John Henry Newman. 


@@@@@


doc= 28969


Weekes, Henry (1807-1877), sculptor, was born on 14 January 1807 in the parish of St Andrew, Canterbury, the son of Capon Weekes (1778/9-1848), a banker's clerk, and his first wife, Mary Pearson (1778/9-1816). After attending the King's School at Canterbury he was apprenticed in 1822 to William Behnes, a talented but chaotic London sculptor. A year later he entered the Royal Academy Schools, and won a silver medal in 1826 for the best model from the antique. Having completed his apprenticeship in 1827, he became a studio assistant to the fashionable sculptor Francis Chantrey, who provided him with a house and studio. Chantrey encouraged Weekes to work on his own account and passed clients on to him. At Chantrey's request, on his death Weekes took over his studio and completed his unfinished sculptures, notably the equestrian bronze statue of the duke of Wellington (1841-4; Royal Exchange) for the City of London. Working for a famous sculptor identified him -- reassuringly for many potential patrons -- as an approved disciple, but this closeness did not advance his standing with contemporary critics. 
From his home county, Kent, came Weekes's early commissions: a sundial base for the Dane John Garden at Canterbury (exh. RA, 1829) and busts of Lord Harris of Seringapatam and Harris's son-in-law Stephen Lushington, MP for Canterbury and governor of Madras from 1827 to 1835 (exh. RA, 1834), for the Canterbury Philosophical Society. These connections led to a series of impressive Indian commissions, notably -- in St George's Cathedral, Madras -- a statue of Stephen Lushington's son James (exh. RA, 1836) and a monument to John Dent (died 1845), who is shown with his Indian secretary under a palm-leaf cresting. 
Weekes's reputation for portraiture -- his forte -- was established with the first bust made of Queen Victoria following her accession (exh. RA, 1838; priv. coll.), which she commissioned as a birthday present for her mother, the duchess of Kent. It combines typical Chantrey touches -- parted lips, as if speaking, and meticulously modelled hair -- with Behnes's sensitivity to the innocence of youth. Weekes held that the primary objective of portraiture is 'to give the eye permanently that which no history or biography will be able hereafter thoroughly to convey to the imagination' (Weekes, 'Prize Treatise', 58). He often hit this target. Of the 124 works he exhibited at the Royal Academy between 1828 and 1877 over 100 were portrait busts or statues, the later ones being larger, more imposing, and more broadly modelled. His diploma work following his election as a Royal Academician in 1863 was a bust of Joseph Henry Green (RA), president of the Royal College of Surgeons and professor of anatomy at the academy -- a tactful choice, as between 1853 and 1867 the college ordered six busts of members costing around $110 each. Such commissions enabled Weekes to leave the substantial sum of nearly $30,000 at his death. 
Understatement, humanity, and technical excellence -- all outstanding Chantrey qualities -- also characterize Weekes's church monuments, well illustrated by his acknowledged masterpiece, the monument to Samuel Whitbread and Lady Elizabeth Whitbread at Cardington, Bedfordshire (exh. RA, 1849). The couple, modelled in high relief, devoutly kneel, she leaning affectionately on his shoulder. Weekes met the fashion for historic figures in period dress with skill and intelligence. His output in this genre is impressive and includes Cranmer, Latimer, and Ridley for George Gilbert Scott's Martyrs' Memorial (1841) in Oxford; a monumental seated Francis Bacon (1845), for Trinity College, Cambridge; a pensive John Hunter (exh. RA, 1864), based on the portrait by Sir Joshua Reynolds, for the Royal College of Surgeons, London; 'William Harvey' (model exh. RA, 1864), for the new University Museum, Oxford; and a swagger Charles II, complete with spaniel (model exh. RA, 1869), for the Palace of Westminster, now in the central criminal court, Old Bailey. 
In the 1850s Weekes developed a more personal style, leaving Chantrey's shadow. He tackled ideal figures and attempted to revive the classical style by introducing naturalistic detail and taking a more pictorial approach. 'The Suppliant' (exh. RA, 1850), his first publicly exhibited work in this vein, secured his election as an associate of the Royal Academy in 1851. 'Resting after a Run', a marble statue depicting the daughter of Frederick J. Reed with a hoop (exh. Great Exhibition, 1851; ex Sothebys, New York, 26 May 1994), portrays childhood itself as much as the individual girl. His ideal figures had some success with patrons: a 'Sardanapalus' (exh. RA, 1861; Mansion House) was ordered by the corporation of London. The monument, commissioned by their son, to Percy Bysshe Shelley and Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley (exh. RA, 1853; priory church, Christchurch, Hampshire) is Weekes's outstanding work in his new manner and earned plaudits from the 'Art Journal'. Touches of naturalistic detail, such as the seaweed wrapped around the poet's arm and the broken rocks, evoke the beach where his drowned body was washed ashore. 
Weekes's most ambitious later commission (after John Gibson's refusal to participate) was to carve 'Manufactures', one of four marble groups representing the industrial arts, in 1864 for Scott's Albert Memorial (finished by April 1870). The genius of 'Manufactures' holds an hourglass, symbolizing the importance of time to industry, and is offered cloth by a young weaver; alongside, an ironworker (modelled on the Farnese 'Hercules') stands by his anvil and a potter exhibits his wares. This group, though well received, highlights the dilemmas facing a sculptor schooled in the neo-classical tradition who attempted a modern subject. 
In 1852 Weekes published the essay that had won him a gold medal from the Royal Society of Arts: 'The Prize Treatise on the Fine Arts Section of the Great Exhibition of 1851'. As well as reviewing the sculpture in the exhibition he gives a rare account of the practicalities of bronze-casting and marble-carving. To some themes -- the issue of modern dress, Roubiliac's genius, the differing roles of portrait sculptors and those of ideal works, and the importance of education to sculptors -- he returns in the eighteen lectures that he delivered following his election as professor of sculpture at the Royal Academy in 1869 (published posthumously in 1880). Besides the usual theoretical issues -- beauty, style, taste, and composition -- he discusses in three lectures the importance of Sir Joshua Reynolds's teaching and, in one masterly lecture, the characters of Chantrey, Behnes, and Gibson. His intelligence, technical skill, and moderate stylistic innovation kept him in steady demand. John Ernest Weekes, his son and the author of a brief memoir prefacing the lectures, describes him as an earnest and thoughtful man with a simple, kindly manner. Weekes died of heart disease, at his home, 96 Buckingham Palace Road, London, on 28 May 1877 and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 28970


Weelkes, Thomas (bap. 1576?, d. 1623), composer and organist, was probably the son of John Weeke, rector of Elsted in Sussex, and his wife, Johanne, who was baptized at Elsted on 25 October 1576. Weeke held this living in plurality with that of Twyford and Owslebury, near Winchester, and his case for paternity is strengthened by the fact that the dedicatee of Weelkes's first publication, 'Madrigals to 3, 4, 5, & 6 Voices' (1597) was George Phillpot, who lived in Compton Place, only 1 mile from Twyford, and that Winchester College, barely 2 miles away, was where Weelkes received his first confirmed appointment -- as organist, evidently in 1598. Certainly at this date Weelkes was still very young for he wrote in the preface to his 'Ballets and Madrigals to Five Voices' (1598) of 'my yeeres yet unripened', also noting that he had earlier been in the service of 'his Maister Edward Darcye Esquire, Groome of hir Majesties privie Chamber'. 
Little is known of Weelkes's life during the three or four years that he passed at Winchester College. There is some suspicion that he felt out of place in what was one of the leading schools in the country, being proficient only in music: 'this small facultie of mine, because it is alone in mee, and without the asistance of other more confident sciences, is the more to bee favored' he pleaded in the preface to his 'Madrigals of 5 and 6 Parts, Apt for the Viols and Voices' (1600). Certainly it is difficult to believe that the sometimes extraordinary music that he wrote during this phase would have found ready approval from the staff of the college, for what he published between 1597 and 1600 contained some of the boldest music yet conceived in England, and the best of the twenty works in his 1600 volume are among the greatest of all English madrigals. In the three-voice 'Cease sorrows now', from his 1597 volume, Weelkes had already opened up a vein of musical pathos that was by now commonplace in the madrigal as composed in its native Italy but that was quite unprecedented in English music; at the opposite expressive extreme, in the ballets of 1598 he had revelled in a degree of rhythmic vitality as yet unmatched in the music of his own country. In the volume of 1600, however, Weelkes's radicalism was consummated, above all perhaps in two compositions: the five-voice 'O care, thou wilt despatch me' and the six-voice 'Thule, the period of cosmography'. In the former, using the structure of the normally vivacious ballet with its 'fa-la' refrains, Weelkes set a grief-ridden text to grave music filled with dissonance and, at the opening of its second half, startling chromatic harmony against which the intervening fa-la refrains seem like nostalgic reflections of that joy of which the lyric itself despairs. It was a brilliant conception, brilliantly worked. But 'Thule', a setting of a text which listed some of the wonders of the world that travellers had begun to report upon during the preceding century, was even bolder. It was the text's imaginative suggestions, especially the volcanic ones, that set Weelkes's inventiveness ablaze: Hekla's 'sulphureous fire', 'Trinacrean Etna's flames', and above all 'how strangely Fogo burns', an image which drew from Weelkes perhaps the weirdest chromatic passage in all English music of the period. Also vastly impressive is 'As Vesta was from Latmos Hill descending', which Weelkes contributed to 'The Triumphs of Oriana' (1601), the collection of madrigals assembled in praise of the aged Queen Elizabeth; especially striking is his treatment of the final line, 'Long live fair Oriana', where the melodic idea setting these words is repeated to saturation point in the upper five voice parts, while this same idea, in twelve-fold augmentation, also provides the bass, thus directing the music's harmonic course. It was a unique procedure -- monolithic, sonorous, and pulsating with concentrated energy -- that Weelkes also used in other madrigals. In fact Weelkes's Winchester phase was, for all his youth, creatively the most brilliant, perhaps even the supreme peak, of his composing career. His one remaining madrigalian publication, 'Ayres or Fantastic Spirits for Three Voices' (1608), containing some attractive, tuneful pieces, is relatively unimportant, as is his handful of compositions for keyboard and viol consort. 
At some time between October 1601 and October 1602 Weelkes moved to Chichester Cathedral as organist and 'informator choristarum'. By 1605 he had been appointed a Sherborne clerk, one of four such lay singers' positions. His career was advancing well; on 13 July 1602 he had been admitted BMus of Oxford University and now, with a yearly income of $15 2's'. 4died plus accommodation and other gratuities, he was well provided for. On 20 February 1603 he married Elizabeth Sandham, daughter of a wealthy Chichester merchant. There were at least three children of the marriage: Thomas, baptized on 9 June, less than four months after the marriage, and two daughters -- Alice, baptized on 17 September 1606, and Katherine, of whose baptism there is no record, but who is mentioned in her father's will. During Weelkes's early years at Chichester there is nothing to suggest that he did not give good and efficient service to the cathedral, and on the title-page of his final madrigalian publication (1608) he is styled 'Gentleman of his Majesty's Chapel', though the chapel's own records never mention him and at most he must have been only a gentleman-extraordinary. 
However, in the following year, 1609, Weelkes was declared contumacious for not attending the bishop's visitation; his personal decline had begun. True he was not the only disorderly member of the cathedral establishment, though in due course he would become its most celebrated. In December 1613 he was accused of a 'fama publica ebrietatis' (Chichester Diocesan RO, Ep.1/18/31). No further action was taken against him, nor were there any personal consequences when, two years later, the archbishop's visitation exposed a deplorable state of affairs, Weelkes and ten other choirmen being sternly upbraided for failure to attend cathedral services. In May 1616 he was for the first time singled out for negligence, and the cathedral chapter prescribed for him a very precise schedule for training the choirboys. This was reaffirmed at the bishop's visitation in September, which also discovered that Weelkes had not been properly performing his duties during divine service itself. Matters came to a head in October, when he was brought before the chapter to answer the charge that he had become notorious both for drunkenness and for outrageous blaspheming. Because he was unable to produce witnesses who would testify for him, on 16 January 1617 he was dismissed as organist and 'informator choristarum', though he retained his Sherborne clerkship. 
Nevertheless, Weelkes remained unreformed, and in 1619 William Lawes, the sub-chanter, reported that, while most of the choir behaved in a seemly manner during prayers, Weelkes frequently turned up so 'disguised' from the tavern or alehouse that he would utter curses and oaths that both profaned the service and outraged those who were present. Moreover, Lawes added, despite numerous admonitions from the bishop, Weelkes not only continued to behave thus every day but was even tending to get worse. Yet this still had no adverse consequences for him, nor was there any reaction even to the report made to the bishop during his visitation of 1622 by two of the four Sherborne clerks that, while three of them were performing their duties as required by the statutes, Weelkes was not. Most surprising of all, in the accounts for the financial year to Michaelmas 1622 Weelkes reappears as organist. On 7 September, however, he buried his wife and his own end came a year later. By then he had clearly been living for some time in the parish of St Bride's in London, for his will, made on 30 November 1623, acknowledges a 50's'. debt for board and lodging. His death followed swiftly, and the next day, 1 December, he was buried in the church of St Bride's, Fleet Street. His possessions proved insufficient to cover his debts, and the site of his grave is unknown. The close friend at whose house he died was called, ironically, Henry Drinkwater. 
None of Weelkes's church music can be dated precisely but presumably most of it was composed during his Chichester years. While single madrigals of his were sporadically printed in the late eighteenth century and three of his complete collections (1597, 1598, and 1608) were issued in the nineteenth, not one of his verse anthems saw print until 1966, and until recently his church music had been badly underestimated. In fact Weelkes was one of the most important church composers of his time. He wrote both services (music for the standard texts in the morning and evening rituals, and in the eucharist) and anthems, in both forms using the two established types: the full type, written for voices only, and the verse type, where choruses for the full choir alternated with verses for soloist(s), the organ accompanying throughout. As a composer of services Weelkes was by far the most prolific of all major Elizabethan and Jacobean composers, producing ten in all (seven verse, and three full), though sadly most survive incomplete. 
Some of Weelkes's verse services and verse anthems are studiedly restrained in manner, with relatively simple choruses, and these, one suspects, were designed for Chichester, where they would not have overstretched the limited musical resources of that establishment. But others are far grander -- the spacious 'In medio chori' service employs an additional semi-chorus placed between the choirstalls and the service for trebles exploits the brilliance of the boys' voices at the top of their range, while the grand verse anthems 'Give the king thy judgements' and 'Christ rising' were surely envisaged for performance in the Chapel Royal; the latter is a particularly impressive piece. The prevailing (though not exclusive) musical demand in the Church of England was for dignified and sober compositions, and Weelkes's full anthems fall into two categories, the style of some clearly designed to be acceptable for general church use as allowed for in the morning and evening liturgies, and others, almost certainly secular anthems, intended for extra-liturgical use, including private domestic devotions (as, explicitly, were Weelkes's two contributions to Sir William Leighton's 'The Tears or Lamentations of a Sorrowful Soul', 1614, his only sacred pieces printed in his lifetime). There is, nevertheless, clear evidence that some at least of Weelkes's full anthems served in both contexts. In secular anthems he was free to employ a more rhetorical, or affective, style; here he was something of a pioneer -- and often at his best, as in the splendid six-voice 'Hosanna to the Son of David' and 'Gloria in excelsis Deo. Sing, my soul'. Of his full services, that for seven voices is especially impressive; set this noble, monolithic creation alongside the trails of dazzling imagery and heightened expressive states from which the greatest of the early madrigals were assembled, and the breadth of Weelkes's expressive range is impressively displayed, confirming him as one of the most prodigiously gifted of all English Renaissance composers, whose personal decline was one of the great tragedies of English music. 


@@@@@


doc= 28971


Weever, John (1575/6-1632), poet and antiquary, was born in Preston, Lancashire, to 'poor but religious parents', and received an excellent education 'by the care of his uncle Thomas' (Whittle, 198). This may have been Thomas Langton, from whom Weever later wrote that he had 'received many favours' (Honigmann, 'Weever', 7), and Weever's father may have been 'Johne Weyver', one of thirteen followers of Langton who were tried for murder in 1590 after a riot at Lea Hall, Lancashire. Weever also addressed Henry Butler of Rawcliffe, Lancashire, as his uncle, but the precise blood relationship of the two men is uncertain. 
On 30 April 1594 Weever was admitted as a sizar to Queens' College, Cambridge. His first tutor there was the Lancashireman William Covell, whose 'Polimanteia' (1595) contains one of the first printed notices of Shakespeare, along with praise for several other poets. Later Weever studied under Robert Pearson, whom he referred to more than thirty years later as a 'reverend, learned divine', to whom he was 'bound to acknowledge all thankfulness' (Weever, 864). Weever's BA supplicat was submitted on 16 April 1598, and the grace was conceded on the same day. While he had apparently considered taking holy orders, instead he went to London after graduation and immersed himself in the city's literary scene. 
In late 1599 Weever's 'Epigrammes in the Oldest Cut, and Newest Fashion' was published in London. The front matter contains commendatory verses by Cambridge friends and an address 'To the Generous Readers' in which the author apologizes for the epigrams being out of date by a year. He dedicated the volume to Richard Hoghton, high sheriff of Lancashire, and also included six other dedications to prominent Lancashire residents, one before each of the seven 'weeks' into which the book is divided. 
Many of the epigrams appear to have been written while Weever was at Cambridge, since they are addressed to fellow students or professors, in many cases invoking puns on the subject's name. However, he also addressed several epigrams to contemporary literary figures. 'Ad Gulielmum Shakespear' is the earliest known complete poem addressed to Shakespeare, and is also the only poem in the volume to take the form of a Shakespearian sonnet. He also addressed poems to Michael Drayton, Edward Alleyn, Samuel Daniel, John Marston and Ben Jonson, William Warner, and Edmund Spenser (then recently dead). In the same year, Weever also wrote commendatory verses for his Cambridge friend Henry Buttes's 'Dyet's Dry Dinner'. 
In 1600 Weever published a curious volume called 'Faunus and Melliflora', dedicated to Sir Edward Stanley of Lancashire. The first part consists of an Ovidian erotic poem influenced by Shakespeare's 'Venus and Adonis', but after a thousand lines this changes abruptly to a mythological account of the origin of satires, followed by translations of satires by Horace, Persius, and Juvenall. The volume concludes with a reference to the burning of satirical books ordered by the archbishop of Canterbury and bishop of London in London on 4 June 1599 and an ironic 'Prophecie' in which Weever alludes to the satires of Joseph Hall and John Marston, pretending to rebuke those men for making fun of the current age. 
In 1601 an anonymous satirical pamphlet called 'The Whipping of the Satyre' was published, which Davenport persuasively argued was written by Weever. The book attacks three people called the Satirist, the Epigrammatist, and the Humorist, probably representing John Marston, Everard Guilpin, and Ben Jonson. Weever's authorship seems to have been widely guessed, and he came in for some counter-attacks. Honigmann argued that Weever is lampooned as Simplicius Faber in Marston's 'What You Will', Shift in Jonson's 'Every Man out of his Humour', and Asinius Bubo in Thomas Dekker's 'Satiromastix'. These works portray Weever as a small man and a lover of tobacco (both characteristics admitted by Weever in his own writings), a hanger-on of Jonson, and possibly a homosexual. Weever may also have been lampooned as Ingenioso, a former Cambridge student searching for a patron, in the three Cambridge-produced plays of 1598-1601 known as the Parnassus plays. 
Weever appears to have been tiring of these wars of words by 1601, for in that year he also published two works which suggest that he was hoping for a career in the church after all. 'The Mirror of Martyrs' is a 1464-line narrative poem about the life and death of proto-protestant martyr Sir John Oldcastle, written as part of the backlash against Shakespeare's Falstaff (originally named Oldcastle). It is heavily influenced by Christopher Middleton's 'The Legend of Humphrey Duke of Glocester' (1600), for which Weever had written commendatory verses, and John Bale's 1544 life of Oldcastle. Weever's other religious work of 1601 was 'An Agnus Dei', a pedestrian verse history of Jesus Christ published as a tiny book less than 2 inches square. Later editions came out in 1603, 1606, and 1610, probably published for the book's novelty value rather than for any literary merit. 
After this burst of publication, Weever appears to have left London for a few years. In April 1603 he was in York for King James's procession from Scotland to London, and early in the reign of James he was at Kendal in Lancashire to witness a Corpus Christi play. He may have settled in Lancashire for a time, since in 1609 he signed depositions in a chancery suit there. However, at some undetermined point he returned to London, married a woman named Anne, and bought a house in the parish of St James's, Clerkenwell. He may be the John 'Weaver' who married Anne Edwards at St James's, Clerkenwell, on 25 July 1614, or the man of the same name who married Anne Panting in the same parish on 21 October 1617, or he may be neither of these. 
During the first three decades of the seventeenth century, Weever travelled 'at painful expense' throughout England and the continent collecting inscriptions from funeral monuments, an interest he had exhibited as early as the 'Epigrammes'. He claimed to have travelled through most of England and parts of Scotland, as well as to Italy, France, and Germany. About 1620 he befriended the herald Augustine Vincent, who gave him access to the records of the heralds' office and introduced him to Sir Robert Cotton and many other antiquaries. 
In 1631 Weever published a portion of his findings in a 900-page folio volume entitled 'Ancient Funerall Monuments'. This contains inscriptions from Canterbury, Rochester, London, and Norwich, interlarded with Weever's commentary and poetical extracts ranging from the ancients to works of the late 1620s. The frontispiece has a portrait of Weever, giving his age as fifty-five. Two notebooks in Weever's hand, containing an early draft of this work along with much unpublished material, survive as Society of Antiquaries manuscripts 127 and 128. The folio and notebooks preserve many inscriptions which have since been lost, and are thus invaluable to present-day historians and biographers. 
Weever did not live long after the publication of his 'magnum opus'. He made his will on 16 February 1632, and probate was granted on 29 March to his widow, Anne, who received the bulk of his estate. The will mentions houses in Gray's Inn Lane and Clerkenwell, and makes bequests to a brother, William, and to sisters Alice Cawthorne, Anne Caton, and Isabel Holt. A monument was erected to Weever in his parish church, where he was buried, but this does not survive; however, the verses from it were preserved by Anthony Munday in his 1633 edition of John Stow's 'Survey of London'. 


@@@@@


doc= 28972


Weguelin, Thomas Matthias (1763/4-1828), army officer, born at Moorfields, London, was the eldest son of John Christopher Weguelin and his second wife, Elizabeth. He was appointed an East India Company cadet in March 1781 in the Bengal presidency. He arrived in Calcutta in April 1782, having been promoted ensign on 16 June 1781. He joined the 3rd European regiment at Burhanpur, and became a lieutenant on 22 September 1782. In November he was transferred to the 1st battalion, 22nd native infantry, at the frontier station of Fatehgarh in the dominions of the nawab of Oudh. In March 1783 he went to the Farrukhabad district, where he took part in some minor operations, and in 1796, when his regiment was incorporated with the 2nd native infantry, he received the brevet rank of captain. 
Weguelin served against Tipu Sahib from 1790 to 1792 with Lieutenant-Colonel John Cockrell's detachment. He fought at the battle and siege of Seringapatam in 1791-2. In December 1797 he was transferred to the 1st battalion, 13th native infantry, which he commanded in 1799 during the deposition of the nawab of Oudh, and shortly after joined the 1st European regiment at Cawnpore, removing with it to Dinapore at the close of the year. On 10 August 1801 he received the regimental rank of captain, and in September 1803 he went in command of the flank companies of his regiment to join the army under Lord Lake, then engaged with the Marathas in the north-west, where he took part in the siege of Gwalior. In September 1804 he accompanied Lake's army as judge-advocate-general in the field provinces north and west of Allahabad, and took part in the siege of Bharatpur. He held the post until his appointment to major on 3 March 1808. 
In June Weguelin commanded an expedition to defend Macau against the French, with the local rank of colonel: he returned to Bengal in February 1809. On the establishment of the commissariat in Bengal on 1 February 1810 he was appointed deputy commissary-general. He accompanied Major-General Sir John Abercromby in the expedition against Mauritius in 1810 as head of the commissariat department, and after the capture of the island was appointed by the governor, Sir Robert Townsend Farquhar, commissary-general of Mauritius, Bourbon, and their dependencies. He returned to Bengal in March 1812. On 1 July 1812 he was nominated commissary-general of Bengal with the rank of lieutenant-colonel, attaining the regimental rank on 16 March 1814. 
Weguelin was commissary-general through the two Nepal wars between 1814 and 1816, and that with the Pindaris from 1816 to 1818, so ably conducting his office that the extra expenses of the wars did not exceed the comparatively small sum of $600,000. Obliged by private affairs to return to England, he resigned his office at the close of 1820, embarking in January 1822. He received the rank of colonel commandant on 20 July 1823. 
Weguelin was twice married. He married at Calcutta on 26 January 1814 Miss Mary Cooper: they had a son and a daughter. He and his second wife, Mary (died 15 Sept 1856), had three sons. He also had, with Elizabeth Shaw, an illegitimate daughter. He died aged sixty-four at 25 Montagu Square, London, on 23 May 1828: a monument was placed in Marylebone church. 


@@@@@


doc= 28973


Wehnert, Edward Henry (1813-1868), watercolour painter, was baptized on 14 February 1813 at St Anne's Church, Soho, London, the son of Henry Wehnert, a German tailor, and his wife, Susanna; he had at least two brothers. In 1825 he was sent to Germany to study in Gottingen, and in 1829 he returned to England, where he studied drawing from classical sculptures in the British Museum, London, and did a large oil painting, 'The Death of Hippolytus', which was exhibited at the Society of British Artists in Suffolk Street in 1832. From 1832 to 1834 he studied art in Paris, and then lived and worked in Jersey for three years before returning permanently to London in 1837, when he became a member of the New Society of Painters in Water Colours. From then on he mainly painted historical genre scenes, including 'Luther Reading his Sermon to some Friends', 'The Death of Wycliffe', 'Caxton Examining the First Proof Sheet from his Press', and 'The Prisoner of Gisors'. He exhibited three pictures at the Royal Academy between 1839 and 1863, including 'The Elopement -- Eve of St Agnes' (exh. 1852) and 'The Death of Jean Goujon' (exh. 1863). He took part in the Westminster Hall cartoon competition in 1845, and the chalk cartoon of 'The Triumph of Justice', submitted by him, is in the Victoria and Albert Museum in London, which also has his 'George Fox Preaching in a Tavern' (1865). 
Wehnert's large works, Germanic in style, did not sell well, and he was more successful as a book illustrator, doing the drawings for editions of Keats's 'Eve of St Agnes' (1856), Coleridge's 'Ancient Mariner' (1857), Hans Christian Andersen's 'Eventyr' (as 'Fairy Tales', 1861), and Edgar Allan Poe's 'Poetical Works' (1865). He died, unmarried, at his home, 9 Fortress Terrace, Kentish Town, London, on 15 September 1868, aged fifty-five. A memorial exhibition was held at the Institute of Painters in Water Colours (the former New Watercolour Society) in 1869. 


@@@@@


doc= 28974


Weir, Thomas (d. 1670), criminal and reputed sorcerer, was the son of Thomas Weir of Kirkton, near Carluke in Lanarkshire. At the time of his trial in 1670 he was described as 'past the age of 70' and 'of great age' (Scott-Moncrieff, 2.10-11). The family land was sold in 1636, and in February 1642 Weir married Isobel Mein, the widow of John Bourdoun, an Edinburgh merchant, entitling himself to become a merchant burgess. He served in the Scottish army in Ireland in 1642-3, and in 1644 was a major in the Scots army in England. 
When the radical covenanting kirk party regime seized power in 1648 it was decided to raise a guard to protect Edinburgh, and on 25 October Weir was given command of this burgh guard. His duties included guarding parliament from January to March 1649, but on 9 May orders were given for paying off Weir and his men. It was later to be asserted that he had had charge of the royalist marquess of Montrose during his imprisonment before his execution in May 1650, and had treated him harshly. Certainly Weir remained closely associated with security in the burgh, and when in 1650 levies were ordered to counter the anticipated English invasion he was appointed major (third in command) of the burgh's forces (7 August). 
In 1650-51 the Church of Scotland split into two conflicting factions and Weir gave his allegiance to the uncompromising remonstrant minority. His zeal survived the restoration of the monarchy in 1660, and he was by then living in the West Bow of Edinburgh, an area favoured by the 'saints' -- those who retained allegiance to the later generally discredited covenants. James Fraser (minister of Wardlaw) recalled seeing him in 1660: 'His garb was still a clock [cloak], and somewhat dark, and [he] never went without his staffe. He was a tall black [dark] man, and ordinarily looked down to the ground: a grim countenance and a big nose.' His prowess in prayer led some to call him 'Angelicall Thomas' (Fraser, fols. 156'r'-158'r'; Wilson, 2.158). 
In 1670 Weir suddenly began to exhibit terror at the word 'burn', presumably in fear of the fires of hell, and began to confess to many sexual crimes. At first the authorities regarded him as mad, but after he had been examined by physicians he was judged to be sane. On 9 April 1670 he was tried before the justiciary court for 'Incests, Adulteries, Fornications, and Bestialitys'. Charges included attempted incest with his sister Jean when she was aged about ten, and actual between 1620 (when she was sixteen) and 1624, at the family 'House of Wicketshaw', the relationship continuing intermittently for many years; incest with his stepdaughter Margaret Bourdoun; habitual adulteries, persisted in even when 'he was of great age'; bestiality with a mare in 1651 at Newmylns in Ayrshire, and lying with 'Cows and other beasts'. His outward piety and professions of purity beyond other men were denounced as aggravating such offences (Scott-Moncrieff, 2.10-11). 
Weir, by now sunk in despair, failed to plead directly to the charges, although he said that 'he thinks himself guilty of the forsaid Crimes and cannot deny them' (Scott-Moncrieff, 2.12), but his confessions had been detailed, specific and consistent, and some aspects of them were corroborated by confessions by his sister Jean, who had lived with him. She also related how they had once, back in the 1620s, been discovered committing incest by their sister Margaret. Margaret confirmed catching her brother and sister in the act. Otherwise no independent witnesses were called, but there was evidence that the 1651 bestiality incident had been observed and reported by a witness at the time, but that no charges had been brought through lack of supporting evidence. 
Thomas Weir was found guilty on all charges, and 'not being able to travell for age, was dragg'd on a sled' on 11 April to the Gallowlee, between Edinburgh and Leith, where he was strangled at the stake and then burnt, dying in 'despair' (Scott-Moncrieff, 2.14). Jean was convicted of incest and sorcery, to which she had confessed, and was hanged in the Grassmarket on 12 April, trying to tear her clothes off so 'she might die with all the shame she could' (Scott-Moncrieff, 2.14). 
The confessions of Thomas and Jean Weir may have exaggerated their misdeeds, but they may be accepted as basically truthful. Their confessions in old age may simply have been the expression of long suppressed guilt which became intolerable, but it seems possible that the Weirs had fallen into the antinomian heresy, and believed that, as the elect of God predestined for salvation, they could do no wrong -- but then lost conviction in their own election and collapsed into wild despair. 
The story of Major Weir's crimes was exploited for propaganda purposes as sensational evidence that the supposedly godly presbyterian dissidents in Scotland were immoral hypocrites. In time the propaganda value of his case vanished, but his name survived in popular tales of outstanding wickedness, their crimes being usually bowdlerized as unsuitable subject matter for oral or literary treatment. Weir was transformed into a sorcerer, though he had never been charged with any offences relating to the supernatural, the surviving tales drawing on his sister Jean's confessions rather than his own. Her confessions to witchcraft, including dealings with 'the Queen of the Fairie, meaning the Devil' (Scott-Moncrieff, 2.11), alleged that Thomas too had had dealings with the devil, owning a magical staff that gave him power. As a result, even contemporary reports attributed 'horrible witchcraft' as well as sexual offences to 'that monster of men and reproach of mankind' (J. Lauder, 'Journals', 1900, 232). 
A number of literary figures took an interest in the Weir legend in this form, including Sir Walter Scott, who refers to Weir in 'Redgauntlet' (1824). His friend Charles Kirkpatrick Sharpe, however, made it clear in correspondence with Scott that those who exploited stories of Weir as a warlock were well aware of his real crimes: Sharpe refers to Byron's 'Manfred', with its themes of the supernatural and incest combined, and suggests that, as with Weir so with Byron, incest would lead on to bestiality. Lady Scott, however, was evidently spared such knowledge of Weir's sexual offences, for she called her husband's walking stick 'Major Weir' ('Journal of Sir Walter Scott', 270), oblivious to the phallic resonances of the staff which had given Weir his power. 


@@@@@


doc= 28975


Weir, William (1802-1858), journalist, was born on 9 February 1802 at Mount Hamilton, St Quivox parish, Ayrshire, the only child of Oswald Weir, factor to the Oswalds of Auchencruive, pre-eminent local landowners, and of May Denholm ('b'. 1775) of Holywell, Dumfriesshire. He was orphaned by the age of thirteen, and the Oswalds became his guardians. After leaving Ayr Academy in 1817 with the reputation of being 'talented, honourable, kind-hearted, somewhat eccentric, and a most rapacious reader' ('DNB') Weir studied arts and law at the universities of St Andrews (1817-20), Edinburgh (1820-22; 1825-6), and Gottingen (1824-5). Although admitted to the Faculty of Advocates in Edinburgh on 31 January 1827, he soon plunged into literary work and journalism. Reminiscences of student life in Germany provided material in 1829-30 for serialized articles in the 'Edinburgh Literary Journal'. This introduced him into the publishing stable of the radical bookseller William Tait, whose 'Edinburgh Magazine', launched appropriately in 1832, accepted articles by Weir promoting liberalism at home and abroad. 
Political credentials established, Weir was engaged in February 1833 as editor of the 'Glasgow Argus', a new organ published by Glasgow's dominant whig clique. During six years Weir brought journalistic flair and rising circulation figures, but also propagated a radical gospel of further constitutional change (including the ballot and suffrage extension), religious dissent, national education, and, above all, total repeal of the corn laws. 
Weir's energies were not monopolized: he married Ellen Reid, daughter of John Reid, advocate, on 18 December 1837, lectured at Glasgow Mechanics' Institute, and in the same decade engaged to duel, with the proprietor of the tory 'Glasgow Chronicle', John Douglas of Barloch, but was fortunately interrupted. More significantly, from 1833 he laid the Scottish foundations of the anti-cornlaw agitation, which combined with Cobden and Manchester free-traders to create the Anti-Corn Law League in 1838-9. Initially Weir was one of its foremost strategists. However, his advocacy in 1839, through the 'Argus', of schismatic tactics by radicals against whigs in support of an uncompromising free trade programme provoked dismissal by his exasperated whig employers. 
Weir fulfilled a long-standing ambition by moving to London. He was admitted as a barrister to the Middle Temple on 4 March 1840, but literary and journalistic commissions soon took precedence. Through Charles Knight, he contributed in 1841-4 to Knight's 'London' and 'The Pictorial History of England during the Reign of George the Third'. Contemporaneously, the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge employed him on the 'Penny Cyclopaedia' and the 'Biographical Dictionary'. He also wrote for 'The Spectator' and was employed for one year in 1841 to edit the 'Journal of the Royal Geographical Society'. Biographical and geographical assignments suited his wide education, encyclopaedic interests, and magpie approach. 
Weir re-entered full-time political journalism appropriately on the eve of corn law repeal in 1846, when he was recruited by Charles Dickens to be railway and colonial editor on the launching of the 'Daily News'. In 1854 he became one of Dickens's successors as general editor of the paper. He had 'at last obtained a position in which [he hoped] to be of some use', but felt that had he attained it when he was 'a little younger and stronger', he 'would have spoken with more confidence' (W. Weir to Lord Brougham, 1856, Brougham MS 29,792). His tenure coincided nevertheless with several major developments abroad, including the Crimean War, the Indian mutiny, and crises in Europe. Weir's endorsement of liberal causes in Italy and Hungary, and of the dissenting cause of national education at home marked his period as editor. He was equally lauded, however, by political friend and foe alike for the high moral tone, professional standards, and gentlemanly conduct which he brought to the journal. 
Although suffering indifferent health for years, Weir died as the result of an accident that precipitated a strangulated hernia, on 15 September 1858, at his home, 4 Hunter Street, Brunswick Square, London. He was buried on 21 September at Kensal Green cemetery. Weir's career as a whole reflected the attraction of journalism as a source of political influence through the expanding Victorian fourth estate. 


@@@@@


doc= 28976


Weiss, Willoughby Hunter (1820-1867), singer and composer, the son of Willoughby Gaspard Weiss, a flute teacher and music publisher in Liverpool, was born there on 2 April 1820. He was a pupil of George Smart and Michael Balfe, and made his first public appearance at a concert of his own at Liverpool on 5 May 1842. His opera debut was as Oroveso in Bellini's 'Norma' at Dublin on 2 July 1842, and he subsequently became a member of the Pyne-Harrison and other opera companies, singing bass. His first London appearance was as Count Rodolfo in Bellini's 'La sonnambula' on 26 December 1842 at the Princess's Theatre. He had a distinguished reputation as a singer of opera, and he excelled in oratorio, which he first performed at the Gloucester festival in 1844. On 15 September 1845 he married Georgina Ansell Barrett (1826-1880), a soprano and the daughter of a music teacher in Gloucester. They had one daughter, Georgina Angelique. 
Weiss's chief claim to distinction was, however, as the composer of 'The Village Blacksmith', a setting of Longfellow's words which he wrote about 1854. It was extraordinarily popular and remains well known. After a firm of music publishers refused to buy the copyright for $5, he published the song himself, thus earning a considerable income for himself and his family for the next forty years. He composed many other songs and ballads, and arranged a piano edition of Weber's mass in G, but none enjoyed the success of 'The Village Blacksmith'. Weiss died at his home, St George's Villa, Gloucester Road, Regent's Park, London, on 24 October 1867, and was buried in Highgate cemetery. His widow remarried in 1872. 


@@@@@


doc= 28977


Hill, Thomas Henry Weist- (1828-1891), violinist and conductor, son of Thomas Hill, goldsmith and freeman of the City, was born in Islington, London, on 3 January 1828. He showed an aptitude for the violin at an early age and appeared at Gravesend as an infant prodigy. In 1844 he entered the Royal Academy of Music, where he studied with Prosper Sainton and in 1845 was awarded the king's scholarship. He was subsequently a professor of the violin at the Royal Academy and conducted its choir and orchestra. He then joined the orchestra of the Princess Theatre, but he soon became known as a concert violinist, and was taken up first by Edward Loder and then by Louis Jullien. With the latter he toured in the United States of America, where he gave the first American performance of Mendelssohn's violin concerto, and later visited several European cities. On his return to London he was engaged as first violin in the Royal Italian Opera orchestra by Michael Costa. 
When the Alexandra Palace opened in 1873 Weist-Hill was appointed music director, and until 1876 he performed works by British composers and held a symphony competition for them; he also revived forgotten works, such as Handel's 'Esther' and 'Susanna'. In 1878 he conducted the orchestral concerts of Madame Viard-Louis at St James's Hall, at which several works by French composers were heard for the first time in England, including Bizet's suite 'L'Arlesienne' and pieces by Massenet, Gounod, and Berlioz. He conducted the first performance in London of Brahms's second symphony. In 1880 he was appointed first principal of the Guildhall School of Music, where he also taught the violin. 
In 1885 the journal 'Musical Opinion' regarded Weist-Hill as the greatest living English conductor. He wrote a few compositions, mostly for violin and cello, of which the 'Pompadour Gavotte' became popular. He died of cancer at South Kensington, London, on 25 December 1891. His two sons also became musicians; one of them, Ferdinand Weist-Hill, was a well-known violinist. 


@@@@@


doc= 28978


Welby, Henry (d. 1636), recluse, was the eldest son of Adlard Welby ('c'.1506-1570), gentleman, of Gedney, Lincolnshire, and his first wife, Ellen Hall of Hull. Henry's age at death was given on his monument and in a memorial biography as eighty-four. This is inconsistent with the information that he matriculated as a pensioner of St John's College, Cambridge, on 24 May 1558, and was a student of the Inner Temple in November 1562. He was probably born in the 1540s. 
Welby bought the country estate of Goxhill in Lincolnshire from Lord Wentworth and, wishing to enlarge his mind, spent some years travelling in the Low Countries, Germany, France, and Italy. He was married to Alice White, daughter of Thomas White of Yorkshire and Nottinghamshire and his wife, Anne 'nee' Cecil, sister of William Cecil, Lord Burghley. They had one daughter, Elizabeth, who was to be his sole heir. 
Welby continued his life of gentlemanly ease until 1592, when his younger half-brother John, angered by Henry's efforts to reform his dissolute habits, attempted to shoot him with a pistol. Profoundly shocked, Henry went into total seclusion for the rest of his life. He took a house on Grub Street, near Cripplegate in London. He lived abstemiously there for forty-four years, reading and praying, eating gruel porridge or salad, and drinking only small beer. 
Welby was generous to his neighbours, especially at Christmas, and to any pauper he noticed passing below. The parish of St Giles Cripplegate in which he lived was experiencing rapid growth in population, in economic activity, especially in the tailoring and carrying trades, and in poverty. Welby had cousins and other family members in London. His daughter married Sir Christopher Hildyard of Winestead, Yorkshire, in the church of St Giles Cripplegate on 13 July 1598. She was buried at Routh, East Riding of Yorkshire, on 28 November 1638; the Hildyard family of Flintham Hall, Newark, Nottinghamshire, descended from her. 
Henry Welby was buried in St Giles Cripplegate on 20 October 1636, only nine days after his long-faithful servant, Elizabeth Villier. Welby's life was eccentric and he achieved some notoriety in his lifetime, and lasting attention from the biography of 1637, 'The Phoenix of these Late Times, or, The Life of Mr Henry Welby Esq.' -- 'He died living that he might live dying'. Some details are incorrect (including his exact date of death), but the quarto volume rehearsed the main features of its subject's life and contained a sequence of commemorative verses by, among others, Shackerley Marmion, John Taylor the Water Poet, Thomas Nabbes, and Thomas Heywood, who gave the funeral elegy. The frontispiece portrait shows Welby in old age, when he was described as being like a wild hermit, his hair being so overgrown. Two further editions appeared the same year, and a century later in 1741 a new edition was published under the title 'The City-Hermit'. 


@@@@@


doc= 28979


Welsh, John (1568/9-1622), Church of Scotland and French Reformed minister, was born in Dumfriesshire, one of five children and the second son of John Welsh (died 1600), laird of Collieston in Dunscore, and his wife, Marion Greir. He attended school locally, although he was a truant and, on leaving this first period of education, fell in with a band of border reivers. Falling on hard times he threw himself on the mercy of his parents, who sent him to the fledgeling college at Edinburgh where he matriculated in 1585 under the regency of Adam Colt and graduated MA in 1588, along with another twenty-nine students, eleven of whom were later ministers. Being ordained into the parish of Selkirk in 1589 he distinguished himself as the first Edinburgh graduate to enter the ministry. In this capacity, on 6 March 1590 the privy council appointed him to a commission to preserve the 'true religion' in Ettrick Forest and Tweeddale. According to an early biography his spiritual zeal aroused 'the malice of the wicked' in Selkirk and he was forced to leave after one local laird killed two of his horses (Tweedie, 1.3). He was last recorded as minister of Selkirk on 11 March 1594 and was then translated to Kirkcudbright, where he remained for six years, also taking on the nearby charges of Galtaway, Dunrod, and Kilchrist. At about the time of leaving Selkirk he married Elizabeth, daughter of the reformer John Knox (died 1572). They had six children, four sons and two daughters, although only three appear still to have been alive in January 1625 at their mother's death. 
Welsh had an active career in the kirk. He was appointed by the general assembly of March 1596 'to visit and try the doctrine, life, diligence and fidelitie' (Calderwood, 5.420) of ministers and to plant clergy in areas with no presbyteries in Nithsdale, Annandale, Lauderdale, Easdale, and Ewesdale. In December of that year he was in Edinburgh when its ministers fled after a confrontation with the king. Occupying the pulpit, he was himself suspended from the ministry for speaking in their support, for 'ellegeing that his Majestie was possest with a devill' and for suggesting that, just as sons may restrain an insane father, so subjects might 'bind his Majestie' ('Reg. PCS', 5.359). He was outlawed for failing to appear before the privy council in January 1597, but was restored after a request from the general assembly. In 1598 he was appointed to a commission of the general assembly charged with examining complaints against the standing commission of the kirk and, in 1600 and 1602, was reappointed as a visitor in Nithsdale by the assembly. In 1599 he wrote the only one of his works to be published in Scotland during his life, 'Popery Anatomized' (1602). Dedicated to James VI, it was a reply to criticisms of the kirk by Gilbert Brown, former abbot of the Cistercian house of Newabbey, taking the form of a 28-section, 440-page attack on Catholicism. 
In August 1600 Welsh was translated to Ayr to be assistant to the ageing John Porterfield. On Porterfield's death in 1604 the people of Ayr called on the burgh council to confirm Welsh as his successor, which they formally did on 12 June. His daily preaching was said to be so popular that the council resolved to build a new kirk to accommodate the increased attendances, a plan which was, however, not carried out until long after Welsh's death. He took an active role in quelling factional violence which troubled Ayr on his arrival, even intervening in disturbances with only a helmet for protection and, once quarrels were quelled, staging public acts of reconciliation. There survive from his time at Ayr a number of stories which endow him with great spiritual gifts. People 'saw clearly a strange light surround him' (Tweedie, 1.12) while he was praying in his garden at night. In 1604, when plague was rife but Ayr was free of disease, he is said to have discerned, through prayer, that two merchants wishing to enter the town were carrying infection. They were sent away and were admitted to Cumnock where plague struck and 'the living were hardly able to bury their dead' (ibid., 1.13). 
Welsh's service at Ayr came to a premature end in 1605. The king had not permitted the general assembly to meet since 1602, and many feared severe curtailment of ecclesiastical freedom, so when the assembly scheduled to meet at Aberdeen in July was also prorogued fourteen presbyteries, including Ayr, sent commissioners anyway. Although Welsh arrived in Aberdeen two days after the bulk of commissioners had already constituted and dissolved the assembly, he formally declared his support for their actions. He was the first to reach Edinburgh after the meeting. Summoned before the privy council he was warded in Blackness Castle and, after languishing there for three months, he again appeared before the privy council and, along with five others, rejected its competence in what they argued was an ecclesiastical matter. They were sent back to Blackness and the king demanded that they be tried for treason. This duly went ahead in the following January. John Forbes and Welsh, described at the time by the secretary of state, Lord Balmerino, as 'the strongest pillaris of that disorder', were appointed by the others to speak for all ('Reg. PCS', 1st ser., 7.478). Welsh warned the packed jury that they were usurping the jurisdiction of Christ, and thus, he said, 'yee... bring upon yourselves... the guiltines of our innocent blood' (Forbes, 485-8). All six were found guilty and sentence was remitted to the king who, in October 1606, ordered that they be banished from his dominions. At two o'clock on the morning of 7 November they took ship at Leith after 'Mr Johne Welsche conceivit a prayer, quhilk bred great motioune in the heartis of all the heareres' ('Autobiography and Diary of... Melvill', 670). The burgh council of Ayr continued to pay 'their weilbelovit pastor' his stipend for a number of years after he was exiled, even though he was never to return ('Fasti Scot.', 2.6). 
Welsh sailed to Bordeaux, immediately set to learning the language, and was able, within fourteen weeks, to preach in French. He soon took up a ministerial charge at Nerac, then moved to Jonzac, where he published another anti-Catholic work, 'L'Armageddon de la Babylon apocalyptique' (1612). Some time after 1613 he settled at St Jean-d'Angely. In 1620 the Huguenot town was besieged by Louis XIII and Welsh is said to have rallied the people and aided the gunners on the walls. Louis sought terms and it was agreed that St Jean would keep its walls, civic privileges, and religious freedom. Welsh was summoned before the king for his preaching but he impressed Louis by pointing out that his priests placed him under papal authority while Welsh argued that none on earth was the king's superior. After a subsequent siege the town was taken by the king, whereupon Welsh was given his freedom and transport to La Rochelle for himself and his family. 
Welsh obtained permission to enter England where, pleading ill health, he attempted to get leave to return to Scotland. The dean of Winchester, John Young, tried to get Welsh to approve the Scottish ecclesiastical 'status quo' as a condition of his return but he refused. Elizabeth Knox's pleadings before the king himself were similarly fruitless. James sought the same condition for his return and she replied, holding out her apron, 'Please your Majesty, I'd rather kep his head there' (McCrie, 396). Welsh was not granted liberty to preach in London until he was too frail to do so. He died there on 2 April 1622 aged fifty-three and was buried in the churchyard of St Botolph without Bishopsgate two days later. Subsequent to his death two collections of his sermons were published, 'Thirty-Five Sermons' (1744) and 'Forty-Eight Select Sermons' (1811), as well as 'Discourses' (1752) and 'A Cry to the Whole Earth' (1785). 


@@@@@


doc= 28980


Welch, Joseph (c.1750-1805), compiler of biographical reference works, was for forty years assistant to William Ginger, bookseller to Westminster School. He prepared a list of scholars, which for many years he sold in manuscript. In 1788, encouraged by the success of Pote's 'Registrum regale' of Eton College (1774), he printed it under the title 'A List of Scholars of St Peter's College, Westminster, as they were elected to Christ Church College, Oxford, and Trinity College, Cambridge, from... 1561 to the Present Time'. To it he prefixed lists of the deans of Westminster, the deans of Christ Church, Oxford, the masters of Trinity College, Cambridge, and the masters of Westminster School. The work, which was the first printed register of the school, was republished in 1852, under the editorship of Charles Bagot Phillimore, with the addition of the queen's scholars from 1663, and of copious biographical notes. The work is generally known as 'Alumni Westmonasterienses'. 
At the time of his death, in April 1805, Welch was living in Bowling Street, Westminster. He died 'not in affluence' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes' ) and was buried at St John the Evangelist, Westminster, on 16 April 1805. 


@@@@@


doc= 28981


Welchman, Edward (1665-1739), Church of England clergyman and religious writer, was the son of John Welchman, gentleman, of Banbury, Oxfordshire. He matriculated as a commoner from Magdalen Hall, Oxford, on 7 July 1679 and was one of the choristers of Magdalen College from 1679 until 1682. He graduated BA on 24 April 1683 and was admitted a probationer fellow of Merton College in 1684; he graduated MA on 19 June 1688. 
In 1690 Merton presented Welchman to the rectory of Lapworth, Warwickshire, in which county he was also rector of Berkeswell. At Lapworth eleven children born to him and his wife, Mary, were baptized between 1696 and 1719, the first being John, on 7 July 1696. Welchman was made archdeacon of Cardigan and a prebendary of St David's on 7 August 1727. He was later appointed chaplain to the bishop of Lichfield, who made him a prebendary of Wolvey in that cathedral on 28 September 1732; Welchman remembered the bishop in his will and left him a thirteen-volume Hebrew 'Bible'. Welchman went on to gain the rectory of Solihull, Warwickshire, in 1736, which he held until his death. 
Welchman published widely on religious subjects; his works include a piece against the nonjuring bishops in 1691, a sermon on charity in 1707, a popular anti-Roman Catholic tract in 1719, and a contribution to the Arian debate in 1721. His main work is his edition of the 'Thirty-Nine Articles'. It was first published in Latin as 'XXXIX articuli ecclesiae Anglicanae' (1713); an English translation from the sixth edition appeared in 1740 as 'The Thirty-Nine Articles of the Church of England, Illustrated with Notes'. The English version proved particularly successful; it was reprinted regularly throughout the eighteenth century and well into the next. 
Welchman's 'Husbandman's Manual' (1695) was also very popular. In it he gives a prayer for every countryside activity, from sowing and ploughing to the singing of the birds. The manual went through eighteen editions in the eighteenth century and, like the edition of the 'Thirty-Nine Articles', was reprinted in the nineteenth century; it was translated into Welsh in 1711 and was one of the works distributed by the SPCK. 
Welchman died on 19 May 1739 and was survived by his wife, who inherited most of his estate, in the manors of Balsall and Knowle, and in the parish of Tamworth. Of their large family only five -- Samuel, Richard, Mary, Anne, and Constance -- are mentioned in Welchman's will of 30 April 1739. 


@@@@@


doc= 28982


Weld, Charles Richard (1813-1869), author, was born at Windsor in August 1813, eldest son and only surviving child of Isaac Weld (died 1824) and his second wife, Lucy (died 1834), daughter of Eyre Powell of Great Connell, Kildare. The Welds claimed descent from an ancient Catholic family of Dorset, through the protestant convert and American pioneer Thomas Weld (1595-1661). This branch of the family possessed considerable estates in Ireland, where Charles's father held a lucrative government appointment, agreeably surrounded by educated and influential men. Charles was named for his father's friendship with Charles James Fox. Isaac Weld (1774-1856), son of Isaac's first marriage, to Elizabeth Kerr, was already well known in literary and scientific circles and had written of his travels in North America before Charles was born. 
From 1820 Charles Weld and his parents resided in a chateau near Dijon for several years and on their return they settled in north Wales. After his father died, Charles lodged with Isaac at Ravenswell, near Dublin, sharing his circle of associates and attending classes at Trinity College, without taking a degree. He also stayed on the Isle of Wight with a married half-sister; on one such occasion, running on the pier at Ryde, he fell and damaged his spine, to which accident he attributed his later stoop. In 1836 he went on the grand tour of the continent with John Potter, and thereafter he generally spent two months each year touring in Britain or abroad. His positions in later life admitted him to all manner of libraries and institutions on the continent. 
Weld moved to London and in 1839 took employment as secretary to the Statistical Society. He contributed several papers to the society's journal and compiled the 'Statistical Companion to the Pocket Book' (1843), which went through many editions; the companions for 1848 and 1850 were compiled jointly with Thomas Collins Banfield, who was sole compiler of those for 1852 and 1854. In 1842 he married Anne, daughter of Henry Selwood, of an old Berkshire family; they had one daughter, Agnes Grace ('b'. 1849). This marriage bonded him into other influential circles. His wife was a niece of Sir John Franklin, the Arctic explorer; her elder sister Emily was married to Alfred Tennyson and her younger sister Louisa to Charles Tennyson. Weld studied law at the Middle Temple and was called to the bar in 1844, but he had succumbed to the attractions of science and, with the help of Sir John Barrow, in December 1843 he was appointed assistant secretary and librarian to the Royal Society, where he drew a salary of $200, with accommodation on the society's premises. Despite his lowly status, he was invited to dine with the Royal Society Club in the 1844/5 session as the guest of Sir John Franklin. 
The Royal Society at this time was in a fever for reform and Weld was frequently asked for details concerning its past organization. Encouraged by Dr Peter Mark Roget, its then secretary, Weld decided to compile an administrative history, a task which, as he pursued his researches well beyond the society's archives, absorbed four years of his spare time. The two volumes, published in 1848, with illustrations by his wife, combined accuracy with style and were well received. Weld had demolished the myth surrounding the society's mace, erroneously said to be that which Cromwell had ordered to be removed from the House of Commons, although 'The Athenaeum's' reviewer took exception to Weld's version of the gossip surrounding Newton's patrons. 
Weld proved a diligent servant, bringing order to the society's library and compiling a list of its portraits. His annual tours, unaccompanied by his wife and daughter, generated a series of travel books, beginning in 1850 with Auvergne, Piedmont, and Savoy, extending to North America in 1854, and eventually including Scotland, Ireland, and other parts of western Europe. His relationship with Sir John and Jane Franklin led him to lecture and write on Arctic travel and, after Franklin's disappearance, on the search for Franklin's expedition. 
In March 1861 Weld left the Royal Society, as a consequence of having introduced a lady to his rooms at Burlington House. His explanation, that 'she was of independent fortune', cut no ice. The affair was disguised by Sir Edward Sabine and Sir George Stokes, who compelled Weld to tender his resignation to the Society's council 'for family reasons'. Wishing him to depart immediately, Sabine and Stokes reluctantly decided to pay his salary to the end of the year. 
In his later years Weld became a partner in a publishing business with Lovell Reeve (died 1865). He enjoyed poetry, especially that of his brother-in-law Alfred Tennyson, and himself wrote verse. He liked dogs, and almost always had one by him, even in town. He was happiest when fishing in some rural stream. In 1862 he was appointed a district superintendent of the international exhibition held in London, responsible for the organization of the philosophical instruments section, which he reported on for the 'Illustrated London News'. He represented Great Britain at the Paris Exhibition of 1867 and, while there, made the acquaintance of a friend who invited him to Burgundy the following year. This provided material for his last book, which his wife edited after his death. From 1865 he had lived near Bath, Somerset, and had been active in the Bath Literary and Philosophical Association. Weld died suddenly at his home, Belle Vue House, Newbridge Hill, Bath, on 15 January 1869. 


@@@@@


doc= 28983


Weld, Sir Frederick Aloysius (1823-1891), premier of New Zealand and colonial governor, was born on 9 May 1823 at Chideock Manor, Bridport, Dorset. He came from a well-known Roman Catholic family, being the third son of Humphrey Weld of Chideock Manor, and his wife, Christina Maria, the second daughter of Charles Clifford, sixth Baron Clifford of Chudleigh. Following his education at Stonyhurst College and at the University of Fribourg, Switzerland, he sailed in November 1843 to join relatives already in the New Zealand Company settlement of Port Nicholson. In partnership with his cousin Charles Clifford, he established sheep stations in the Wairarapa (Wharekaka), Marlborough (Flaxbourne), and Canterbury (Stonyhurst) districts, and he drew on this practical experience to produce an informative pamphlet, 'Hints to Intending Sheepfarmers in New Zealand', which was published in London in 1851. Pastoralism and exploration were major preoccupations at this time of his life, and early in 1855 Weld succeeded in finding a shorter stock route between Nelson and Christchurch. His competence as an artist is revealed in the sketches and paintings that resulted from his explorations within the North and South Islands of New Zealand and his ascent of the active Hawaiian volcano Mauna Loa in November 1855. 
Weld was elected member for Wairau, and attended the first session of the New Zealand house of representatives, which opened in Auckland in May 1854. He was one of the three members chosen to serve in a ministry which sought, unsuccessfully, to expedite the transition from crown colony to responsible government status. Political involvement over the next five years was erratic, but in November 1860 Weld's fundamental belief in the need to assert the supremacy of British rule in New Zealand led him to accept the native affairs portfolio in the ministry of Edward Stafford. On 3 March 1859 he married Filumena (Mena) Mary Anne Lisle Phillipps (died 1903) of Garendon Park, Leicester; the couple had six sons and seven daughters, all but one of whom survived to adulthood. 
Following political defeat in July 1861, Weld concentrated on developing a 300-acre family estate at Brackenfield, north of Christchurch. He continued to deplore official handling of the armed conflict in Taranaki, advocating instead a policy of military self-reliance whereby the colonists would dispense with the imperial regiments and would conduct colonial campaigns using colonial resources. In November 1864, believing, unwisely, that he had secured Governor Sir George Grey's support for such a policy, the 41-year-old was sworn in as premier. 
The prospects for success were inauspicious. Weld's personal reputation as a man of integrity was no match for Grey's duplicity. Prolonged wrangling between the governor and Lieutenant-General Duncan Cameron undermined all prospect of the colonists' military success against Maori, while the removal of the seat of government from Auckland to Wellington fuelled provincial hostilities. Confiscation of 1.2 million acres of Waikato land in December 1864 caused widespread bitterness and resentment among those tribes most affected. Financial difficulties, petty political wrangling, and lack of co-operation from the governor contributed to the strain of holding office. Utterly exhausted, Weld announced his resignation on 13 October 1865 and retreated to Brackenfield to recover his health. Later ministries were to build on the financial and military initiatives of the self-reliance advocates, but the destructive legacy of confiscation persists to the present, a legacy which Weld did not acknowledge when reviewing political developments in his pamphlet 'Notes on New Zealand Affairs' published in London in 1869. 
The Welds returned to England in 1867. In December 1868, his health restored, Weld approached the Colonial Office seeking employment, a request favourably received and promptly actioned, for in May 1869, with his wife and their family of six children, he departed England for Western Australia and the start of an eighteen-year career as a colonial governor. 
Once in the colony, Weld moved quickly to establish the style of energetic and active administration that was to be his hallmark. He promoted such public works as the inauguration of a coastal shipping service and the extension of telegraph lines; he facilitated the expansion of the timber industry; and fostered the farming sector through his introduction in 1873 of the Torrens system of land registration. He presided over the introduction of an elective element into the legislative council in December 1870; and he encouraged settler participation in local self-government through membership of school and roads boards and other municipal institutions. Eventually in 1871, but only after heated debate, he achieved his goal of an elementary education act, which included the principle of state aid to denominational schools. Although Weld displayed significant errors of judgement both in his handling of the controversial Landor-Burges affair of 1872-3, which involved a white settler facing criminal charges for the shooting of an Aborigine, and with his precipitate advocacy of responsible government in 1874, his achievements in Western Australia were substantial. He was created CMG for services rendered and promoted to the self-governing colony of Tasmania at the end of 1874, taking up the position early the next year. 
Political factionalism and personal financial difficulties marred Weld's enjoyment of an otherwise pleasant and successful term of office in Tasmania. The intense personal antipathy between the chief justice and the premier affected Weld most directly when he acted on ministerial advice to pardon a convicted arsonist in November 1876. His conduct throughout the subsequent two-year controversy was upheld by the Colonial Office, but Weld was constantly irritated by the Tasmanians' reluctance to address more substantial issues -- provision for meeting imperial self-defence requirements especially. In personal terms the Welds paid a high price for the Tasmania interlude, for official economies in 1872 had significantly reduced the level of the governor's salary and abolished all allowances. Weld's difficulties in meeting official expenses while maintaining a household of twelve children were exacerbated when his aide-de-camp incurred substantial debts by misusing the governor's household account. Weld had therefore to sell Brackenfield and to draw heavily on personal income in an effort to cover the costs of his Tasmanian term of office. 
Weld was promoted to the Straits Settlements, in March 1880, at a time when the possible extension of British influence in the Malay peninsula was under review, and he relished the return to a more active style of governorship. He made sustained efforts to resolve land-tenure problems, fostered improved communications and public services, supported the construction of a new museum and library at Singapore, and promoted effective management of the country's timber resources. His primary interest, though, was the consolidation of relations with the princely states, and by the end of his term of office he was able to record progress in Perak, Selangor, Sungei Ujong, and the states of the Negri Sembilan and Rembau, while new accords with the rulers of Johore and Pahang led to closer administrative links between Malay and British authorities. Weld had nevertheless annoyed the Foreign Office by his persistent suggestions for undermining Siamese influence in the northern part of the peninsula and by his independent actions when sent, in 1887, on a mission to Borneo to resolve the rival claims of Sarawak and the British North Borneo Company. 
Weld was made KCMG in 1880 and GCMG in 1885. He retired on a first-class pension in October 1887, and he returned with his family to England, to Chideock Manor, where on 20 July 1891 he died of illnesses contracted during a visit to the Straits Settlements in his capacity as a director of the Pahang Exploration and Development Company. A man of ability, culture, and deep faith, straightforward and chivalrous but occasionally lacking in judgement, Weld had a lifelong devotion to the cause of empire. 


@@@@@


doc= 28984


Weld, Isaac (1774-1856), topographical writer, born in Fleet Street, Dublin, on 15 March 1774, was the eldest son of Isaac Weld (died 1824) and his first wife, Elizabeth Kerr, and the half-brother of Charles Richard Weld. His great-great-grandfather, the Revd Edmund Weld ('c'.1631-1668), chaplain of Blarney Castle, co. Cork, was the descendant of Sir Richard Weld of Eaton. His grandfather was named Isaac after Newton, the friend of his great-grandfather, Dr Nathaniel Weld (1660-1730). Both Nathaniel and his son Isaac (1710-1778) were nonconformist ministers at New Row, Dublin. Isaac's edition of John Leland's 'Discourses' (4 vols., 1769) has an autobiographical preface. 
Young Isaac, the third of the name, was sent to the school of Samuel Whyte at 75 Grafton Street, Dublin, and thence to that of Rochemont Barbauld at Palgrave, near Diss, Norfolk. From Diss he went to Norwich as a private pupil of Dr William Enfield, a well-known dissenting minister; he left Norwich in 1793. He gained the degree BA from Trinity College, Dublin. In 1795, having decided to explore the United States and Canada, he set sail from Dublin for Philadelphia. He spent a little over two years in America. Often guided by Indians, he explored the vast forests and great rivers. While in the towns he mixed in the best society, and he met George Washington. He returned home at the close of 1797 'without entertaining the slightest wish to revisit [North America]', and published in 1799 his 'Travels through... North America and... Canada'. The work was well received and it went to several English editions and was translated into French, German, and Dutch. It was, however, described as 'a silly book by one Weld', one of a number of European 'birds of passage' whose books had done 'much mischief' and whose enquiries often bothered George Washington (letter of Richard Peters, American patriot and jurist, to James Madison). None the less, his descriptions were influential because they were relatively early and were long included in compilations of travellers' reports on the United States in this period, despite his general lack of sympathy with the American patriots. Weld was introduced at the Institut at Paris as an American traveller, and was elected a member of the Historical and Literary Society of Quebec, and, on 27 November 1800, of the Royal Dublin Society, of which he in 1849 became vice-president. 
In 1801, at the request of the lord lieutenant of Ireland, Lord Hardwicke, Weld drew up a paper based on data in his book, in the hope of diverting Irish emigrants away from the United States to Canada. Lord Hardwicke in return procured for him a post in the Irish customs, which had been held by Weld's father, but which brought Weld himself very little money. He married at Edinburgh, in 1802, Alexandrina Home; they had no children. 
Shortly afterwards Weld published 'Illustrations of... Killarney' (1807 and 1812), which, like his American work, he illustrated himself, and which included a description of his journeys made in a boat which he manufactured out of compressed brown paper. His taste for unusual craft continued when, in May 1815, he sailed in the pioneer 14 horsepower steamboat 'Thames', from Dun Laoghaire to London, a voyage which he described in an appendix to George Dodd's 'Dissertation on Steam Engines' (1818). In 1838 he drew up for the Royal Dublin Society a 'Statistical Survey... of Roscommon'. He took a keen interest in Irish industries, and suggested the triennial exhibitions which the Royal Dublin Society later inaugurated. 
In his later years Weld travelled extensively in Italy and spent much time in Rome, where he became a close friend of Canova. He died on 4 August 1856 at Ravenswell, near Bray, where most of his later life (when he was not travelling) had been spent. The Royal Dublin Society raised a monument to his memory in Mount Jerome cemetery in 1857. He apparently regretted the ill humour and anti-American tone of his first book (letter of Joseph Dulles cited in Allibone, 'Dict.') but it is none the less the work for which he is best remembered. 


@@@@@


doc= 28985


Joseph Weld (1777-1863), younger brother of Cardinal Weld, was born on 27 January 1777 at Lulworth Castle. Educated at home, he was sent to Stonyhurst College in November 1794. In November 1802 he married Elizabeth Charlotte Stourton (1782-1864), daughter of Charles Philip, sixteenth Lord Stourton; his father settled the estate of Pylewell, near the Solent, on the couple. Pylewell was situated very conveniently for the pursuit of Weld's yachting interests, and he spent over $3000 on improvements to the property. In 1830 Weld received the family of Charles X, the exiled French king, at Lulworth, when the castle became their temporary refuge. 


@@@@@


doc= 28986


Weld, Thomas (bap. 1595, d. 1661), Independent minister and religious controversialist, was baptized on 13 July 1595 in Sudbury, Suffolk, the son of Edmund Weld. He graduated BA from Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1613 and MA in 1618. He was soon active in Essex puritan networks, may have served as a lecturer at Haverhill in the early 1620s, and became vicar of Terling in 1625. By then he had married his first wife, Margaret; they had four children. He worked hard and contentiously to suppress moral disorder in Terling, boarded divinity students, including the future New England divine Thomas Shepard, in his house, and occasionally hosted the regular meetings of the informal Essex ministerial conference led by Thomas Hooker; Weld signed a petition dated 10 November 1629 to William Laud, then bishop of London, in support of Hooker. 
Weld's activism caught the attention of the church authorities, who were unhappy with the extent of puritan agitation in Essex. They already had their eye on him for his nonconformity in 1628, and in 1629 his churchwardens had to explain to diocesan officials why Hugh Peters, a silenced minister, had been allowed to preach in their church. Weld was called before the archdeacon's court in May 1630 to explain why he lectured on weekdays. He cleared himself but investigation continued. A paper drawn up by Laud, dated 25 November 1630, lists Weld as one of Essex's nonconformable ministers and he was asked to subscribe. Fined $20 by the ecclesiastical commission in 1631 for an unspecified offence, Weld was deprived by Laud on 2 September for his nonconformity, a process completed by the high commission in January 1632. After his excommunication, at the instigation of a number of Essex ministers, he personally confronted Laud following a church service. Weld left behind him in Terling a core of nonconformist lay puritan militancy which his puritan successor, John Stalham, had to manage discreetly to avoid more conflict with the authorities. 
Later in 1632 Weld went briefly to the Netherlands but he was already in touch with the leaders of the Massachusetts Bay Colony and he arrived at Boston, Massachusetts, on 5 June. In July he became pastor of the newly founded church at Roxbury, serving along with its teacher, John Eliot, the future 'Apostle to the Indians'. A glowing letter from Weld to Terling that summer, describing Massachusetts as a model puritan polity, induced some of his former parishioners to join him in Roxbury, where he took the freeman's oath on 6 November 1632. In 1636 he married his second wife, Judith. 
Roxbury was heavily affected by the antinomian controversy, a religious dispute over how one could know one was saved, that shook the colony in the mid-1630s. Perhaps because Roxbury bordered Boston, source of the dissident opinions, more of its laity actively sided with the dissidents than in any town outside Boston. Weld worked vigorously to re-establish orthodoxy. He was a member of the synod that met at the end of the summer of 1637 and condemned a variety of the teachings of Boston's teacher, John Cotton, the minister, John Wheelwright, and the leading Boston lay person, Anne Hutchinson. In January 1638 Roxbury excommunicated three members, the only church besides Boston to resort to this extreme measure. Weld's brother boarded Anne Hutchinson in Roxbury in her period of house arrest between her trial in November 1637 and the execution of her sentence of banishment the following March. Weld's other major contribution to New England religious life was to serve on a committee with John Eliot and Richard Mather that devised a new metrical version of the psalms, 'The Whole Book of Psalmes, Faithfully Translated into English Metre'. Printed in Cambridge, Massachusetts, in 1640, it was the first book published in the English colonies. Its versification has won little praise. 
On 2 June 1641 the Massachusetts general court appointed Weld, along with the minister Hugh Peters and Boston merchant William Hibbins, to serve as agents in England. The agents were to seek for financial relief for the hard-pressed colony, to raise funds for Harvard College and evangelizing the Native Americans, and to support further church reform in England. Weld helped to secure customs relief for New England trade and had some success in fund-raising, but his efforts became mired at the New England end in mismanagement and corruption. 
Weld threw himself into the religious controversies of England, with mixed results. Once again he confronted William Laud, by now imprisoned, for his harrowing of Essex puritans, and may have been involved in an abortive scheme to exile Laud and Matthew Wren to Massachusetts. As Independents and presbyterians began to dispute over church government, Weld wrote tracts defending New England Congregationalism, and, with Peters, edited and published the works of his New England brethren. As disputes over the nature of salvation similar to the antinomian controversy surfaced in England, a collection of related documents compiled by John Winthrop was published in London as 'A Catalogue of Erroneous Opinions Condemned in New England' (1644). The compilation had little narrative thread, and Weld, at the urging of others, he claimed, remedied that deficiency with a preface and conclusion added to a second edition, 'A short story of the rise, reign, and ruin of the antinomians, familists, & libertines, that infected the churches of New-England' (1644). 'Short Story' was intended to show that Congregationalism was capable of defending religious orthodoxy; presbyterians seized upon the example to show that Congregationalism fostered religious anarchy, and that the toleration that Independents were claiming for themselves in England was belied by the intolerance of their Massachusetts brethren. Some in New England suspected that presbyterians had manoeuvred Weld into publishing it. Presbyterians also stirred up rumours that Weld and Peters had embezzled funds destined for Massachusetts. The Massachusetts authorities recalled the two men in October 1645, but both elected to remain in England. Weld served briefly in 1646 as rector at Wanlip, Leicestershire, and on 1 February 1649 was installed at St Mary's, Gateshead. 
In Newcastle, Weld became embroiled in more religious controversy. He worked with other Newcastle ministers, Independent and presbyterian, to attack the sects. He helped expose the 'False Jew', Thomas Ramsey, whom the Hexham Baptists had assumed they had converted -- an exposure Weld was able to turn into an effective attack on the Baptists. He joined forces with other local ministers for a number of attacks on Quakers, but those opponents, including James Nayler, were not easily cowed and a nasty pamphlet war ensued. Weld also had to deal with difficulties in his own congregation. He employed Independent standards of eligibility for the Lord's supper which were notably stricter than presbyterian and always a bone of contention between the two groups. By 1657 dissatisfied parishioners claimed that Weld had excluded over a thousand people from the sacrament, and only administered it to ten marginal members of the congregation (Weld claimed the figure was twenty). His renegation on a compromise to admit a presbyterian lecturer resulted in his parishioners bringing an unsuccessful complaint against him to the northern commissioners on 3 March 1658. 
There is no evidence that Weld attempted to retain his post at the Restoration, and Charles II appointed John Landler to the position on 16 March 1660. Weld signed the declaration of London Independent ministers denouncing Venner's Fifth Monarchy insurrection of January 1661, and died in the city on 23 March that year. His second wife had died (she was buried at Gateshead in 1656) and he had married again; his third wife, Margaret, died after him, in 1671. 


@@@@@


doc= 28987


Weld, Thomas (1773-1837), cardinal, was born in London on 22 January 1773, the eldest son of Thomas Weld (1750-1810) of Lulworth Castle, Dorset, and his wife, Mary Massey Stanley (1753-1830), eldest daughter of Sir John Massey Stanley of Hooton Hall, Cheshire. Weld was educated at home by Father Charles Plowden SJ, and may also have spent a year at the Jesuit academy at Liege. He was a keen amateur artist and musician; a French horn and a flageolet were found in his possession at his death. In the 1790s he served as a sergeant in the Dorset yeomanry. During these years he was also associated with his father in offering hospitality to French clerics and religious communities in exile. On 14 June 1796 he married, at Ugbrooke, Lucy Bridget (died 1815), second daughter of Thomas Clifford of Tixall. He and his wife spent their early married life at Westbrook House, at Upwey, near Weymouth, where their only child, a daughter named Mary Lucy, was born in 1799. 
In 1810, after the death of his father, who had provided liberally for his younger sons and his widow, Weld, as heir, was probably left with a straitened income. He decided to economize by closing Lulworth Castle and living in Clifton, near Bath, for six years. His next years were troubled ones. His financial situation worsened as the agricultural slump of the second decade of the century affected his income. In addition, Weld was drawn into the arguments between Bishop John Milner, an old family friend and political ally of his father, and the other vicars apostolic over the question of concessions to the British government in order to secure Catholic emancipation. Weld had joined the Catholic board organizing the campaign against the remaining disabilities in 1812, but resigned when Milner was expelled from it in 1814. Then, on 1 June 1815, his wife died. 
Soon after her death Weld decided to become a priest, but before he could begin his studies several matters needed to be settled. The first was a crisis in the Cistercian monastery of St Susan, which Weld's father had established at Lulworth for emigre French monks: a renegade monk had made several serious allegations against the monastery before local magistrates. Secretary of state Lord Sidmouth demanded that Weld close the monastery, but Weld managed to persuade him against any active measures and to induce the monks to return to France voluntarily in 1817. In addition, Weld wished to see his daughter married and his estate settled before following his vocation. Mary's marriage in September 1818 to her second cousin, Hugh Charles Clifford, later seventh Baron Clifford, removed one anxiety, but the settlement of his estate proved complicated: Lulworth was not transferred to his brother Joseph until 1828. 
Weld began his studies for the priesthood under Abbe Carron, taking minor orders in 1820; he was ordained on 7 April 1821. In June 1822 he became assistant priest at the Chelsea mission and at St Mary's, Cadogan Street. He subsequently moved to Hammersmith, where he was spiritual director to a community of Benedictine nuns. In 1826 he was appointed coadjutor to Alexander Macdonell, bishop in Upper Canada, and was consecrated as bishop of Amycla on 6 August. However, legal business, his own frail health, and the sickness of his daughter meant that he never left for Canada. Accompanying his daughter and her family on a trip to Italy, Weld visited Rome; shortly after his arrival there he was made a cardinal by Pius VIII, being admitted to the College of Cardinals on 15 March 1830. Weld's unexpected elevation, which made him the first English cardinal since Philip Thomas Howard (1629-1694), was seen as a gesture of papal goodwill towards England in the wake of the 'Catholic Emancipation Act'. A Weld family legend less credibly interpreted it as a compliment to George IV: Mrs Fitzherbert, the king's mistress (or wife), was the widow of Weld's uncle. Weld is said to have received assurances from leading figures in England that his elevation was viewed favourably. 
Weld's daughter died on 15 May 1831, but her widower and children continued to live with the cardinal, who occupied splendid apartments in the Odescalchi Palace. He was well known for his hospitality, entertaining Roman society as well as his fellow countrymen. Unable to learn Italian, he probably participated little in the management of Vatican business, appointing secretaries and advisers to assist him. But he was held to be influential in English affairs with the pope, and he acted as cardinal protector of the English College in Rome. Weld died on 19 April 1837 in Rome, and, like his daughter, was buried at the church of St Marcellus. His contemporaries were effusive in their praise of his character; Nicholas Wiseman (389) commented that if he had a fault, it was 'the excessiveness of his kindness'. 


Yachting was Weld's main occupation: in 1815 he was a founder member of the club which later became the Royal Yacht Club, and he dominated yacht races from 1825 until 1861, winning -- according to his own estimate -- $3000 in prize money. He was extremely interested in boat design: on one occasion he wrote to the Admiralty offering to build a naval brig to his own design on their approval. The successes of his yachts, particularly the 'Arrow' and the 'Alarm', witnessed to his considerable expertise. He died at Lulworth Castle on 19 October 1863, survived by three sons and a daughter. 


@@@@@


doc= 28988


Weldon, Sir Anthony (bap. 1583, d. 1648), local politician and reputed satirist, was baptized at East Peckham, Kent, on 29 January 1583, the eldest son of Ralph Weldon (1545/6-1609) of Swanscombe, Kent, and his wife, Elizabeth (died 1616), the daughter of Leven Buskin. Anthony's father, knighted by James I on 24 July 1603, was clerk of the green cloth to both Elizabeth I and her successor, while his uncle, also Anthony, was clerk of the kitchen. Weldon succeeded to both these places in the royal household: acquiring his uncle's office in 1604 when the latter resigned, and in 1609 inheriting that of his father. On 5 June 1604 Weldon married Elinor, or Ellen ('bap'. 1588, died 1622), daughter of George Wilmer. They had four daughters and eight sons (of whom six survived to adulthood). Two of his sons, Ralph Weldon, the eldest, and Anthony Weldon, held commissions as officers in the parliamentarian armies of the civil war period. 
In the tenth year of the reign of James I, Weldon was granted the ownership of Rochester Castle. Firmly ensconced in a place of influence within the royal household, Weldon accompanied the king on his progress to Scotland in 1617 and on the way north was knighted at Berwick on 11 May. However, something went wrong to disrupt the long career at court that Weldon might have anticipated. After his death it was claimed that he was the author, long shrouded in mystery, of a letter which had been written from Leith, near Edinburgh, ostensibly directed to an English correspondent, on 20 June 1617, describing the poverty, bigotry, and foolish traditions of the Scots in exaggerated terms. It is said that, discovering the depths of his official's distaste for the land of his birth, the king dismissed Weldon from his post. However, attribution of the letter to Weldon is very insecure. The many surviving manuscript versions are signed by different names, including John E. and John R. The first surviving printed edition, 'A Discription of Scotland', apparently published in the Netherlands in 1626, was credited to one Doctor Corbett. More printed versions were published in the 1640s and 1650s, none of which is ascribed to Weldon. James Howell's name appears on the title-page of the 1649 edition. Claims for Weldon's authorship of the 'Perfect Description of the People and Country of Scotland' are further undermined by the fact that the clerk of the green cloth and the kitchen does not appear to have relinquished his position in the king's household until October 1623, six years after supposedly falling into disgrace. While it may be possible to see euphemism in the formal instrument by which he laid down his patent, where the reason given for his resignation was his retirement into the country on health grounds, he was nevertheless granted compensation for the loss of office to the tune of $1000, a show of munificence which does not bespeak disfavour. There are hints that he may have fallen victim to Lionel Cranfield's reform of the household. On 11 February the secretary, Conway, had written to Cranfield about taking in hand the articles against Weldon and another household official, Sir Robert Bannister, while in a letter apparently written around that time Weldon sought the assistance of a colleague in moving the case against him from the exchequer chamber to king's bench. It seems entirely likely that Weldon's name became associated with the 'Perfect Description' only when the violently anti-Jacobean tract of 1650, 'The Court and Character of King James', was attributed to him, apologists for the house of Stuart seeking to depict its author as an embittered former courtier. Weldon was imaginatively portrayed as the victim of James I's ire in order that he might be further smeared with the vices of ingratitude, hypocrisy, and tale bearing. After the Restoration Anthony Wood further undermined the former courtier's reputation by offering additional evidence for Weldon's authorship of 'The Court and Character'. Wood stated that Weldon had shown the work to fellow courtiers before the civil war, but that their horrified reactions convinced him not to publish. But there would appear to be no contemporary evidence whatever to suggest that Weldon even moved into a position of hostility towards the court after he left service there. Certainly, he promoted a scheme for improving assessment of ship money in 1638 by ending the 'abuse' of employing sheriffs and high constables as collectors ('CSP dom.', '1637-8', p. 233). In 1641 he complained against the administration of the gunpowder monopoly. But such actions do not clearly mark him out as an opponent of royal policies, much less of the king himself. 
However, after 1642 Weldon's loyalties were not in question for a moment. As the head of the county committee he held Kent for parliament, remorselessly engrossing every jurisdiction and applying 'dictatorial methods' which rendered him 'personally detestable' to the historian of the great rebellion in that shire (Everitt, 15). He has been portrayed as an autocrat and tyrant, needlessly oppressive in his treatment of the county's numerous royalists, increasingly dependent on an ever narrowing clique of lesser parliamentarian gentry, and most of the blame for the Kentish revolt of 1648 has been laid at Weldon's door. But although much has been made of his reputedly violent and embittered temperament, construed almost entirely on the basis of his supposed sufferings at the hands of James I, it seems likely that Weldon was as much a victim of the 'functional radicalisation' which the harsh and terrifying experiences of civil war inflicted on Englishmen in the 1640s, as any malevolence of spirit. His fellow Kentishman, sworn foe, and passionate royalist, Sir Roger Twysden, was gracious enough to acknowledge the 'noble principles' which jostled with the 'many vanities, if not vices' in Weldon's breast (Everitt, 134-5). Twysden also believed that it was not Weldon's support for the two houses which motivated him so much as a 'desire of rule' inspired by feuds with his neighbours which 'brought hym to run with the forwardest' (ibid.). 
Weldon did what he could to protect Kent from the exactions of a parliament too easily prey to the many temptations of the rich and populous county on its doorstep, and he himself was quick to blame the 1648 revolt on the disproportionate burden of parliamentary taxation placed on his countrymen. It is probably equally true that Weldon and his cohort too often found their interests betrayed at Westminster, where parliament was prepared to extend a lenient hand to the royalists of the county who rebelled with alarming frequency. For instance, a failure of resolve at Westminster in the prosecution of the Christmas 1647 Canterbury rioters probably also contributed to the rebellion the following summer. Faced with the uncertainty of support at Westminster, Weldon and his clique owed the security of their position in Kent almost entirely to their own efforts, a fact which doubtless helps to explain their vigour in the government of the county. 
It is equally clear that the full story of Weldonian 'tyranny' cannot be told independently of the factional struggles within the county committee, and their correlation with the conflicts at Westminster between presbyterians and Independents. From 1646 the maintenance of Weldon's supremacy in Kent in the face of the challenges posed by his fellow committee man Sir John Sedley of St Clere depended very largely on the closeness of his ties with the Independent leadership in the House of Commons, and their ability to bear down Sedley's supporters, among them Denzil Holles and Sir William Waller. On 24 October 1648 Weldon was awarded $500 for his service in suppressing the royalist rebellion in Kent. However, he may already have been dead when the award was made. He was buried at Swanscombe on 27 October. 
In 1650 'The Court and Character' was published. The following year William Sanderson first made the allegation that Weldon was its author, and set in train the tradition of the embittered former courtier. In 1653 a brief history of the English monarchy was published entitled 'A Cat may Look upon a King'. This book has also been attributed to Weldon, evidently incorrectly, as the author refers to the execution of Charles I, and it is considered far more likely to have been the work of Marchamont Nedham. Despite the somewhat perilous uncertainty of evidence for Weldon's role as a satirist, the publications with which he is commonly associated have enjoyed enormous popularity and influence on later historians. Sir Walter Scott's republication of 'The Court and Character' in 'The Secret History of the Court of James I' (1811) revived them, and modern historians have frequently had cause to lament the way in which 'Weldon' succeeded in distorting history. He may have been unfair, and his satire was certainly just one example drawn from a rich contemporary vein of courtly criticism, but his version of James VI and I as a perverted, hypocritical, slobbering villain remains compelling. 




@@@@@


doc= 28989


Weldon, Anthony (bap. 1610), parliamentarian army officer, was baptized at East Peckham, Kent, on 29 June 1610, the fourth son, of eight sons and four daughters, of Sir Anthony Weldon (bap. 1583, d. 1648) of Swanscombe, Kent, and his wife, Helen (or Elinor) Wilmer ('bap'. 1588, died 1622). His father, knighted in 1617, lost his place at court in 1623, emerging in the 1640s as the county boss who controlled Kent for parliament. Anthony's eldest brother, Ralph Weldon, was also a parliamentarian army officer. 
By his own account Weldon was a professional soldier from 1622 or 1623 onwards. In 1639 he met at Lyons the returning ambassador to Venice, Basil Feilding, earl of Denbigh, who persuaded him to come back to England and march in the king's army against the Scots. Weldon was colonel of a Northumberland regiment during the first bishops' war, but chose not to serve when the army reformed the following year 'as not being at all satisfied with the lawfulness of that Engagement, and for some other reasons which I expressed in a Letter to the earl of Northumberland the General of that Army' (Weldon, 'To the Parliament', 3). He went abroad and returned in time, he later claimed, to refuse to accompany the king in demanding the five members from parliament in January 1642. He went to fight in Ireland where, he later recalled with characteristic self-righteousness, while other less worthy men were given senior posts, he 'was forced (if I would go at all), to go with a single Company (which my zeal prompted me cheerfully to accept)' (ibid., 4). 
Weldon was sent to the relief of Duncannon, co. Wexford, where he served as captain of the garrison until 1643. However, he quarrelled with the garrison commander, Laurence Esmonde, Lord Esmonde, whom he regarded as too much the friend of the king rather than of parliament and too easy-going in his relations with his Catholic neighbours whom he was holding the fort against. He returned to England and took a commission as major in the horse regiment of Theophilus Clinton, earl of Lincoln, part of the army of the eastern association. This posting proved no more congenial than the former, and Weldon was soon presenting parliament with charges against the Lincolnshire county committee. In 1644 he transferred as major to a Kentish horse regiment in Sir William Waller's army, commanded by Sir Michael Livesey. Livesey was not a success as a soldier. In May 1644 Weldon preferred articles against his commander, accusing him of dishonouring his regiment, exposing his major to grave personal danger for no better reason than his own timidity, then trying to rid himself of the embarrassment by putting Weldon and his troop under another command. He also referred to Livesey's desertion of his post at Cheriton Down in March. A committee was set up by the Commons to investigate. Sir William Waller accused Livesey of running away from the battle at Cropredy Bridge in June, and at the same time Weldon 'posted him [Livesey] for a mutineer and a coward' in Westminster Hall (Weldon, 'True Declaration', 14). 
The Commons regarded Weldon's accusation as an act of disrespect to their authority, and referred the matter to the committee of examinations, who ruled Weldon's claims 'a false and scandalous Libell' and sent him to Newgate until he should give Livesey satisfaction (Weldon, 'True Declaration', 18). They no doubt meant an apology and possibly financial recompense; an unrepentant Weldon interpreted the word rather differently and compounded the offence: 'I challenged him [Livesey], told him I would Cudgell him, and publisht it, which satisfied me, for my private affronts I received by him' (ibid., 19). After ten months' imprisonment in Newgate, and several petitions for his release, he published his defiant 'The True Declaration of Colonell Anthony Welden'. Gaoled without a hearing, and denied a trial, he charged parliament with arbitrary actions every bit as bad as those of Star Chamber or high commission: 'And since I suffer for accusing, and my accusation not heard, nor my witnesses accepted, I leave to the world to judge the measure I have received. And I hope this will satisfie all men I am not the least sufferer for the Publike but the greatest for this particular. (ibid.)' Weldon was released in 1646, after the Lords pressed his case on the Commons in March. He left England and took service in the Spanish army in the Netherlands. However, he lost his command, and was imprisoned on account of yet another quarrel with a commanding officer, this time George Goring, Lord Goring. In 1648 Weldon returned to England and attempted to raise a regiment from royalist prisoners for service in the pay of the Venetian state. On 19 March 1649, having alerted the Rump Parliament to the recent publication of the 'Koran', Weldon was sent with a party of soldiers and a sergeant-at-arms to search out and seize the press responsible, and to bring the printer before the council of state, who seem to have regarded Weldon as an officious nuisance for his efforts. Obstructed in his Venetian scheme by his enemies in parliament, owed eight years' arrears, and denied the opportunity of service in England or Ireland, Weldon vented his frustrations in another pamphlet, 'To the Parliament of England and Army'. He repeated his charge of parliamentary tyranny: 'It goes much against my heart and conscience, to see that arbitrary power continue in them, for which they plucked others down, and see so many poor oppressed cry at their doors daily for justice, without dispatch, hearing, redress or hope thereof. (Weldon, 'To the Parliament', 45)' He now added the bitterness of the old soldier overtaken by younger men, of the gentleman displaced by the social upstarts of the New Model Army: ''Tis high time for me to learn some mechanick Trade after twenty six yeers Service; and so come to be admitted a Colonel in the Army, as others are, who are not known by their birth, garb or merit. I am sorry to see Gentry so trodden down, as if they were lesse meritorious, or less faithfull than these new upstarts. (ibid., 41)' On 20 April 1649 Weldon had a pass for himself, his wife (of whom nothing is yet known), and three servants to take ship overseas, to an unspecified destination. On 11 December 1650 a warrant went out from the council of state for his arrest, for reasons unstated. On 30 November 1654 the lord protector granted Weldon's personal request to go abroad once more. Nothing more is heard of him. 


