@@@@@


doc= 28990


Weldon, John (1676/7-1736), musician, was born at Chichester on 19 January 1676 or 1677 of unknown parentage. He was a chorister at Eton College under the organist, John Walter, and the college paid for him to receive lessons from Henry Purcell for a year from about March 1693 to March 1694. Later in 1694 he became organist of New College, Oxford. Three years later he wrote an ode, 'A Song on the Peace of Ryswick' (Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, MU MS 120, pp. 60-75). In March 1700 four prizes were offered for the best settings of Congreve's masque 'The Judgment of Paris'. Weldon's setting, first performed on 6 May 1701, was awarded the first prize of $100. Although John Eccles and Daniel Purcell, the second and third prize-winners, published their settings, Weldon did not, and the complete score survives in only one manuscript (Folger Shakespeare Library, Washington, MS W. b. 526). On 6 January 1701 Weldon was sworn in as a gentleman-extraordinary of the Chapel Royal and at the end of that year resigned his post in Oxford. 
Weldon was appointed organist at St Bride's, Fleet Street, on 18 June 1702, and on 11 November 1703 he married Susanna Betton ('bap'. 15 July 1682) at Lavant, near Chichester. They had seven children. During this period he wrote a number of songs for plays and concerts, including vocal music for Motteux's interlude 'Britain's Happiness' (1704), of which only one duet survives. On the death of John Blow on 1 October 1708 Weldon succeeded him as one of the two organists at the Chapel Royal. His appointment as second composer to the Chapel Royal also dates from this time, although the establishment of this post was not acknowledged in the Chapel Royal chequebook until 8 August 1715. He became organist of St Martin-in-the-Fields on 2 February 1714 without relinquishing his other posts. Two years later he published 'Divine Harmony', containing six solo anthems written for the countertenor Richard Elford, and at about the same time he composed a service in D (Royal College of Music, MS 2043) and a communion service in E[flat]. Most of his extant anthems, however, seem to be earlier than this. A revival of 'The Tempest' with music by Weldon was advertised in the 'Daily Courant' for 30 July 1716. No setting ascribed to him is known but it has been suggested that the setting usually attributed to Purcell may actually be Weldon's (Laurie, 'Did Purcell set 'The Tempest'?'). He died at his home in Downing Street on 7 May 1736 after a long illness and was buried on 11 May in the churchyard of St Paul's, Covent Garden; he was survived by his wife. At the Chapel Royal he was succeeded as composer by William Boyce and as organist by Jonathan Martin, and at St Martin's by Joseph Kelway. 
In addition to the works mentioned above, Weldon wrote about thirty anthems, two odes, some fifty songs, and a few instrumental pieces, although not all have survived. He was a composer of considerable talent but uneven achievement. At its best his music is by turns elegantly tuneful and deeply expressive, showing a keen sensitivity to the text and imaginative handling of harmony, key, and structure. He did not, however, always have the skill to sustain his ideas and tended to over-decorate his melodic lines and rely too heavily on repetitive patterns. Two of his anthems were printed in Boyce's 'Cathedral Music', volume 2 (1768), and others in Arnold's 'Cathedral Music' (1790) and Page's 'Harmonia sacra' (1800). Several of his songs, especially 'Let Ambition Fire thy Mind' from 'The Judgment of Paris', 'From Grave Lessons', and 'The Wakeful Nightingale', remained popular throughout the eighteenth century. A few of his works were available in print at the end of the twentieth century. 


@@@@@


doc= 28991


Michael Weldon (d. in or before 1654), army officer, was a kinsman of Sir Anthony, a member of the Northumberland branch of the family. He was employed by parliament as an agent to the Scottish committee of estates in May 1643 and commanded a regiment of horse in the Scottish army which entered England the following year, continuing to serve in that capacity until 1646. Letters of administration were granted to his widow, Mary, on 12 July 1654. 


@@@@@


doc= 28992


Weldon, Ralph (bap. 1606, d. 1676), parliamentarian army officer, was baptized at Swanscombe, Kent, on 12 January 1606, the eldest son of Sir Anthony Weldon (bap. 1583, d. 1648) of Swanscombe, and his wife, Elinor (1588-1622), daughter of George Wilmer. His father held the office of clerk of the green cloth under James I and became the leading parliamentarian committeeman in Kent during the civil war. Anthony Weldon, another parliamentarian army officer of note, was one of Ralph's seven younger brothers. Ralph Weldon was admitted to Jesus College, Cambridge, on 24 November 1620 and matriculated in 1621. Some time before 1639 he subsequently married the widow of Thomas Francklyn, probably the Mary who later appears as his wife; when Weldon was called upon to pay Francklyn's debts the accounts committee of Essex did 'much marvel he took no notice' (Everitt, 183). 
Ralph Weldon was serving as a parliamentarian captain by September 1643, but quarrelled with his superior officer, Sir Michael Livesey. He was offered a commission under the earl of Essex, but according to his father, in a statement which may perhaps reflect his own attitudes more than those of his son, Ralph refused it on the ground that Kent should maintain control over its own forces. He served as colonel under Sir William Waller in 1644 in command of a regiment of foot raised in Kent, and his regiment was selected for the New Model Army the following year. On 10 March 1645 the House of Lords approved his officers' commissions, and Fairfax subsequently appointed Weldon 'as eldest Colonel' (Sprigge, 17), to command the brigade of 2000 horse and 4000-5000 foot sent to relieve Taunton, a task they accomplished on 11 May. Consequently Weldon was absent from Naseby, but he was active in engagements at Bridgwater and Bristol. On 10 September Weldon's brigade, storming the well-fortified south side of Bristol, lost 100 men 'by reason of the height of the Works... and the shortness of the Ladders' (Sprigge, 116). On 16 October Weldon's forces overran Tiverton and on 25 October parliament commissioned him governor of Plymouth. His regiment saw further action in 1646 at the siege of Exeter and captured Charles Fort and Inchmere House for parliament. 
In April 1647 Weldon's regiment mustered 124 officers and 1060 men. When his soldiers' arrears of pay grew extreme Weldon raised money for them on his personal bond. He wrote to Speaker Lenthall on 30 July: 'I have now no way left, but in most humble manner to lay down the command of this garrison of Plymouth to the honourable houses of parliament, who were pleased to bestow it on me without my knowledge' (Cary, 1.324-5). On 2 August, with his soldiers enduring famine, and in fear for his life, he requisitioned $500 out of the customs house to buy them bread. On 27 August he wrote to Lenthall complaining that he was reduced to forced billeting and that parliament had ignored his letter of resignation. He spent a staggering $6000 on settling his soldiers' debts to Plymouth's inhabitants, a sum apparently never fully repaid. Robert Lilburne succeeded to command his regiment upon his retirement. 
On 12 February 1653 Weldon's wife, Mary, was buried. In or before 1656 he married Ellen or Eleanor; their son George was buried on 17 April 1662, aged five; their daughter Elinor ('bap'. 1660) was buried on 15 February 1662; and their daughter Elizabeth was baptized on 22 August 1662. Weldon was MP for Kent in the protectorate parliaments of 1654 and 1656. On 23 December 1656 the $3300 still owed to Weldon was ordered to be paid out of the arrear assessments of the City of London, but on 6 June 1657 the House of Commons had to reiterate orders for him to receive $4000. In 1663 the Restoration government received information against Weldon that: 'He was a hater of monarchy, a seeker for popularity, rather an Anabaptist than a presbyterian, as he pretends to be. Before the Restoration he declared himself a Commonwealth man; he has called the punishment of the horrid regicides martyrdom; he is suspected of being implicated in the last two attempts against the King, and makes his house a resort for discontented persons. ('CSP dom.', '1663-4', 406)' On 12 May 1676 'not likely to continue long in this world' (will, TNA: PRO, PROB 11/373, fol. 107'v') Weldon made his will. His wife had died in 1669, and he made his son Anthony (died 1698) his executor, who proved the will on 4 May 1683. 


@@@@@


doc= 28993


Weldon, Ralph (1674-1713), Benedictine monk and chronicler, was born on 12 April 1674 in London, the seventeenth child of Colonel George Weldon (died 1679), youngest son of Sir Anthony Weldon, historical writer, and of his wife, Lucy Necton (died 1702). He belonged to an ancient but impoverished family from Swanscombe, Kent. Converted to Roman Catholicism by Father Joseph Johnston, he made his abjuration at St James's Chapel on 12 October 1687. After schooling with the Maurists at Pontlevoy, he was clothed as a Benedictine monk in the priory of St Edmund the King at Paris on 17 December 1690, taking the name Benet a Sancto Raphaelo Archangelo. He made his profession on 13 January 1692, but lameness prevented his ordination. 
Weldon was of a scrupulous and nervous disposition, prone to following advice given him in dreams, which led to a degree of instability throughout his monastic life. He was for a brief period in 1694 a novice at La Trappe. At St Edmund's, Paris, he was librarian, and in 1702 compiled the catalogue (Paris, Bibliotheque Mazarine, MS 4057). He also drew up for this library in 1706 his draft of a life of King James II (BL, Add. MS 10118) to celebrate the deposition of the king's remains at St Edmund's in 1701. In an attempt to draw him away from his personal difficulties his superiors recommended he collect material to illustrate the history of the post-Reformation English Benedictines. This large collection, written between 1707 and 1711, he called 'Memorials' (Douai Abbey, Woolhampton, Reading, deposit IA), and incorporated much autobiographical detail in it. Summaries of it, entitled 'Chronological notes', were drafted by him in 1709 and 1711. Weldon lived within his community as a recluse, spending much of the day in study and writing, and was found dead in his locked cell on 23 November 1713, having been accidentally asphyxiated; he was buried at St Edmund's. His compilations contain the most comprehensive survey of early modern English Benedictine history. 


@@@@@


doc= 28994


Weldon, Walter (1832-1885), chemist, was born on 31 October 1832 at Loughborough, the eldest son of Reuben Weldon, manufacturer, and his wife, Esther Fowke. He was employed for some years in his father's business, and on 14 March 1854 at Wirksworth, Derbyshire, he married Annie Cotton ('c'.1832-1881) daughter of John Cotton, cordwainer; they had three children. 
Shortly after his marriage Weldon went to London as a journalist. He contributed to the 'Dial', afterwards incorporated with the 'Morning Star', an influential Liberal daily newspaper of the time. On 1 August 1860 he issued the first number of a sixpenny monthly magazine called 'Weldon's Register of Facts and Occurrences Relating to Literature, the Sciences, and the Arts', by which he hoped primarily to record scientific facts and discoveries in a popular form. Although ably conducted, it proved a failure, and was abandoned in 1864. Among the contributors were George Augustus Sala, Edmund Yates, William Michael Rossetti, James Hain Friswell, and Percy Greg. 
About this time, probably through the influence of a friend and fellow-Swedenborgian, Charles Townsend Hook, a paper manufacturer of Snodland, near Rochester, Weldon became interested in technological chemistry. Without any formal or practical training, he began to consider certain industrial problems, particularly chlorine and alkali manufacture, mainly by reading at the British Museum. He took out his first patents for the 'manganese-regeneration process', which eventually made his name famous, before he had ever seen a chemical experiment. 
By September 1865 Weldon had devised two new processes for the cheaper manufacture of magnesium and aluminium, but was advised that they were impracticable. In the latter part of 1866 he met the chemical manufacturer David Gamble, and explained, in the chemical language of the day, that he thought he had obtained a 'peroxide' of manganese from the 'protoxide' by suspending it in water and blowing air through. He was then totally unacquainted with quantitative chemical analysis and the results to be obtained thereby, and did not realize that his process had already been worked on a large scale and found unsatisfactory. The object of Weldon (and of various unsuccessful predecessors) was to regenerate the manganese peroxide used in enormous quantities in the manufacture of chlorine, and converted into a valueless by-product which was discarded. 
From this time onwards Weldon carried out experiments on a large scale, first in 1866 at the demolished works of the Walker Chemical Company on the Tyne, and later at those of J. C. Gamble & Co. at St Helens. These led to the 'magnesia-manganese' process patented in 1867, and the 'lime-manganese' process patented a little later, which was finally adopted, but not worked commercially until 1869. By this latter process ninety to ninety-five per cent of the manganese peroxide formerly lost was recovered, the price of bleaching powder was reduced by $6 per ton, and its production was quadrupled. The essential detail of the process which distinguished it from earlier attempts was the use of an excess of lime over and above that required for the precipitation of the manganese. Jean-Baptiste Dumas, in presenting to Weldon the gold medal of the Societe d'Encouragement pour l'Industrie Nationale in Paris, said: 'By this invention every sheet of paper and every yard of calico throughout the world was cheapened'. In addition, his proposers for membership of the Royal Society cited the invention's 'great importance in preventing the pollution of streams and of the atmosphere' (RS, election certificate, 1882). For his discovery Weldon was also awarded a grand prix at the Paris Exhibition of 1878. 
In 1870 the invention of a new chlorine process, 'the Deacon process', by Henry Deacon (died 1876) and Ferdinand Hurter (1844-1898) led Weldon to fear that his work might be superseded, and he invented another process, known as the 'magnesia-chlorine' process, which was developed later at the works at Salindres by Messrs Pechiney and M. Boulouvard, and was then called the Pechiney-Weldon process. This process did not prove ultimately successful, while the lime-manganese process was widely employed. In 1880 Weldon read at the Swansea meeting of the British Association an important paper, in which he showed that the heat of formation of compounds increases in nearly all cases with the atomic volume, the heat of formation of equal volumes of different compounds being approximately equal. On 11 July 1883 he was elected president of the Society of Chemical Industry, of which he had been one of the founders in 1881. During the first half of 1884 he voluntarily undertook the laborious duty of abstracting large numbers of patents for the society's journal. On 9 July 1884 he delivered his presidential address at Newcastle upon Tyne on the soda and chlorine industries. A paper on the numerical relations between the atomic weights, read at the Montreal meeting of the British Association, was not published, but in 1885 Weldon printed, for private circulation, the first chapter dealing with the glucinum family, of a memoir 'On the ratios... of the atomic weights.' In it, he attempted to show that the ratios of the atomic weights of the members of a series of elements (Mendeleyev's periodic table) could be expressed by a simple constant. Like his scientific contemporaries Alfred Russel Wallace and Sir William Crookes, Weldon was a believer in spiritualism. 
Weldon went, despite illness, to the Aberdeen meeting of the British Association in 1885, but was obliged to return, and died at his house, Rede Hall, Burstow, Surrey, of heart disease on 20 September. He was survived by his son Walter Frank Raphael Weldon FRS (1860-1906), professor of comparative anatomy at Oxford. A second son, Walter Alfred Dante ('b'. 1862), died suddenly at Cambridge in 1881 shortly before his mother's death. The manganese recovery process has been remembered not only for its intrinsic importance to chemical industry, but as a marvellous achievement by a man without previous training. 


@@@@@


doc= 28995


Wellbeloved, Charles (1769-1858), Unitarian minister and tutor, was born on 6 April 1769 in Denmark Street, St Giles, London, the only child of John Wellbeloved (1742-1787) and his wife, Elizabeth ('b'. 1747), daughter of Thomas Plaw. Owing to his parents' unhappy marriage he was brought up from the age of four by his grandfather Charles Wellbeloved (1713-1782), friend of John Wesley, who had an estate at Mortlake, Surrey. He was educated principally by the Revd Robert Delafosse of Richmond. Placed with a firm of drapers on Holborn Hill, Wellbeloved found the experience 'utterly uncongenial', claiming he only learned 'how to tie up a parcel' (Kenrick, 5). In 1785 he entered the orthodox Homerton Academy, but, influenced by two of the students, David Jones (1765-1816) and David Jardine (died 1797), his opinions became heterodox. In September 1787 he entered New College, Hackney, recently established by rational dissenters. In January 1792 he accepted an invitation from Newcome Cappe to become his assistant at St Saviourgate Chapel, York, though the salary was only $60. All the duties were undertaken by Wellbeloved as Cappe had suffered a paralytic stroke. On Cappe's death in 1800 he became sole minister, continuing until his death, though with the help of assistants from 1845. Because of ill health he did not officiate after 1853. Wellbeloved married Ann (died 1823), eldest daughter of John Kinder, a linen draper in Cheapside, London, on 1 July 1793, at St Mary's, Stoke Newington. They had four sons and five daughters, including three sets of mixed twins. Two daughters married Unitarian ministers, John Kenrick (1788-1877) and J. R. Wreford; the youngest, Emma (died 1842), married Sir James Carter, later chief justice of New Brunswick (1815-65). 
Because of his small salary, his growing family, and some initial discouragement as a minister, Wellbeloved for some years remained unsettled at York. About 1795 he began his own school; in 1796 it was reported that he had thirteen day pupils at $15 p.a. each. In November 1797 he was invited to succeed Thomas Barnes (1747-1810) as divinity tutor at the dissenters' academy in Manchester, but he declined, discouraged by the financial state of the institution and the coldness of Barnes, an Arian, who was unwilling to see a Unitarian successor. When in 1803 the invitation was renewed Wellbeloved accepted, and Manchester College moved to York. He received much valuable support from Cappe's widow, Catherine (1744-1821), and William Wood (1745-1808), minister at Mill Hill, Leeds. During the early years the chronic financial difficulties persisted, and, assisted only by a classics tutor, Wellbeloved was grossly overworked. He was noted for his methodical allocation of time and habit of rising early. Nevertheless, a former student, Joseph Hunter, privately believed that 'There was always something too much of a procrastinating spirit in Mr Wellbeloved, & of the representing himself as having too much business on his hands' (BL, Add. MS 36527, fol. 50'r'). He was seriously ill through stress and exhaustion in 1807 and 1809. Gradually there were sufficient benefactions and subscriptions for a third tutor. William Turner (1788-1853) was appointed mathematics tutor in 1809, and was succeeded in 1827 by William Hincks. From 1810 Wellbeloved had the invaluable co-operation of John Kenrick as classics tutor. 
Wellbeloved substituted biblical exegesis for systematic theology. By carefully reading the whole of the 'Old' and 'New' testaments with his students, Wellbeloved sought to encourage them to develop their own views. He scrupulously avoided teaching any particular system of doctrine, or indeed openly expressing his own theological opinions, though it did leave some students 'in a painful state of doubt... without definite conceptions of the system of Christian truth' (Kenrick, 102). He also rarely introduced controversial subjects into his pulpit. His approach angered those who wanted a clearer identification of the college with Unitarianism. Doubts concerning his commitment were not finally resolved until his brilliant defence of Unitarianism against Archdeacon Francis Wrangham in 1823 and 1824. Sydney Smith wrote: 'If I had a cause to gain I would fee Mr Wellbeloved to plead for me, and double fee Mr Wrangham to plead against me' (ibid., 152). He closely followed the theological system of Newcome Cappe, particularly in his treatment of prophecy. James Martineau, a student at York, recalled the depth of Wellbeloved's scholarship: 'a Lightfoot, a Jeremiah Jones and an Eichhorn all in one, yet no mere theologian after all, but scarcely less a naturalist and an archaeologist as well' (J. Martineau, 'Essays, Reviews and Addresses', 1890-91, 4.54). Wellbeloved was fluent in Greek and Latin, proficient in Hebrew, Syriac, and Chaldee, and read Arabic; he could also read French and Italian, and understand German. He was responsible for the theological and metaphysical section of the short-lived 'Annual Review' (1802-8). His principal work was a revised translation of the 'Bible' for families: the undertaking proved too great for Wellbeloved and only nine parts of the 'Old Testament' were published during his life, the first in 1819 and the last at his own expense in 1838. After his death the text was revised by John Kenrick and republished in three volumes in 'Holy Scriptures of the Old Covenant' (1859-62), with translations of the remaining books of the 'Old Testament'. Wellbeloved's most popular work was his 'Devotional Exercises for Young Persons' (1801), which reached an eighth edition in 1838. He retired as theology tutor in 1840, when the college returned to Manchester. 
For nearly seventy years Wellbeloved was actively concerned in all the major reform and social movements in York. In 1813 he helped expose the shameful abuses of the York Lunatic Asylum. He was one of the founders of the York Book Society (1794), subsequently the Subscription Library, the York Mechanics' Institute (1827), the York Whig Club (1827), and the School of Art (1842), and although not among the original promoters of the Yorkshire Philosophical Society (1822), he was curator of antiquities from 1823 until his death. He was largely responsible for the interpretation and preservation of York's historic past. In 1981 his 'Eburacum' was described as 'a valuable scholarly summary epitomising the breadth of learning, systematic method and practical approach of Victorian antiquarianism at its best' (Addyman, 58). In 1829 he headed the subscription list for the restoration of York Minster following the devastating fire, and led the opposition to the proposals to alter the position of the undamaged choir screen. He also supported the preservation of the city walls. He died on 29 August 1858 at Monkgate, York. He was buried in the graveyard behind the St Saviourgate Chapel on 3 September. His reputation rested on his work as principal of Manchester College, but as a reformer and scholar he also made an important contribution to nineteenth-century York. 


@@@@@


doc= 28996


Welles, Adam de, first Lord Welles (d. 1311), baron and soldier, was the son of a Lincolnshire landowner, William de Welle (died 1264), and his wife, Isabel Periton (died 1315). The family derived its name from Well, near Alford in Lincolnshire. Adam succeeded his elder brother, William, in or after 1286. He went abroad with Hugh Despenser on a royal embassy to Germany in 1294. The date of his entry into the royal household is not known, but he was listed as a banneret of the king's household from 1297 to 1306. In 1297 he was among those appointed to receive fines from those clergy who wished to re-enter the king's protection during Edward I's dispute with Archbishop Winchelsey. It seems certain that he continued to support the king during the developing political crisis in that year; he participated in the fruitless royal expedition in Flanders in the autumn with a retinue of one knight and twelve squires. Two of the latter were knighted in the course of the campaign. Welles fought with Edward at the battle of Falkirk in 1298. In 1299 he was given custody of Rockingham Castle and was made keeper of the royal forests between Oxford and Stamford, a clear sign of royal favour. In the same year he was summoned to parliament as a baron. In 1300 he was present on the Caerlaverock campaign in Scotland, serving with a contingent of three knights and nine squires. He served in Scotland again in 1301 and in 1303-4. His involvement in the Scottish wars continued under Edward II, with service in the campaign of 1309-10. He was also summoned regularly to parliament. 
Adam de Welles died on 1 September 1311, and was buried in Greenfield Priory, Lincolnshire. He was survived by his wife Joan (died 1315), daughter of Sir John Engaine and widow of Walter Fitzrobert, whom he had married by 1296. Virtually all his estates were in Lincolnshire. In 1297 he acquired lands in that county from William (II) of Wyleby, and he later bought the manor of Wyberton from John Holland. Edward II granted him lands there worth $42. The inquisition taken on his death showed that he held the whole or parts of seventeen manors, and five advowsons. He left two sons, Robert and Adam. 


@@@@@


doc= 28997


John Welles, Viscount Welles (d. 1499), soldier and administrator, was the son of Leo, sixth Baron Welles and his second wife, Margaret Beauchamp, duchess of Somerset. As the younger son of both parents, he had no hereditary expectations. During the 1460s his mother sought to divert the Welles inheritance to him, and, but for the attainders, he would have succeeded 'c'.1474 to the Welles barony. His pardon in 1478 as of Bletsoe, Bedfordshire, and Maxey, Lincolnshire, both properties of the duchess, suggests that he depended on his mother until her death in 1482. Apparently in the royal household at Edward IV's death, he was commissioned to victual the fleet sent against Sir Edward Woodville, but was already in rebellion against Richard III by 13 August 1483, when his property was seized. Knighted and recognized as Lord Welles by Henry Tudor on his landing at Milford Haven on 7 August 1485, he fought at Bosworth, and by February 1486 had been restored to his inheritance, created Viscount Welles, and elected knight of the Garter. Such favours recognized his special status as the king's uncle, half-brother to the king's mother, Margaret Beaufort, a connection which was reinforced by his marriage as 'a safe man' to the queen's eldest surviving sister, Cecily (1469-1507). Hence he was appointed in 1485 constable of Bolingbroke, Lincolnshire, constable, steward, and master forester of Rockingham, and JP in six counties. In 1488 he was granted several forfeitures and in 1490 the castles of Caerleon and Usk for life. He served in France in 1492 and in 1496 treated with Burgundy. Such limited activity and moderate rewards indicate that he was never politically of the front rank. He had two daughters by 1493, Anne and Elizabeth, whom he planned to marry to the Stanley heir, but both predeceased him. At his death in London on 9 February 1499 the Welles inheritance devolved on the children of his four half-sisters. 


@@@@@


doc= 28998


Welles, Leo, sixth Baron Welles (c.1406-1461), soldier, was the eldest son of Eudo Welles and Maud, daughter of Ralph, Lord Greystoke. Eudo predeceased his father, the Lincolnshire baron John, Lord Welles, on whose death in 1421 Leo succeeded while still a minor. He had been married on 15 August 1417 at Methley, Yorkshire, to Joan (or Cecilia), daughter of Robert Waterton of Methley, trusted retainer both of John of Gaunt and of the Lancastrian kings, who was granted his custody on his grandfather's death in 1421. How much this marriage and the Waterton connection mattered to him is suggested by his choice, long after Joan's death, of the Waterton chapel in Methley church for his burial. Knighted in 1426, Leo Welles was granted seisin of his inheritance in 1427, summoned to parliament from 1432, and was a royal councillor from 1434. He went to France with the king in 1430 and with Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, to relieve Calais, in 1436. Essentially a Lincolnshire landowner Welles served as commissioner principally of sewers and of the peace for the three parts of Lincolnshire and Northamptonshire. Appointed as lieutenant of Ireland for seven years from 1437, perhaps reluctantly, and actually resident there from 1438, he failed to control the contending factions and resigned prematurely in 1442. Welles was quite well endowed for a baron, with an income of $604 in 1436, but he had only $322 net, the balance supporting his mother, aunts, brother, son, and repayments of his grandfather's debts. Following Joan's death, which had occurred by 1447, his wedding in that year as third husband to Margaret Beauchamp, duchess of Somerset (died 1482), gave him an interest in her two dowers and her Beauchamp of Bletsoe inheritance. It also married him into the royal family, and placed him on the fringes of the dominant court faction. From 1451 to 1455 he was at Calais as a lieutenant of his brother-in-law Edmund Beaufort, duke of Somerset, apparently continuing until possession was secured by Richard Neville, earl of Warwick (died 1471), on 20 April 1456. Elected a Garter knight before 13 May 1457, he was allegedly captured by the Yorkists at Bloreheath and took the Lancastrian oath of allegiance in 1459. Having joined Margaret of Anjou in the north in 1461, he was with her at the battles of St Albans (17 February) and Towton (29 March), where he was killed, and was subsequently attainted. 






@@@@@


doc= 28999


Richard Welles, seventh Baron Willoughby and seventh Baron Welles (c.1428-1470), magnate, was Leo Welles's son with Joan Waterton and his heir. Richard Welles married by 9 January 1449 Joan, sole daughter and heir of the Lincolnshire baron Robert, Lord Willoughby, whom he succeeded in 1452. The Willoughby barony was worth $1002 in 1436. Welles was knighted and first attended parliament in 1453, and was a royal councillor in 1454. With the expectation of the Welles and ultimately the Waterton of Methley inheritances he was destined to be the principal magnate in the Lincolnshire area. Like his father Richard Welles was with Queen Margaret in the north, and at St Albans and Towton in 1461, but he was allowed to make his peace with Edward IV, escaped attainder and was pardoned on 5 February 1462, and continued to attend parliament. Richard's first wife, Joan, was the daughter of Elizabeth Montagu, sister of Thomas, earl of Salisbury (died 1428), and Richard and Joan Welles were therefore included in the Salisbury roll of arms, which was probably prepared for the funeral of Richard Neville, earl of Salisbury (died 1460), at Bisham Priory (Berkshire) in 1463. He associated himself with the dominant Nevilles in the destruction of the northern Lancastrians in 1464, at the enthronement of Archbishop Neville, and through his second marriage in 1468 to the widowed Margery Ingelby, 'nee' Strangways, a family of important Neville retainers. He was rewarded by the grant of his father's chattels on 9 October 1464, of his Welles estates on 11 July 1465, and by the reversal of Leo Welles's attainder in 1467. However, he had to overturn previous grants to his stepmother, the duchess of Somerset, who had been admitted both to her dower and to a life estate in the principal Welles lands with remainder to her own son, his half-brother John Welles, which was cancelled only in 1468 on the king's command. Welles had thus painfully reunited his inheritances, but not his local pre-eminence, which was shared instead by the king's kinsman Humphrey Bourchier, Lord Cromwell, and his household knight Sir Thomas Burgh -- hence, perhaps, the marriage of Richard Welles's heir Sir Robert Welles to Elizabeth Bourchier (died 1470), heir of Lord Berners and niece of Lord Cromwell, and his feud with Burgh, which resulted after 2 February 1470 in the destruction of Burgh's house at Gainsborough. Although Welles was summoned to London by Edward IV to account, and pardoned, he was already in alliance with the earl of Warwick and duke of Clarence, on whose behalf the Lincolnshire rebellion was organized as part of a much larger uprising. Edward IV advanced in person to suppress it, discovered the Welles family's role, arrested and executed Richard at Stamford on 12 March 1470, the date of Robert's defeat at Losecote Field (Empingham), and executed Robert also on 19 March at Doncaster. Although both were attainted and Robert died childless, their lands were diverted to the loyal Richard Hastings, Lord Welles, husband of Richard Welles's daughter Joan (died 'c'.1474). 


@@@@@


doc= 29000


Welles, Thomas (c.1590-1660), colonial governor, was born in Whichford, Warwickshire, the second of the three children of Robert Welles (1540-1617), yeoman, and his wife, Alice. Several nineteenth- and early twentieth-century sketches of Welles's life provide conflicting details of his English origins, but recent work shows that these earlier biographers had confused him with two other men named Thomas Welles, one of whom lived in Northamptonshire and did not migrate to New England, while the other was of unknown English background and arrived in Massachusetts in 1636, the same year as Thomas Welles of Whichford. As far as can be determined, the family of Welles had lived in Warwickshire for four generations and owned a substantial amount of property there but were not members of the gentry. Welles's parents had sufficient funds to educate him in Latin, however, and his reception in New England suggests that he had the bearing of a gentleman. 
Several accounts of Welles's life state that he emigrated to New England as secretary to William Fiennes, first Viscount Saye and Sele, and settled briefly at a fort named Saybrook, the nucleus of a settlement Saye and Sele was trying to create under the terms of a royal land grant called the Warwick patent. Both Welles's official relationship with Saye and Sele and his residence at Saybrook appear fanciful, an invention intended to elevate his status. Members of the Welles and Fiennes families certainly knew each other in Warwickshire, but no evidence exists to link them in the New World. Inasmuch as Welles arrived in New England with his wife, Alice Tomes ('c'.1592-1640), whom he married about 1615, and six children, Fort Saybrook, with its all-male garrison, seems unlikely to have been his early residence. 
Instead, when Welles arrived in June 1636, he probably disembarked in Boston. Before the year was over he and his family had moved twice, first to Newtown (later Cambridge) and then to Hartford as part of an overland expedition led by Thomas Hooker into the Connecticut river valley. Chosen a magistrate in Connecticut in 1637, Welles was one of the seven magistrates who in 1639 drafted and signed the famous fundamental orders of Connecticut, often called the first English constitution written in the New World. Under it he served as treasurer of Connecticut (1639-51), secretary (1640-48), deputy governor (1654-5, 1656-8), and governor (1655-6, 1658-9). His terms as governor were not consecutive because the fundamental orders specified that no one could serve two years in a row. He also frequently served as Connecticut's delegate to the meetings of the United Colonies of New England, a loose confederation of puritan settlements that was created to maintain a common defence against military threats. His greatest talents seemed to lie in his ability as a diplomat to inspire trust in people and to bring disputants together in compromise. He represented Connecticut in thorny negotiations with all of its neighbours, Massachusetts, the Dutch in New Netherland, and the Mohican Indians in the Narragansett country of south-east New England. In each case Welles exercised a restraining hand and quelled apprehended disturbances. 
One of Connecticut's wealthiest residents, Welles acquired much of his estate from his second marriage in 1646, to Elizabeth ('nee' Deming) Foote ('c'.1595-1683), the widow of Nathaniel Foote (1593-1644) from the neighbouring town of Wethersfield, Connecticut. Welles moved to his wife's Wethersfield home shortly after their marriage and died there unexpectedly in his sleep on 14 January 1660. Buried in the First Society cemetery in Wethersfield, Welles also has his name inscribed on the founders' monument in the ancient burial-ground in Hartford. 


@@@@@


doc= 29001


Wellesley, Arthur, first duke of Wellington (1769-1852), army officer and prime minister, was the third surviving son of Garret Wesley, first earl of Mornington (1735-1781), and his wife, Anne (1742-1831), eldest daughter of Arthur Hill, first Viscount Dungannon. The family name was altered from Wesley to the older form Wellesley by Richard Wellesley, second earl, who used this spelling from 1789. Arthur did not sign himself Wellesley until May 1798. There is disagreement over the date and place of his birth, but 1 May 1769 and 6 Merrion Street (later 24 Upper Merrion Street), Dublin, have been accepted by modern biographers. The register of St Peter's Church, Dublin, records his christening under the date 30 April 1769. This is reconcilable with the alternative birth date of 29 April preferred by some earlier authorities, including the 'Dictionary of National Biography', but it would imply a degree of haste in the ceremony unusual except in cases of imminent danger, for which there is no evidence. Both parents subsequently attested to the date 1 May and this was the day kept as his birthday by Arthur himself. 
Arthur Wesley lost his father at the age of twelve and was thought by his imperious mother to be foolish and dull in comparison with his elder brothers, Richard Wellesley, second earl of Mornington, and William Wellesley-Pole, later Baron Maryborough and third earl of Mornington. His only talents seemed to be for playing the violin (which may have come from his father, who was an accomplished amateur musician) and arithmetical calculation. But these minor gifts were obscured by his physical indolence and social awkwardness: signs perhaps of an unhappy and lonely childhood. His education was disjointed and his record undistinguished. As a small boy he attended the diocesan school at Trim, co. Meath, near the family seat at Dangan. He was then taken by his parents to London, where he became a pupil at Brown's Seminary, Chelsea. In 1781 he went to Eton College with his younger brother Gerald, who soon surpassed him scholastically. The little evidence that survives suggests that he was an unsociable and occasionally aggressive schoolboy who made little effort to learn. As a result he was removed from the college in the summer of 1784 to make way for the more promising fourth son, Henry Wellesley (later Baron Cowley). When his mother moved to the cheaper society of Brussels in 1785 he accompanied her and received lessons in French from their landlord, a lawyer ('avocat'), Jacobus Foubert (not apparently Goubert as usually stated). On Lady Mornington's departure to England she dispatched him to the Academy of Equitation at Angers in preparation for the military career which seemed the only possible employment for such an unpromising boy. 
The academy, where Arthur arrived in January 1786, was less a military college than an international finishing school for young men, which had been run for generations by the Pignerolle family; nearly a third of the intake that year came from the British Isles. In addition to fencing, horsemanship, and the science of fortification (none of which seems to have left much mark on him), there were lessons in mathematics, grammar, and dancing. Out of school, besides drinking, gambling, and youthful rowdiness, there were occasional invitations from the local nobility. At the end of the year, when Arthur reappeared in London, he had visibly improved in manners and social deportment, with a command of fluent if old-fashioned French. 
Lord Mornington, after the manner of the Ascendancy aristocracy, took seriously the duty of providing for the family of which he had become the youthful head. In March 1787 a commission was obtained for Arthur as ensign in the 73rd foot, a Highland regiment then in India. Further solicitation procured him an appointment as aide-de-camp to the lord lieutenant of Ireland, Lord Buckingham. To facilitate this (and possibly avoid his being sent to India) a commission as lieutenant in the 76th foot was secured in December. This was quickly followed by an exchange first into the 41st foot in January 1788 and then into the 12th light dragoons in June 1789. As part of Mornington's political ambitions his brother William was found a seat at Westminster, and Arthur replaced him in 1790 as MP for the family borough of Trim (where Arthur is commemorated by a fine obelisk). More military promotion followed. In June 1781 he was commissioned as captain in the 58th foot, exchanging to the 18th light dragoons in October 1792. In little more than five years he had held commissions in six different regiments, though there is no evidence that he served with any of them. As aide-de-camp in Dublin, member of the Irish House of Commons, and manager of the family estate at Dangan, he had more than sufficient occupation. His leisure pursuits were more conventional: drinking, gambling, and getting into debt. But he still played his violin and was showing an interest in serious reading. 
The year 1793, which saw the start of the long war with revolutionary France, was also a turning point in Arthur Wesley's private life. In April he obtained a commission as major in the 33rd foot and about the same time proposed to Lady Catherine Sarah Dorothea Pakenham (died 1831), sister of the young Lord Longford, whom he had been courting since 1792. The offer was declined by her brother on the grounds that Wesley lacked the prospect of being able to support her properly. This blow to his sensitive pride was harder to bear since (perhaps for not unconnected reasons) he had been displaying more activity in the Irish House of Commons, making his maiden speech when seconding the address in January. His emotional response to the snub was to apply himself more single-mindedly to his military profession. He gave up music and (in one of his not uncharacteristic dramatic gestures) burnt his violin. To familiarize himself with drill, he obtained leave from the new lord lieutenant, the duke of Richmond, to attend his military parades; and later that summer he asked Mornington to help him get a posting to one of the corps being formed for service abroad. Nothing came of that, but in September he was promoted to lieutenant-colonel and commanding officer of his regiment. 
With this last step Wesley had risen as far up the military ladder as his brother's money and influence could take him. He was now caught in what a contemporary biographer called the 'seniority groove' (Gleig, 'Life of Wellington', 7), from which he could hope to escape only by active service. His chance came in 1794 when his regiment was assigned to an expeditionary force under Lord Moira sent out as reinforcement for the duke of York in the Netherlands. Having embarked at Cork early in June, the 33rd landed at Ostend nineteen days later. Wesley, given command of a rear-guard of three battalions, on his own initiative took them round to Antwerp by boat, arriving somewhat unconventionally before the main column. The outcome of the campaign, however, was virtually decided by the timidity and divisions of Britain's allies. The Austrians withdrew from the Netherlands after the battle of Fleurus (26 June), and Prussian co-operation had been half-hearted from the start. The small British contingent retreated therefore into Holland. In the new year, when the French were able to cross the frozen waterways, the isolated British troops moved off, starving and demoralized, into Hanover, to be evacuated to England in the early spring of 1795. Wesley had earned an official commendation for checking a French column in a minor engagement in September 1794 at Boxtel, but for the British force as a whole the campaign had been a miserable experience, made worse by defective organization and poor leadership. Individual regiments had behaved well, but it was clear to the young Colonel Wesley that nobody on the staff knew how to command an army. His laconic verdict many years later was that it had at least taught him 'what one ought 'not' to do; and that is always something!' (Stanhope, 182). 
Disillusioned by his first experience of active service Wesley turned his thoughts to civil employment. An optimistic application to his elder brother (now in the government) for the administrative post of secretary at war had no result; nor did a more despairing one to the new lord lieutenant, Lord Camden, for an appointment in the Irish administration. In the autumn of 1795 his regiment joined an expeditionary force destined for the West Indies. Wesley, whose health had suffered in the Netherlands campaign, was ill with fever at the time and the fleet sailed from Portsmouth without him. This was good fortune for him, since it ran straight into a channel gale and seven transports were wrecked on Chesil Beach with great loss of life. When it was sent out again in December it was once more hit by bad weather and Wesley's ship was one of the lucky ones that found their way back to England in February 1796. After a short stay at Poole the 33rd left in April for India, leaving its colonel, again seriously ill, to follow it out. Wesley, now a brevet colonel, eventually sailed from Portsmouth in June 1796. 
To occupy himself on the voyage Wesley took with him a library of several hundred volumes. Nearly half of them, including a number on the history, languages, and government of India, he bought in London before he sailed. Others, brought from Ireland, indicated the seriousness with which he had already been studying his profession. Among them were works on military history and the art of war by Frederick the Great, Marshal Saxe, the contemporary French general Dumouriez, and the cosmopolitan soldier General H. Lloyd. Eton had presumably given Wesley enough Latin to read Caesar in the original since his 'Commentaria' was among the London purchases. Methodical, strong-willed, and ambitious, Wesley was clearly bent on making the most of the opportunities which India offered. 
Having caught up with his convoy at the Cape, Wesley arrived at Calcutta in February 1797. A few months later he received the welcome news that his brother Lord Mornington had been offered an Indian appointment, and at once wrote urging him to accept. Meanwhile he and his regiment went off on an abortive expedition to Manila, in the Spanish Philippines, only to be recalled half way because of the worsening military situation in both Europe and southern India. Early next year he visited Madras and remained there, at the instance of the local British commander General Harris, to act as adviser to the new governor, the reputedly dull and obstinate Lord Clive. 
In May Wesley's brother, now Lord Wellesley, arrived in India as governor-general and commander-in-chief, bringing their younger brother Henry as his private secretary. In view of this sudden irruption of the Wellesley family into Indian affairs, it is possible that Harris's noticeable partiality towards Colonel Wesley was not uninfluenced by his connection with the new administration in Calcutta, since otherwise the two men did not get on well. For most of 1798, therefore, Wesley remained at Madras in the slightly equivocal role of unofficial representative of the governor-general, working surreptitiously to secure Lord Clive's co-operation (against the views of his local advisers) with the expansionist plans favoured by his ambitious elder brother. 
The immediate problem was Tipu Sultan of Mysore, who was believed to be plotting, with French encouragement, the overthrow of British influence in southern India. Though Colonel Wellesley (as he now signed himself) counselled his brother against precipitate action, in the absence of General Harris he organized the Madras forces in readiness for a conflict. On his advice the friendly nizam of Hyderabad was forcibly extricated from the control of the French officers in his army, and a treaty made to assure the neutrality of the powerful Maratha confederacy further north. When war broke out in February 1799 Wellesley was given command of the native Hyderabad army, stiffened by the attachment of his own 33rd regiment. This appointment brought a sharp protest from General Baird who, despite being senior in rank, had been given an inferior command. General Harris, however, had been impressed by Wellesley's careful preparations for the campaign, and the nizam's prime minister had specifically requested that Wellesley should be in charge of his ruler's contingent. 
During the advance against the great fortress town of Seringapatam the 33rd distinguished itself in a skirmish at Malavalli on 27 March against a column of Tipu's French-trained troops. This was followed, however, by an ignominious failure of a night attack in difficult enclosed country outside Seringapatam. Wellesley, suffering from dysentery at the time, was momentarily shaken by this reverse, though he took the position without difficulty next day. The rueful moral he drew was never to attack a prepared position by night that had not been reconnoitred. In the assault of 4 May on Seringapatam he was in command of the reserves but after its capture was appointed governor. This brought another protest from the peppery General Baird. It was, however, a defensible choice, since Wellesley enjoyed good relations with the local Indians and Baird notoriously did not. His share of prize money for this campaign was $4000, a sum which just covered the advances his brother had made to him from time to time for the purchase of commissions: but Lord Wellesley regally refused his offer of repayment. For the rest of 1799 and 1800 he was busy repressing looting, enforcing on his own men respect for Indian customs, and breaking up marauding bands of former enemy soldiers. The most formidable and elusive of these was led by the guerrilla leader Dhundia Wagh, who was chased first into Maratha territory and then back again into Hyderabad before he was defeated and killed. In an unconventional act of compassion Wellesley made himself responsible for the welfare and upbringing of Dhundia's four-year-old son, discovered among the enemy's baggage. 
At the end of 1800 Wellesley became increasingly involved in the plans of the governor-general, now the Marquess Wellesley, to intensify the war against the French dominions overseas, and in December he went to Trincomalee in Ceylon to organize a sea-borne expeditionary force. The original idea was to attack the French naval base on the Ile de France (Mauritius). Nothing came of this, however, because of the refusal of the local British naval commander to participate. Then, in January 1801, Wellesley was warned by the governor-general that if his force had to be employed against a more important target it would be necessary to appoint a more senior officer, probably General Baird, leaving him as second in command. It was now Wellesley's turn to protest, at what he chose to regard as his supersession, in language understandable between candid brothers but hardly fitting in a colonel addressing his commander-in-chief. Worse followed. In February he learned from Lord Clive in Madras that the government in London had decided to send the expeditionary force to the Red Sea port of Mocha (in modern Yemen) to assist the current operations against the French in Egypt. Without waiting for orders from Calcutta, Wellesley sailed off with his force, intending first to revictual at Bombay and then proceed to the Red Sea. It is difficult to interpret this remarkable action as anything other than an attempt to forestall Baird's assumption of command. At Bombay, however, he fell victim to an attack of the distressing skin complaint known as the Malabar itch. The delay gave Baird time to catch up with his errant expeditionary force and take it on to Mocha. Wellesley was left behind to endure the heroic remedy of acid baths and vent his frustration in angry letters to Lord Wellesley and to another of his brothers, the discreet Henry. It was painfully obvious that he had set his heart on having an independent command, which would bring him both promotion and prize money, and that he had allowed his ambition to overcome his judgement. Though he soon made his peace with Baird, his resentment against his elder brother took some time to cool. 
In April 1802, on his return to Mysore, Wellesley was finally promoted to the rank of major-general, but only on the Indian strength. More importantly, at the end of the year quarrels between the Maratha chiefs of the Deccan forced the peshwa of Poona to seek protection from the Bombay presidency. This created a welcome opportunity for Lord Wellesley to break the power of the formidable Maratha confederacy. His brother assumed, this time correctly, that he would be in charge of the military operation, and his appointment ended the breach with the governor-general. In June 1803, having without difficulty restored the peshwa to his throne, he received plenary political and military authority to pacify the Deccan. When negotiations broke down in August, he declared war on Sindhia and Berar, the two leading Maratha states, and in a surprise attack captured almost without loss the great fortress of Ahmadnagar, regarded as one of the strongest in India. Pushing another 120 miles north-east he made contact with the Maratha forces on 23 September. 
Expecting, on the basis of Indian intelligence, to meet a body of only some 20,000 infantry, Wellesley found himself in the presence of the whole Maratha army of some 50,000, drawn up in a strong position behind the River Kaitna. His force, reduced by his questionable decision to send Colonel Stevenson's Hyderabad contingent round by a different route, numbered only 7000. His men had already marched 20 miles that day and retreat would have been almost as hazardous as an advance. He took the bolder course. Guessing correctly that there must be a ford between two villages on opposite sides of the river, he crossed below the left flank of the Maratha position and placed his force in a narrow angle between the Kaitna and a tributary river, the Juah: a position which shortened his front and protected his flanks, but would have been a death-trap had he been beaten. The Marathas, under their French officers, skilfully changed front to meet him, and a desperate battle followed before victory was assured. Wellesley's right flank advanced too far and came under heavy artillery fire near Assaye village. Of approximately 5000 men who crossed the Kaitna over a third became casualties, a disproportionate number being among the British troops. Wellesley contributed by his personal example to the result. In the thick of the fighting throughout, he had one horse killed under him and another wounded. 
Assaye was a remarkable victory, in which audacity and aggressiveness succeeded against a well-trained and numerically greatly superior enemy. Given the situation in which he found himself (partly his own fault), Wellesley's decision to risk a battle was perhaps unavoidable, certainly defensible, but it was hardly a textbook battle. The only justification is that he won it: a consideration which commonly outweighs all academic criticisms. Many years later he said that Assaye was the finest thing he had ever done in the fighting line -- meaning, no doubt, that it was a triumph against all the odds. It undoubtedly made his reputation and ended all the talk of unfair family favouritism. 
It also broke the morale of the Marathas. At Argaon on 29 November they were routed with only minor British casualties and early in December the raja of Berar's fortress of Gawilgarh fell after a weak resistance. Before the end of the year peace was made with both Sindhia and Berar. By the summer of 1804, however, Wellesley was anxious to get back to England. He was aggrieved by the failure of the authorities at home to confirm his last promotion and felt that as long as he remained in India he would be professionally in a disadvantageous position. In any case he did not want to stay after the expiry of Lord Wellesley's term of office. A further consideration was that he had suffered constantly in India from minor tropical illnesses, even though in later life he stoutly affirmed that India had toughened his previously weak constitution. From every point of view Europe offered a more promising field for his intensely ambitious nature. On 10 March 1805 he sailed for home. He was now Sir Arthur, having been made KB the previous August, and he had accumulated a fortune of $42,000, enough to give him financial independence. Success had turned him into a supremely confident man, convinced that nothing was impossible if the will-power and attention to details were present. His professional education, he felt, was now complete. He returned from India, he said afterwards, understanding 'as much of military matters as I have ever done since' (Guedalla, 117-18). 
During Wellesley's homeward voyage he learned that Lord Wellesley had been recalled because of official dissatisfaction with his Maratha policy. As soon as he arrived, therefore, on 10 September, he began to lobby the government on Richard's behalf. It was when engaged on this task that he had his solitary meeting with Nelson in the anteroom of the old war and Colonial Office in Downing Street a few days later. He had much talk with most of the leading ministers, including Pitt and Castlereagh, though they were evidently more impressed by Richard's brother than by Richard's policy. Wellesley soon found himself in the congenial position of advising the government on Indian politics and European strategy. In December, however, he was selected to command a brigade in the abortive expedition to Hanover and wasted six weeks in the neighbourhood of Bremen before returning to England in February 1806. Despite Pitt's death the previous month, the formation of a coalition ministry, and his friend Castlereagh's consequent loss of office, Wellesley's career continued to progress. His 1802 promotion to major-general was confirmed and in January 1806 he was given the colonelcy of the 33rd, made vacant by the death of Lord Cornwallis. These two appointments made him a comparatively rich man. He was posted to a brigade near Hastings, and in the autumn of that year wrote the first of a series of mainly critical memoranda for the government on various projects that had been suggested for helping the independence movements in the Spanish colonies. To add to his responsibilities, in April 1806, at the instance of the new prime minister, Lord Grenville, he was elected MP for Rye so that he could defend his brother in the House of Commons against charges of maladministration and fraud. 
In the middle of these preoccupations came one of the most inexplicable actions of Wellesley's life: his marriage to Catherine Pakenham. They had not met for twelve years and he had never written to her in all the time he had been away, though they had received news of each other through a common friend, Lady Olivia Sparrow. It is not easy to tell from his friendly remarks about Kitty (as she was generally known) and references to the disappointment he had suffered in 1793 what his feelings really were. Certainly by 1802 Kitty had decided that the affair was over, became engaged to another man, broke it off, and suffered a nervous breakdown which destroyed her youthful charm and self-confidence. On Wellesley's return in 1805, however, Olivia Sparrow threw herself into her matchmaking role with renewed energy. Having first revived Kitty's faltering hopes, she reminded Wellesley of her continued devotion to him and his continued duty to marry her. He obediently sent off a written proposal which Kitty accepted, with the timid suggestion that he should wait until he saw her before committing himself. That was in November 1805, and was followed, on his own confession, by considerable misgivings on his part. However, when he returned from Germany he secured a week's leave, crossed to Ireland, and the wedding took place in Dublin on 10 April 1806. His wife subsequently joined him in London, and Arthur, the first of their two sons, was born in Harley Street on 3 February 1807, followed by Charles in January 1808. His motives for the marriage can only be guessed, but it was to turn out an unhappy relationship for both of them. 
In October 1806 parliament was dissolved and Wellesley was without a seat until one was found for him with Treasury assistance at Mitchell, a Cornish pocket borough, in January 1807. In March, however, the Portland ministry, containing several of his friends, took office and through the instrumentality of Lord Hawkesbury he was offered the post of chief secretary for Ireland. He accepted on condition it should not be allowed to interfere with his army career. Though re-elected for Mitchell he transferred in May to a cheaper seat at Newport, Isle of Wight. Learning soon afterwards of plans for a Baltic expedition, he put in an immediate application to serve. In due course he was given command of a division in the force under Lord Cathcart which was sent at the end of July to impound the Danish fleet. During the subsequent siege of Copenhagen he defeated a diversionary force at Kjoge on 29 August with no difficulty and little loss. By the beginning of October he was back in Dublin where his post had been kept open for him despite his request to be relieved. Unexciting as the Danish campaign had been, it confirmed his Indian reputation and earned him the thanks of the House of Commons. He had no great enthusiasm for the South American plans of the government on which he was still working, but at least his growing intimacy with the ministers gave him confidence of early employment in the field. As he wrote to a friend in India, since he had returned to England 'I have got pretty high up the tree' (Maxwell, 1.90). 
Meanwhile Wellesley applied himself with his customary assiduity to his duties in Dublin and at Westminster. Courteous and firm, he brought to the multifarious tasks of a chief secretary a brisk efficiency which won him general respect. The larger part of his work lay in the unedifying field of Irish patronage, particularly demanding in the early summer of 1807 because of the imminent general election. He found time, however, to reorganize the Dublin police and introduce an 'Irish Insurrection Bill'. Though pessimistic about the ultimate success of the recent union between England and Ireland, he took the view that government policy should at least aim at obliterating the distinction between protestant and Catholic. There was little room in his sceptical mind for religious partisanship. Back in London he dutifully conferred at ministerial request with General Miranda, the envoy of the revolutionary party in South America, but privately suggested to ministers that it made more strategic sense to strike a blow at Napoleon in Europe. In May 1808, within a week of his promotion to lieutenant-general, that opportunity came with the popular uprising in Spain against the French military occupation. It was, he told ministers, 'a crisis in which a great effort might be made with advantage' (Guedalla, 151). The government, and indeed public opinion in general, were of the same mind. In June, to his great satisfaction, Wellesley was ordered to take a force already assembled in Ireland to the Peninsula to co-operate with the Portuguese and Spanish armies. 
The expedition, 9000 strong, left Cork on 12 July. It was weak in cavalry and transport, but contained some of the best infantry in the army. Sailing ahead in a fast frigate Wellesley called at Corunna to talk to the Spanish and at Porto to the Portuguese authorities before going on to confer with the commander of the British naval squadron in the Tagus. The advice he received confirmed his view that the best place to disembark was Mondego Bay, 100 miles north of Junot's force in Lisbon. On 30 July he received the unwelcome news that since the French army in Portugal was larger than had previously been assumed, the British expeditionary force was to be reinforced by another 15,000 men and placed under the command of Sir Hew Dalrymple, the governor of Gibraltar, with General Burrard as his second in command, who were to be joined later by General Moore. Wellesley, already strengthened by 5000 men under General Spencer from Cadiz, decided to beat Junot, if he could, before his seniors arrived. The disembarkation of his force was carried out in the first week of August and he then moved off south by the coastal road. His first encounter with French troops came at Rolica on 17 August when contact was made with General Delaborde's corps. Enjoying a considerable numerical advantage, Wellesley launched a neat enveloping attack marred only by the rashness of some of the regiments in his centre. Delaborde made an adroit retreat and Wellesley's deficiencies in cavalry prevented him from making an effective pursuit. 
Nevertheless, British losses were few and Wellesley's troops, most of them under fire for the first time, were impressed by what they saw of their new commander. Moving on south he halted at Vimeiro to cover the landing of two more brigades from England. A less welcome arrival on 20 August was General Burrard, who forbade any further advance until they were joined by General Moore, then at Mondego. When Junot, coming up from Lisbon, attacked the following day, however, Wellesley was still in command. 
Vimeiro was the first of Wellesley's classic defensive battles. Though inferior in cavalry and artillery, he had nearly 19,000 men against the 14,000 which Junot brought into the field. He arranged his force in a shallow arc with the right flank bent back towards the sea and his left on a high ridge north of Vimeiro village. In a forward central position on Vimeiro Hill he placed a strong detachment covered by enfilade fire from the high ground on his left. Attacking in column in their usual manner the French were driven back (as most British military experts including Wellesley thought they would always be) by musketry volleys followed by bayonet charges from the British infantry drawn up in lines two deep. On the left, two French brigades attempting an outflanking movement were pushed northwards away from their main body. Only Wellesley's lack of cavalry and the belated appearance of Burrard on the battlefield saved Junot from a crushing defeat. Next day he sent Kellermann to propose an armistice to the recently arrived Dalrymple. This was followed by the so-called convention of Cintra, ratified on 30 August. By its terms Lisbon and the French-held fortresses in Portugal were to be surrendered and the French troops conveyed back to France in British vessels. At Dalrymple's request Wellesley signed the armistice document, though he did not approve of it and had no hand in drawing it up. Not surprisingly his relations with Dalrymple were frosty and, like the troops he had just led, he was angry that so little advantage had been taken of the victory. Rather insubordinately he let his opinions be known in London and did his best to get Moore appointed commander in Portugal. Snubbing various suggestions for his own further employment in the Peninsula, Wellesley obtained leave to return to Dublin and resume his neglected duties as chief secretary. 
Apart from the failure to exploit the victory, the convention of Cintra was not without advantages. It secured not only the removal of the main French army from Portugal but the surrender of the two strong fortresses of Elvas and Almeida, commanding the great roads into Portugal guarded on the Spanish side by Badajoz and Ciudad Rodrigo. The outraged British public, however, was blind to everything except the inexcusable caution, amounting to culpable timidity, which had thrown away the fruits of a rare victory over the French. Bowing to the universal indignation the government instituted a court of inquiry at which Wellesley, as well as Dalrymple and Burrard, was called to give evidence. Wellesley wisely confined himself to a defence of his own actions. Though the report of the inquiry, dated 22 December, was bland and inconclusive, the two senior generals were never employed on active service again. 
For Wellesley, by contrast, the episode was a disguised piece of good fortune. In the middle of January 1809 Sir John Moore was killed at Corunna in a battle which successfully covered the embarkation of his shattered army. In a matter of weeks, therefore, three senior generals with Peninsular experience, including the ablest of them all, had been removed from Wellesley's path. The cabinet were still determined to pursue their interventionist policy, and even before the Corunna evacuation they had signed an alliance with the provisional government in Spain. They were heartened by Wellesley's confident advice that Portugal, with its long sea coast and short land communications, offered an advantageous base for operations against Napoleon. At the beginning of April he was appointed commander of yet another expeditionary force to the Peninsula. A degree of realism, however, had entered into ministerial strategy. His instructions in 1808 had been to liberate Portugal and Spain, and secure the expulsion of French forces from the Peninsula. In 1809 his letter of service laid down more soberly that his principal object was the defence of Portugal. 
Having resigned both his Irish secretaryship and his seat in parliament, Wellesley arrived on 22 April in Lisbon, where there was still a small British garrison. He reorganized his 21,000-strong force into integrated, self-sufficient divisions, with Portuguese battalions brigaded with British regiments, and then rapidly moved north to secure Porto. Soult, leisurely preparing to withdraw from his isolated position in the city, was surprised by an improvised crossing of the Douro River. Evacuating the port on 12 May he made a precipitate retreat into Spain, losing a fifth of his men and all his guns on the way. Wellesley then turned his attention to Spain, and after negotiations with the Spanish commander Cuesta a joint advance was planned against Madrid. 
After Vimeiro, Wellesley had advised his government that little reliance could be placed on the Spanish army and that, though an advance into Spain might be attempted as a strategic method of defending Portugal, it would have to be on the assumption of a quick withdrawal if faced by a large concentration of French troops. Despite this, the campaign of 1809 was in many respects a recapitulation of Moore's ill-fated operations of 1808 and with nearly the same catastrophic outcome. It rested on delusive assurances of Spanish support and was undertaken with inadequate knowledge of the strength and movements of the opposing forces. Wellesley moved into Spain at the end of June along the valley of the Tagus. Overestimating the time it would take Soult to reorganize, he thought that the Portuguese forces under Beresford would be sufficient to protect his northern flank. His southern flank was to be covered by a second Spanish army under Venegas which had been ordered up to the Madrid area. 
In the event everything went wrong. Venegas's march was countermanded by the supreme junta; Spanish promises of transport and food were not kept. Between 20 July and 20 August the British army received only ten days' rations. Meanwhile Victor's forces in front of Venegas were reinforced from Madrid and Soult was ordered south from Salamanca to cut the British lines of communication. When contact was made with the French, Cuesta's obstinacy frustrated Wellesley's wish for an immediate attack, and when they joined battle a few days later it was on less favourable terms. 
Talavera was Wellesley's second great defensive battle, comparable to Waterloo and almost as hard fought. His disposition of the allied army and choice of ground were admirable. The naturally strong position on his right, resting on the River Tagus and Talavera village and protected in front by olive groves and irrigation channels, was allotted to the suspect Spanish troops. His centre was behind a stream and shallow ravine, with a half-finished gun emplacement occupying a prominent site. His left was withdrawn along high ground overlooking a valley. The fighting started on 27 July with an unsuccessful French night attack and continued more fiercely on the 28th. The allied army numbered some 52,000 men (21,500 being Wellesley's Anglo-Portuguese), compared with the 46,000 French of Victor and Jourdan, under the nominal command of King Joseph. On the evening of the second day, after desperate fighting, the French began to retreat even though they had not used their reserves. Wellesley's men by that time were too exhausted to follow up. Allied casualties, at about 7000, were almost as heavy as the French, and a disproportionate share was borne by the British regiments. This was not all. Shortly afterwards Wellesley learned of the formidable threat of Soult's army coming down from the north. He therefore left his sick and wounded at Talavera under the protection of Cuesta (who promptly abandoned them), recrossed the Tagus, and took his famished and disorderly troops back to the shelter of Badajoz on the Portuguese frontier. 
Wellesley had escaped the French trap by the narrowest of margins. It was a sharp lesson and he drew the natural but mistaken moral. Writing to Castlereagh on 25 August he listed all the shortcomings of his Spanish allies and concluded savagely that 'I can only tell you that I feel no inclination to join in cooperation with them again' (Maxwell, 1.174). Talavera has been criticized as a useless battle; certainly it was a victory that would have been impossible to exploit. Yet, as with Moore's campaign, it yielded a measure of political, if not military, profit. The British cabinet and public had been longing for a success in Spain which would avenge Corunna, and the Spanish authorities had been given tangible evidence of British readiness to give them support. The victory earned Wellesley a peerage (4 September) and a pension as Viscount Wellington. But opinion at home was divided, and the whig parliamentary opposition was becoming sceptical of the whole concept of defending Portugal. 
From August 1809 to February 1810 Wellington's army saw no fighting. For their general, however, it was an anxious period in which the future of his command hung in the balance. The defeat of Austria at Wagram in July 1809 set Napoleon free to turn his immense military resources against Spain and in December he announced his intention to lead an army of 140,000 veterans to drive the British from the Peninsula. At home a political crisis in the autumn weakened the ministry and brought about the resignation of Castlereagh, the only minister in whom Wellington had any trust. When parliament met in January 1810 the whig opposition mounted a fierce attack on Perceval's depleted administration. The Talavera campaign was described as a disaster and Wellington's motives in undertaking it impugned. Many of his own officers were openly critical of their chief, and an atmosphere of defeatism was detectable in both London and Lisbon. 
Not surprisingly the new secretary of state for war, Lord Liverpool, in a lengthy correspondence from the autumn of 1809 to the spring of 1810, made it his business to elicit from Wellington his considered views on the basic problems which confronted him in the Peninsula. Could he defend Portugal against the vastly superior forces likely to be brought against him? Would Cadiz be a better base than Lisbon? If he could not maintain himself in Portugal, when and in what circumstances should he consider evacuation? Much of what Liverpool wrote was probably designed to obtain information and arguments which could be used against criticism in parliament and at court. He invariably accepted Wellington's view of what was the right strategy and did his best to convince him of the cabinet's confidence in his leadership. Nevertheless, ministers were gravely concerned for the safety of Wellington's force. Liverpool felt it right to emphasize that it was not one of Britain's armies, but its only army, and that its destruction would have profound political as well as military consequences. 
While Wellington returned firm and confident, if not always very specific, answers, his occasionally testy letters (and still more the intemperate and sometimes unreasonable language he used about the government privately) showed the strain he was under. In their different spheres both he and the cabinet were fighting for their professional existence. But though Wellington was irritated by what seemed to him the unnecessary caution of the ministers, he did not ignore the points raised by Liverpool. Indeed, his actions in the twelve months after Talavera were marked by the caution and avoidance of desperate battles which the secretary for war enjoined. In the autumn and winter of 1809, while the Spanish armies were being systematically routed by the French, he moved his own troops to the Mondego valley in northern Portugal. Unknown to the cabinet he had already surveyed the Torres Vedras district in front of Lisbon and given detailed orders for the construction of initially two and finally three lines of defences: the first of which would at least delay, the second halt, and the third (if the worst came to the worst) cover an embarkation. In July 1809 he had been appointed marshal-general of Portugal. Using his new powers to the limit, in March 1810 he revived the old Portuguese laws which authorized in a national emergency the mobilization of the entire male population. Simultaneously he issued a proclamation directing the inhabitants of the districts through which the French would advance to fall back towards Lisbon, taking their goods and cattle with them. 
In the event Napoleon's divorce and his marriage to Marie-Louise of Austria in the spring of 1810 made him delegate the command of a much reduced army of Portugal to Massena, one of his ablest commanders. Wellington, while detaching 12,000 men under Hill to stiffen Spanish resistance against a possible advance south of the Tagus, remained on the defensive in the north where he judged the main attack would come. He refused to weaken his force by sending assistance to the Spanish garrison of Ciudad Rodrigo and the fortress eventually surrendered to Massena in July. This was followed by the unexpectedly early capture by the French of Almeida on the Portuguese side of the frontier. As Massena advanced Wellington fell back, issuing another appeal to the civil population to remove or destroy everything that might be of use to the French invaders. On 21 September Hill's corps rejoined him to bring the army up to 25,000. With these, and about the same number of Portuguese, he had to face Massena's 65,000. 
Wellington's eventual decision to stand and fight at Busaco was probably influenced by a number of considerations: the political panic in Lisbon as refugees came pouring in, the increasing doubts among his own officers, and the demoralizing effect on his men of continuous retreat, from which Moore had suffered in 1808. Massena clinched the issue by choosing, through ignorance, the most westerly and worst road to Lisbon through Viseu and Coimbra. Aligning his force from north to south along the Busaco Ridge, a natural defensive feature he had previously noted, Wellington met the French attack on 27 September. The main weakness of his position, apart from his chronic insufficiency of cavalry and guns, was the sheer length (over 5 miles) of his front. In the opening attacks Reynier's corps actually pierced his line before being thrown back. But skilful use of the reverse slope and a recently improved lateral road, which enabled him to reinforce quickly any threatened point, gave Wellington in the end an emphatic victory. French casualties at 4500 were heavy compared with the allied total of 1200 shared equally between the Portuguese, who fought excellently, and the British. 
Any hope Wellington might have had of stopping Massena was disappointed. The French found a way round his left and Wellington was forced to resume his retreat southward. When Massena reached the Torres Vedras defences in October, however, a brief examination was enough to convince him of the impossibility of his task: he had no stomach for a second Busaco. After waiting for a month with his supplies steadily diminishing, he made a masterly retreat to Santarem, 30 miles to the north-east, and in the spring returned to Spain. Wellington's drastic and comprehensive preparations, though gaining only the partial co-operation of the Portuguese population, had brought him a strategic success which permanently shaped the course of the war. After 1810 little doubt remained on either side that Portugal could be held against any French attack. 
Wellington's next objective was to prevent such attacks by capturing the Spanish fortresses which commanded the only two roads into central Portugal suitable for the passage of large armies: Ciudad Rodrigo in the north and Badajoz in the south, separated by some 130 miles. Beresford, whom he had detached with 22,000 men in March to operate on the River Guadiana, was ordered in April to undertake the siege of Badajoz. He himself invested Almeida, the only Portuguese fortress in French hands, as a preliminary to moving against Ciudad Rodrigo. His Indian experience, as he once admitted, had perhaps made him trust too much to rapidity of attack and underestimate the potential for resistance of fortresses manned by resolute troops under a resourceful commander. The chief problem, however, was his numerical weakness. Against superior French manpower his best weapons were speed and surprise. Sieges pinned his army down to a particular locality and gave time for his opponents to concentrate against him. Wellington's simultaneous operations in the summer of 1811 demonstrated these inherent weaknesses as well as the self-willed streak in his own character. 
Before Almeida fell Massena, showing unanticipated resilience, launched an attack on the covering British force east of the town. With inferior numbers and a disparity of one to three in cavalry, Wellington's dispositions at the battle of Fuentes d'Onoro fell short of his usual standards. Though his centre and left were securely posted along a ridge, his extreme right hung somewhat in the air on the edge of a level plain. Moreover, the units posted there included a newly arrived British division and some Spanish irregulars. In the battle which followed on 5 May his left flank, against which there had been a French feint on 3 May, was hardly engaged. In the centre, the village of Fuentes d'Onoro was the scene of savage street fighting in which the French gave as good as they got. On the right his inexperienced troops were completely broken by French cavalry attacks. In this critical situation Wellington made a bold decision to pull back that part of his line to a more defensible position at right angles to his original front. This risky manoeuvre, skilfully covered by the light division, enabled him to keep between Massena's army and Almeida, though at the cost of uncovering his own lines of communication back through Sabugal. In the night of 7-8th, however, frustrated by the insubordination of his senior commanders, Massena disengaged. For Wellington it was a lucky escape. Writing to his brother William a month later he confessed it had been the most difficult battle he had ever fought: 'If Bony had been there we should have been beaten' (Maxwell, 1.228). 
Almeida fell a few days later, though poor staff work permitted the French garrison to escape. Worse news came from the south. The battle of Albuera, fought by Beresford on 16 May against Soult's relieving force, resulted in some of the most murderous casualties of the war. The British lost some 4000 out of their total of 7600; the Spanish and Portuguese 2000; the French 7000 out of 24,000. Napoleon could afford such losses; Wellington could not. 'Another such battle would ruin us,' he wrote grimly to his brother Henry, the British attache at Cadiz (Longford, 'Years of the Sword', 258). On arriving at Badajoz three days later he decided to renew the attack on the fortress, but made the double mistake of relying on ancient Portuguese siege guns and assuming he could capture Badajoz (a stronger fortress than Almeida with a larger garrison) before Soult could recover from his defeat. Two attempts in June failed before he abandoned the siege and in the face of the advancing French returned to Ciudad Rodrigo. His disease-ridden army, however, was too weak to permit more than a blockade of the town, and in September Marmont (Massena's successor) was able to revictual the garrison. After some inconclusive manoeuvring both sides then drew apart. 
In midwinter, however, having learned that Marmont had detached part of his force to aid French operations in Valencia, Wellington resumed the offensive, despite the lateness of the season. Three months' rest in cantonments, better preparations, and a modern siege-train which arrived during the summer had transformed the capabilities of his army. After a brief investment the under-garrisoned fortress of Ciudad Rodrigo was stormed in January 1812. It was the only siege undertaken by Wellington which went according to plan, though with heavy casualties and their usual aftermath, looting and violence. The success encouraged him to attempt another quick operation against Badajoz. Preparations started in mid-March, but since the first siege the defences had been improved, the garrison resupplied, and time was running short. It was not impossible that Marmont might move south to reinforce Soult, who himself was only three days' march away. When the assault took place on the night of 6-7 April the three breaches in the fortifications were far from adequate. The main storming-parties suffered enormous casualties and ironically victory came only as a result of following up diversionary attacks against lightly held points not previously bombarded. British losses were nearly 5000, and when the following day Wellington saw the steaming piles of corpses in front of the main breach his self-control momentarily broke down. The ferocious animal courage shown by his men had its blacker side in two days of looting, arson, rape, and drunkenness which followed the capture of the town. 
Nevertheless, in the space of three months the two strong fortresses opening the way into Spain had been captured in the face of 80,000 French troops, and this was followed in mid-May by the destruction of the bridge of boats at Almaraz on the Tagus, which was the link between the French army of Portugal and its army of the south. It was a series of successes which strengthened the moral ascendancy that Wellington was already beginning to impose on the French marshals and confirmed his own army's faith in his leadership. 
Wellington himself in the early summer of 1812 was full of confidence. He had received substantial reinforcements from England while the French armies had been reduced in numbers and quality by withdrawals for Napoleon's Russian campaign. Towards the end of May he wrote to Lord Liverpool that he was prepared to advance into Castile and bring Marmont to a general action. Though the French still had some 280,000 men in the Peninsula, their armies were divided by rivers, mountain ranges, and the mutual antipathies of their generals, and weakened by difficulties in supply, the continued existence of pockets of Spanish regular troops, and widespread harassment by Spanish guerrillas. Wellington hoped that further distraction would be provided by a British sea-borne expedition under Bentinck to be launched from Sicily against Valencia, attacks from the Spanish army under Ballesteros in the south-west, and naval demonstrations along the Biscayan coast. 
As things turned out, there was little synchronization between the different parts of this ambitious strategy. Sicilian politics and Bentinck's vacillations delayed the landing in Valencia until late summer and Ballesteros signally failed to mount any serious threat. When Wellington moved into Spain in mid-June he was held up at Salamanca by recently improved defences and was unwilling to provoke a battle. Marmont, on the other hand, still in the process of concentrating his forces, refused to attack Wellington in a prepared position. As a result there were several weeks of cautious movement in which the more lightly equipped French infantry outmarched, and Marmont outmanoeuvred, their British opponents. At one point there was even a threat to Wellington's line of communication with his base at Ciudad Rodrigo. On 22 July, however, with both armies moving west on parallel lines, Marmont allowed a gap to open up between his vanguard and his centre which Wellington immediately exploited. The 3rd division, which unknown to Marmont had been ordered up from Salamanca, rolled back the leading French divisions while Wellington developed a Frederician oblique attack from left to right. Marmont was wounded early in the engagement and had to relinquish command; an initially successful attack by Clausel on the allied centre was first stopped and then crushed by Wellington's reserves. Though he later claimed that the abandonment by the Spanish of a bridge across the River Tormes alone prevented a stubborn French retreat from developing into a rout, in fact there was no vigorous pursuit on his part. As it was, the French suffered some 7000 casualties and had about the same number taken prisoner, compared with only about 5000 casualties on the allied side. Salamanca, Wellington's greatest victory so far and one which the military historian Napier judged to be the most skilful of all his battles, brought him a marquessate (3 October 1812) to outrank the earldom (18 February 1812) conferred on him after the capture of Ciudad Rodrigo. 
More important than this rapid ascent through the peerage was the problem of Wellington's next step: to pursue the defeated French army under Clausel or reap an easy political success by entering Madrid. He chose the latter: partly to rest and resupply his own army, which was suffering from sickness, unusually heavy losses among its senior officers, and shortages of food and money; partly to assist his home government (still precariously holding on to office despite Perceval's assassination in May) with a spectacular event more likely to catch the attention of Europe than the victory that made it possible. Having entered the Spanish capital to a tumultuous welcome on 12 August 1812, Wellington spent three weeks there before turning north against Clausel. The French, however, prudently fell back past Valladolid and Burgos to make contact with their remaining army behind the River Ebro. Lacking adequate artillery, Wellington's hasty siege of the castle at Burgos at the end of September failed ignominiously after five assaults. With the French beginning to concentrate against him once more, Wellington was now in a dangerously exposed position. Having lost 2000 men to no purpose he called off the siege and on 21 October began a long and disorderly retreat to the shelter of Ciudad Rodrigo, pressed hard by greatly superior French forces. At the end of the month he was back in familiar territory on the River Tormes, where he was joined by Hill's troops recalled from Madrid. 
It was a disappointing end to a year that had promised so much. Wellington's hopes of pushing the French behind the Ebro had vanished and both he and his army were out of humour. A caustic circular letter he sent to his divisional and brigade commanders denouncing the indiscipline of their men during the retreat was evidence of his bad temper but did nothing to improve theirs. Moore's campaign of 1808, the Talavera campaign of 1809, and now the retreat from Salamanca in 1812 seemed part of a pattern he could not break. For this the fundamental reason was that the French armies in aggregate were always too strong to allow Wellington to exploit any of his local victories, however brilliant. Out of this realization came a new approach to the role of the Spanish armed forces. It amounted, in fact, to a change of heart among both allies. 
In Spain, a larger and more decentralized country than Portugal, the government was weakened by deep provincial jealousies and constant friction between the successive regency councils and the Cortes. The larger part of Spain was under French occupation, thus depriving the Spanish government of revenue and manpower. The ill-trained Spanish professional army was never able to stand up to the French in battle; the guerrilla bands in the countryside could harass but not drive away the French invaders. As a result Spanish administration was paralysed to an extent that perhaps Wellington never fully realized. What was clear to him, however, was the need for Spain to make a greater contribution to a war which seemed impossible for him to win by himself. For this some impetus from above was required. 
To obtain for Wellington command of the Spanish armies had been an object of British diplomacy ever since 1809. National pride, provincial autonomy, liberal jealousy of military authority, and the reluctance of the Spanish regency to part with power had all conspired to frustrate it. Nevertheless, the entry into Madrid finally converted the Cortes, and in September they offered Wellington the post of generalissimo of the Spanish armies. In this there was a degree of self-deception on both sides. The primary purpose of the Cortes was to secure Wellington and his army for the service of Spain, not to transfer to him the fundamental military control which by the liberal constitution of 1812 belonged to the civil authority. For Wellington the only value of the post was that it promised a more unified and authoritative direction of the Spanish military effort. In a letter to the Spanish war minister early in December 1812 he made a number of sweeping demands: the right to approve senior appointments in the Spanish army and the allocation of the military budget; the transmission through his headquarters of all orders to the Spanish armies in the field; and powers for the Spanish military commanders to obtain supplies without having to go through civilian authorities. He followed this up by going himself to Cadiz at the end of the month. By dint of threatening to resign his appointment he obtained the grudging consent of both the regency council and the Cortes to his demands. 
Though he used his new powers circumspectly and the regency rarely fulfilled their side of the compact, the new arrangement at least gave Wellington hope that in future the Spanish armies would prove a more efficient ally. With Soult's retirement towards Madrid, Hill's force in south-west Spain was free to join the main army, and further reinforcements from England arrived during the winter of 1812-13, including five cavalry regiments. By the spring Wellington had under his command an effective force of over 100,000 men, comprising 55,000 British, 31,000 Portuguese, and 21,000 Spanish. By contrast the French forces had been further depleted by the withdrawal of 15,000 of their best troops to make good Napoleon's terrible losses in Russia, and their ablest general, Soult, had been recalled to Paris. 
This was a decidedly more hopeful outlook than in any previous year, and Wellington improved on it by adopting a totally new strategy. Up to that point everything he had done in the Peninsula had been conditioned by his primary object, the defence of Portugal, and by the periodic opportunities to advance into Spain which that successful defence had created. The liberation of Spain, however, was a different kind of military problem. The whole French position in the Peninsula depended on the great high road from Bayonne through Burgos to Madrid. In 1808, in a different set of circumstances, Wellington had argued in a memorandum for the government that the only effective way to carry on operations against the French armies in Spain was to strike down from the Asturias against the flank and rear of the French line of communication, using the Biscayan ports as a base. In the early part of 1813, in fact, the protection of this vital link was becoming an increasing concern for King Joseph and his generals. Their strategy was to hold the northern part of Spain, using the River Douro as a defensive front on the left flank of any allied advance from the Ciudad Rodrigo sally-port. The bulk of their troops was concentrated in this sector, the rest being in the south-east guarding the Mediterranean coast against the Anglo-Sicilian threat. 
This policy assumed that Wellington would, as in previous years, make his advance from central Portugal south of the Douro. In fact his new strategy, a modification of his 1808 ideas, was to outflank the French defensive position by crossing the Douro inside Portugal and make his main thrust against the French line of communication running north-east from the Douro to Bayonne. In doing so he proposed to use the Biscayan ports for his own communications and supplies. It was at this point that the defence of Portugal was transformed into the liberation of Spain. His theatrical gesture of farewell when he crossed the Portuguese frontier marked his sense that the war had taken on a new shape. In May 60,000 men under Graham began their march through the mountainous terrain of the Tras-os-Montes, emerging into northern Spain. As a blind, Wellington remained with Hill's smaller force which started out along the familiar route from Ciudad Rodrigo towards Salamanca. There Wellington left them to join Graham. The two halves of the army were reunited at Toro, north of the Douro, at the beginning of June. The surprise had been complete and the French, abandoning first Valladolid and then, surprisingly, Burgos, fell back towards the Ebro. 
Wellington's tactics were to hustle, as he put it, the French towards Bayonne by continuously outflanking them to the north and giving them no time to regroup. Meanwhile he shifted his base from Lisbon and Corunna to Santander on the Biscayan coast. It was a remarkable logistic achievement. Between mid-May and mid-June he moved 100,000 men, with 100 guns and a pontoon bridge train, 250 miles to within striking distance of the French frontier. The decisive engagement came on 21 June at Vitoria where the Madrid-Bayonne highway was joined by roads going north to Bilbao and east to Pamplona, the fortress guarding the pass of Roncesvalles through the Pyrenees into France. 
Wellington, with a superiority of numbers, planned the battle as a classic enveloping movement with three separate parts of his army converging on the French position between the great bend of the River Zamorra and the town of Vitoria. It did not quite achieve classic perfection. Varying difficulties of terrain and distances to be covered upset the symmetry of his concentric attack. The French left and centre were broken after hard fighting but the stubborn resistance of their right wing under Reille saved them from being totally encircled. Nevertheless, not only was Joseph's army sent in disorderly retreat towards Pamplona but 150 guns, an immense store of ammunition, almost all his baggage, and a war chest of about $1 million (most of which disappeared into the pockets of the soldiers) fell into allied hands. Only an orgy of looting by the victorious troops prevented even more prisoners from being taken. As it was, though Joseph suffered 6000 casualties and had another 3000 captured, he was able to lead the wreckage of his army back into France. The usual disorganizing effect of protracted fighting and difficult country prevented Wellington from making any serious pursuit. Allied losses were 5000, mainly British: a relatively moderate price to pay for a victory that echoed round Europe. 
The extraordinary success of the campaign had carried Wellington's army faster and further into the north-eastern corner of Spain than he had expected. His immediate thought was more to protect what he had gained than to prepare for another forward leap. An invasion of France would mean that he would face a hostile population as well as French armies better supplied, more easily reinforced, and with shorter lines of communication than in Spain. He had no confidence in Britain's allies in central Europe and felt it not impossible that the armistice they had signed in June 1813 might end in a permanent peace which would set Napoleon free to turn south against him. He had equally little confidence in the Spanish government. The regency had been appointing and removing military commanders without consulting him and was conspicuously failing either to pay or provision the Spanish forces serving in his army. He was so exasperated at their conduct that at the end of August he resigned his command of the Spanish forces and consented to continue only until the next meeting of the Cortes. His difficulties in supplying his Portuguese and Spanish allies were further reasons for remaining on the defensive. In the event the Cortes in December requested him to stay in office; but this made little practical difference. 
There were in any case military reasons for Wellington to consolidate his position rather than advance into France. The fortresses of San Sebastian and Pamplona were still in French hands; in Catalonia, where the Anglo-Sicilian effort was petering out, Suchet with his 20,000 French was a potential threat to his right flank. Not surprisingly Wellington saw as his primary task the reduction of the two fortresses and the elimination of the last pockets of French resistance in Spain. This proved a longer and more difficult operation than could have been anticipated. Soult, sent down after Vitoria to take command in the south of France, proved as always a skilful and aggressive opponent. The allied front, stretching nearly 40 miles from San Sebastian to Pamplona, with poor lateral communications, was difficult for Wellington to supervise personally. In July Graham's attempt on San Sebastian was a miserable failure and Soult's simultaneous and unexpected attack through the Pyrenean passes involved Wellington in awkward and costly fighting until the French finally withdrew. The renewed siege of San Sebastian in August proved, like most of Wellington's sieges, a protracted and bloody operation. Despite the large new battering-train at Graham's disposal, the fortress did not yield until 8 September; in all it had resisted for seventy-three days. 
There followed four weeks of inactivity on both sides. Only when he was confident of the imminent fall of Pamplona (which finally surrendered to the blockading Spanish force at the end of October) did Wellington reluctantly give way to the pressures of his own government and the wishes of the allied powers in Germany to invade France. On 7 October he forced the passage of the River Bidassoa and the French retreated to Bayonne. At the battle of the Nivelle a month later Soult's army, dispirited by the news of Napoleon's defeat at Leipzig, was both outnumbered and outmanoeuvred. Fighting gradually died down in December and when it resumed in the spring of 1814 the outcome was hardly in doubt. Soult's army, weakened by desertion and troop withdrawals, was defeated at Orthez in February and retired eastward. This allowed Wellington to send Beresford to make a formal entry into Bordeaux where a royalist party was already active. Wellington personally favoured a Bourbon restoration but he was tied by his government which, with their European allies, still recognized Napoleon. By the time the last engagement took place at Toulouse on 10 April, however, Napoleon had abdicated. Nine days later Wellington signed a separate convention with Soult and Suchet for the cessation of hostilities and the removal of all French forces from Spain. 
The Peninsular War was over at last and part, at least, of the credit for its successful outcome was due to the ministers at home. They had supported Wellington when he had been under severe parliamentary attack, given him great latitude of action, and had made immense efforts to supply him with the manpower and money needed to sustain his campaigns. Wellington's frequent grumblings and occasional threats in the early years did not so much reflect a lack of government support as illustrate the customary vehemence he employed on matters important to him. Nevertheless, the language of some of his official dispatches, coupled with the whig bias of Napier's monumental 'History of the War in the Peninsula' (1828-40), subsequently created a false impression which was slow to disappear. But Wellington flatly denied in 1834 that he had ever offered to resign, though as he put it, 'I dare say I may have said as often as fifty times, 'Damn it, if you don't do this or that you may as well give up the war at once'' (Stanhope, 58-9). And writing of the cabinet on another occasion, he said 'it is not true that they did not, in every way in their power, as individuals, as Ministers, and as a Government, support me' (ibid., 83). 
Even so, that does not explain why Wellington was able to maintain his small force in the Peninsula in the face of the French armies ten times its size. In the proverbial phrase he himself quoted on occasion, Spain was a country where small armies were defeated and large armies starved. That Wellington's army suffered neither fate was primarily because he understood the peculiarities of that region better than Napoleon ever did. In Spain, as in Russia, the French encountered conditions quite unlike the civilized, populous, fertile states of central Europe in which they had previously campaigned. A country with great barren mountainous tracts, few good roads, a harsh climate, strong provincial autonomy, and a primitive, vengeful peasantry, Spain could hardly have been more unfavourable to the French system, often brutally enforced, of living off the land. For both political and logistical reasons the French forces had to become an army of occupation, spread over a large area, rather than a military organization dedicated to winning a war. This inherent disadvantage was compounded by jealousies between French marshals, who often behaved like proconsuls in their own territory, and the stream of injunctions and criticisms which came from the distant emperor, too late to be useful but irritating and oppressive. At bottom, therefore, the factor which made Wellington's victories possible was the steadfast Spanish national resistance. The outcome of the war, he wrote some years later: 'may be attributed to the operations of the Allied Armies in the Peninsula, but those would form a very erroneous notion of the facts who should not attribute a fair proportion of it to the effect of the enmity of the people of Spain. (Wellington MS 1/644/7, 16 April 1820)' Wellington tried from the start to enforce on his troops respect for the religion, customs, and property of the peoples of Portugal and Spain. It was a lesson the value of which he had learned in India, though he was not always successful in imparting it to others. Between his men, their officers included, and the inhabitants of the Peninsula was a gulf of prejudice, suspicion, and incomprehension. Even apart from the brutalities which accompanied the British captures of Ciudad Rodrigo, Badajoz, and San Sebastian, the endemic problems of looting and theft required constant attention, and among Wellington's many innovations was an improved system of military police. But occasional shootings and hangings would have been useless had he not adopted a system of feeding his army that was completely different from that of the French. He could see all the military disadvantages of their methods. Not only did they antagonize the peasant population but they were difficult to operate when their armies were concentrated, or in rapid movement, or had stayed too long in one district. 
Wellington, on the other hand, secured the co-operation of the civilian population by purchasing what he needed. He even dispensed with such powers of requisitioning as he legally possessed. Supplies which did not come directly from England were bought from contractors in the large towns or from local merchants. Regimental forage parties were strictly controlled to prevent waste, provide proper distribution, and ensure due payment to the owners. Depots were built up inside Portugal; for operations in Spain he organized a huge ancillary force of drivers, muleteers, waggoners, and draught animals to bring supplies up to his marching troops. It was a task for which India had provided him with considerable practice. A further refinement was his creation by 1810 of divisional transport to give additional mobility to his forward troops. This self-supporting system added a large and costly administrative tail to his army and explains his continual demands to his home government for ever-increasing amounts of gold and silver coinage. The system broke down from time to time, usually because of bad weather or rapid movement, but this was the inevitable friction of war. For all its expense and difficulty it was immensely superior in both military and political terms to the French practice. 
One reward for Wellington's considerate policy towards the civilian population came in the form of continuous information about the French armies. This was a valuable supplement to the intelligence gathered by his patrols and outposts. Individuals at every level of Spanish society assisted in this way, often at great personal risk. Dr Curtis, rector of the Irish College at Salamanca, organized his clerical seminarists to report on French dispositions and movements. Guerrilla bands which intercepted French couriers gave or sold their dispatches to the British. In 1809 British military intelligence was patchy, much of it out of date, and its genuineness sometimes suspect. It steadily improved, however, and by 1811 Wellington was able to boast to Lord Liverpool that he knew all that passed in the French armies. As always the mass of miscellaneous reports coming to him had to be carefully assessed to be of operational value. Nevertheless, it is evident that Wellington placed a high value on his intelligence service and that his sources were superior to those of the French generals. He created a secret intelligence staff under his direct control, mainly British but including some Portuguese and Spanish officers. He also possessed a highly efficient mapping and sketching section under his quartermaster-general, which as early as 1810 provided him with better maps of central Portugal than were available to the French or even the Portuguese government. Without its work Graham's surprise advance in 1813 through the Tras-os-Montes over 150 miles of mountains and rivers would have been impossible. Even in Spain, Wellington was never hampered by inadequate knowledge of the terrain or seriously misled by faulty topographical information as Massena had been in the Busaco campaign. 
The increasingly systematic gathering of topographical and military intelligence was only part of the general structural reforms Wellington carried out in his army. His primary purpose was to impose uniformity, method, and discipline on his force so that it responded directly to his leadership. By 1814 the staff of his army, from the general headquarters down to divisional level, was not only larger proportionately but probably more efficient than that of any continental army, not excluding the French. The printed volumes of his 'General Orders' offer impressive evidence of the comprehensive attention to detail which was at the heart of his generalship. From the additional training given to new divisions arriving from England and the raising of a corps of guides to direct the marches of his formations, down to the issue of tents, blankets, and tin kettles to the individual soldier, nothing that affected the efficiency or welfare of his troops seems to have escaped his attention. The mastery of logistics which he had acquired in India explains much of his success in Spain. 
The final test of any general, however, is on the battlefield and it was here that Wellington displayed his supreme qualities. Though he won the reputation among French marshals of being primarily a master of defensive tactics, this was largely because his habitual inferiority in numbers forced those tactics on him. But Salamanca and Vitoria are proofs of his talents as an attacking commander. One important feature was his continuous control and tactical flexibility once the battle had started. 'I made my campaigns of ropes' he once remarked. 'If anything went wrong I tied a knot; and went on' (Longford, 'Years of the Sword', 442). The same was true of his conduct of battle. He had the faculty (the product of both instinct and experience) of being at the crucial point at the decisive moment. 
Wellington's inexhaustible energy and powers of physical endurance enabled him to cover the whole area of most of his battles, and his unruffled manner (the product of will-power and self-discipline) had a moral effect on both officers and men. As with Napoleon, his presence on the battlefield came to be regarded by his troops as a guarantee of success. He has been criticized for exposing himself too much in action and delegating too little to his commanders in the field, but with armies as small as those he habitually led, and battlefields which could usually be kept under his direct observation, he would have regarded it as irresponsible not to exercise personal leadership. It was never his way to leave anything to chance. This type of generalship demanded complete and rigid obedience from his subordinates, and he was notably harsh, on some occasions to the point of injustice, on any apparent disregard of his orders. 
A disciplinarian to his army, Wellington was equally disciplined with himself. He had the invaluable gift of being able to do with little sleep, and this, together with his methodical habits, enabled him to get through a load of administrative work which would have taxed most men and broken some. His normal routine was to rise at six and write letters until nine. He then appeared for breakfast, shaved and trimly dressed, and spent the rest of the morning seeing his senior staff officers. In the afternoon he would go off on horseback to visit various units and any places that called for particular attention. But, though busy, his life was not austere. The atmosphere at his headquarters was relaxed and informal. He enjoyed the society of his young, high-spirited, mainly aristocratic aides-de-camp, and there were usually a number of casual visitors at his mess dinners. Here the attraction was the conversation rather than the cuisine; Wellington had notoriously little interest in food. During the winter he hunted with his own pack, and he encouraged his officers to organize balls and concerts at which he would put in an appearance even if he took little part in the proceedings. 
Nicknamed by his officers the Beau and later the Peer, to his more irreverent men he was Atty (for Arthur) or Nosey. They saw his neat figure in grey frock coat and plain cocked hat often enough, both on the battlefield and in cantonments, since he believed in seeing things for himself. It was fortunate for the army, in an age when brigadiers led their men into action and generals were not infrequently killed or wounded, that he was never a casualty himself. He was hit twice by spent bullets (in India and at Salamanca), slightly wounded once (at Orthez), and nearly captured on at least two occasions. After a narrow escape on the bridge at Sorauren during the battles of the Pyrenees, he wrote with a certain wryness to his brother William, 'I begin to believe that the finger of God is upon me' (Longford, 'Years of the Sword', 330). He had one other piece of good luck. Unlike his unfortunate predecessor, Sir John Moore, he was never obliged to face Napoleon (until 1815). Unkindly reminded of this in Paris after the war, he replied with the honesty which was one of his characteristics, 'no, and I am very glad I never was. I would at any time rather have heard that a reinforcement of 40,000 men had joined the French army, than that he had arrived to take the command' (ibid., 348-9). 
With the war over, Wellington on 21 April 1814 accepted an invitation from Castlereagh to act as British ambassador in Paris. The appointment was less strange than might appear. Never a democrat, Wellington had looked to a Bourbon restoration even before the allies abandoned their negotiations with Napoleon, and he consistently held the view that one of the objects of an allied occupation of France was to protect the monarchy against republicans and Bonapartists. For himself he felt that the natural sequel to his military career would be some high post under the government. Castlereagh, for his part, was anxious to exercise a major influence on the eventual peace settlement and believed that to have Wellington in Paris during the negotiations would give unique weight to British diplomacy. 'His military name', he wrote to Lord Liverpool, 'would give him and us the greatest ascendancy' (Hinde, 'Castlereagh', 214). 
On 4 May Wellington, having been made a duke the previous day, arrived in Paris: an object of interest to all, despite his deliberately inconspicuous civilian attire. Soon afterwards, at Castlereagh's request, he went back to Spain with a memorandum for the new king, Ferdinand VII, recommending him to adopt a degree of liberalism in the future government of his kingdom. But, as he reported to Castlereagh, 'I fear that I have done but little good' (Maxwell, 1.380). Returning to France he stopped at Bayonne to issue a general order on 14 June, taking leave of his Peninsular army in a few brief but dignified paragraphs. By 23 June he was back in England for the first time in over five years to meet a hero's welcome. He went down to Portsmouth to pay his respects to the prince regent and his distinguished guests, the emperor of Russia and the king of Prussia, and then back to London to take his seat in the House of Lords and receive the congratulations of the House of Commons, which had just voted him $400,000 for the purchase of an estate to support his new title. In July came a thanksgiving service at St Paul's, at which he carried the sword of state, and a fete at Carlton House. 
By August Wellington was on the continent again, inspecting the defences of Belgium on behalf of the allies and then moving on to Paris to resume his diplomatic duties. These consisted mainly in an attempt to induce the French government to abolish the slave trade: a task almost as unpromising as persuading the Spanish king to embrace liberalism. By the time the Congress of Vienna opened in the autumn, however, the jealousy of some of the Bourbon princes and assassination threats from outraged Bonapartists were already causing concern to the British government. The only decent pretext for recalling Wellington from France was either to appoint him deputy to Castlereagh or give him a command in the field in the war against the USA that had broken out in 1812. Liverpool chose the latter as the more convincing excuse, though it is unlikely that he had any intention of sending Wellington across the Atlantic except possibly to negotiate peace. In the end, when Castlereagh returned home to assist the ministry in the House of Commons, Wellington took his place at the congress, arriving in Vienna on 3 February 1815. 
When Napoleon escaped from Elba it was the general desire of the allied sovereigns that Wellington should take charge of the forces in the Netherlands. As soon as a new treaty of alliance was signed towards the end of March, therefore, he left for Brussels, arriving in the first week of April. Politically and militarily his situation there was strewn with difficulties. A large part of the Belgian troops had recently served under Napoleon and their loyalty was suspect. King William of the Netherlands was jealous of his authority and only tardily surrendered control of the Dutch army. The duke's responsibilities included guarding the seat of government in Brussels, protecting the court of the fugitive French king at Ghent, and liaising with the Prussian military headquarters at Namur. These different needs imposed on him a strategically awkward deployment of his motley allied army. His line of communication from Brussels to his base at Ostend, contrary to all orthodox theory, ran parallel to his front against Napoleon and not at right angles to it. Geographically the French frontier was only 27 miles from Brussels, less than 50 by the paved road through Hal, Mons, and Maubeuge, and he had little faith in either the ability or the fidelity of the barrier-fortress garrisons. There would be little space for manoeuvre once the French invaded and he was precluded by political considerations from sending patrols into France until Napoleon actually declared war. Both British and Prussian intelligence were dangerously ill-informed about what was going on behind the strict security screen Napoleon enforced along the frontier. 
Militarily the British force placed under his command drew from Wellington the sour comment on 8 May that 'I have got an infamous army, very weak and ill-equipped, and a very inexperienced staff' (Maxwell, 1.394). Over the next six weeks, however, its quality gradually improved with the dispatch of many of his Peninsular generals and staff officers, and the last-minute arrival at Brussels on 17 June of a further 2000 of what he called his Spanish (that is, Peninsular) infantry. By that date his army had risen to about 95,000, composed of just over 33,000 British troops (only 7000 of whom had served in Spain), nearly 8000 of the King's German Legion (equal in value to the best British units), some 27,000 Brunswick, Hanoverian, and Nassau troops of varying quality, together with 20,000 Dutch and nearly 6000 Belgians of doubtful reliability. It was an uneven and heterogeneous array which spoke four languages and had no common training or equipment. Wellington was not even supreme commander in his own theatre of war, since he shared responsibility for the defence of the Netherlands with the Prussian commander, the 73-year-old Blucher. 
Wellington's hope that an allied offensive would be launched before Napoleon completed his preparations disappeared when the allied sovereigns decided on a methodical mobilization to be followed in July by an invasion of France on a broad front. In the interval he and Blucher were left to guard the Netherlands against a possible (but by no means certain) French attack. Conscious of the vulnerability of his own position, the duke thought (and for the rest of his life believed) that the best strategy for Napoleon was to attack from the south-west up the great road from Paris to Brussels through Mons and Hal. This, if successful, would cut the British army off from its base: in effect a strategy comparable to his own in the Vitoria campaign. For that reason he kept the bulk of his force in his western sector rather than close to the Prussian zone. On 3 May he met Blucher at Tirlemont and came to a general understanding with him on their joint strategy if Napoleon invaded Belgium. Outwardly he remained (or took care to give the impression of being) calm and confident in the face of the feverish excitement in Brussels. Nevertheless, the initiative lay with Napoleon, and not until 13 June did it become clear that French military activity in the western sector of the frontier was a feint. 
Very early on 15 June 1815 the French army invaded Belgium on a narrow front moving in the direction of Charleroi in the Prussian zone. When, later that day, Wellington learned that Blucher had committed himself to battle around Sombresse, he gave preparatory orders for an eastward movement towards Nivelles. What he did not know was that the Prussians had uncovered the high road from Charleroi to Brussels, and only at supper on the 15th (at the famous duchess of Richmond's ball) was he informed that French units had advanced up that road to the vicinity of Quatre Bras, only 20 miles from the capital. 'Napoleon has humbugged me, by God', he exclaimed to the duke of Richmond; 'he has gained twenty-four hours' march upon me' (Longford, 'Years of the Sword', 421). Early next morning he left for Quatre Bras, which in the meantime had been occupied by two brigades of the prince of Orange's corps on the initiative of his able chief of staff, Constant-Rebecque, and General Perponcher, commander of his 2nd division. Later he went on to meet Blucher at Brye, half way to Sombresse, and agreed to assist him if not attacked himself. By 3 p.m. he was back at Quatre Bras where stiff fighting had already started. With allied reinforcements steadily arriving Wellington was able to stabilize the situation, and at dusk the allies still held their position. 
Early next day Wellington learned that the Prussians had been worsted at Ligny and were withdrawing towards Wavre, some 14 miles by road south-east of Brussels. The direction of their retreat was crucial since it kept the Prussians in touch with the allied army. To conform to their new alignment Wellington retired north to the ridge of Mont St Jean which he had previously reconnoitred. It lay just south of the village of Waterloo and about 10 miles from Brussels. In the small hours of the next morning (18th) a message came from Blucher informing him that two Prussian army corps would move towards his left flank and the duke promised in return to hold his ground until the Prussians arrived. The position he had selected was a classic example of his defensive skill. Along the Mont St Jean Ridge the Ohain road, partly hedged, partly sunken between high banks, constituted a considerable, in places an impassable, obstacle to cavalry. In front standing fields of rye provided further concealment from an enemy advancing across the shallow, undulating basin that lay to the south. It had rained heavily during the night and the thick Brabant clay soil was a further advantage to the defence. Wellington placed the bulk of his force, and his best troops, on his right wing where the road bent south-west towards the high road to Nivelles. It was in this obtuse angle that the most desperate fighting and heaviest casualties occurred. About 400 yards in front was the large walled enclosure of Hougoumont, consisting of a manor house, chapel, and farm buildings, into which he put four companies of the foot guards, later reinforced. 
Wellington's weaker left flank, where the Prussians would arrive, was protected by the marshy ground of the Smohain stream to the east and the farm buildings of Papelotte and La Haye in front. In the centre, about 300 yards to the south, was the most exposed of all his forward defences, the farm and sandpits of La Haye-Sainte commanding the road from Quatre Bras, the axis of the French advance. The entire front was just over 2 miles long. To hold it he had (though estimates differ slightly) some 68,000 troops (of whom 24,000 were British) and 156 guns to oppose Napoleon's army of some 72,000 with 246 guns. About 80 of these were massed in the 'grande batterie' which Napoleon established in his centre, though almost at the limit of their range. 
The battle which followed on Sunday, 18 June, was a savage and bloody encounter which with some intermissions lasted from the opening cannonade of the French guns at 11.30 a.m. until dusk fell soon after 8 p.m. Napoleon's fundamental mistake was to underestimate his opponent. Snubbing those of his marshals with Peninsular experience who cautioned him against attacking Wellington in a prepared position, he mounted a series of massive but unco-ordinated onslaughts without any preliminary manoeuvring. It was Vimeiro all over again on a larger scale. The French cavalry were met by allied squares, their infantry columns by allied troops in line, concealed until the last moment on the reverse side of the ridge. Wellington, slightly surprised by Napoleon's bludgeoning tactics, described the battle afterwards as a 'pounding match' (Longford, 'Years of the Sword', 488); this is often recalled as 'Hard pounding, gentlemen; let's see who will pound longest' (W. Scott, 'Paul's Letters', 1816, letter 8). On Wellington's right the Hougoumont garrison held out all day against almost continual attack, pinning down forces of ten times their number. At the other end of the line Papelotte and La Haye remained in allied hands until relieved by the advancing Prussians. In the afternoon, however, La Haye-Sainte was captured when its ammunition ran out, enabling French troops to reach the crest of the ridge. But by then it was too late; by 4.30 p.m. Wellington knew that the Prussians were engaging the right flank of the French position. Papelotte, in fact, became the hinge joining the allied front running from east to west with the Prussian front from north to south, between which the French were increasingly compressed as the evening wore on. Wellington himself was constantly on the move, encouraging his troops at each crisis, rallying wavering units (not always successfully), and meeting the inevitable set-backs and misfortunes of the fluctuating fighting with the uncomplaining good humour which was one of his greatest qualities on the battlefield. Though he had been nearly captured at Quatre Bras, his remarkable personal immunity continued. Frequently caught up in the fighting, the duke, riding Copenhagen, went through the day without injury while men were struck down at his side and all but one of his personal staff were killed or wounded. When Lord Uxbridge was hit, the following exchange took place: ''By God! I've lost my leg,' cried Uxbridge. 'Have you, by God' was all the Duke's reply' (Maxwell, 2.90). 
Had he been forced to retire, Wellington would have moved west towards the coast, abandoning Brussels. On his way he would have picked up a detachment of 17,000 men, under the nominal command of Prince Frederick of the Netherlands, which (in a decision often criticized since) he left unused at Hal 8 miles away. This, however, was clearly one of his defensive precautions. That line of retreat would have taken him back along his lines of communication and not away from them. He might have been defeated at Waterloo but not routed. In any case he did not think that Napoleon, with the Prussians in his rear, would have been in a position to pursue him. In reality Napoleon himself, though operating on interior lines, had little room for manoeuvre, and Wellington's superbly organized defence presented his opponent with little choice but a frontal attack. Despite heavy casualties, mainly from French artillery fire, Wellington's thinning lines held out. Though the Prussians (chiefly because of the suspicious caution of Gneisenau, Blucher's chief of staff) arrived later and in smaller numbers than Wellington expected, the Anglo-Prussian strategy held firm. As early as 2.30 p.m. Wellington had seen the Prussian vedettes in the distance, heralding the approach of their main body; by 4 p.m. he could hear their guns in action. Relieved of anxiety on that flank he was able to move units from his left wing to strengthen his centre and right. To the end he always had reserves in hand. 
Imperturbable as he seemed during the battle, Wellington admitted afterwards, as he put it next day to Thomas Creevey, 'It has been a damned nice thing -- the nearest run thing you ever saw' ('Creevey Papers', 236). 'I never took so much trouble about any Battle,' he wrote, 'and never was so near being beat' (Longford, 'Years of the Sword', 490). But with the failure of Napoleon's last futile effort -- the attack at about 7 p.m. by five battalions of the middle guard against the reinforced centre-right of the allied position -- the battle was over. The French troops, as always, had fought with immense courage and tenacity. Now, for the first time in Wellington's experience, their morale collapsed. What started as a retreat turned into a rout. Soon after 9 p.m. he met Blucher near the Belle Alliance crossroads and relinquished further pursuit to the Prussians. On both sides casualties had been very heavy: about 17,000 in Wellington's army, nearly 7000 among the Prussians, about 26,000 among the French, with a further 9000 taken prisoner and up to 10,000 missing or deserted. 'I hope to God', the duke said sombrely to Lady Shelley when talking to her not long afterwards, 'that I have fought my last battle' ('Diary of Frances, Lady Shelley', 1.102). But that last battle, the most famous in European history, had done its work. Advancing rapidly into France, Wellington and Blucher secured an armistice on 3 July and three days later their troops entered Paris. 
With this Wellington had reached the summit of his career. No man, certainly no Briton, had ever been in such a situation before in Europe, the object of universal hero-worship and gratitude. Honours and tributes poured in from every side. The king of the Netherlands conferred on him the title of prince of Waterloo, accompanied by an estate in Belgium to add to those presented to him during the Peninsular War by the governments of Portugal and Spain. Chivalric orders of knighthood came from Russia and from lesser European states -- Savoy, Denmark, Naples, Saxony, Bavaria, Hesse-Cassel, and Wurttemberg. This international prestige gave him, in turn, an influence on the post-Waterloo settlement of Europe far surpassing that of any single military leader at the end of the two world wars in the following century. Though there was no enthusiasm either among the allied sovereigns or in the French provisional government for the Bourbon monarchy, Wellington believed that there was no practical alternative. He paved the way for a second restoration by persuading the king to take into his service the cynical and time-serving Fouche as minister of police. On the question of a final peace settlement he considered that financial reparations enforced by an army of occupation were preferable to permanent cessions of territory which would create lasting hostility and immediately discredit the restored monarchy. His military reputation, together with his integrity and common sense, gave his opinion peculiar weight. 
By the second treaty of Paris, signed in November 1815, France was to be occupied by an allied force of 150,000 for five years, the cost to be borne by the French government, in addition to a general indemnity of 700 million francs. Wellington was appointed commander-in-chief of the allied occupation force and principal intermediary between the council of ambassadors in Paris and the French government. He was further charged with the responsibility for supervising the reconstruction of the barrier fortresses along the Belgian frontier. For this purpose, in a separate agreement signed in October 1816 between the British and Netherlands governments, he was given control of the financial arrangements for these works. He was soon on good terms with the French ministers, especially their leading figure, the duc de Richelieu, and showed himself unusually sympathetic to their problems. 
As early as June 1816 Richelieu was pressing for a reduction in the size of the occupation forces, and though Wellington took the view that reparations and occupation were inseparable, he took steps to reduce the inflated allied armies to their proper treaty numbers. Financially, however, the French government was still in great difficulty and in November suspended its treaty payments. In a quick change of policy Wellington recommended to the council of ambassadors a reduction in the occupation forces of one-fifth on the grounds that the stability of the Bourbon monarchy, which it was an essential allied interest to preserve, was being endangered by the continued allied presence in France. He himself, as commander-in-chief, was the target of resentment from all parties in France. Besides a stream of threatening letters there were two, admittedly blundering, attempts on his life: one by arson and explosives at his house in June 1816, the other by pistol in February 1818. After the second incident the cabinet and the prince regent ordered him to withdraw to his military headquarters at Cambrai: a command which the duke, showing an indifference to superior authority which he would never have tolerated in a subordinate of his own, urbanely rejected. 
An additional financial difficulty in the last years of the occupation was the repayment of the debts incurred by the French army abroad, which threatened to produce an avalanche of claims from both states and individuals. On the initiative of the tsar the whole problem was remitted to Wellington for arbitration in the autumn of 1817. His solution was to fix a maximum total of 240 million francs, together with accrued interest, and assign the decisions on individual claims to the respective states concerned. By that date he had concluded that a prolongation of the period of occupation was pointless, that the French government could be trusted to meet its remaining obligations, and that France should be admitted on equal footing to the European congress system established in 1815. To facilitate a shortening of the occupation he promoted negotiations between the French ministers and two British banks, Barings and Rothschilds, for a private loan to pay off the balance of the treaty indemnity. This paved the way for a general agreement in the autumn of 1818 at the Congress of Aix-la-Chapelle for the final evacuation of France and her readmittance to the councils of Europe. The allied powers accepted an immediate sum of 265 million francs in lieu of the 332 million still outstanding under the peace treaty. In October Wellington issued his last general order to the departing British occupation troops, thanking them for 'their uniform good conduct', and by the end of November, two years ahead of schedule, the last foreign armies had left French soil. As a final salute the tsar of Russia, the emperor of Austria, and the king of Prussia created him a field marshal in their respective armies. 
A decision on Wellington's future had already been taken. The prime minister had for some time been considering what employment could be found for the most illustrious subject of the crown since Marlborough. At the age of fifty it was unthinkable that the duke should be relegated to a routine military post. To bring him into the government for which he had long been an influential adviser seemed the most straightforward solution. A vacancy was created for him by Lord Mulgrave, who gave up his position as master-general of the ordnance, the one cabinet office of a specifically military character. The unexpected demur came from the intended recipient. Wellington, with a soldier's distrust of politicians, showed a distinct unwillingness to enter the cabinet. Only his sense of duty to the crown and loyalty to the ministers who had supported him in the early difficulties of the Peninsular War persuaded him to accept. It was his old friend Castlereagh who seems to have overcome his final scruples with the argument that a refusal would weaken the government and leave him as a possible rallying point for the opposition. Even so, Wellington stipulated that if at any time the ministry was changed, he must be free to choose his own future, since 'my long service abroad has convinced me that a factious opposition to the Government is highly injurious to the interests of the country' (Yonge, 2.378). It was as a great servant of the state, therefore, not as a party politician, that the duke joined the government. This was certainly the view taken by the prime minister. When discussing in March 1821 the prospects of the administration, Liverpool and Castlereagh were united in thinking that though Wellington had become an important member of the cabinet, he was too great a national figure to be placed in any post where he would be exposed to party animosity or be disqualified from resuming his active professional career. 
The return to England at the end of 1818 enabled Wellington for the first time to establish a settled domestic life. In 1817 he had paid a deliberately generous price for his brother Richard's residence, Apsley House at Hyde Park Corner, and this now became his London home, soon being known as No. 1, London. Eleven years later he employed the fashionable architect Benjamin Wyatt at considerable expense to enlarge and reshape the appearance of the house to make it a fitting depository for all the war trophies, pictures, statues, and other immense and elaborate presents (mainly gold, silver, and porcelain) given to him by foreign governments and public authorities at home. The year 1817 also saw the acquisition of a country seat. In November the parliamentary commissioners purchased for him Lord Rivers's estate at Stratfield Saye near Basingstoke for the sum of $263,000. The pleasant, unpretentious mansion on the River Loddon became the preferred home of the duchess and a place where her husband could assemble regular house parties. His new status as a Hampshire landowner was marked in December 1820 by appointment as lord lieutenant of the county, a position he held for the rest of his life. 
From this time Wellington lived almost permanently in England with only a rare excursion abroad on official business. Not once during the Peninsular War had he returned home or suggested that his wife should join him. Though she had gone across to Paris in 1815, no more children were born to them. Closer proximity did nothing to improve their relationship. The duchess lacked confidence, found it difficult to manage her servants and finances, and because of her short sight dreaded large social gatherings. The duke wanted a poised, intelligent woman to organize his household and be hostess to his guests. Her clinging devotion was a burden to him and her tactlessness a recurrent irritation. He did not tell her (or many other people) of his movements; she resorted to questioning his attendants. At one point in the early summer of 1821 she angered him so much that he threatened to cease living in the same house with her. Though at times he tried to cultivate the society of their two sons, he remained apprehensive of the effect of their mother's weak and over-affectionate upbringing on their characters. Only when Kitty was dying in April 1831 did he show a belated tenderness towards her. Wellington in fact was at his worst and most ungracious in his dealings with his wife. His harshness and outbursts of blazing temper were signs of how little the marriage had come to mean (or perhaps had ever meant) to him. Talking about it with Mrs Arbuthnot in 1822 he exclaimed 'Would you have believed that anybody could have been such a damned fool? I was not the least in love with her. I married her because they asked me to do it' ('Journal of Mrs Arbuthnot', 1.169). That was not necessarily the reason, but the other possible explanation -- that he did it to erase the slight of his rejection in 1793 -- is hardly more complimentary. 
Both before and after marrying Kitty Pakenham, Wellington had had relations with other women. One of them was the well-known London courtesan Harriette Wilson (1786-1845), who later tried to blackmail him. Sexual affairs for Wellington were a form of physical relaxation, not a serious matter. Though suggestions of various brief liaisons in India and the Peninsula are largely anecdotal, there is too much to be ignored. Curiosity about his private life increased as his fame grew. To judge from cartoonists and the more scurrilous journals, both British and foreign, he had an established reputation after 1815 as a womanizer. No doubt more women were reputed to have enjoyed his attentions than were entitled to be. In Paris the singer Grassini and the actress Mlle Georges both claimed to have been his mistress. The allegation in the 'St James's Gazette' in 1815 of intimacy with Lady Frances Webster seems to have been groundless. The evidence of an affair with Lady Charlotte Greville (died 1862) about 1820 is more plausible, though not completely proved. After that date the duke appears to have been content with the platonic hero-worship of various pretty, aristocratic, preferably intelligent, and safely married women like Lady Shelley, Mrs Arbuthnot (a granddaughter of the eighth earl of Westmorland), and later the young marchioness of Salisbury. He also found much domestic pleasure in the society of his elder son's wife, Lady Douro, as well as in the children of his second son. His deepest feminine friendship, however, was with the devoted, discreet, but not uncritical Harriet Arbuthnot, wife of a junior tory minister. Their open companionship was such that many of the duke's colleagues believed her to be his mistress -- not unreasonably, but certainly wrongly. After her death in 1834 her grieving husband came to join the equally grieving duke and lived with him until his death in 1850. 
In his first years as cabinet minister nothing indicated that Wellington's new and slightly ambiguous position in public life would prove unsustainable. Besides his departmental duties he soon fell into the familiar role of general adviser to the government on all military matters: imperial defence, peacetime economies in army establishments, affairs in India, and deployment of troops in disturbed districts at home. Together with Castlereagh he acted as governmental representative in the abortive negotiations with the queen's advisers on issues between the royal couple, and when the collapse of the parliamentary divorce bill in 1820 threatened the existence of Liverpool's administration he took the remarkable step of warning the king privately against any precipitate dismissal of the ministry. He was regularly involved in discussions on foreign policy, and after Castlereagh's suicide in 1822 took his place at the Congress of Verona. Before leaving England he was instrumental in persuading George IV to agree to Lord Liverpool's desire to appoint Canning as the new foreign secretary. 
The main problem for the congress was the constitutional conflict in Spain. British policy was already moving towards disengagement from collective action on the continent and Wellington's instructions left him with little latitude of action. Ironically therefore it fell to him, the most European of the British cabinet, to make the first breach in the congress system. In expressing British reservations about French intervention in Spain he found himself completely isolated, and an offer of mediation which he was told to make in Paris on his way home was, as he expected, politely refused. He arrived back in December decidedly out of humour. With the changes in the international scene it was clear that his old personal influence in Europe was a thing of the past. 
While agreeing with the principle of non-intervention abroad, Wellington soon came to dislike both the style of Canning's diplomacy and the man himself. In his resentment and inexperience he allowed himself to be identified more than was wise with the anti-Canning faction at court, the so-called Cottage Coterie (which included the Russian, Austrian, and French ambassadors) that clustered round George IV and his favourites at Windsor. The king's frequently proclaimed partiality for Wellington was the more unfortunate since it was accompanied by royal criticisms of the prime minister. When in the spring of 1824 it seemed that Lord Liverpool might retire because of ill health, the duke was already being spoken of as a potential successor. In June the king and his brother, the duke of York, heir presumptive to the throne, both dropped hints that he should be in readiness for such a possibility. Though he protested his unfitness for such a post, his mind was certainly not closed on the matter. He was already emerging as the chief opponent of Canning within the cabinet, and since Liverpool regarded Canning as his obvious successor any rivalry between the two men had implications for the future. 
The two matters of policy on which they differed were the recognition of the independent republics of the former Spanish and Portuguese colonies, and the domestic issue of Catholic emancipation. With his respect for legitimate authority and dislike of democracy, the duke thought it wrong to sanction independence movements abroad while repressing one in Ireland. Behind Canning, however, stood Lord Liverpool and the majority of his ministerial colleagues. In the end Wellington became so restive at his near isolation in the cabinet that early in December 1824 he offered to resign. Liverpool replied with a friendly remonstrance, and the duke was finally won over to the South American policy by the argument that British maritime and commercial power needed to be strengthened in this way. On the other issue the difference between Canning and Wellington was less than appeared. Always cosmopolitan, rational, and tolerant in his attitude to religion, the duke had enjoyed friendly personal relations with the Roman Catholic church in Spain and at home had been considerably influenced by Castlereagh's liberal views. Lord Liverpool's ministry, however, had been formed on the basis of neutrality on the Catholic issue and it was clear that there could be no departure from that position as long as he remained prime minister. What Wellington disliked was Canning's suspected connivance with members of the opposition in promoting emancipation, and even more his apparent readiness to risk breaking up the administration on the issue. When in April 1825, following the success of Burdett's 'Catholic Relief Bill' in the House of Commons, both Liverpool and Peel, the home secretary, indicated their readiness to resign Wellington used all his influence to prevent such a political catastrophe. Though he objected to Burdett's bill, he believed nevertheless that the time had come to settle the dispute and produced a plan of his own for legalizing and endowing the Roman church in Ireland by means of a concordat with the pope. 
The cabinet crisis ended in May with the defeat of Burdett's bill in the House of Lords and the failure of Canning's attempt to persuade the cabinet to abandon its neutrality on the issue. In subsequent discussion of the timing of the general election, due not later than 1826, Wellington headed the 'protestant' group in the ministry, which argued for an early election in 1825 to take advantage of the current anti-Catholic feeling in the country. Characteristically he attached more importance to the immediate need to strengthen the ministry than to any consistency of principle over Catholic emancipation. The fact remained, however, that by 1826 Wellington's political position had become curiously involved and illogical. Entering the government in 1818 as a non-partisan public figure, he had become deeply involved in controversial issues. On foreign policy, where he differed fundamentally from Canning, he had little support, especially after the king in the course of 1825 became reconciled to the foreign secretary. On Catholic emancipation, however, where he differed from Canning only on tactics, he had become the figurehead, if not the leader, for tory-Anglican politicians, both peers and commoners, who opposed the measure. It was a deceptive and dangerous position, though neither Wellington nor the political world at large realized it. For another year his ambiguous role as elder statesman remained intact. At the start of 1826 he was chosen by Canning for a special mission to Russia to congratulate the new Tsar Nicholas on his accession and to use his influence to prevent war between Russia and Turkey over the issue of Greek independence. It is doubtful whether his presence made any difference to Russian foreign policy. The protocol of 4 April that he was persuaded to sign went in some respects beyond his instructions and against his private inclinations. It provided for the establishment of Greece as a virtually autonomous state under nominal Turkish suzerainty and for joint Anglo-Russian mediation. 
The wider implications were probably not realized by Wellington until he had returned home. To others it was apparent that another blow had been struck at the congress system and that the traditional British strategy of preserving the Ottoman empire as a counterpoise to Russian strength in the east had been compromised. Peace, however, had been preserved, and this after all had been the main object of his mission. He remained intensely critical of Canning's methods and felt that he himself was being excluded from foreign affairs. Nevertheless, the fragile truce between the two men lasted through 1826. Wellington supported the cabinet decision of 9 December to meet a Portuguese request for military assistance against a threatened Spanish invasion, though he thought (with the prime minister) that the British force should be withdrawn as soon as practicable. At the turn of the year two new appointments emphasized once again Wellington's dual position in public life. In December he was made constable of the Tower of London and in January 1827, following the death of the duke of York, he became commander-in-chief of the forces. 
Lord Liverpool's stroke on 17 February 1827 which ended the prime minister's political life marked an important stage in Wellington's career. Though many tories at once thought of him as a successor, the duke refused to make any response. He disliked the appearance of angling for Liverpool's office while he was still alive or of doing anything which might seem to limit the king's freedom of choice. To his friends he argued that his position as commander-in-chief was sufficient to exclude him from the premiership. This did not prevent him, however, from warning the king in emphatic terms of the disruptive effect on the administration if he appointed Canning. On 10 April, when Canning was formally commissioned to form a new government, he invited Wellington to continue as member of the cabinet. A frosty exchange of letters ended in Wellington's resignation not only as master-general of the ordnance but as commander-in-chief as well. Canning had taken no pains to be tactful or friendly; Wellington was sensitive and distrustful. Since his resignation was followed by that of six of his cabinet colleagues, the Liberal press accused him of heading a cabal against Canning. The duke's resentment at this baseless charge found an outlet in a vehement speech in the House of Lords on 2 May in which he said that he was not qualified to be head of government and would have been mad to think of such a thing. A further exchange of letters with Canning did nothing to remove the duke's angry conviction that he had been personally insulted by the new prime minister. 
Between two proud and touchy men, with a record of mutual hostility and distrust, reconciliation was hardly to be expected, but the incident established Wellington even more firmly as titular leader of the 'protestant' anti-Canning party in politics. This impression was strengthened when the government's 'Corn Bill' was defeated in June on an amendment moved by the duke, largely because of a genuine misunderstanding between Wellington and Huskisson and weak handling by Lord Goderich, the new leader of the House of Lords. After Canning's death in August and his succession by Goderich, Wellington at the king's invitation resumed command of the army. Although some of his close friends thought this might be interpreted as support for the ministry, any such impression must have been removed by a subsequent trip by the duke to the north of England which was converted by his tory hosts into a series of political demonstrations. 
When the weak Goderich cabinet collapsed on 8 January 1828, Wellington was commissioned by George IV to form an administration on the old basis of neutrality on the Catholic question. In consultation with Peel, who in effect became the duke's second in command in the House of Commons, it was agreed to reconstruct the old Liverpool party with a slightly more liberal flavour. Three of the more tory members of Liverpool's former cabinet -- Eldon, Bexley, and Westmorland -- were omitted. Two new young peers -- Aberdeen and Ellenborough -- together with Lyndhurst, Canning's supple lord chancellor, were recruited from the upper house. Four Canningites -- Huskisson, Grant, Dudley, and Palmerston -- joined Peel, Goulburn, and Herries to make up the House of Commons contingent. With seven 'Catholics' and six 'protestants' the cabinet returned to the balanced central position favoured by Lord Liverpool. Under pressure from his colleagues the duke also resigned his command of the army, though he grumbled unreasonably at having to submit to a constitutional requirement which he had implicitly accepted less than a year earlier. His main difficulty, however, lay in his inability to adjust his mind to the political outlook demanded of a prime minister. 
In foreign affairs Wellington was able to have his own way, since neither Dudley, the incompetent Canningite he had taken over from the Goderich ministry, nor the younger but more experienced Aberdeen, who succeeded as foreign secretary in May 1828, was temperamentally disposed to challenge his considerable authority in that field. But the duke's increasingly old-fashioned views made much of his diplomacy hesitant and ineffective, responding to events rather than anticipating them. He upheld the principle of non-intervention by withdrawing the British force from Portugal as soon as possible; but his handling of the issue of Greek independence, the main problem confronting him when he took office, amounted to little more than the abandonment of one position after another. He had already come to regret the concessions he had made at St Petersburg and had little enthusiasm for the 1827 treaty of London which had embodied them. Admiral Codrington's destruction of the Turco-Egyptian fleet at Navarino in October 1827, though a predictable consequence of armed allied intervention, had been profoundly unwelcome to the duke since it ran counter to his settled view that the Ottoman empire must be preserved as an essential element of the balance of power in the Middle East. 
The king's speech of January 1828, drawn up by Wellington's cabinet, referred to Navarino as 'a collision wholly unexpected' and 'an untoward event'. The duke hoped even so to keep the question of Greek independence separate from the larger issue of Russian expansion, but he was unable either to get the support of France, which had ambitions of its own in the eastern Mediterranean, or to prevent the war which broke out between Russia and Turkey in April. The fatuity and intransigence of the Ottoman government in fact made any pro-Turkish policy singularly difficult to sustain. The moderate terms of the treaty of Adrianople which ended hostilities in September were due to Russian calculation and not the duke's influence. In the subsequent delimitation of Greek territory Wellington and Aberdeen found it hard to make up their minds whether the new state should be kept small, on the assumption that it would fall under Russian domination, or made large in the hope of establishing it as a genuinely independent power. In the end the Greek frontiers laid down in the London protocol of February 1830 represented an unsatisfactory compromise which was to be a source of much later trouble. For the rest, Wellington's proposal for an international guarantee of Turkish territorial integrity, though supported by Austria, proved impracticable in the face of the studied indifference of the Russian government, which demonstrated its newly acquired influence over both the Ottoman empire and the fledgeling Greek state by persuading both to accept the diplomatic settlement. Even Metternich, the European statesman most sympathetic to Wellington's outlook, by now regarded him as a spent force. In reality, both these survivors of the Congress of Vienna had been left behind by the emergence of new personalities and objectives in European politics. 
In domestic affairs the optimism with which the duke had taken up his office barely survived the first few months of his administration. He was particularly incensed by the four Canningite ministers, who not only criticized his views but showed a disconcerting readiness to offer their resignations when thwarted. The duke had to accept a more free-trade version of Liverpool's 'Corn Bill' than he would have liked and a surrender to the House of Commons over the repeal of the 'Test and Corporation Acts'. His annoyance with the Canningites came to a head in May when Huskisson's impulsive offer of resignation over his equally impulsive departure from agreed cabinet policy on the 'East Retford Disfranchisement Bill' was accepted by the prime minister with no attempt at conciliation. The resignation of the other three which followed not only destroyed the balance of the cabinet but left the government painfully short of front-bench talent in the House of Commons. The appointment of two of his Peninsular staff officers, Sir George Murray and Sir Henry Hardinge, to help fill the vacancies did nothing to assist Peel in the lower house, while strengthening the impression that the ministry was both illiberal and militaristic. 
Meanwhile the state of Ireland was urgently demanding attention. In May 1828 the House of Commons had voted in favour of a settlement of the Catholic question. In subsequent debate in the Lords, Wellington based his objections entirely on expediency, arguing that concessions to Roman Catholics must be accompanied by guarantees for protestants. In private he was urged by Peel to say nothing that would prevent him from taking up the question at a later date. In July the election of Daniel O'Connell, a Roman Catholic and therefore ineligible to take the oath, in the County Clare by-election (another consequence of the Huskissonite resignations) brought a new danger. Having discussed the situation at length with Peel, the duke sent a memorandum to the king dated 1 August pointing out that the threat of a repetition of the County Clare election effectively paralysed Irish administration, and requesting permission to embark on a confidential review of the whole Catholic problem with Peel and the lord chancellor. His own ideas for a settlement, laid out in a memorandum for Peel, envisaged payment of Irish Catholic priests, suspension rather than abolition of the penal laws, and a reduction in the size of the Irish county electorate. 
Apart from these internal discussions, the summer passed away with no progress on the main issue. Wellington felt that he could not depart from the principle of government neutrality without the king's permission; the king, physically ill and temperamentally irresolute, evaded any positive commitment. In Ireland the mounting expectation was heightened by an indiscreet letter from the prime minister to his old Peninsular friend Curtis, now the Roman Catholic archbishop of Armagh, which was leaked to the Irish press. On 10 January 1829 the continued indiscretions of another Peninsular veteran, now marquess of Anglesey and lord lieutenant of Ireland, resulted in his peremptory recall. The increasing atmosphere of crisis and alarm convinced Peel of the need to remain at the duke's side rather than persist with the provisional resignation he had tendered in May. For Wellington this helped to unblock the whole situation, and after interviewing three cabinet ministers previously opposed to emancipation George IV reluctantly gave permission on 15 January for the cabinet to take the Irish problem into consideration. 
There were now less than three weeks before parliament met in which to settle the details of a settlement of the Catholic issue. In the course of intensive discussion most of Wellington's securities were dropped, because of the feeling in the cabinet that they were either technically impracticable or politically unacceptable. After a last-minute show of resistance by George IV, the ministerial plan, foreshadowed in the king's speech on 5 February, was placed before parliament in the course of February and March. It included the suppression of the Catholic Association; the admission of Roman Catholics to parliament, to all but a few offices under the crown, and to all civil and municipal offices without restriction; and a limitation of the Irish county franchise qualification. There was no veto on Roman Catholic episcopal appointments, no concordat with the pope, in fact none of the safeguards which Wellington had formerly considered necessary. He had been persuaded of their inutility partly by Henry Phillpotts, later bishop of Exeter, partly by Peel and his other cabinet colleagues. The bill represented, as he admitted in his speech in the Lords on the second reading on 2 April, a great change of opinion on his part; but in politics as in war, the duke never found it difficult to abandon untenable positions. 
The anger of the tory Anglicans at what appeared to be a complete surrender to the emancipation party was deep and bitter. It found expression in gross personal abuse of the principal authors of the bill, the prime minister and the home secretary, and resulted in a duel between Wellington and one of his most insulting critics, Lord Winchilsea, at Battersea Fields on 21 March, when both men carefully fired wide. The duke maintained afterwards that he fought to vindicate not his personal honour but the right of a public figure to change his opinions; but not everyone accepted this high-minded explanation. The resentment of the ultra-protestants could not, however, be dispersed by a couple of pistol shots. Two considerations in particular made Wellington's political conduct seem an unforgiveable betrayal: the general ignorance of his long-standing opinions on the Catholic question and the secrecy with which he had shrouded his actions following the County Clare election. The upshot was that, having given hostages to fortune by shedding the liberal Huskissonites, the duke had now alienated the ultra-tory wing of his supporters. 
It is probable that in the existing political circumstances only the duke could have broken the deadlock over emancipation. In so doing he got rid of an issue which every administration since 1801 had found both insoluble and disruptive. In a sense it was a solution imposed on both the monarch and parliament by an authoritarian prime minister using to the full his executive power. But it was an act which further diminished the parliamentary basis of his government. The damage was mainly felt by Peel in the House of Commons; the duke could never be brought to believe that his ministry lacked numerical support in the lower house, only that it was weak in debating talent, to which he did not attach much importance. In this, as in other respects, he showed his lack of political sense. Years of military command and unbroken success had hardened his self-confidence and autocratic outlook. He despised public opinion because he had seen it so often prove unstable and misguided, and he was not a good manager of men because what had counted in his military life was leadership and discipline, not management and persuasion. Even in the cabinet he tended to interpret disagreement and criticism as indications of personal hostility, and the longer his ministry lasted the more peevish and disillusioned he became. So conscious was he of the alien character of the office he had taken on, that in the early summer of 1830, when George IV was clearly dying, he wrote a memorandum for Peel suggesting that the new reign should be made the occasion for his own retirement and Peel's succession to the premiership. The document was never sent, however, probably because of the objections raised by his over-partial friends the Arbuthnots. 
At the same time the duke's innate conservatism inhibited him from accepting any of the new economic and financial policies which his former Liverpool cabinet colleagues were pressing on him. The proposal of the chancellor of the exchequer, Goulburn, in the spring of 1830 to revive the wartime income tax in modified form, though supported by the House of Commons members of the cabinet, found no sympathy with the prime minister. He thought the tax would press heavily on the landed aristocracy and that to resort to such an expedient would damage the credit of the country in the eyes of foreign powers. The consequent lack of apparent government initiatives in the 1830 session led to a steady erosion of its authority, and the general election in the summer caused by the king's death did nothing to improve matters. News of the July revolution in Paris, which came during the later stage of the polling, while it did not affect the outcome, added to the disorder of British domestic politics. The ultra-tory press seized the occasion to charge Wellington with being an accomplice of the overthrown Bourbon regime, and coupled this with Peel's recently introduced Metropolitan Police to accuse the duke of planning a military dictatorship. This was pure party vindictiveness. In fact there was immediate British recognition of the new French ruler, Louis Philippe, and when a similar revolution took place in Brussels shortly afterwards Wellington acted in concert with the French government to calm the situation. 
Wellington in reality had no great opinion of the evicted Bourbon monarchy he had helped to put on the throne. The new French government was anxious to secure British friendship, and the arrival in London of the aged but familiar figure of Talleyrand as French ambassador was welcomed by the prime minister. While he regretted the break-up of the kingdom of the Netherlands, he soon realized that it could not be stopped. He concentrated instead on securing a member of the house of Orange as a ruler of the new state and preventing French military intervention. He refused Dutch appeals for assistance and sought a compromise settlement with the French government. They were more than ready to meet him halfway. While prepared for intervention to protect the rebellious Belgians against their former Dutch masters, French diplomacy had as its main object the preservation of peace. Wellington was able therefore to get general agreement for the issue to be submitted to the European powers responsible for the 1815 treaties, and for London rather than Paris to be the place for a conference. Though the detailed settlement of the Belgian question was ultimately left for his successors to negotiate, it was the duke who constructed the foundation for their work. His achievement owed something to the inability of Russia and the reluctance of Austria and Prussia to intervene, and even more to the needs of the fragile new regime in France. Nevertheless, in this final belated success for his diplomacy the duke showed realistic common sense in his handling of what was the first great breach that had so far been made in the 1815 territorial settlement. 
Little domestic credit, however, accrued to Wellington on that account. By November 1830 it was obvious that the ministry was neither popular nor influential, and that there was a general feeling in the country in favour of more government economies, tax reduction, and parliamentary reform. Under pressure from his colleagues Wellington in September reluctantly agreed to explore the possibility of bringing back some of Canning's old followers. But after Huskisson's death in September the rest of his group were unwilling to return without a pledge of parliamentary reform and the inclusion in the cabinet of some of the whigs. This Wellington was not prepared to accept. It was in these uncertain circumstances that the duke made his celebrated declaration, in the debate on the king's speech at the beginning of November, that the constitution needed no improvement and that he would resist any measure of parliamentary reform as long as he was in office. Couched in his usual peremptory and uncompromising style, his statement was probably intended not so much to win back the ultra-tories (the usual interpretation placed on it at the time) as to make his own attitude plain and so put a stop to all the talk of parliamentary reform which had been going on, both outside and inside the administration, for several weeks. The speech was followed a few days later by the much derided decision to cancel the attendance of the king and his ministers at the lord mayor's banquet on 9 November for fear of public demonstrations. The final event in a suddenly worsening crisis was the defeat of the government in the House of Commons on 15 November on a hostile motion to submit its civil list to the scrutiny of a parliamentary committee. This unprecedented and offensive demand demonstrated more clearly than anything else that the ministry had lost control of the legislature. With Brougham's long-advertised parliamentary reform motion due to be debated the following day, the cabinet decided to avoid further humiliation. Next day Wellington laid his resignation before the king and by 22 November had ceased to hold office. 
The duke later attributed the fall of his ministry to two adventitious factors: the duke of Cumberland's activity in stirring up ultra-tory opposition to him, and the effect of the July revolution in France in creating a temporary enthusiasm for parliamentary reform among the British public. What he would not admit was that either Catholic emancipation or his anti-reform speech had been a direct cause. It is clear, however, that neither before nor after the general election did his administration enjoy firm support in the Commons and that to survive the 1830-31 session would require imaginative leadership and parliamentary skill. Wellington was incapable of either, and the growing realization of his defects as prime minister had by 1830 demoralized his cabinet. Most of his colleagues were resigned to their fate; some, including Peel, welcomed it. The duke himself was probably not sorry to go. For three years he had been playing a role for which he was not suited either by temperament or training, and the strain was beginning to tell. It was a final irony that his own political limitations brought about the end of the parliamentary system of which he had made himself the champion. 
During the protracted reform crisis of 1831-2 Wellington's attitude was shaped by two considerations. He thought that the whig 'Reform Bill' would be the ruin of the constitution and that the excitement in its favour was an artificial product not supported by the solid majority of his countrymen. His tactics were based on the belief that the government would not pin its existence to the bill and that the opposition should aim at gaining time for the true feeling in the country to assert itself. He therefore tried to restore good relations with the ultra-tories and discourage those Conservative peers (the so-called Waverers) anxious to negotiate a compromise. As always he felt that his primary duty was to the throne, and as early as November 1831, when advising the king to suppress the Birmingham Political Union, he let William IV know that if he wished to escape from his whig ministers he could count on the duke's assistance. Impervious to the hostility of the London mob, which twice smashed the windows of Apsley House, he planned his political battle with care. The decision to oppose the second reading of the bill was taken at a meeting of peers at Apsley House on 21 September 1831. When the bill was duly rejected by a decisive majority of 199 votes to 158, he hoped for a respite of six months in which both the nation and the ministers would come to their senses. During the autumn, however, the violence in the country, the resolution of the ministry, and the activity of the Waverers undermined the solidarity of the opposition peers. When a revised bill came to the Lords in April 1832 it passed by 184 votes to 175, though the duke both spoke and voted against it. 
Wellington's tactics now became increasingly confused. He realized that reform of some sort was inevitable. Nevertheless, he still wanted to retain the support of the ultra-tory peers so that he could continue to influence events. The success, however, of an opposition amendment on 7 May to postpone the disfranchising clauses of the bill merely served to reveal the determination of the cabinet to force it through, if necessary by large peerage creations, or else resign. The startled duke and his colleagues felt obliged to make a disclosure of how far they themselves were ready to reform. But this in turn simply uncovered the ambivalent nature of the opposition without shaking the cabinet's resolve to bring the whole reform issue to a head. 
The resignation of the ministry on 9 May placed Wellington in an extraordinary position. To take office with the king's stipulation that he must be prepared to carry an extensive measure of reform involved him in a display of public inconsistency, a sacrifice of cherished convictions, and a loss of personal dignity which few public men would have contemplated. Only the refusal of Peel and most of his former colleagues in the Commons saved him from that degrading spectacle. After five days of anger, uproar, and agitation in the country and desperate efforts behind the scene to discover presentable politicians ready to join him, Wellington on 15 May resigned his commission and privately assured the king that he would drop any further opposition to the bill. He was now convinced that there was no credible alternative to Lord Grey's ministry and that further struggle was useless. Though he continued for several years to believe that the 'Reform Act' of 1832 was a revolution by due force of law, this conviction in itself made him all the more reluctant to engage in systematic hostility to the whig ministries. Stable, preferably also strong, government was to the duke a more important consideration than party advantage or temporary triumphs. 
Nevertheless, Wellington was still an influential figure in politics, and when early in 1834 he was elected chancellor of Oxford University his installation in June was marked by noisy tory celebrations. The duke, who conspicuously lacked academic credentials, at one point suggested to his supporters that they should unite behind Peel, whose claims were stronger and who had substantial backing in the university. His failure to communicate this to his sensitive colleague in the Commons increased the coolness which had grown up between them since their disagreement over taking office in 1832. However, they sensibly acted in concert when declining an overture for a coalition with the whigs made at the king's direction in July 1834 following Lord Grey's resignation. 
William IV's dismissal of the whigs in November 1834 brought Wellington back for the last time to the centre of the political stage. With Peel absent in Italy, the duke was sworn in as first lord of the Treasury and secretary of state on 17 November to act as temporary head of a new government until his colleague's arrival three weeks later. He then became foreign secretary. But while insisting from the start that Peel must be the prime minister, the duke unwittingly presented him with an embarrassing 'fait accompli'. Left to himself Peel might have refused a commission which promised little success; the preparations for a general election which he found in full swing on his return made it virtually impossible for him to meet parliament and explain his policies before appealing to the electorate. At the same time the extraordinary omnicompetent role of the duke in the first few weeks of the new administration alienated many moderate politicians, in particular the recently seceded members of Grey's cabinet -- Stanley, Graham, Ripon, and Richmond -- whom Peel wished to recruit. 
Nevertheless, Peel's 'hundred days' raised the morale of the Conservative Party and perceptibly improved the relations of the two leaders. In the following years the duke's influence in the upper house did much to secure a degree of unity among opposition peers and to prevent any serious divergence from the line taken by Peel in the Commons. It was not always possible for Wellington to control ultra-tory peers like Cumberland and Londonderry, and the issue of municipal reform in 1835 in particular placed a severe strain on party unity. Wellington's language in the House of Lords often suggested a more extreme opposition to the government than was borne out by his subsequent actions, and age, deafness, and recurrent ill health increased his dislike of formal party gatherings. With the accession of the young Victoria in 1837, moreover, the duke became markedly more reluctant to have a Conservative ministry thrust upon her. When Melbourne resigned over the Jamaican crisis of 1839, the queen on his advice sent for Wellington and it was he who counselled her to summon Peel. In the difficulties with Victoria over the ladies of the bedchamber he supported Peel, but the fiasco strengthened his scepticism about taking office. He himself showed remarkable restraint during the years 1839-41 in subordinating his private views to the decisions taken by the House of Commons on such issues as the Hansard case, Irish corporations, and the Canadian question. Despite occasional trepidation among his party colleagues over his inconsistent or perhaps devious tactics, he remained faithful to his principle of avoiding clashes either between the two branches of the legislature or between the two Conservative oppositions. In contrast to his military career, Wellington in politics rendered his best services as a second in command. 
When Peel formed his cabinet in September 1841 the duke became a minister without portfolio. At seventy-two he was the oldest man in the cabinet and the decision not to burden him with departmental duties was clearly right. In the autumn of 1842, when Lord Hill resigned as commander of the forces because of ill health, Wellington was the only conceivable successor. Though he offered to resign from the cabinet and the leadership of the House of Lords, his object was clearly to remove any constitutional objection to his appointment; he knew his cabinet colleagues would not wish to see him go. He continued, therefore, to serve as expert adviser to the prime minister on various aspects of national policy, especially India, disorder in Ireland, and home defence. On the latter the advantage given to France by the development of steam power loomed large in his mind, and in 1845 he made a personal tour of the fortifications in the Strait of Dover. His presence in the government, however, was never more valuable to the prime minister than in the corn law crisis of 1845-6. Though disagreeing with Peel over the need to repeal the corn laws, he urged his cabinet colleagues in a memorandum of 30 November 1845 to support the prime minister since 'a good Government for the country is more important than Corn Laws or any other consideration' ('Memoirs of Sir Robert Peel', ed. Lord Mahon and Edward Cardwell, 1858, 2.200). After the failure of Lord John Russell to form a ministry in December, the issue for the duke became then a simple matter of loyalty to the queen and her prime minister. At the crucial second reading of the 'Corn Bill' on 25 May 1846 he told the peers bluntly that they could not afford to isolate themselves from the crown and the majority in the House of Commons, and he later advised Peel, in the event of defeat on the 'Irish Coercion Bill', to dissolve parliament and go to the country. 
The end of Peel's ministry, however, in June 1846, marked the effective end of the duke's political career. Though he believed it important that a strong Conservative Party should continue to exist, he felt it inconsistent with his public position to act as leader of opposition in the Lords. As a 'retained servant of the Sovereign', to use his own phrase ('Croker Papers', 3.51), and commander-in-chief of the army, his allegiance was to something higher than party. As late as 1851, when informed confidentially by Prince Albert of the cabinet crisis in late February, he expressed the view that it was better to have the Liberals in office rather than joining the opposition radicals in attacks on the country's institutions. The last time his services were called upon in any extraordinary fashion, however, was in 1848 on the occasion of the great Chartist demonstration in London. Wellington organized the military preparations with all his old vigour; but in the event the Metropolitan Police maintained control of the streets with no need for assistance. 
Wellington's ten-year period as head of the army from 1842 to 1852 not surprisingly showed him at his most conservative. He saw little reason to change either the organization or the equipment of the army with which he had beaten Napoleon. Never a lover of technical innovation, he regarded the old Brown Bess musket as the most serviceable infantry weapon so far produced. Even when he sanctioned a partial issue of the new Minie rifle, he insisted on modifications so that the existing stock of smooth-bore ammunition could be used. He was only reluctantly brought to acquiesce in Lord Grey's scheme in 1847 to reduce the minimum period for service in regiments of the line to ten years, and to the last defended the retention of flogging as a necessary disciplinary sanction. In the 1830s and 1840s he opposed whig attempts to simplify the complicated and inefficient system of army administration by amalgamating the Ordnance department with the office of commander-in-chief, and was equally adamant against the creation of a chief of staff. 
Wellington's general attitude towards the army was paradoxically that of a civilian aristocrat rather than of a professional soldier. He shared the traditional view that a standing army was an anomaly in the British constitution, justified only by the needs of imperial defence and internal order, and was reluctant to bring it unnecessarily under public scrutiny. Given its unpopularity and the absence of conscription, his argument was that the quality of the recruits on entry was bound to be poor, and that long-service engagements were the only way to ensure efficiency. What troubled him was not the old-fashioned structure but the inadequate size of the standing army. The parsimony of successive governments since 1815 had brought the armed forces of the crown to a point in the 1840s when he believed with sombre intensity that the country was incapable of defending itself. Since he knew that there was little hope of reversing this tendency, he paid increasing attention in his later years to plans for fortifying harbours and dockyards, and for the revival of the old militia system. He lived to see the passage of the Derby ministry's 'Militia Bill' of 1852, which he thought superior to that for a purely local militia proposed by the whigs in 1851. The fact remained, however, that in the more restricted area of internal army reform, where he might have brought about useful changes, he was disinclined to act; in the wider field of national defence his anxieties (revealed to the public through his famous leaked letter of 1847 to the inspector-general of fortifications, Sir John Burgoyne) made little impression. The outcome was the obsolescent Waterloo army which went to the Crimea two years after his death. 
Ironically, Wellington's robust common sense was seen at its best in his dealings as chancellor with the arcane world of Oxford University. In the controversies which followed the appointment of the theologically suspect Dr Hampden as regius professor in 1836, the duke invariably recommended the avoidance of personal feuds and the preservation of at least an outward appearance of academic harmony. He was less kindly disposed towards the Tractarians, since he thought their movement smacked of schism. In religion as in politics the duke believed in authority and discipline. He was particularly incensed when their party challenged his nomination of an evangelical vice-chancellor in 1844. His disconcerting proposal to make a personal appearance at the induction ceremony was tactfully evaded, however, and a satisfyingly orthodox vote in convocation in support of his candidate made further action unnecessary. A larger issue loomed up in the movement for university reform heralded by Lord Radnor's parliamentary activities in the 1830s. When the prospect of a public inquiry into the internal regulations of the colleges began increasingly to take shape, Wellington took the sensible view that it would be best for the university to anticipate compulsory reform from without by voluntary change from within. He could only, however, advise and warn; he could not command the academic society over which he incongruously presided. It was not his fault that reform, foreshadowed in the report of a royal commission in 1852, was in the end imposed on Oxford by parliament. 
The three other important offices Wellington filled in the latter part of his life lay in more familiar territory. As constable of the Tower of London and lord lieutenant of the Tower Hamlets from 1826 he had to deal not only with patronage and military security but with the corrupt and lawless population of the Tower liberties and their endemic problems of civil order and public health. The post of constable of Dover Castle and lord warden of the Cinque Ports, to which he was appointed in 1829, involved an even wider range of responsibilities: harbour works, salvage, channel pilotage, appointments of local officials, and recommendations to the magistracy. The perquisites, however, included a residence at Walmer Castle, a domesticated Tudor fortress in Kent which became his favourite country residence. Though he treated neither of these quasi-honorary posts as sinecures, the most onerous of his subsidiary appointments was the lord lieutenancy of Hampshire, which he held for thirty-two years. The office, traditionally held by one of the titled landowners of the county, was still one of the most influential positions in local government. For Wellington it was an instrument for maintaining the traditional hierarchy of county society against the forces of electoral democracy. His recommendations for the magistracy, one of his most important duties, showed a clear preference for men who were politically Conservative, and a distaste, amounting to a virtual veto, for manufacturers, attorneys, brewers, and (for different reasons) clergy. Nevertheless, though not a reformer, the duke demonstrated a readiness to improve, a regard to economy, and a liking for efficiency which almost ranks him as a Peelite. He did much to revive the county yeomanry after the agricultural riots of 1830 and at the very end of his life he was encouraging the organization of the county militia under the terms of the 1852 act. Unlike many tory gentry he supported the 'Poor Law Amendment Act' of 1834 from a conviction of the weakness of the old system, and though he was opposed to a compulsory national police force he welcomed the permissive act of 1839, which in effect placed control of any new local police force in the hands of the magistracy. Hampshire, in fact, was the second county to adopt the act. 
These latter years, with a widening circle of friends (few of them military men other than his old Spanish crony Alava), allowed Wellington to display the other aspects of his complex nature. The epithet Iron Duke, which was current even in his lifetime, was a curiously misleading description and its origin is obscure. 'Punch' used the term Wrought-Iron Duke as early as 1842. In October of that year his irreverent great-nephew Richard called him the Iron Duke when describing the funeral of the Marquess Wellesley, as though it were an already accepted nickname. In the duke's obituary in the 'Annual Register' for 1853 the term appears three times, though always in an ironical sense, to point the difference between the real man and his public image. 
It is unlikely that many of Wellington's contemporaries regarded him as the impassive, unfeeling man that the sobriquet suggests. It is true that he had schooled himself during his army career to control, if not entirely to suppress, his emotions, and long habit easily becomes second nature. A youthful introvert who had found fulfilment as a man of action, he always had two sides to his temperament. In later life, with ambition sated, his basic nature reasserted itself. It was essentially a warm and lively one. His fondness for playing with small children, his continued interest in music, his indiscriminate generosity, his wry humour, his unassuming friendliness towards ordinary people all testified to that. So too did his occasional gusts of anger, his resentment at presumed slights, and his partiality for sarcasm and irony. There was fire beneath the surface, not to speak of other emotions. His continuing interest in young women, when coupled with his compulsive urge to answer letters, led to some curious relationships. The intermittent correspondence with the religious-minded Miss Jenkins, nearly forty-five years his junior, was pursued in nearly 400 letters on his side between 1834 and 1851. Another sentimental and mainly epistolary friendship was with the equally youthful Angela Burdett-Coutts, wealthy heir of the banker Thomas Coutts, to whom he wrote over 800 letters and who (like Miss Jenkins) did her best to become his duchess: an outcome which the duke steadfastly avoided. 
Little of this was known in Wellington's lifetime. To the outside world the image he presented was that of a less complicated, more soldierly figure. He was seen as the archetypal servant of the state, whose watchwords were duty and service. He contributed to the making of this legend, which in any case embodied a substantial truth, by increasingly referring to himself in the third person, as though his extraordinary career had created a kind of separate personality, a national figure of whom he was the living guardian. As he wrote to Croker in 1834, 'I am Duke of Wellington and, 'bon gre mal gre', must do as the Duke of Wellington doth' ('Croker Papers', 2.224). The conventions of written correspondence served to strengthen this concept, since the duke was the recipient of a large, varied, and incessant flow of letters from the general public. Much of it was unsolicited, much of it personal, but rarely going unanswered. Though he devised standard lithographed forms to lighten the load on his secretaries, he often could not refrain from adding a few pungent comments of his own. He complained bitterly of the burden of letter writing, but he would not have wished it to stop. It had become almost a psychological necessity for him to feel that he was universally consulted on matters of importance, personal and public, by the highest and lowest. His life had been full of action and responsibility, and it would have been hard for him not to have had at least the semblance of these things in his old age. 
Unlike his unhappy wife, Wellington was a sociable man who loved to fill his house with congenial company. He was, moreover, a lively and inexhaustible conversationalist with a fund of stories from his unique experiences which became more polished and witty with countless repetitions. Yet he jealously guarded his privacy and would have been outraged had he known how many of his guests were secretly recording his remarks for posterity. Even the inevitable decline in his physical powers he tried to conceal as long as possible. To the end he protested that, deafness apart, he was as fit as he had ever been. In his later years he drove a curricle at alarming speeds both in London and along the narrow lanes of Kent, and he hunted regularly in Hampshire despite being (on the authority of R. S. Surtees, the austere hunting correspondent of the 'New Sporting Magazine' in the 1830s) a clumsy rider who suffered countless falls. He was also a keen though indifferent and (for bystanders) an occasionally dangerous shot. Being susceptible to colds, he had a variety of strange shooting coats and galoshes to fend off the English climate, of which after so many years in warmer climes he had the lowest opinion. Gadgets of all kinds, in fact, had a fascination for him, from patent teapots and finger-stalls to a sword-umbrella and the formidable central-heating system he installed at Stratfield Saye. 
Though neat and almost dandyish in his dress on formal occasions, Wellington remained spartan in his personal habits, frugal in his diet, and notoriously indifferent to the quality of the food and wine he consumed. Physically he was a trim but never a handsome man. His great nose and long, protruding jaw gave his profile something of the appearance of Punch, a resemblance joyfully seized on by the cartoonists though tactfully toned down in his many portraits, with the notable exception of the sketch by R. B. Haydon in 1839. In height Wellington was about 5 feet 9 inches, with brown hair that later turned silvery white, penetrating eyes usually described as blue though by some as grey, and a physique that even at the age of eighty-two impressed Thomas Carlyle as all muscle and bone. His voice was light, and when he spoke in public apt to be indistinct. This was partly due to loss of teeth in early life which was later remedied by a set of false teeth made of walrus ivory. 
Wellington was most famously painted by Goya, whose chalk drawing of 1812 was said by Goya's grandson in 1862, when it was bought by the British Museum, to have been done the day after the battle of Salamanca, though this seems unlikely. All three of the oil portraits subsequently painted by Goya may derive from this drawing. Two very probably do; the portrait in the National Gallery was painted in August 1812 at the time when the duke entered Madrid and was probably, at least in part, done from life. 
Wellington's general health began to deteriorate perceptibly after 1818, not surprisingly in view of the extraordinary demands of his soldierly career, his neglect of proper food, and the human vanity which led him to conceal any symptoms of physical weakness. Rheumatism in his neck and shoulders made his figure droop, and an attack of giddiness was reported as early as 1838. In November 1839, at Walmer, he suffered a severe stroke from which he only slowly recovered. More attacks came in the next few years, including one while riding in London in February 1840 and another a year later in the House of Lords, which were not easy to hide from public knowledge. After that there seems to have been an intermission, though the effects of the earlier seizures were evident in his changed appearance and failing energies. He resumed his sporting activities but in a more cautious fashion, and except for his deafness he seemed in better health as time went on. Active to the last, he died at Walmer Castle in the afternoon of 14 September 1852 following a stroke early that morning. His body lay in state at Walmer and then at Chelsea Hospital. His burial at St Paul's Cathedral on 18 November was the occasion for probably the most ornate and spectacular funeral ever seen in England, the procession from Horse Guards via Constitution Hill to St Paul's being witnessed, it was estimated, by a million and a half people ('LondG', 3 Dec 1852; 'Annual Register', 1852, 482-92). Alfred Stevens's monument to the duke was later erected in an arch in the north side of the cathedral's nave. 
Wellington's funeral marked, for all its florid pomposity, the general sense among his countrymen that they had lost a great man: 'the only great man of the present time', wrote Greville ('The Greville Memoirs, 1814-1860', ed. G. L. Strachey and R. Fulford, 8 vols., 1938, 18 Sept 1852), who had no reason to be friendly. 'The last great Englishman is low' lamented Tennyson in his fine funerary 'Ode on the Death of the Duke of Wellington' (1852). In the years that followed Wellington's name was commemorated in almost every imaginable way, from articles of clothing, streets (fifty-seven in London), barracks, towers, waterfalls, and warships to a public school near Sandhurst, the capital city of New Zealand, and the great Californian redwood tree 'Sequoia gigantica'. Already in his lifetime anecdotes had begun to cluster around him -- some true, some (like 'publish and be damned') highly doubtful, others (like 'try sparrow-hawks, ma'am') demonstrably fictitious. That he remains one of the best-known characters in English history is not solely due to his military achievements, though these were greater than those of his only two rivals, Cromwell and Marlborough, nor to his unwavering sense of public duty, though it was the general recognition of this that enabled him to ride out his crisis of personal unpopularity in 1829-32 with undiminished reputation. Besides these outward virtues were the more human and endearing aspects: his lack of conceit, his ability to reflect with humorous detachment on his astonishing life, and a fundamental simplicity which charmed his friends and disarmed his enemies. 
Earlier assessments of Wellington's professional career tended to be coloured by personal or patriotic prejudices, with British as with continental historians. Subsequent studies have enabled his military achievements to be seen in a more objective light than was possible in the first fifty years after his death. They have not, however, resulted in any substantial reversal of judgement, only a more discriminating analysis of his qualities. Moreover, they have revealed something which the earlier historians, concentrating on battles and campaigns, tended to overlook: the crucial importance of his organization and administration of the Peninsular army. Family influence and his elder brother's money gave Wellington invaluable advantages at the outset of his career, but what he made of those advantages was the work of no ordinary man. He was fortunate in the opportunities which came his way; yet he was active, in his early years aggressively so, in seeking them out. He had remarkable luck in escaping death by shipwreck or on the battlefield, but in the hazardous profession of war few rise to the top without a measure of luck. It has been said of him that he lacked the brilliance of Marlborough or Napoleon; but if as a general he was not a supreme artist, he was a supreme professional. His was the sober form of genius defined by Carlyle as the 'transcendent capacity of taking trouble'. If chance seemed to favour him, it was because he left so little to chance. 
Wellington was successful in so many things that he came to believe that he could undertake anything. What is surprising is how well his integrity, common sense, and attention to detail carried him through even in positions for which he was patently unsuited. The world of politics which he entered in 1818 was, as it is for most soldiers, alien and uncomfortable. Yet no account of early nineteenth-century political history is complete that does not take into account his positive contribution. His premiership, disastrous in most respects, was vindicated by the single achievement of Catholic emancipation. His influence in the House of Lords helped to consolidate the Conservative Party in the 1830s and sustain Peel's ministry in the 1840s. Like all men he had his weaknesses. He could be unduly secretive in his actions, unduly prejudiced in his opinions. There was more than a touch of egotism in his nature and he was often insensitive to the feelings of others. But these defects were redeemed by his innate kindness and sense of justice. His idiosyncrasies were for the most part harmless while his virtues were solid as rock. A military commander of rare and comprehensive ability, a dedicated servant of the state, Wellington was also a remarkable human being whose personality left an imprint on his countrymen equalled only by that of Winston Churchill a century after him. 


@@@@@


doc= 29002


Wesley, Garrett, first earl of Mornington (1735-1781), composer, was born on 19 July 1735, probably at Dangan Castle, co. Meath, the son of Richard Wesley (or Wellesley, formerly Colley), first baron of Mornington (1690-1758), and Elizabeth Sale (died 1738). Educated at Trinity College, Dublin, he graduated BA in 1754 and MA in 1757. He sat in the Irish House of Commons for the family borough of Trim, co. Meath, beginning in 1757. On his father's death in 1758 he took his seat in the Irish House of Lords as the second baron. His surname is sometimes given as Wellesley, but though he used this name for the viscountcy he received in 1760, Wesley was his usual surname in his lifetime. 
Wesley showed signs of musical talent at an early age. His mother's death when he was three left him in the doting hands of his father and sisters, who fostered his musical interests. By age nine he played the violin with some skill and began training on his father's harpsichord and organ, which had long been a part of the family home, Dangan Castle. According to his godmother, Mrs Delany, he grew up nicely: 'My godson, Master Wesley, is a most extraordinary boy; he was thirteen last month, he is a very good scholar, and whatever study he undertakes he masters it most surprisingly' ('Autobiography... Mrs Delany', 2.501). In his years at Trinity College and afterwards, Wesley immersed himself in Dublin society and music. He composed glees and church music with great success, and in 1758 he assembled a music academy for philanthropic purposes. The academy attracted well-heeled amateurs who met regularly under Garrett's direction to indulge their love of music and to hold concerts, the proceeds of which went to loans for poor tradesmen. In 1764 Trinity College conferred upon him the degree of doctor of music. 
On 6 February 1759 Mornington married Anne Hill (1742-1831), the eldest daughter of a Dublin banker, Arthur Hill, later Lord Dungannon. Anne was a lively, intelligent young woman but, according to Mrs Delany, was wanting in judgement and manners: 'What I think L. M. [Lady Mornington] may be wanting in, is what few people have attained at her age, who have not had some real superiority of understanding and a little experience of the manners of the world' ('Autobiography... Mrs Delany', 3.534-7). The following year on 2 October 1760 Wellesley was rewarded for his musical and philanthropic achievements with an elevation in the Irish peerage as first Viscount Wellesley of Dangan and first earl of Mornington. 
Lord and Lady Mornington had nine children, seven of whom survived childhood and six of whom lived into adulthood. Richard Wellesley, the future Marquess Wellesley (1760-1842), came first, followed by the first Arthur (1762-1768?) and William (1763-1845), the future William Wellesley-Pole, third earl of Mornington. The short-lived Francis came in 1765 and Anne in 1768. Anne (1768-1844) married first the Hon. Henry Fitzroy, and second Charles Culling Smith. These were followed by the second Arthur Wellesley, the future duke of Wellington (1769-1852), Gerald Valerian (1770-1848), prebendary of Durham, Henry Wellesley, first Baron Cowley (1773-1847), and Elizabeth (1773-1794). The Morningtons decided to educate their children in England, and the boys attended Eton College. Consequently, the family divided their time between Ireland and London. The practical consequences were significant as increased expenses combined with declining income from the family's estates to dissipate the family fortune. When Lord Mornington died suddenly, in Kensington, London, on 22 May 1781 he left his family in straitened circumstances. He was buried in Grosvenor Chapel, South Audley Street, London, after an elaborate funeral planned by his heir, Richard. Lady Mornington lived into her ninetieth year; constant financial difficulties in those years turned her into a severe and demanding woman largely ignored by her children. She died on 10 September 1831 and was buried with her husband in Grosvenor Chapel. 


@@@@@


doc= 29003


Wellesley, Gerald Valerian (1809-1882), dean of Windsor, was the third son of Henry Wellesley, first Baron Cowley (1773-1847), and his first wife, Lady Charlotte Cadogan ('c'.1781-1853), whom he divorced in 1810. He was born in London, and educated at Eton College and Trinity College, Cambridge, from whence he graduated MA in 1830. He was ordained in 1831, was rector of the family living of Stratfield Saye from 1836 to 1854, and dean of Windsor from 1854 until his death. On 16 September 1856, at St Mary's, Bryanston Square, London, he married the Hon. Magdalen 'Lily' Montagu (1831-1919), daughter of Henry Montagu, sixth Baron Rokeby, and his wife, Magdalen Huxley. They had one son, who died at the age of eighteen in 1883. 
Wellesley was appointed resident chaplain to the queen in 1849, which, along with his appointment to the deanery of Windsor, brought him into close and regular contact with the royal family. His tact and gentlemanly demeanour made him one of Victoria's most valued advisers. In religious matters, he suited the queen, as he preached short sermons, and did 'everything on all sad and happy occasions to make me comfortable' (Fulford, 125). He was an essential conduit between Gladstone and the queen (not only on ecclesiastical matters), and the former frequently sought his advice on patronage questions. On his death, Gladstone noted in his diary: 'I reckoned his life the most valuable in the Church of England'. He died at Hazelwood, near Watford, on 17 September 1882, and was buried in St George's Chapel, Windsor. His wife was appointed extra woman of the bedchamber in the November following his death. The queen's requirements for his replacement summed up his character: 'a tolerant, liberal minded broad church clergyman who at the same time is pleasant socially & is popular with all Members and classes of her Household, -- who understands her feelings not only in ecclesiastical but also in social matters -- a good kind man without pride. (Ponsonby, 62-3)' 



@@@@@


doc= 29004


Wellesley, Henry, first Baron Cowley (1773-1847), diplomatist, born at Dangan Castle, co. Meath, on 20 January 1773, was the youngest son of Garrett Wesley, first earl of Mornington (1735-1781), and Anne (1742-1831), daughter of Arthur Hill, first Viscount Dungannon. He was brother of Richard Wellesley, Marquess Wellesley, of Arthur Wellesley, duke of Wellington, and of William Wellesley-Pole, Baron Maryborough (afterwards third earl of Mornington). After being educated at Eton College (1783-9) and then studying languages and military science at the court of Brunswick in Germany (1789-90), he served in the army, where he exchanged from the 40th foot into the 1st foot guards in April 1791. He adopted the surname Wellesley some time after his eldest brother did so in 1789. 
Wellesley's diplomatic career began with his appointment in 1791 as attache to the British embassy at The Hague. The following year he went to Stockholm as secretary of legation. The year 1793 found him with his regiment in Flanders; it would prove to be his first and last encounter with military life. In February 1794 he left for Lisbon to accompany his sister Anne, recently widowed, to Britain. On the return trip their ship was seized by the French and passengers and crew were taken as prisoners of war, just as the terror entered its most violent stage. In January 1795, after Anne's release, Wellesley contrived his escape. He reached Britain's shores only after a harrowing crossing in which three men died. The experience confirmed the Wellesley family's antipathy for revolutionary France. 
Wellesley subsequently was given a post in the Foreign Office as a precis writer and in July 1797 he accompanied Lord Malmesbury to Lille as his secretary. In November of the same year he sailed for India as private secretary to his brother, then Lord Mornington, afterwards Marquess Wellesley, the newly appointed governor-general. While in India, Henry Wellesley rendered important special services. Together with his brother Sir Arthur Wellesley (afterwards duke of Wellington), he acted as one of the commissioners for the settlement of Mysore after the defeat of Tipu Sultan. He was then dispatched to Britain to provide a firsthand account of the war and the treaties that concluded it. Lord Wellesley described him as 'next to himself most completely informed on these topics'. Henry Wellesley left India on 15 August 1799, and returned in February 1801. Soon after he was sent to Lucknow to negotiate a treaty requiring the vizier of Oudh to cede territory sufficient to defray the cost of the increased subsidized force dispatched to Oudh by the governor-general, and to act in conformity with the East India Company's instructions. On the treaty's conclusion Wellesley was appointed governor of the ceded territory. The court of directors of the company, though acknowledging his services, objected to the appointment because Wellesley was not a member of the service. They revoked the appointment but were subsequently overruled by the Board of Control, who pointed out that the Oudh mission was an extraordinary service, and that Wellesley had declined all emoluments except his salary as private secretary to the governor-general. He resigned the governorship in March 1802, and returned to Europe. The following November the directors wrote to the governor-general a full acknowledgement of his brother's services in Oudh. Wellesley's years in India were not without controversy. On Lord Wellesley's return to Britain an attack on his governor-generalship was launched in parliament and Henry Wellesley's work was scrutinized along with the marquess's; though the inquiry lingered longer than expected, the brothers emerged with their reputations intact. 
On 20 September 1803 Wellesley married Charlotte Sloane ('c'. 1781-1853), daughter of Charles Sloane, first Earl Cadogan. Together they had four children, three sons and a daughter. The eldest son, Henry Richard Charles Wellesley, second Baron and first Earl Cowley, is separately noticed, as is the third son, Gerald Valerian Wellesley. The second son, William Henry George, served as a captain in the Royal Navy. The daughter, Charlotte Arbuthnot, married Robert Grosvenor, first Lord Ebury. Wellesley was appointed a lord of the Treasury in 1804, a post he shortly afterwards resigned to take up an appointment as envoy to Spain. The outbreak of war with Spain prevented his going out and left him without employment. Subsequently, he was returned to parliament for Eye on 20 April 1808 and again appointed to the Treasury. In 1809 his marriage with Charlotte Sloane broke up in scandalous fashion, when Charlotte ran off with Henry Paget, the future first marquess of Anglesey. Wellesley was divorced by act of parliament on 22 February 1810, after an action for criminal conversation, in which he received $20,000 from Paget, who married Charlotte that same year. The event had two important consequences: Wellesley again resigned from the Treasury, and his brother Arthur refused to employ Paget in the Peninsular War, where cavalry officers of his calibre were much in demand. 
In December 1809 Wellesley was again appointed envoy to Spain, this time by his brother the marquess, who had taken up the seals of office as foreign secretary. Accordingly, Wellesley was sworn of the privy council on 20 December 1809 and received his credentials as envoy-extraordinary on 3 January 1810. His appointment to the Spanish embassy put in place the remarkable arrangement whereby one family controlled the central places in Great Britain's prosecution of the war in Iberia: Arthur as commander-in-chief of the expeditionary forces, Richard as foreign secretary, and Henry as envoy and then (from 1 October 1811) ambassador to Spain. Together they worked to sustain the war effort throughout its most difficult stage. In 1812 Wellesley was knighted, and in January 1815 created GCB. In 1814 he prevailed upon the king of Spain to sign a treaty relinquishing for ever the scheme of a Bourbon alliance. After the peace he concluded a treaty with Spain containing an article by which Anglo-Spanish commercial relations were restored to those of 1796. In August 1815 he left Spain for Britain on leave. It was then that he married on 27 February 1816 his second wife, Georgiana Charlotte Augusta Cecil (1786-1860), eldest daughter of James Cecil, first marquess of Salisbury. Their only child, Georgiana Charlotte Mary, married William Henry Lytton Earle Bulwer, Baron Dalling and Bulwer. On his return to Spain, Wellesley negotiated in 1817 a treaty abolishing the slave trade. 
Wellesley left Spain in April 1821 and on 3 February 1823 was named ambassador at Vienna. He remained in Austria for eight years. In August 1827 he told Wellington that he thought he had more than once prevented a rupture between Britain and Austria. But he complained that Canning never recognized his services. Although the two had known one another for years, and Canning had even asked Wellesley to be his second in the infamous duel with Lord Castlereagh, Wellesley was too conciliatory to please his aggressive minister. 
In 1827 Wellington approached Canning's successor, Lord Goderich, concerning a peerage for his brother and on 21 January 1828 Wellesley was created a peer, with the title of Baron Cowley of Wellesley. On Palmerston's appointment to the Foreign Office at the end of 1830, Cowley offered to resign, and in July 1831 he left Vienna. On 13 March 1835 he was named ambassador at Paris by Peel's tory government, but he retired in May when the whigs returned to office. 
Cowley was reappointed by Peel in October 1841. The appointment was unexpected in that the new ambassador was sixty-eight years old and there were those who questioned both his stamina and his hearing. None the less, Cowley presided successfully over the embassy in Paris until his resignation in August 1846 after the tories went out of office. 
A handsome man of average height and build, Cowley possessed a gentle disposition which made him the most endearing of the Wellesley brothers. Metternich, the Austrian chancellor, characterized Cowley as a straightforward man with an eye for affairs. He lacked the brilliance of his brothers the marquess and the duke, but he was steady and sensible. He died in Paris on 27 April 1847. He was buried in Grosvenor Chapel, South Audley Street, London. Lady Cowley died at Hatfield House on 18 January 1860. 


@@@@@


doc= 29005


Wellesley, Henry (1794-1866), college head and art connoisseur, was born on 20 January 1794 at Park Lane in the parish of St George Hanover Square, London, the third son and youngest of five illegitimate children of Richard Wellesley, second earl of Mornington and later first Marquess Wellesley (1760-1842), statesman, and Hyacinthe Gabrielle Roland (1760?-1816) daughter of Pierre Roland, of Paris. His parents married in November 1794 but were formally separated in 1810 after his father's long absence in India as governor-general (1797-1806). Wellesley was educated at the Revd Richard Roberts's Preparatory School in Mitcham, Surrey (1800-06), and Eton College (1806-11) before going up in October 1811 to Christ Church, Oxford, where he held a studentship until 1828. He graduated BA in 1816, with second class honours in classics, and MA in 1818. He was briefly enrolled at Lincoln's Inn in 1816 but was ordained at Oxford in 1823, and after travelling extensively in Europe he was appointed vicar of Flitton-with-Silsoe, Bedfordshire, in 1827. He was subsequently rector of Dunsfold in Surrey (1833-8), Woodmancote in Sussex (1838-60), and Herstmonceux in Sussex (1860-66). In 1835 he married Charlotte Anne Mackenzie Vandyck (1817?/1818-1845), the stepdaughter of the Revd William Mackenzie DD, rector of Hascombe in Surrey. They had three sons, one of whom died at birth, and a daughter. 
Although he remained a partially resident incumbent until his death, Wellesley was not entirely suited to the life of a country clergyman and was keen to return to Oxford. He unsuccessfully sought a canonry at Christ Church in 1830 and the regius professorship of modern history and modern languages in 1842, but in the latter year he was appointed vice-principal of New Inn Hall and in 1847 succeeded to the principalship on the nomination of his uncle the duke of Wellington, then chancellor of the university. In the same year he took the degrees of BD and DD and was appointed as a select preacher in the university. A connoisseur of old master prints and drawings with contacts in the art trade, he was one of the original curators of the university galleries and the leading figure in the campaign which acquired by public subscription the Raphael and Michelangelo drawings, delivered to Oxford in 1845, from the collection of Sir Thomas Lawrence. His own remarkable collection was largely broken up at sales in London and Paris, both before and after his death. Noted for his linguistic ability and especially his mastery of Italian dialects, he promoted the study of modern European languages in the university by the donation of books to the Taylor Institution, of which he was a curator from 1855; he was examiner in Italian for the scholarships offered there from 1858. His most substantial publication, 'Anthologia polyglotta: a selection of versions in various languages chiefly from the Greek anthology' (1849), was intended to stimulate interest in the same field, then in the very early stages of development at Oxford. Elected a curator of the Bodleian Library in 1856, he represented it in negotiations to improve the copyright deposit procedure and devised a scheme for the enlargement of the library's storage capacity which, although not implemented, influenced designs for its expansion until the end of the century. He was also a delegate of the University Museum and one of the four members of the sub-delegacy which in 1854 steered the university towards choosing a Gothic design for that building. 
Wellesley's other publications included an edition of the catalogue of the Bodleian's Canonici Italian manuscripts by his friend Count Alessandro Mortara and antiquarian papers in the 'Collections' of the Sussex Archaeological Society, of which he was a founder member. Portraits suggest that Wellesley, who was considered to resemble his uncle, the duke of Wellington, was tall and of medium build; he was admired for his sociability, courteous and agreeable manner, and the light way he carried his learning. He died of prostatic disease at New Inn Hall, Oxford, on 11 January 1866 and was buried five days later at Iffley. 


@@@@@


doc= 29006


Wellesley, Henry Richard Charles, first Earl Cowley (1804-1884), diplomatist, was born in Hertford Street, Mayfair, Westminster, on 17 June 1804, the eldest son of Henry Wellesley, first Baron Cowley (1773-1847), and his first wife, Charlotte Cadogan (1781-1853), daughter of the first Earl Cadogan. Gerald Valerian Wellesley was his younger brother; Lord Clarence Paget and Lord George Paget were his half-brothers. His father was a diplomatist of note, ambassador at Vienna and, twice, at Paris. Educated at Eton College (1817-20) and Brasenose College, Oxford (where he matriculated in January 1822), Wellesley left the university without taking his degree to be an unpaid attache at the Viennese embassy, then headed by his father. He was promoted paid attache at The Hague in 1829 and secretary of legation at Stuttgart in 1832, and married on 23 October 1833 the Hon. Olivia Cecilia (1807-1885), daughter of Charlotte, 'suo jure' Baroness de Ros, and her husband, Lord Henry Fitzgerald. They had three sons and two daughters. His wife's good looks and social gifts were to make her a notable ambassadress. From the diplomatic backwater of Wurttemberg, Wellesley eventually went to Constantinople (1843) as secretary of embassy, and served as minister 'ad interim' in 1846-8. On his father's death in 1847, he succeeded to his peerage, and in February 1848 was appointed minister to Switzerland. 
Although Cowley's politics were tory and he remained a member of the Carlton Club to his death, his career flourished under Liberal foreign secretaries. He was also a favourite at court, trusted, unlike his Liberal masters, by Queen Victoria and her dominant husband, Prince Albert. These connections notwithstanding, he proved himself a serviceable instrument of Palmerstonian policy. He did not take up his post at Bern, but proceeded instead on a special mission to observe the Frankfurt parliament's constitution-making for a liberal Germany. After the parliament's dissolution, and the defeat of the hopes it embodied, he became minister at Frankfurt to the old Germanic confederation (June 1851); a CB since 1848, he was made KCB (1 March 1851). In the following February Lord Granville chose him to succeed Lord Normanby at the Paris embassy; Palmerston had previously suggested him for St Petersburg, but Paris was a surprising promotion for a career diplomat without an established reputation. 
The Bonapartist restoration in France in the person of Louis Napoleon as president and, from December 1852, as Emperor Napoleon III was an event of tremendous importance. Handing over the Foreign Office to Lord Malmesbury in 1859, Lord Clarendon told him that 'the chief employment of the foreign secretary was to make bridges for the Emperor of the French' (Martin, 4.406). Cowley made himself indispensable in that context, helped by the fact that Napoleon III was an Anglophile, and Franco-British relations were central to his domestic as well as his foreign policy. He declared that his long-term aim was the gradual liberalization of the imperial dictatorship until it bore some resemblance to a parliamentary monarchy 'a l'anglaise'. Although by no means pro-British in other respects, educated opinion in France tended to measure his internal achievements by British standards of personal and political freedom. At the same time the expansion of French power in continental Europe, dictated by the Bonapartist legend, needed Britain to abstain from making the coalitions faced by the first Napoleon. Cowley's dispatches and correspondence depict the complementary themes of French and British policy as Palmerston, above all, exploited the emperor's inclinations and his needs for British purposes. 
A typical Englishman of his class and time in his bearing and outlook, although quite at home in a cosmopolitan world, Cowley was close to Napoleon by the time the Crimean War broke out. 'I am not generally of a confiding character in regard to foreigners', he wrote a little later, 'but there is something about that man that always imbues me with a feeling of his sincerity' (Wellesley and Sencourt, 93). Nevertheless, he was acutely sensitive to the ambiguities and contradictions of the man and his policies: the emperor was 'the sole depositary of his intentions' (Wellesley, 3). While the cynicism and corruption of the regime appalled Cowley -- 'the jobbery... amongst the Emperor's entourage exceeds all belief' (ibid., 110) -- he was susceptible to Napoleon's appeals in their conversations for British tolerance and understanding of his problems as ruler of France. His authoritarian rule would change its nature once 'time and a settled government' had done their work: 'I cannot say what an impression his words and manner... made upon me', reported the ambassador (Wellesley and Sencourt, 117). Cowley responded to Napoleon's candour in private: 'there is a great charm in doing business with him, even when we do not agree' (ibid., 120). He was sympathetic to constantly reiterated complaints of British press hostility, accompanied as those imperial remonstrances were by reminders of what the French alliance was worth in great power politics. Cowley exemplified his countrymen's gratitude to Napoleon for having tamed the revolutionary France of 1848, 'not only a terror to herself but to all civilized governments' (Wellesley, 2-3). 
Cowley's diplomatic successes were concentrated in the 1850s. The influence he then enjoyed with the emperor was instrumental in persuading him to reject the terms of peace brokered by Austria in the spring of 1855, when the Crimean campaign was not going well for Britain and France. Cowley enlisted the support of the French war minister against the foreign minister, Drouyn de Lhuys. The three argued in the emperor's presence: 'the decision lay with Napoleon and depended on whether Drouyn or Cowley would possess his soul' (Schroeder, 277). The latter prevailed, and determined the outcome of the war: without the deployment of France's large conscript army the Crimean operations could not have been sustained. Cowley had pressed the government to see that Napoleon, always conscious of being a parvenu among monarchs, received the highest honour in the queen's gift, although Prince Albert shuddered at the mere thought: 'Sebastopol is well worth the Garter' (Wellesley and Sencourt, 62). Once Sevastopol was taken in September 1855, however, Napoleon's liking for Cowley and respect for his judgement did not prevent him from bringing the war to an end, as the army and public opinion in France desired. As one of Britain's plenipotentiaries at the congress of Paris, Cowley was disappointed with the peace treaty (March 1856), which he considered too favourable to Russia. It was an indication of his standing that ministers brought him over to testify in the Lords that no better terms could have been obtained. A privy councillor from 1852 (2 February) and a GCB (21 February 1853), he declined a step in the peerage at this time, but on 4 April 1857 became Earl Cowley. The earlier refusal, like the wish to retire he expressed in 1855, was prompted by his relative poverty in an expensive post. His plight was eased by $2000 paid annually from secret service money. 
Cowley was entrusted with the negotiations, moved from Constantinople to Paris, that ended (March 1857) the Anglo-Persian War begun the year before. Apprised by the French of Russian intrigues to delay a settlement in the hope of embarrassing the Palmerston ministry at Westminster, Cowley indulged in some undiplomatic language to his Russian colleague: 'There is nothing like showing contempt for these bears, it brings them to reason sooner than anything' (Wellesley, 107). He could not take that tone with the emperor when Napoleon seized the opportunity presented by Britain's preoccupation with the Indian mutiny (May 1857) to get his way in the matter of Romanian union, with some sharp practice, after an international conference (Paris, May-August 1858) at which Cowley represented his country. Afraid of losing his privileged position with Napoleon -- 'Sometimes... he will barely condescend to speak to me' (Wellesley and Sencourt, 114) -- he warned that the emperor resented Britain's independent diplomacy: 'it galls him to see that we do not... obey his behests' (ibid., 127). 
Against this background, the attempted assassination of Napoleon and his empress in January 1858 by conspirators based in Britain introduced a period of Anglo-French tension that tested Cowley's abilities to the full. The Palmerston ministry fell in February, overturned for proposing legislation on refugee conspirators designed to appease French indignation. The tory foreign secretary in 1858-9, Lord Malmesbury, who relied heavily on the ambassador's advice, pursued for many months a distinctly conciliatory policy towards France, in order to buy time while Britain's navy was strengthened. Victoria and her husband were induced to grace a celebration of French power at the naval base of Cherbourg, flattered by Cowley's assurance that 'nothing does the Emperor so much moral good as seeing the Queen and Prince...' (Martin, 4.256-7). 
Behind Napoleon's own desire for the restoration of the Crimean friendship lay his maturing plans to extrude Austria from Italy. Cowley's toryism was evident in the scepticism with which he contemplated a federal, or a unitary, Italian state. Malmesbury authorized him to approach Palmerston in search of an understanding between the parties to resist, by diplomatic means, the drift to war over Italy (Wellesley, 173-4). The overture was fruitless, as was Cowley's mission to Vienna in March 1859, frustrated by the emperor's 'ambiguous words and dark dealings' (Wellesley and Sencourt, 164-5). Napoleon was bent on war, and Palmerston on supporting him by an active and friendly diplomacy. But the second Palmerston administration (June 1859) saw renewed strain upon the Anglo-French relationship: Cowley himself could not forgive the emperor for the deceptions that French policy in Italy involved. The realization of Napoleon's duplicity over the French acquisition of Savoy and Nice in 1860 completely disillusioned him: 'You will never find me ask you to trust... him again', he told Lord John Russell (ibid., 181). Emperor and ambassador clashed in public at a function in March 1860, when Napoleon's 'tone and manner were really offensive' ('Letters of Queen Victoria', ed. A. C. Benson, Lord Esher, and G. E. Buckle, 2nd ser., 1926-8, 3.390). Although the queen and foreign secretary approved of his behaviour on this occasion, the British court found Cowley still too ready to make excuses for Napoleon, while Palmerston and Russell felt he was too pro-Austrian. He now carried less weight with Palmerston, and complained, at an important juncture, that for all he knew of the premier's thinking, 'I might as well be in California' (Maxwell, ii). Yet, if he currently predicted that a united Italy would have to resort to military rule in the south, he welcomed the reduction of papal authority and prestige: 'If the Pope is driven from Rome... the blessings to mankind will overrule everything else...' (Wellesley and Sencourt, 186). 
As both Liberal ministers at home and the emperor recognized, Cowley's first priority was unchanging: the avoidance of dangerous frictions between their two countries. If the technicalities were outside his competence, he helped to negotiate the Anglo-French commercial treaty of 1860 as a contribution to repairing a relationship damaged by the invasion scare of 1859 and by France's annexations. The clumsiness of Russell's language and actions at the Foreign Office was agony to him. After the crude rejection of Napoleon's proposed European congress in 1863 was followed by Britain's humiliating isolation in the Schleswig-Holstein crisis, Cowley was ''broken hearted'' (Burghclere, 74). The transformation of his personal finances by the unexpected inheritance of a cousin's estate made him anxious to retire, but on the tories' return to office in 1866 their foreign secretary, Lord Stanley, appealed to him to stay in his post. Before he left in 1867, Cowley did a weak government in London and the Emperor, but particularly the latter, a final service by his part in defusing the politically explosive Franco-Prussian dispute over Luxembourg. 
While Cowley lost confidence in the emperor, and consequently influence with him, he had interpreted Bonapartist France and Palmerstonian Britain to each other at critical moments, reminding both that it would be 'insane' if they were to come to blows, and cutting British fears of a sudden invasion down to size (Wellesley, 165; Wellesley and Sencourt, 200-205). No Francophile -- he thought the French were not a moral people -- he preferred Napoleon III's France to Bismarck's Germany, whose victory over Austria in 1866 he observed with misgiving: 'if ever she becomes a naval power, she will give us trouble' (Wellesley and Sencourt, 303). His large private correspondence is a major source for the diplomatic historian. It shows Cowley for what he was: a pragmatist in the best sense, as little cynical as was possible for someone in his calling; temperate and humane, an often amused and amusing observer, who seldom lost sight of the realities he was there to describe, and to reconcile. Some of the praise he received was not disinterested. The best estimate, perhaps, is Stanley's: 'Though not a man of first-rate talent, he knows the country and the people thoroughly, and can be relied on' (Vincent, 258). 
Further honours came to Cowley after his earldom: KG (1866) and DCL from Oxford University (1870). He died at his London house, 20 Albemarle Street, on 15 July 1884, after an uneventful retirement, devoted to his property and the social round, and was buried at Draycot parish church, near Chippenham, on 18 July. He was succeeded by his eldest son, William, Viscount Dangan. 


@@@@@


doc= 29007


Wesley, Richard, first baron of Mornington (1690-1758), landowner, was the youngest son of Henry Colley (died 1700) of Castle Carbury, Kildare, and his first wife, Mary, daughter of Sir William Usher of Dublin. The Colleys were of English origin, having gone to Ireland like so many Anglo-Irish in the capacity of civil servant or soldier. The first of the Irish Colleys, Robert Colley, served as bailiff of Dublin in 1515 but it was his grandson, Sir Henry Colley, deputy lieutenant and steward of King's county, who firmly established the Colley place in Ireland. 
Richard Colley followed a path well worn by the ascendancy Irish. He matriculated at Trinity College, Dublin, where he graduated BA in 1711 and MA in 1714, under the name Cowly. On 23 December 1719 he married Elizabeth (died 1738), daughter of John Sale, a lawyer, MP for Carysfort and registrar of the diocese of Dublin. The couple had two daughters, Elizabeth and Frances; Elizabeth married Chichester Fortescue in 1743 and in 1750 Frances married William Francis Crosbie. Colley's son and heir, Garrett Wesley, was born several years later on 19 July 1735. The death of Richard's elder brother, Henry Colley, in 1723 left the family property of Kildare solely in his hands, though the estate was modest owing to the ample provision his father had made for his unmarried daughters. On 23 September 1728 Richard inherited the property of his cousin Garrett Wesley (or Wellesley) of Dangan and Mornington in co. Meath, who died without issue. On 15 November 1728 he took the surname of Wesley, later altered to Wellesley by his grandson. 
An amiable and sociable man, Richard Wesley appreciated his good fortune and he enthusiastically adopted an expansive generosity. He was both gentleman farmer and member of the Irish parliament for the borough of Trim (1729-46), but these were only sidelines. His real occupation was entertaining friends and expanding, remodelling, and enhancing Dangan Castle and its extensive grounds. Wesley's obsession with improving his estate reflected the values of ascendancy Ireland. Rising out of the nondescript landscape of co. Meath, Wesley's estate became a showplace. Mary Delany, Wesley's well-connected friend, left behind flattering descriptions of both the house and the park, but she reserved most praise for its owner: 'The more I am acquainted with Mr. Wesley the higher my esteem rises for him. He has certainly more virtues and fewer faults than any man I know.... He values his riches 'only' as they are the means of making all about him happy. ('Autobiography... Mrs Delany', 2.501)' On 17 June 1738 his wife, Elizabeth, died but her loss neither altered nor curtailed Wesley's activities. His daughters served as hostess and surrogate mother until their marriages, and life went on as usual. On 9 July 1746 Wesley was rewarded for his untiring sociability with an Irish peerage, becoming baron of Mornington; he took his seat in the Irish House of Lords on 6 October 1746. He died at his house on Grafton Street, Dublin, on 31 January 1758. Though he had expended enormous sums on Dangan, he still left his son an ample income of $8000 per annum. Garrett Wesley, who later became the first earl of Mornington, was the father of Arthur Wellesley, duke of Wellington, and Richard Wellesley, Marquess Wellesley. 


@@@@@


doc= 29008


Wellesley, Richard, Marquess Wellesley (1760-1842), governor-general of Bengal, was born on 20 June 1760, probably at Dangan Castle, co. Meath, though he later referred to himself as a 'native' of Dublin ('Wellesley Papers', 1.4), and spent much of his early life at the family town house in Grafton Street, Dublin, opposite the Irish government buildings. The eldest of the six sons (one of whom died in infancy) and one daughter of Garret Wesley (1735-1781), who was created earl of Mornington in October 1760, Richard became Viscount Wellesley, though he did not adopt Wellesley (in place of Wesley) as his surname until 1789. His mother was Anne (1742-1831), eldest daughter of Arthur Hill of Belvoir, co. Down, first Viscount Dungannon. His younger brothers were William Wellesley-Pole, first Baron Maryborough and third earl of Mornington (1763-1845), Arthur Wellesley, duke of Wellington (1769-1852), the Revd Gerald Wellesley (1770-1848), and Henry Wellesley, Baron Cowley (1773-1847). The Wesleys had originated in Somerset, but members of the family held minor office in Ireland from the thirteenth century onward. The Colley family, into which they married, was descended from Richard Colley, who had been sent to Ireland in the reign of King Henry VII to watch the conduct of the earl of Kildare, lord-deputy of the country. The Wellesleys settled to a career as typical country gentlemen of the protestant ascendancy, mostly shunning active politics, though Richard Wesley (or Wellesley, formerly Colley), grandfather of the subject of this article, sat in the Irish parliament as member for Trim until 1746, when he was raised to the peerage of Ireland as the first Baron Mornington. Garret Wesley, his son, was an amateur musician and poet whose artistic interests did little to repair the crumbling family fortunes. Richard Wellesley's relations with his demanding and embittered mother were poor. He was later to remark of his parents, with typical condescension, that they were 'frivolous and careless personages, like most of the Irish nobility of that time' (Butler, 27). 
Viscount Wellesley was educated at Miss Towers's private school in Portarlington, a Huguenot settlement, where he learned fluent French. He was sent to Harrow when he was ten years old. As the result of taking too active a part in a schoolboy revolt against a newly appointed headmaster, Wellesley was removed from Harrow after eighteen months and sent to Eton, where he excelled in the classics, an interest which he retained in his later years. He matriculated as a nobleman at Christ Church, Oxford, in December 1778, and achieved early distinction by winning the chancellor's prize for Latin verse on the subject of the death of Captain Cook. But his career in the university was cut short when he returned to Ireland following the death of his father in May 1781 and succeeded as second earl of Mornington. Young Mornington took on the responsibility of paying his father's debts, running the estate, and educating his brothers. His brief period in the Irish House of Lords did, however, consolidate one important political connection, his friendship with William Grenville, later Baron Grenville, a friend from Eton. Grenville was chief secretary for Ireland at the time. More importantly, Grenville was William Pitt's first cousin: perpetually short of money, Mornington could at least count on productive 'connections'. Grenville eased Mornington's route into English politics, and in April 1784 he was returned to the House of Commons as member for Bere Alston in Devon. He was later returned as member for Windsor (19 July 1787 and 16 June 1790), and Old Sarum (13 May 1796). He was one of the original knights of St Patrick when the order was founded in 1783 and was made junior lord of the Treasury in 1786. In this year Mornington also made one of the most momentous decisions of his life: he entered his younger brother Arthur, who had not excelled academically at Eton, as a cadet in the Royal Academy of Equitation at Angers in Anjou. He later bought a colonelcy for Arthur, who was immediately posted to India, so becoming precursor to his brother. 
Already a liberal whig in politics, Mornington had admired the Irish patriot Henry Grattan during his period in the politics of Dublin. Despite private cynicism about 'popery', he argued vigorously in the Irish House of Lords for Catholic emancipation. He also demanded an end to corruption in the disbursement of Irish government funds. On the other hand, his reverence for property and the constitution made him increasingly suspicious of the Irish armed volunteering movement of 1779-83. He had once 'revered' ('Wellesley Papers', 1.12) its leaders but came to fear that it would tend in a democratic direction and infringe on the powers of the monarchy and the Irish parliament. In English politics, similarly, he now aligned himself with William Pitt in support of the radical agenda of free trade; he asserted the need to place England on 'the throne of commerce of the world' (ibid., 1.15) some ten years before he embarked for India. He also supported and began a lifelong friendship with William Wilberforce in opposition to the slave trade, which he regarded as a 'disgrace to Great Britain' (ibid., 1.18). Yet, suspicious of constitutional innovation, he was lukewarm to parliamentary reform, and his views against it hardened as the effects of the French Revolution gathered pace. Once the republican danger had passed by 1820, however, in contrast to his brother, by then the duke of Wellington, he was to become a firm advocate of reform. 
At this time Mornington was also ambivalent about the consequences of British imperial expansion. He admired Burke, and his maiden speech in the Commons was, ironically, an attack on the ministry for supporting the wars of Warren Hastings in India. He was not, however, opposed to territorial annexations as such, and early on he had read and absorbed Robert Orme's 'Military Transactions of the British Nation in Indostan' (2 vols., 1763, 1778), which provided a justification for Robert Clive's conquest of Bengal. Growing expertise in Indian affairs resulted in his transfer in June 1793 from the Treasury to the Board of Control for India, where he worked with Henry Dundas, Viscount Melville, in a close but contentious partnership which was to continue during his governor-generalship of India. Mornington also became a confidant of Lord Cornwallis, who was expected to be reappointed to the post of governor-general, with Mornington as governor of Madras. In 1797 Cornwallis was indeed appointed governor-general, but the gathering Irish rising forced the administration to keep him in Ireland as lord lieutenant, while Mornington himself was unexpectedly appointed governor-general. He sailed for India in November 1797, leaving in England a wife, Hyacinthe Gabrielle (1760?-1816), purported daughter of Pierre Roland of Paris, whom he had married on 29 November 1794. To the distaste of some members of his family, he had already been living with Hyacinthe for nine years and had had five children with her. 
Mornington's period of governor-generalship was to be the decisive phase in the establishment of British dominion over the Indian subcontinent and witnessed the beginnings of the projection of British military and maritime power into the Middle East and south-east Asia. As late as 1798 the East India Company was faced with a series of powerful enemies in the subcontinent who had been driven by the imminent threat to their own independence to revitalize their administrations and create more effective military forces on partly European lines. In the south the Muslim ruler Tipu Sultan of Mysore had been defeated by Cornwallis in 1792, but had quickly set about rebuilding his power. Having earlier founded his own armaments industry and centrally organized army, he now strengthened his hold on the rich, revenue-bearing districts which he had retained after the settlement of 1792, and embarked upon a more active foreign policy, seeking allies throughout India, in the Ottoman empire, and in France, to which he had recently sent an embassy. The French republic, while in no position to help Britain's Indian enemies directly, provided moral support and expertise and, in a piece of piquant symbolism, Tipu had planted a 'liberty tree' at his capital, Seringapatam. 
In western India the Hindu states were also attempting to narrow the gap in military technology between themselves and the East India Company, developing powerful artillery and infantry forces to complement their already formidable capacity in mobile light-cavalry warfare. In retrospect the dangers to the British position were much less than contemporaries feared. And these were anyway exaggerated by officials such as William Kirkpatrick, later Mornington's military secretary, who favoured an aggressive policy, in part because they hoped it would increase their own wealth and glory. But there is no doubt that the situation was highly fluid when Mornington reached Madras in January 1798. In the north-west the Afghan ruler Zaman Shah was threatening to repeat the destructive foray into the Indian plains made by his predecessor, Ahmad Shah Durrani, in 1759-61. Meanwhile, in those successor states to the Mughal empire -- Oudh, Hyderabad, and Arcot -- where the British had established overwhelming political influence, dissident factions still flourished, making overtures to the distant French or seeking the nearer support of Tipu Sultan. Worse was the social and economic decline of the company's allies. Caused in the main by excessive British demands for military subsidies, it threatened the company with the prospect of going to war against Maratha and Mysore troops, whose officers were French advisers, while the forces of their own clients melted away in disarray. 
Lord Cornwallis and Sir John Shore, the previous governors-general, had been cautious about direct annexation. The one was forced by logistical weakness to allow Tipu Sultan to retain much of his power-base; the other placed a British supporter on the throne of Oudh in 1797, rather than directly annexing the territory. But Mornington's arrival heralded a new attitude to the balance of power in India. In London, Henry Dundas, Lord Melville, president of the Board of Control of the East India Company, was keen to use India as a source of tribute for the British government; the classic strategy of the Hanoverian minister had always been to seize as many foreign territories as possible during time of war in order to display a good hand of cards during peace negotiations. But there had been a deeper change; Dundas averred that 'We are in truth become an armed nation' ('Two Views', 50), and resolute defence of the United Kingdom had to be complemented by the entrenchment of the British position in India, the loss of which would be a 'death-wound' (ibid.). The dangerous Irish rising of 1797-8 was accompanied by Bonaparte's thrust to the East. In England the landed classes were disturbed by the spread of radical societies, while Mornington's Irish correspondents, notably his brother William Wellesley-Pole, wrote to him of the 'spirit of insurrection and treason' ('Wellesley Papers', 1.71) which manifested itself throughout Ireland. The sense of national emergency which pervaded Mornington's governor-generalship undoubtedly predisposed him to a more aggressive policy against the Indian powers, and one which was thoroughly welcomed by the group of able and intransigent young civil and military officers he gathered around him. These included William Kirkpatrick, Neil Edmonstone, John Malcolm, and William Palmer. Contemptuous of the 'weakness and langour of the late governor-general' ('Two Views', 79), Sir John Shore, Mornington soon announced his intention of establishing complete British suzerainty in southern Asia. 
Tipu Sultan's Mysore was no doubt a formidable potential enemy of the company's power, but it is clear that Mornington was determined to force him into war as quickly as possible. Malartic, the French governor of Mauritius, had unwisely issued a proclamation inviting volunteers 'to serve under the banners of Tippoo' (Moon, 278), who, he asserted, was aiming to drive the British out of India. During the summer of 1798 Mornington regretfully heeded the advice of his senior officials and his brother Arthur Wellesley that the company was unprepared for war. His vigorous diplomatic and military preparations for a campaign over the next few months indicate, however, that the protestations that he wished to compromise with the sultan were false. As he wrote to Grenville at the onset of the war, 'I have had the satisfaction to succeed completely in drawing the beast of the jungle [Tipu] into the toils' (ibid., 285). They also give credence to the view of Joshua Uhthoff, resident at Mysore, that the tardy military preparations which Tipu himself made were no more than an expression of 'common prudence and self-defence' (W. Kirkpatrick to J. Uhthoff, 8 March 1799, BL, Add. MS 13587), a phrase which the governor-general and his military secretary, William Kirkpatrick, edited out of the envoy's dispatches. 
As he made preparations for the final conflict with Tipu, Mornington reached an accommodation with the Marathas in the north and galvanized into action the sluggish authorities in Madras, whom he had despised since he first made landfall there during his voyage out from England. Wellesley also engineered a coup against the anti-British party in the Mughal successor state of Hyderabad to the north of Mysore. Here the ageing nizam, its ruler, fearing attack from Tipu and the Marathas and feeling that his French officers were getting above themselves, agreed that his French-led corps of 14,000 men should be disbanded and replaced with a British subsidiary force. This was effected without bloodshed, and the military and logistical support of Hyderabad proved critical in the forthcoming war. 
Taxing Tipu with his relations with France, Mornington managed finally to harry the sultan into war in February 1799. General Harris, who had served under Cornwallis in the Second Anglo-Mysore War, marched into the kingdom. In contrast to the earlier occasion, the invading army was properly provisioned by the Madras authorities. Slightly outnumbered by the combined company and Hyderabad force and betrayed by two of his ministers, Tipu was unable to halt the resolute British advance on his capital, Seringapatam. On 4 May 1799 the final assault was launched and Tipu Sultan, vowing to 'die like a soldier', was killed defending the breach. 
Mornington's rapid victory over his most formidable Indian opponent shifted the balance of power in the subcontinent. His armies were strengthened by the access of a huge number of pack bullocks seized from the Mysorean troops, Madras was relieved from the danger of imminent revolt, and the Maratha states were now surrounded by British-controlled territory on three sides. Most importantly, the governor-general's success emboldened him to overawe the subordinate presidencies and appoint his own supporters to critical military and political positions. Henceforward, his relations with the cost-conscious directors of the East India Company were to deteriorate rapidly. Mornington himself was rewarded by being created Marquess Wellesley in December 1799. 
In south India, it is true, Wellesley secured a settlement which seemed financially and politically favourable. He restored what Mark Wilks, the new Mysore resident, regarded as the ancient Hindu constitution of the state by returning to power a young prince of the Wodeyar dynasty, which had formally retained sovereignty during the reigns of the Muslim sovereigns. The effective ruler was the Maratha Brahman Purniya, who had served and later betrayed Tipu, but who quickly put the state on a strong financial footing, allowing it to pay a large subsidy to the British. The subsidy continued to be paid throughout the period of British rule in India, even in times of famine. Further to the south Wellesley was also able to terminate the irritating system of dual government which had since the 1760s split authority in Madras between the company and another sub-Mughal regime, the government of the nawab of Arcot. In the archives of Seringapatam the British had discovered letters from the nawab of Arcot to Tipu dating from Cornwallis's war of 1792. The Arcot authorities held, perfectly correctly, that these letters were merely aspects of the normal diplomatic relations among Indian states and did not constitute any betrayal of Arcot's treaty obligations. But the British deemed them treasonable and the Arcot dynasty was abruptly deprived of its remaining political power and pensioned off. 
Hereafter Wellesley's policies towards the Indian rulers formed a common pattern; he wished to limit what he conceived of, following Cornwallis, as the corruption of oriental government and at the same time improve the company's financial position by annexing territories or negotiating generous subsidies in return for 'protection' by the company's forces. In October 1799 the small but rich state of Tanjore was effectively annexed to the Madras presidency, though its raja was afforded a substantial pension, which allowed him to sustain a large court and many religious and charitable institutions. More importantly, the large northern state of Oudh, which had been in alliance with the British since 1765, was partitioned. The governor-general sought 'not merely to secure the subsidiary funds, but to extinguish the Vizier's [ruler's] military power, substituting in its place a considerable British force' (Edmonstone to Scott, 27 May 1801, BL, Add. MS 13527). Oudh's central tracts around Lucknow were to remain semi-independent until 1856, but the commercial districts along the Ganges passed under a new British administration, the head of which for a time was another of the governor-general's brothers, Henry Wellesley. Cornwallis, hostile to further territorial expansion by the company, had sought to exclude British private interests from the state under a treaty of 1788. But it proved impossible to stabilize the frontier of British India; as many contemporaries observed, the very terms of the subsidiary alliances created by the company undermined Indian states. The huge payments required to support company contingents on their own territory drained away the resources of the rajas and nawabs. In turn their desperate attempts to raise money and pay off their powerful creditor caused revolts which reinforced the appearance of 'native misgovernment'. 
Indian rulers were only too well aware of this. Tipu and the major Maratha rulers, Daulat Rao Sindhia, the raja of Berar, and Jaswant Rao Holkar, had all resolutely refused to negotiate subsidiary treaties with the company, fearing an inevitable loss of their independence. To Wellesley, the alliance system was, by contrast, a financial and strategic panacea. When conflicts in Poona, capital of the peshwa, nominal head of the Maratha confederacy, drove Peshwa Baji Rao into British territory in 1802, Wellesley saw a chance to settle finally the affairs of Britain's only remaining formidable potential enemy in peninsular India, the Marathas. Deeming the peshwa to be ruler of an actual Maratha 'empire', and the great chieftains such as Sindhia and Holkar a mere territorial nobility, he thought that binding the former with a rigid treaty would tame the latter. The opposite turned out to be the case. In mid-1803, in a violent reaction to the treaty Wellesley had made with the peshwa at Bassein, the raja of Berar and Sindhia took to the field against the company. Opinion in Britain was generally hostile to Wellesley's diplomatic harassment of the Marathas. British power was already firmly entrenched in India, and, barring a small number of French soldiers employed by Sindhia, no significant European enemy remained in the subcontinent. Most important, both the now enraged directors of the company and the government feared that a further round of wars would be extremely costly. This was to prove perfectly correct. Over his governor-generalship, far from stabilizing the Indian finances, Wellesley managed virtually to treble the company's debt. 
In the short term, however, Wellesley's war against the Marathas went brilliantly. Secure in the alliance and resources of the nizam of Hyderabad, the puppet state of Mysore, and the newly partitioned Oudh, the British were able to launch a two-pronged attack on the Marathas' redoubts in the western Indian uplands. The company, in addition, was lucky in that its forces were led by two soldiers of unusual ability for the Indian theatre. The southern army was commanded by Sir Arthur Wellesley, a ruthless officer in dealing with his Indian subordinates, but one who had early learned the importance of proper commissary and logistical arrangements. The army of the north, which moved from the Ganges valley against the Maratha armies poised south and west of Delhi, was led by the stolid and methodical General Gerard Lake (1744-1808), who had proved himself one of the best British commanders during the Irish rising of 1797-8. 
Arthur Wellesley won a famous victory against the most powerful of the Maratha chieftains, Daulat Rao Sindhia, at Assaye in September 1803. Next he turned and defeated the army of the raja of Berar, which had a less powerful cavalry wing to deploy against the British. In the north, Lake and the Bengal army defeated Sindhia's French-led army, taking Delhi and Agra, ancient centres of the Mughal empire. Wellesley was able to claim that he had eradicated residual French interest in north India, in the guise of Sindhia's French military advisers. This was a view which accorded well with opinion at home now that European hostilities had recommenced. 
The year 1803 was to prove the high point of his Indian career, when Wellesley believed he had achieved his main aims in India. The company's government had, moreover, begun to flex its muscles on the broader Asian scene, foreshadowing the thrust of nineteenth-century imperial policies. Indian military and marine contingents had taken part in a British expeditionary force to Egypt in order to force a French withdrawal; John Malcolm's mission to Persia had marked out British antipathy to both French and Russian advances in the region; diplomatic relations with Burma seemed on the point of being established; and the company had exploited a further commercial bridgehead in south-east Asia which had appeared following the cession of the hinterland of Penang in 1798. Hereafter, the pace of military and diplomatic success slowed, and political difficulties between the governor-general and the directors became insurmountable. 
The British had managed to force the major Maratha rulers into a dependent status because the armies of Lake and Arthur Wellesley had combined strict infantry discipline with a superiority in heavy cavalry. After the defeat of the main forces of the raja of Berar and Sindhia, however, they were faced with a more elusive and subtle enemy in the form of the 'predatory' light cavalry of Jaswant Rao Holkar, a Maratha chief who had abandoned the attempt to defeat the European armies in direct confrontations. Holkar's nuisance value was increased by the dispersal throughout central and western India of cavalry war bands, released from the defeated Indian armies, who plundered settled agriculture and frustrated the British attempt to revive agriculture and trade following the man-made food shortages of the previous two years. Colonel William Monson's attempt to trap Holkar in Rajputana failed miserably, and the British were drawn deeper into a war of light cavalry movement against him. They were simultaneously alarmed by the movements of the Muslim chieftain Amir Khan and pinned down by an ineffectual siege of the Jat stronghold of Bharatpur, south-west of Delhi. Worse, future military strategy was imperilled by the soaring debt of the company and the increasing unwillingness of native Indian capitalists to finance it. 
Until 1804 the British government, and Castlereagh in particular, had generally favoured Wellesley, drawing credit from his suppression of the supposed French threat to India. The directors, however, had become bitterly hostile, resenting alike the cost of the governor-general's victories, his scarcely concealed contempt for their residual monopolies of trade and public office, and the pro-consular style of his government. The set-backs against Holkar and Bharatpur turned the ministry against Wellesley too, and in 1805 he was, to all intents and purposes, recalled. Hereafter the legacy of his Indian administration was to come under increasing attack in the British press, in parliament, and from the court of directors. Old radicals such as Philip Francis joined forces with anti-annexationist evangelicals like Charles Grant and 'new' radicals, who disliked the influence of the 'Irish cabal' in both domestic and imperial politics. 
Wellesley's style of Indian government had been a particular source of suspicion across the political spectrum. Early in his governor-generalship he had announced his desire to revamp the stately dimension of Indian government and model his court on that of the lord lieutenant of Ireland. He rebuilt government house, Calcutta, in Palladian style and introduced a round of rituals, ceremonies, and levees. He hoped this would impress Indian rulers and subjects, but also instil discipline into the British master race in Calcutta, which had hitherto shown a marked preference for gambling, peculation, and extramarital affairs, including liaisons with Indian or Indo-Portuguese women. He clamped down on the scurrilous and outspoken English-language press in Calcutta, and sent two of its editors back home, charging them with 'Jacobin' sympathies. Wellesley was far from being an evangelical Christian; indeed, one of his sternest enemies, Charles Grant, a director of the company, charged his administration with being idolatrous. But Wellesley felt that, in India as in Ireland, the Anglican church itself should be on parade, as it were, an embodiment of the morality and pageantry of British rule. He insisted on regular Sunday observance and attendance at chapel or church for company servants and military officers. While he discountenanced active proselytization against Hinduism and Islam on the part of the Baptist missionaries established at the Danish station of Serampore, near Calcutta, he established better relations with its scholarly evangelists, who had once been classed with political radicals, and associated them with the government's plan to translate Sanskrit and Persian classics. These policies created many enemies. The increased ceremoniousness of government irritated the crown at home, while the new puritanism annoyed the lethargic Calcutta and Madras 'society'. 
More damaging to Wellesley's political future, however, was the struggle between the governor-general and the directors over the education and control of junior civil servants. Wellesley's liking for efficiency and his distaste for the lax lifestyles of many 'griffins' (newly arrived servants of the company) quickly convinced him of the need to establish a training academy in Calcutta. Fort William College, which he opened in July 1799, married features of Oxford and Cambridge, such as the study of theology, and classical and oriental languages, with the discipline and sense of cadre common in the military academies of France, to one of which he had sent his brother and on which he specifically modelled the institution ('College of Fort William', BL, Add. MS 13862, fol. 29). A regular routine of teaching in secluded circumstances would also, he hoped, keep the company's youthful servants off the hunting field and out of the clutches of 'native women' (ibid., fol. 17b), corrupt Indian secretaries, or 'munshis', and other representatives of what Wellesley regarded as native corruption. The college did, indeed, train, if sometimes only briefly, a spectacular group of young men, including Mountstuart Elphinstone, Charles Metcalfe, Richard Jenkins, and E. C. Bayley, who went on to high office in the administrative and political services of the company. It also embarked upon a programme of teaching and translation of classical and modern south Asian languages which gave a considerable impetus to oriental studies worldwide. John Gilchrist, who standardized and explained Urdu, the Indian lingua franca, to the West, was professor there. Many learned Indians who played a prominent role in the recovery of Indian religious texts and history and their dissemination to the indigenous population were also associated with the college. 
The directors, however, felt that Wellesley had exceeded his authority in establishing Fort William College. Alongside his creation of a private secretariat, his denomination of certain topics too secret to be readily discussed in home correspondence, and patronage of young military and civil officers directly dependent on him, Wellesley's actions smacked of an attempt to elevate the governor-general's authority over that of the company. The directors were particularly incensed by his promotion of his youngest brother, Henry, to the office of resident at Lucknow and the generous staff salary which he sanctioned for his brother Arthur. Wellesley's economic policies did not recommend themselves to the directors either. The huge expansion of the company's debt as a result of costly wars and shortfalls in the collection of land revenue provided a dismal background to his drive to create a more efficient government. The governor-general broadly approved Cornwallis's policy of creating an Indian landed class by fostering large landowners or 'zamindars', who, like the Anglo-Irish gentry, he believed could be cajoled into acting benignly towards their tenants. He would probably have tipped the balance against the favoured small farmer ('ryotwari') strategy of south Indian officials which was beginning to gather support among the directors if he had finished his second term. In trade policy, however, Wellesley's attempt to have as much bullion pumped into India as possible in order to finance his military activities and his resolute championing of free trade on both intercontinental and Asian routes offended the mercantilist majority and the monopolist 'shipping interest' of the company which still prevailed among directors, if not among ministers. 
Wellesley returned to England in early 1806. Here he had to contend with a dramatic loss of status in comparison with his Indian days. This affected him so badly that he petulantly withdrew from his first dinner on English soil with his family and friends at an inn in Dover. His relationship with his wife did not survive his return for very long. In 1808 he separated from her and began a series of affairs with young ladies about town, which many, including Arthur Wellesley, thought damaged his ministerial ambitions: the Iron Duke once wrote furiously of his brother's manifold liaisons: 'I wish that Wellesley was 'castrated'' (Severn, 133). But, despite the scandals, the support of the friends of the recently dead William Pitt would probably have ensured Wellesley office but for the eruption of a noisy political controversy about his Indian government. Radicals and personal enemies of the Wellesley family combined to denounce his governor-generalship in parliament. They based their charges on the evidence of one James Paull, an old-style 'nabob', now MP, who charged him with ruining his trade in Oudh and undermining the nawab's authority in 1801-2. The change in attitudes to Asian territorial empire since the impeachment of Warren Hastings ensured, however, that the motion was finally defeated (182 to 31) in 1808. 
Wellesley, once despot of 150 million people, like Warren Hastings before him and George Curzon after, proved a difficult, indeed embarrassing, figure to fit back into the intricate pattern of British politics and high office. His haughty refusal of office in 1807 when under attack in parliament worried his financially embarrassed family. Ultimately a position was found for him, and in 1809 he was dispatched as ambassador-extraordinary to the embattled Spanish junta in Seville. Here, he found himself once again in the same theatre of military and diplomatic activity as his brother Sir Arthur Wellesley. His main aim being to support his brother's army in the Peninsula, Wellesley objected strongly to Castlereagh's attempt to open a second front against Napoleon through his Walcheren expedition to Belgium. To Wellesley, ever alert in protection of Britain's international trading position, a Napoleonic conquest of Spain was a direct threat to Britain's growing trade with Spanish America. Equally, he believed that British support for a weakened Spain would help further prise open the Spanish monopoly of its colonial trade. Furious at the vacillation of the ministry in regard to the Spanish war, he tendered his resignation from his post at Seville and only withdrew it when ministers agreed to reinforce Arthur's military position against the French. Wellesley's main diplomatic effort was a prolonged battle to squeeze supplies and support out of an impoverished Spanish regime by threatening the withdrawal of British forces into Portugal. He also reinforced Canning's attempt to broaden the basis of the Spanish junta's support by having called a general representative assembly, or cortes. 
In 1810 Wellesley joined Spencer Perceval's ministry as foreign secretary, following Canning's open breach and duel with Castlereagh and their joint resignation. The moment was not propitious: the Peninsular campaign was bogged down, Napoleon pushed victorious into Poland and Russia, and war loomed with the United States over the operation of the British embargo on European trade. The British situation in the Iberian peninsula was also complicated by the rise of the Venezuelan independence movement. Wellesley, always distrustful of radical nationalism, hoped that the freeing of Spanish colonial trade would dissipate the grievances of the Latin American patriots and still their clamour for independence while also benefiting Britain. At the same time he kept his lines open to Bolivar and the Creole nationalists. By comparison with his negative attitudes to Indian self-government, Wellesley always displayed a shrewd understanding of the power of European and American nationalisms. In Europe he supported with finance and munitions the national movements against Napoleon in Russia and Sweden. 
While the outlines of Wellesley's policies were clear enough, his execution of them left something to be desired. Perceval, the prime minister, was regarded as a weak leader attempting to hold together a fractious administration. In this he was not helped by Wellesley, who ran foreign policy without reference to his colleagues, rarely attended cabinet meetings, and also failed to support his friends vigorously in the Lords on the grounds of his 'nervousness'. Despite the pleas of the prince regent and the offer of the lord lieutenancy of Ireland, Wellesley finally broke with Perceval and resigned from the ministry in January 1812. But he was drawn back into the heart of politics in May of that year when Perceval was assassinated. Instructed by the prince regent to try to form a ministry, his attempt foundered on personal animosities and the two great divisive issues of the day: Catholic emancipation and the extent to which military and financial resources ought to be poured into the Peninsula. Liverpool refused to serve under Wellesley; Grey and Grenville disagreed with him on military policy. In the event Liverpool and his supporters formed a government, which, despite initial failures, was preserved by Wellington's victory at Salamanca and went on to last for more than a decade. 
From 1812 to 1821 Wellesley was out of office. His vigorous support for Catholic emancipation alienated many important political figures, including Wellington, who opposed it. At the same time Wellesley's stance on the European war changed. He opposed the treaty of Fontainebleau and later the campaign which ended at Waterloo, arguing that Napoleon ought to be recognized as a constitutional monarch following his return from Elba. Wellesley also pressed for free trade and opposed the policy of protecting British wheat producers, another difference with Wellington and the ministry. After the end of the war he argued for an immediate reduction in military charges and taxation to palliate popular discontent, though he ultimately rallied behind the ministry when it came under fierce attack as a consequence of the Peterloo massacre. 
On the death of George III in 1820 and Grenville's move to support the ministry, Wellesley was again offered and this time accepted the post of lord lieutenant of Ireland. This was an astute move on the part of Liverpool, who consolidated the 'rapprochement' with Grenville, while at the same time maintaining that this appointment was good for Ireland. Wellesley's support for Catholic emancipation suggested that, in the short run, he was in a position to allay the religious and social discontent which spread rapidly in the aftermath of the war. At the same time he was popular with Irish protestants, who saw him and Wellington as two of their own, and had conspicuously benefited from the military and political offices created by the brothers all over the British empire and in the Iberian peninsula. This fund of goodwill was, however, rapidly exhausted in a country lurching again towards political violence, where the clandestine resistance of Ribbonmen and Whiteboys was matched by the public display of power of the Orange lodges. A few months after his arrival in January 1822 Wellesley was already in bad odour in Dublin when he attempted, through the lord mayor of the city, to prohibit the annual garlanding of the statue of William III, which constituted the classic demonstration of Orange triumphalism. A riot followed and troops were called out. Later, Wellesley was insulted in public and narrowly missed injury from a flying bottle thrown at him in the theatre. He responded by prosecuting those he regarded as responsible for these incidents. But the Dublin grand jury threw out the charges and the Irish administration very nearly stood condemned for its policy in the Commons. 
Wellesley's Irish policies aimed at a compromise which would preserve social hierarchy and order: 'Ireland tranquillised' instead of the 'polemical clamour of conflicting religious zealots' ('Wellesley Papers', 2.149), as he wrote to Liverpool. He attempted to alleviate the immediate economic crisis of 1821-2 with famine relief. He sought to limit the element of compulsion in the payment of tithes by the Catholic peasantry to the Church of Ireland and actually secured a bill for the composition of tithes in 1823. He modified the 'Insurrection Act', and sought to curb the arbitrary operation of the magistracy and petty sessions. Over his period in office he did his best to remove extremist protestants from major office; these included, ironically enough, Sir David Baird, commander of the final assault on Seringapatam a quarter of a century before, who was ousted as commander-in-chief of the Irish forces. 
All these initiatives, however, were doomed to failure. In the first place the political nation in Britain, as well as the Irish administration, was fundamentally split on the issue of the future of the protestant ascendancy. Wellesley's Irish chief secretary, Henry Goulbourn, was ambivalent about further concessions to the Catholics, while in Britain powerful figures such as Peel and Wellington deplored every move of the Irish administration towards compromise. Wellesley's public relations were also poor. He failed to consult the Church of Ireland clergy about the planned reduction of tithes, which they saw as a raid on their property. He also allowed to spiral out of control a controversy about a measure allowing Catholics burial in protestant churchyards according to their own rites. Worse, Wellesley's grip over business was visibly weakening. His 'pretentious yet penurious' administration (Jenkins, 185) courted public ridicule. In a pathetic throwback to his Indian durbars, he dressed up his attendants in silver lace and required heralds to accompany him to the viceregal chapel in Dublin Castle. His natural son Edward Johnston (probably the product of a liaison which had predated even Hyacinthe) intervened openly in the distribution of jobs. As Brian Jenkins puts it: 'Sound, sensible and liberal as his position was, Wellesley's ability to shape a programme of reform was seriously impaired by those foibles and administrative failings which quickly undermined his authority and realised all the misgivings harboured at the time of his appointment. (ibid.)' It is doubtful, of course, whether even a more dynamic and less self-indulgent politician could have proceeded much further. The artificial boom which had concealed Irish poverty during the French wars had ended abruptly in 1816. Irish manufacturing was withering away without tariff protection, its food supply dangerously dependent on a single crop, the potato. The shift of political power to London following the union had only exacerbated the kingdom's sense of marginality and malaise. 
Indeed, the fusion of social and religious grievances had proceeded too far for social peace to be easily assured by any viceregal measure. The founding of O'Connell's Catholic Association in 1824 saw Wellesley striving uneasily to balance his instinctive concern for social order with his longer-term aim of Catholic advancement. In the event he passed vigorous legislation against both protestant and Catholic secret societies which pleased no one. Wellesley's own alienation from his brother Arthur and from the protestant establishment was further confirmed by his marriage on 29 October 1825 to Marianne Paterson (died 1853), 'nee' Caton, widow of Robert Paterson, a Baltimore merchant. (His estranged first wife, Hyacinthe, had died in 1816.) Marianne Paterson was a Catholic, and the marriage was solemnized by the lord primate of Ireland and by the Roman Catholic archbishop of Ireland. They had no children. 
Wellesley held the position of lord lieutenant until 1828, when, after Canning's death, his brother became prime minister with the main intention of upholding the protestant ascendancy, and he left the ministry. Ironically, the opposition of Wellington and Peel to Catholic emancipation was soon afterwards abandoned as the country slid towards civil war. Supporting the 'Reform Bill', his adherence to the moderate whig party brought Wellesley a number of offices in the last years of his life. He became lord steward of the household under Lord Grey. He then resumed the lord lieutenancy of Ireland for two years (early 1832 to April 1834), during which time he again tried to promote Catholics to civil and judicial office. He left office with the whigs in April 1834, but when they returned to power in the next year, he took the office of lord chamberlain only briefly before finally retiring from public affairs at the age of seventy-five. He spent the last seven years of his life at Kingston House, Brompton, immersed once again in the classics. 
Wellesley's reputation, as has been seen, suffered a partial eclipse in the 1810s and 1820s, when a reaction set in against the cost of his Indian conquests, and he managed to alienate both factions in the Irish conflict. But as the generation of Indian officers whom he had promoted, such as Malcolm and Edmonstone, wrote memoirs and achieved power among the directors, Wellesley began to be seen as a guarantor of the British destiny in India as notable as Robert Clive and Warren Hastings. The first stage of his rehabilitation culminated with Montgomery Martin's edition of Wellesley's 'Despatches, Minutes and Correspondence' (1836) and the erection of a marble statue in his honour in the company's premises at Leadenhall Street. Wellesley's extension of British dominion in the subcontinent now seemed a marvellous thing to tories who had once been suspicious of him. Equally, his commitment to free trade and education ensured that whig radicals of the reform era did not view him with total hostility. After Wellesley's death the machine of Victorian biographical deification took over, producing the works of W. McCullagh Torrens (1880), Colonel G. B. Malleson (1889), and the Revd W. H. Hutton (1893). Malleson's work, written in the light of his own collaboration on Kaye's history of the Indian mutiny, set the stage for a full-blown imperialist interpretation of Wellesley which emphasized the French 'threat' to British India and the depravity of Tipu Sultan. Malleson was one of the first historians to compare Wellesley favourably with the supposedly unimaginative and impolitic Iron Duke. Wellesley's strict dealings with the Indian states also appealed to the experts of the later Victorian age, who saw domesticated Indian princes as a guarantee of the British Indian empire. Hereafter, the 'glorious little man' was generally applauded for his public policies but berated for his arrogance and impetuousness; a veil was drawn over his affairs with Drury Lane actresses and other concubines between the breakdown of his marriage in 1807 and his remarriage in 1825. At the end of the nineteenth century Lord Curzon's viceroyalty seemed like an avatar of Wellesley's government. Curzon's 'British Government in India' (1925), volume 2, spent a whole chapter on Wellesley's new government house in Calcutta. By a delicious chance of fate, Wellesley's plans of 1799 had been based on Kedleston Hall, the Curzon family seat. Yet by the 1920s imperialist jingo was matched by nationalist and liberal deprecation of Wellesley's 'forward policy' against Tipu and the Marathas. Edward Thompson's and G. T. Garrett's 'The Rise and Fulfilment of British Rule in India' (1934) was decidedly hostile to him. 
In recent years Wellesley and his family have sometimes been seen as embodiments of the spirit of the 'second British empire', arch-exponents of 'military fiscalism', and upholders of the balance of power in Asia. This characterization, however, raises some difficulties. Wellesley was certainly an expansionist and a domineering governor-general. Iris Butler, in her perceptive 'The Eldest Brother' (1973), the most recent biography of Wellesley, makes a vain effort to protect him against charges of aggression in India. She claims that the state of the subcontinent demanded action and implies that Wellesley was forming the basis for Indian nationality by his forced unification of the country (Butler, 417). In other respects, however, she does succeed in showing that the marquess was a more interesting and complex figure than the duke, and a most ambivalent Conservative and imperialist. It is clear that any attempt to paint a picture of a monolithic 'new imperialism' of the period of the Napoleonic war looks problematic after an examination of this powerful family alone, whose opinions were at variance on almost every major issue. In Europe, at least, Wellesley, unlike Wellington and Wellesley-Pole, was a free-trading liberal whig. He argued for representative government in Spain, Catholic emancipation, and, ultimately, for the reform of the British parliament. Both a lover and a hater of France from his youth, he seems to have had some admiration for the rationality of Napoleon's administration, and in 1814 preferred a constitutional government under the emperor to the antiquated absolutism of the Bourbons. He was an exponent abroad of the imperialism of free trade, buttressed by Indian territorial empire, and of whig modernization at home. He anticipated Peel in trying to impart vigour and professionalism to his Indian administrations and was more radical than Peel in his support for the Catholic cause in Ireland. Despite his origins among the Anglo-Irish rentier cabals of the eighteenth century, Wellesley anticipated many leading ideas and policies of the early Victorian generation. 
Even in his own personality Wellesley displayed manifold contradictions. A small man of no more than 5 foot 7 inches in height, his charisma and classical features made him attractive to both sexes. A stern public moralist in India, who did not himself drink or gamble, he was soon to launch himself into a new series of sexual adventures which astounded even the relaxed Regency age. In India he was regarded as a hard-driving workaholic who personally penned hundreds of lengthy and percipient minutes. By contrast, at the Foreign Office and in Ireland he was noted for laziness and inattention to his duties. These contradictions seem to have come to a head in 1807 and 1808, when, as Iris Butler plausibly surmises, he may have suffered some kind of mental collapse. 
Wellesley died at Kingston House, Brompton, on 26 September 1842, at the age of eighty-three, and was buried in the chapel of Eton College on 8 October. He composed his own Latin funerary ode, affirming the importance of the school in his early development. This epitaph was later placed over the inner archway of the north transept of the chapel by the duke of Wellington. Always impecunious, despite an 'ex gratia' grant of $20,000 from the East India Company in 1837, he seems to have left little to his family. Wellesley's second wife, Marianne, lady of the bedchamber to the queen dowager Adelaide, died at Hampton Court Palace on 17 December 1853. He was survived at least by one illegitimate son, the Revd Henry Wellesley (1794-1866), and his illegitimate daughters Anne, Lady Charles Bentinck (1788-1875), and Hyacinthe Mary, Lady Hatherton (1789-1849). His eldest son, Richard ('b'. 1787), who had led a relatively unsuccessful parliamentary career, predeceased him in 1831. His second son, Gerald (1799-1833), was for a time the East India Company's resident at Indore. Wellesley's relations with his male offspring were not close, although he acknowledged his paternity. The marquessate became extinct on his death, and the earldom of Mornington descended to his brother William. 


@@@@@


doc= 29009


William Pole-Tylney-Long-Wellesley, fourth earl of Mornington (1788-1857), born on 22 June 1788, probably at Ballyfin, Queen's county, assumed the names of Tylney-Long on his marriage on 14 March 1812 with Catherine, sister and coheir of Sir James Tylney-Long, bt, of Draycot, Wiltshire. She had estates in Essex and Hampshire said to be worth considerably over $1 million a year and had been sought in marriage by the duke of Clarence (later William IV). In 1823 Long-Wellesley eloped with Helena Paterson Bligh, the wife of Captain Thomas Bligh of the Coldstream Guards, abandoning Catherine, who died two years later on 12 September 1825. He subsequently married Helena Bligh (died 7 April 1869) in 1828. Long-Wellesley, a notorious rake, was generally charged with having run through his first wife's property, but this he was unable to do, having only a life interest. In the years following Catherine's death, Long-Wellesley sought control over his children. He was especially interested in William, the eldest, on whom Catherine's fortune had devolved. His uncle the duke of Wellington intervened on behalf of the children, fighting one of his furious defensive actions to keep the hapless William from his father's clutches. Long-Wellesley was, accordingly, deprived of the custody of his children by the court of chancery, and in July 1831 committed to the Fleet prison by Lord Brougham for contempt of court: Long-Wellesley invoked parliamentary privilege but his plea was rejected by the committee of privileges of the House of Commons. Long-Wellesley sat for St Ives from 1812 to 1818, Wiltshire 1818-20, St Ives again 1830-31, and Essex 1831-2. Out of pique he joined the recalcitrant tories who on 15 November 1830 succeeded in defeating the Wellington ministry. He led a very dissipated life and in his last days he subsisted upon the bounty of his uncle the duke of Wellington, who suffered fools only when they came from the family. He died in lodgings in Mayer Street, Manchester Square, London, on 1 July 1857. The obituary notice in the 'Morning Chronicle' claimed that he was redeemed by no single virtue, adorned by no single grace. 


@@@@@


doc= 29010


Pole, William Wellesley-, third earl of Mornington (1763-1845), politician, was born at Dangan Castle, co. Meath, on 20 May 1763. He was the second surviving son of Garrett Wesley, first earl of Mornington (1735-1781), and his wife, Anne Hill (1742-1831), daughter of the first Viscount Dungannon. Richard Colley Wellesley, Marquess Wellesley, and Arthur Wellesley, first duke of Wellington, were his brothers. After early education at Trim, co. Meath, he went to Eton College but stayed only two years (1774-6), before leaving for a brief stint in the navy. In 1778 he inherited the estates of his cousin William Pole of Ballyfin, Queen's county. It was at this time that he assumed the additional name of Pole. Though his name became Wesley-Pole, and after 1789 Wellesley-Pole, he was always subsequently referred to simply as Pole. 
New-found wealth and status allowed Pole to settle into Irish life as an ascendancy country gentleman. From 1783 to 1790 he sat for Trim, the Wesley family seat in the Irish parliament. On 17 May 1784 he married Katherine Elizabeth (1760/61-1851), daughter and coheir of Admiral John Forbes (1714-1796). They had three daughters and a son. In 1790 he tied his fortunes to those of his aggressive elder brother, Richard, the second earl of Mornington and future Marquess Wellesley, whom he joined at Westminster. He sat for East Looe until 1795 and then for Queen's county from 1801 to 1821. While Lord Wellesley was in India as governor-general, Pole represented both his personal and political interests. On 13 May 1802 he seconded Hawkesbury's motion approving the peace of Amiens, and in the following July was named clerk of the ordnance. In succeeding sessions he vigorously defended Wellesley's Indian policy, courting a full investigation of the charges made against him by James Paull and others. He also defended Melville during his impeachment proceedings. 
On the return of the tories to power after the death of Fox, Pole resumed his former office, and on 24 June 1807 he became secretary to the Admiralty. In October 1809 he was appointed by Perceval chief secretary for Ireland and was sworn of the privy council, as part of an arrangement to bring Lord Wellesley into the government as foreign secretary. His predecessor in the office had been his own brother Sir Arthur Wellesley. Pole's period of office was marked by renewed agitation for Catholic emancipation. His conservative instincts made him hostile to the measure and its proponents and he recommended their vigorous repression. Pole was by no means alone in his hostility to Catholic rights, as his views were those of the prime minister, Spencer Perceval, and other leading ministers. Pole was, however, intemperate in advocating resistance to Catholic claims and he proved a problem for the government. At the same time, Pole's views were contrary to those of his brother Lord Wellesley. While this did not lead to a split, Pole began to attach himself more closely to his younger brother Arthur, the future duke of Wellington, whose views more closely reflected his own. 
In March 1812, following Lord Wellesley's resignation, Perceval proposed Pole's name for admission to the cabinet, but the prince regent peremptorily refused unless Marquess Wellesley were head or part of the government. In the following month Pole is said to have made 'a miserable figure' in the debate on Grattan's motion for a committee on the Catholic claims. In May 1812 he became reconciled with Wellesley, and formally acquiesced in the latter's liberal views on the Catholic claims. In deference to his brother, who had lost his duel with Liverpool for the premiership, he resigned the chief secretaryship and the chancellorship of the Irish exchequer in August of that year. He remained out of government until 28 September 1814, when Liverpool appointed him master of the Royal Mint and gave him a seat in his cabinet. In April of the following year Pole went with Lord Harrowby to Brussels to confer with Wellington as to the disposition of the allies and the arrangements for the coming campaign. In the troubled years after Waterloo, he remained an active member of the Liverpool cabinet and he entered into a close personal and working relationship with Wellington. 
On 17 July 1821, through Wellington's influence, Pole was created a peer of the United Kingdom with the title of Baron Maryborough. He shared Wellington's disapproval of Lord Wellesley's policy as lord lieutenant in Ireland, but stood alone in the cabinet in opposing a measure for the enforcement of the laws against the secret societies. In August 1823 he resigned the mint and left the cabinet to make room for Canning's associate William Huskisson. He thought himself 'shamefully deceived, ill-used, and abandoned' (Grenville, 'Memoirs of the Court of George IV', 2.7), though in a face-saving gesture he was made master of the buckhounds. He never again held cabinet office, though he was postmaster-general in Sir Robert Peel's short ministry of 1834-5, and in 1838 Wellington appointed him captain of Deal Castle. On the death of Marquess Wellesley in 1842 he succeeded to the Irish earldom of Mornington. 
Lord Mornington's career was very much a product of his more illustrious brother's influence. Though there are few references to him as a man of talent, it is clear that both Wellesley and Wellington valued his judgement, and therefore so did others. He attended to business conscientiously and, though prone to fits of temper, he was remarkably steady in his politics. Like his brothers, he was an aggressive place-seeker, and fiercely loyal to the interests of the family. He died on 22 February 1845 in Grosvenor Square, London, and was buried in Grosvenor Chapel, Audley Street. Of his three daughters, Mary Charlotte Anne married Sir Charles Bagot; Emily Harriet married Field Marshal Fitzroy James Henry Somerset, first Baron Raglan; and the youngest became Priscilla Anne Fane, wife of John Fane, eleventh earl of Westmorland. 
Lord Mornington's son 
Long-Wellesley's eldest son by his first marriage, William Richard Arthur, fifth earl of Mornington (1813-1863), died unmarried at Paris on 25 July 1863, when the Irish earldom of Mornington passed to the duke of Wellington and the United Kingdom barony of Maryborough became extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 29011


Wells, Charles Jeremiah (c.1800-1879), lawyer and poet, was born probably in London, the elder of the two children of James Turner Wells and Jane, 'nee' Sayers (died 1832). Little is known of his parents, though his mother may have been an actress, and they appear to have been reasonably well off and planned for their son to become a solicitor. Wells is now remembered, if at all, for a practical joke which he played on the brother of the poet John Keats and for a belated period of fame among Pre-Raphaelite circles for his biblical verse-drama 'Joseph and his Brethren' (1824). 
From at least 1803 until Wells's departure from London about 1830, the family lived at Featherstone Buildings, Holborn, London. As a youth Wells met Tom Keats, and his brother John who, in the summer of 1816, wrote for him the sonnet 'To a Friend who Sent me some Roses'. After leaving school, he was apprenticed to a solicitor, and Keats's letters of 1817-18 show that during this period he moved in the Keats circle at dinners, parties, the theatre, and other social occasions. Wells comes across from these and other accounts as lively and high-spirited, witty and irrepressible, if somewhat lazy and irresponsible and even, at least as far as the details of his own life are concerned, untrustworthy. After the death of Tom in December 1818, Keats discovered that Wells had played what he saw as a cruel joke on his brother, a 'diabolical scheme' as he called it ('Letters of John Keats', 2.90), which he believed had exacerbated his brother's illness and even hastened his death. Wells had written a series of admiring and amorous letters to Tom, signed by a fictitious Frenchwoman named Amena Bellafilla, in highly stylized and poeticized language full of cliche and mock-archaism, much of which was borrowed from the early pseudo-medieval poetry of Keats himself. Tom Keats appears to have been taken in by this patent prank and was deeply hurt when the truth became clear. On discovering the deception, and in mourning for his brother, Keats declared that 'I do not think death too bad' (ibid.) for Wells and that 'I will harm him all I possibly can' (ibid., 2.91). Having been dropped by the Keats circle, Wells undertook two literary projects which were, nevertheless, heavily indebted to the style of his erstwhile friend. The first was a series of prose stories modelled on Boccaccio, 'Stories after Nature', published anonymously in 1822: this volume rivalled a volume of verse-translations of Boccaccio planned by Keats and J. H. Reynolds. The second project was the dramatic poem 'Joseph and his Brethren', published in December 1823 (with 1824 on the title-page) under the name H. L. Howard. It was written, so Wells later claimed, in six weeks, 'to compel Keats to esteem me and admit my 'power'' (Johnston, 81). Both projects were almost entirely ignored by the literary reviews -- a fate which Wells apparently accepted with equanimity: throughout his life he exhibited what H. Buxton Forman described as 'a superb indifference to fame' (Forman, 294). 
About 1827 Wells married Emily Jane Hill (died 1874), daughter of a schoolmaster, Francis Hill, and his wife, Margaret, 'nee' Powell, from Broxbourne in Hertfordshire. Between 1827 and 1841 the couple had three daughters and a son, all born in Broxbourne, which suggests that despite the fact that Wells continued working as a solicitor in London until 1830, he may have been living at least part of the time in Hertfordshire. Possibly for reasons of health and no doubt afflicted by what Forman called 'a constitutional indolence' (Tatchell, 16), Wells retired to Hertfordshire, and possibly also to Wales, about 1830, where he seems to have devoted his time to hunting, fishing, and boating as well as horticulture and bee-keeping. In 1841 he moved with his family to France, where he lived until his death in 1879, first in Brittany where he taught English at a college in Quimper, and later in Marseilles. 
Meanwhile, however, developments in England were slowly beginning to give Wells a cult status among certain poets and artists. In 1837 Thomas Wade, in his poem 'Contention of Love and Death', named him as one of the unjustly neglected poets; in 1841 Richard Henry Horne, an old schoolfriend, included Wells's 'Sonnet to Chaucer' (written in 1823) in his edition of 'The Poems of Geoffrey Chaucer Modernised' and in 1844 made favourable mention of him in his 'New Spirit of the Age'. In 1842 the magazine editor W. J. Linton reprinted a number of Wells's 'Stories after Nature' in his 'Illuminated Magazine'; and in 1846-7 two essays by Wells, on field sports and the local gentry in Brittany, were published in 'Fraser's Magazine'. Through these and other public notices Dante Gabriel Rossetti was alerted to his work and read one of the few remaining copies of 'Joseph and his Brethren' in the British Library. Convinced that he had discovered a neglected genius, Rossetti began to proselytize among his friends to the extent that it was said that reading Wells's verse-narrative became compulsory for entry into the Pre-Raphaelite circle. Edmund Gosse commented that reading the poem became a 'kind of shibboleth -- a rite of passage into the true poetic culture' ('Encyclopaedia Britannica'). Over the next twenty-odd years attempts were made by Rossetti, Algernon Charles Swinburne, Theodore Watts-Dunton, George Meredith, and others to have 'Joseph' republished, until eventually Chatto and Windus took an interest after Swinburne published an appreciation of Wells entitled 'An unknown poet' in the 'Fortnightly Review' in February 1875. The poem was republished in 1876, edited by Forman with a revised version of Swinburne's essay as an introduction, and with corrections and revisions by Wells himself. This time the poem was reviewed more widely and favourably and for a brief period there seemed to be a chance that Wells would become a famous poet. But since he had burnt a series of manuscripts in 1874 after the death of his wife (including, he claimed, a novel, three volumes of stories, a number of lyric poems, and an epic), he was unable to capitalize on his new-found popularity, such as it was, to any significant extent. Wells, as Watts-Dunton remarked, seemed to have an 'instinct for 'not getting on'' (Watts-Dunton, xlvi). 
What appears to have attracted Rossetti, Swinburne, and others to Wells's poetry and to have made them believe that they had discovered another Keats, was a certain derivative richness of imagery, a facility with rhythm and poetic form, and an easy eloquence combined with a once-fashionable pseudo-Elizabethan manner which allowed his work to be compared favourably with that of Shakespeare, Webster, and Cyril Tourneur, as well as with Keats and other nineteenth-century poets such as Wordsworth and Blake. Wells remains, however -- and despite attempts to revive his work -- a curiosity of literary history: even the hyperbolic reviews of the second edition of 'Joseph' by the Pre-Raphaelite circle were unable to generate significant sales for his poem, and he remains today little known and even less read. 
Wells died at 2 Montee des Oblats, Barthelemy, Marseilles, on 17 February 1879 after a long illness. Some time before his death he had converted to the Roman Catholic church. He had also dabbled in spiritualism and claimed to have raised a young lady from the dead by means of prayer, a 'faculty which is', as Watts-Dunton comments, 'rare among modern poets' (Watts-Dunton, xlvii). Wells's son Charles, an engineer by profession and gambler by inclination, had his own moment of fame as the subject of Fred Gilbert's popular song 'The Man who Broke the Bank at Monte Carlo' (sung by Charles Coborn). 


@@@@@


doc= 29012


Wells, Edward (1667-1727), Church of England clergyman and educationist, was the eldest child of Edward Wells (died 1677), vicar of Corsham, Wiltshire, and his wife, Elizabeth. He was admitted into Westminster School, London, in 1680, and was thence elected to a scholarship at Christ Church, Oxford, from where he matriculated on 16 December 1686. Wells was tutored by Thomas Burton, later canon of Gloucester, and held two exhibitionerships (in 1691-2 and 1699). He graduated BA on 10 July 1690 and was elected a praelector in the same year. He proceeded MA on 1 June 1693. From 1691 to 1702, Wells was a tutor at Christ Church, and among his pupils was Thomas Bennet, who later presented Wells to the living at Cotesbach, Leicestershire, into which he was inducted on 2 January 1702. He accumulated the degrees of BD and DD on 5 April 1704, the year in which his studentship at Christ Church became void. In March 1716 he was inducted to the rectory of Bletchley, Buckinghamshire, on the presentation of Browne Willis, another former pupil. He took the opportunity in sermons there 'to mark out by slander his benefactor, the very man who by mistake, in an uncommon manner, gave him the stand and opportunity of his behaviour' (Nichols, 'Lit. anecdotes', 6.187). 
Wells published copiously from 1698 until his death, and his output can be divided into five main categories: two religious and three educational. As a divine, Wells achieved some notoriety for his polemical high-church tracts. Thus Wells attacked Presbyterianism in his 'Letter from Minister of the Church of England to a Dissenting Parishioner' (1706; four subsequent editions and several replies), which was followed up by a similar 'Letter' to a Presbyterian minister (1706; three subsequent editions and several replies) and a tract on 'The Invalidity of Presbyterian Ordination' (1707). He also attacked the Anglican divine Samuel Clarke in his 'Remarks' (1713) and the exchange which followed, Clarke's scepticism over Christ's status in Trinitarian doctrine rousing his ire (Wells had already written an 'Essay' on the Trinity and Christ's divinity in 1712). In the realm of church politics, Wells also wrote 'Forty-Six Propositions' (1717), asserting the legality of the Hanoverian succession and supporting the removal of the nonjurors from their parishes. Second, Wells published several more eirenic religious works later in life in the form of catechismal and pastoral tracts: most popular was his 'Letter Concerning the Sin of Taking Christ's Name in Vain' (1710; nine further editions). He also wrote 'Of Children's Capacities to Receive Religious Instructions' (1717) and three works for such a juvenile audience: a catechism, 'The Common Christian Rightly and Plainly Instructed' (1707); and a pair of instructional manuals of devotion, a 'Help for the More Easy Understanding of the Holy Scripture' (1724) and a 'Help for the Right Understanding of the Several Divine Laws and Covenants' (1729). 
Wells's publications as an educationist dovetail neatly with his catechismal and pastoral writings, but also make occasional forays into religious polemics. First, he published a series of mathematical works, including the 'Elementa arithmeticae' (1698), which was followed by a series of interconnected works: the 'Young Gentleman's Astronomy, Chronology and Dialling' (1712), 'Young Gentleman's Arithmetick and Geometry' (1713), 'Young Gentleman's Course of Mathematicks' (1714), and 'Young Gentleman's Trigonometry, Mechanicks and Opticks' (1714). These volumes treated, 'inter alia', the mathematical element of geography (the use of globes, determination of latitude and longitude, and so on), but Wells also, and secondly, published a series of descriptive geographies, largely cribbed from other sources, but widely recommended at schools and universities in the period. His 'Treatise of Antient and Present Geography' (1701; and four further editions) was a popular gazetteer intended for students reading classics, while his 'Historical Geography of the New Testament' (1708) and the companion 'Historical Geography of the Old Testament' (1711-12) plagiarized travellers to the Near East and biblical scholars to give a description of the Holy Land, but also attacked Roman Catholicism and Presbyterianism in passing. Connected with his geographical books, and thirdly, Wells published translations and editions of classical and Christian texts: he contributed geographical notes to editions of Xenophon's 'Hellenica' (1690) and of Eusebius's 'History of the Church' (1709), and translated Dionysius the Guide's 'Periegetes' (1704) from Greek into Latin, adding a series of notes in the light of sixteen centuries of subsequent geographical discoveries. 
Wells's writings are more voluminous than distinguished. While uncharitable in tone, Thomas Hearne's assessment of Wells's 'oeuvre' is substantially accurate: '[he] writ & scribbled many books, on purpose to scrape up money... The truth is, he was a man of great industry, but the books he hath writ & published, as they are very many, so they are inaccurate, & contain very little that is curious. ('Remarks', 9.330)' Wells never married; he died at Cotesbach on 11 July 1727, and was buried on 15 July there. 


@@@@@


doc= 29013


Wells, Henry Lake (1850-1898), army officer, son of Thomas Bury Wells, rector of Portlemouth, Devon, and his wife, Catharine Frances, daughter of the Revd William Stockdale (fellow of Jesus College, Cambridge), was born on 8 March 1850. After attending the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich he was commissioned lieutenant into the Royal Engineers on 2 August 1871, was captain in 1883, major in 1889, and lieutenant-colonel on 6 November 1896. He was specially employed in the War Office in 1873 and 1874, and went to India in 1875. 
Wells served in the Afghan campaign of 1878-9, raised a corps of Ghilzai labourers, and constructed a road across the Khojak Pass, and was for some time in sole charge of the public works department at Quetta. He commanded detachments of Punjab cavalry and Sind horse in an engagement near the Khojak, where he was wounded. He accompanied General Biddulph's force down the Thal-Chotiali route, took part in the action at Baghao, served with the Khyber line force, was present at the action of Majina, and had charge of the positions at the crossing of the Kabul River. He was five times mentioned in dispatches, Sir Donald Stewart recommending him 'for conspicuous gallantry and bravery'. 
Wells surveyed routes in 1879-80 in Kashmir and Gilgit for a telegraph line, and in the latter year was appointed to the government Indo-European telegraph service in Persia as assistant director. During many years spent in Persia he surveyed routes between Dezful and Shiraz, and contributed papers to the Royal Geographical Society, the Society of Arts, and to the Royal Engineers' professional papers. He was repeatedly thanked for his services, especially for those rendered in the delimitation of the Afghan frontier in 1886, the army remount operations for India in 1887, in the cholera epidemic, and during the revolt in Shiraz in 1893. Wells married, on 15 January 1885, in London, Alice Bertha, daughter of the Revd Hugh Bacon. 
Wells became director of the Persian telegraph service in 1891. He was presented by Shah Nasir al-Din with a sword of honour, and by Shah Muraffer with a diamond ring. On 1 January 1897 he was made CIE. He died suddenly at Karachi on 31 August 1898. 


@@@@@


doc= 29014


Wells, John (d. 1388), Benedictine monk and theological controversialist, was already a monk of Ramsey Abbey, Huntingdonshire, when he was ordained priest on 7 June 1365. From at least 1374 he studied at Gloucester College, the Benedictine hall in Oxford. While at Gloucester College he was for thirteen years 'prior studentium', a position he still held in 1381. He incepted as DTh about 1376. 
As a member of a religious order, Wells seems always to have been implacably opposed to John Wyclif (died 1384) and his followers. Indeed, so determined was he in his opposition that he acquired the title Malleus Haereticorum ('Hammer of Heretics'). He was almost certainly the Wellys that the compiler of 'Fasciculi zizaniorum' identifies as 'quidam canis niger de ordine Benedicti' ('a black dog of the Benedictine order'; 'Fasciculi zizaniorum', 239), who argued with Wyclif concerning the religious orders; although the rubricator of the only extant copy of the compilation gives Wellys's first name as William, John Bale corrected the rubric to John. John Wells was also very probably the opponent Wyclif refers to as 'dompnus niger' (Wyclif, 'Sermones', 3.252), as well as the one he dismisses as speaking elaborately and diffusely, just like a monk. In 1380-81 he was on William Barton's committee of twelve doctors of theology who condemned Wyclif's views on the eucharist. In 1382 he and the Carmelite Peter Stokes (died 1399) complained to the new chancellor of Oxford, Robert Rygge (died 1410), about a sermon Nicholas Hereford had preached in St Mary's, in which he had asserted that members of religious orders could not take degrees in the university without apostatizing. Wells was also the first to speak at the council convened in that year by Archbishop William Courtenay (died 1396) at Blackfriars, London, which condemned ten of Wyclif's views as heretical and fourteen as erroneous; three of the errors correspond with views Wyclif seems to have maintained specifically against Wells. A satirical song describes Wells's arguments on this occasion as windy and feeble, just what might be expected of someone with a face the colour of gall; in words Wyclif would mockingly echo, the song then describes how Wells had been completely out-argued by Hereford in the schools. 
On 9 July 1387 the English Benedictines sent Wells as their general proctor to Pope Urban VI, with instructions to intercede for the deprived and imprisoned Cardinal Adam Easton (died 1397). Wells must have pleaded on behalf of Easton either at Lucca, where the pope was resident until 23 September, or at Perugia, where the pope then took up residence; as Easton was not reinstated until 18 December 1389, Wells's pleas were evidently unsuccessful. Wells himself died in Perugia in 1388 and was buried in the church of Santa Sabina. 
John Bale credits Wells with 'De socii sui ingratitudine', 'Epistolae ad diversos', 'Pro religione privata' (probably identical with the 'De religione perfectorum' some later authorities refer to), 'Super cleri prerogativa', 'Super eucharistiae negotio', and 'Contra Nicolaum Herefordium'. John Pits notes that Wells wrote many further works, almost always against heresies and heretics. All that has survived of Wells's writing is Wyclif's account of his 'Pro religione privata' (in 'Fasciculi zizaniorum', 239-41). 
On folio 6'v' of Bodl. Oxf., MS Bodley 851 (SC 3041), a fifteenth-century illumination indicates that this manuscript belonged to someone almost certainly identifiable with Wells: 'Iste liber constat fratri Johanni de Wellis, monacho Ramseye'. Because the manuscript contains, among other items, the 'Z' text of 'Piers Plowman', it has been suggested that Wells is the first known owner of any text of 'Piers Plowman'. However, scholars are still debating whether the relevant part of the manuscript is early enough to have been his. The part of the manuscript he could have owned contains mainly texts by Walter Map. 
John Wells of Ramsey should be distinguished from various contemporaries and near contemporaries with the same name, including a John Wells, also a DTh, but a Franciscan, who had goods stolen from him in London in 1377, and who may or may not have also been the John Wells who sought to procure the election of Doctor John Wylyot as chancellor of Oxford in 1349. He should also be distinguished from the Master John Wells who on 26 June 1410 moved a decree in Oxford against the works of Wyclif, and who spoke at the Council of Constance. 


@@@@@


doc= 29015


Wells, John (1623-1676), nonconformist minister, son of Hugh Wells of London, was born on 29 January 1623. He must be distinguished from the John Wells of Mickleton, Gloucestershire, who later became vicar of Tewkesbury and for some time lived at St Ives, Huntingdonshire. John Wells of London was admitted to Merchant Taylors' School on 11 September 1634. He matriculated from St John's College, Oxford, on 3 July 1640, was elected a fellow in 1643, and took the degree of BA on 7 May 1644. In November 1646 Wells was acting as chaplain at Ilford Hospital, in Essex, but he returned to Oxford and was created MA on 14 April 1648; his submission to the parliamentary visitors is not recorded, and it seems that he took up his rights as a fellow in response to their call. Certainly he was one of those appointed on 10 August 1648 'to take care of all the affairs of St John Baptist College in the absence of Mr Cheynell' (Burrows, 182). Wells was minister of St Olave Jewry by January 1649, signing together with many others 'A Vindication of the Ministers of the Gospel in and about London' in opposition to the trial of Charles I. He was a leader with Edmund Calamy of the City's sixth classis and acted as scribe of the London Provincial Assembly in November 1654. 
Wells was ejected from St Olave's in 1662. On 3 May 1665 he was reported to be preaching at his house in Moorfields, and in 1669 another report had him preaching at the Blackamore, in Wood Street. On 1 July 1670 the governor of the Tower, Sir John Robinson, reported that the Moorfields house was no longer used as a meeting-place, but on 17 April 1672 Wells took out a licence to preach as a presbyterian there. He died on 18 June 1676 when, as the administration of his property records, he was resident in the parish of St Leonard, Shoreditch. In his sermon at the funeral of Wells on 2 July 1676, Thomas Watson, former minister at St Stephen Walbrook, recalled a minister who 'preached intelligibly to the capacity of his auditory', who was 'charitable and of a forgiving spirit', a man of 'candour and courtesy', 'not morose but affable' (Watson, 33-4). Wells's wife, Maria, survived him, but Sarah, the daughter of a minister named John Wells, was buried at St Giles Cripplegate on 25 July 1664. 


@@@@@


doc= 29016


Wells, Mary Stephens (1762-1829), actress, one of the three daughters of Thomas Davies, a carver and gilder in Birmingham, was born in that city on 16 December 1762. Her father died in a madhouse while she was a small child. Her mother kept a tavern frequented by actors, including Richard Yates, under whose management both mother and daughter appeared on the stage. Mary Davies's early roles at the Birmingham theatre included the Duke of York in 'Richard III', Cupid in Whitehead's 'A Trip to Scotland', and Arthur in 'King John'. After visiting Bath and York she went to Gloucester, where she played Juliet to the Romeo of an actor named Ezra Wells. They were married on 22 November 1778 in St Chad's Church, Shrewsbury, but Wells shortly afterwards deserted her. 
After provincial performances in Bristol and Plymouth, Mary Wells made her first appearance at the Haymarket on 1 June 1781, as Madge in Bickerstaffe's 'Love in a Village' and Mrs Cadwallader in Foote's 'Author'. On 3 September, in O'Keeffe's 'The Agreeable Surprize', she was the first Cowslip, a name that stuck to her (although she was occasionally spoken of as Becky Wells). Genest thought her acting as Cowslip was superior. On 25 September 1781, as Nancy in 'The Camp', she made her debut at Drury Lane, where she remained for four seasons. Her roles included Mrs Oakley in Colman's 'The Jealous Wife', Widow Brady in Garrick's 'The Irish Widow', and Jacintha in Benjamin Hoadley's 'The Suspicious Husband'. At the Haymarket in 1782 she appeared as Molly in 'The English Merchant', and Bridget in 'The Chapter of Accidents'. She also replaced Ann Cargill, after that lady's elopement, as Macheath in 'The Beggar's Opera', with the male characters played by women and vice versa. She made from the first a distinguished success, and was received with great enthusiasm. 
As the title character in Nicholas Rowe's 'Jane Shore', Mary Wells made her first appearance at Covent Garden on 14 December 1785, in what she considered her best performance. She also played Laura in Edward Topham's farce 'The Fool' and a variety of other comic and tragic characters. She remained at Covent Garden for the following winter season, and continued her summer performances at the Haymarket. James Leigh, in 'The New Rosciad', complimented her 'magic smile' and 'enchanting form', admitting that he was as pleased with her attempt at tragedy as he had previously been with her comic characters. When John Palmer made his ill-starred experiment at the Royalty Theatre, Wellclose Square, in 1787, Wells gave her imitations of Sarah Siddons and other famous actresses, in 'Ourselves, or, The Realities of the Stage', which proved highly popular. She returned to Covent Garden, where she played Mrs Page in 'The Merry Wives of Windsor', Lady in Milton's 'Comus', and Fatima in Garrick's 'Cymon'. Here she remained until 1792, while acting in the summers at Cheltenham, Brighton, and Weymouth. 
Meanwhile Wells's domestic affairs had become complicated. She had begun a liaison with Edward Topham (1751-1820), who was concerned in a daily newspaper called 'The World', which she assisted in producing. It served as a medium for complimentary criticisms of her performances. However, by 1792 Topham had taken their three daughters and left her for another woman. Wells had, moreover, backed bills for a considerable amount for her brother-in-law, Emmanuel Samuel, the husband of Anna Davies, who appeared at the Haymarket on 28 July 1786. This last indiscretion involved her in endless trouble. More than once she was a prisoner in the Fleet and in other places of detention in England and Ireland. Frederick Reynolds, who described her as the most beautiful actress of her day, tells of her eccentricities and erratic behaviour. In her own memoirs, she denied the charge of madness, but resorted to staying with Dr Francis Willis in Lincolnshire to avoid her creditors. 
This was to little avail, and it was in the Fleet that Wells met her second husband, Joseph Sumbel, who was confined there for contempt of court. Sumbel was a Moorish Jew, and secretary to the ambassador from Morocco. Their reputedly lavish wedding was performed in the Fleet in October 1797 to the amusement of contemporary newspapers, which recorded that the bride had converted to Judaism and changed her name to Leah. Evidently a man of morbid temperament, Sumbel seems to have alternately made passionate love to her and disowned her and left her to starve. A year later he sought unsuccessfully to have the marriage dissolved, declaring that on account of failure to follow the prescribed ceremony she was not his wife. He apparently died abroad in 1804. After their separation, she reverted to Christianity. 
The three volumes of her rambling autobiography, initially advertised in Brighton in 1792 and published in 1811 as 'Memoirs of the Life of Mrs Sumbel, Late Wells', are occupied principally with details of travels in search of her children and denunciations of Topham, Sumbel, and Samuel. The third volume is composed largely of printed compliments on her performances and correspondence from Topham and Reynolds. 
Although the actress had no permanent engagement in London after 1792, she made occasional appearances under the name Mary Sumbel in London into the nineteenth century. After a final benefit performance, in 1815, she spent her later years in lodgings with her aged mother. She also applied to the Covent Garden Theatrical Fund, and received an annuity of $55 until her death in London on 23 January 1829. She was buried in St Pancras, London. 


@@@@@


doc= 29017


Wells, Samuel (1614-1678), nonconformist minister, was born on 18 August 1614 in St Peter-in-the-East, Oxford, and baptized there on 24 August, the son of William Wells of Oxford. He matriculated from Magdalen Hall, Oxford, on 11 May 1632, graduated BA from New College on 27 June 1633, and proceeded MA from Magdalen Hall on 3 May 1636. He was ordained as deacon in Salisbury on 25 September 1636 as curate at Ashbury, Berkshire, and was for some time a schoolmaster at Wandsworth, Surrey. In 1637 he married Dorothy Doyley of Wiltshire; the couple had ten or eleven children, including a son, William, and daughter, Martha (died 1669). During the civil war Wells served as chaplain to Colonel Charles Essex's regiment in 1642. After his chaplaincy he was made vicar of Wendover, Buckinghamshire, on 9 October 1643. Subsequently he was given, by the Westminster assembly, on 1 July 1646, the lucrative sequestered rectory of Remenham, Berkshire, where, with only about twenty households in the parish, he had little work to do yet $200 per annum of living. Therefore when the House of Lords ordered, on 13 September 1648, that 'Dr Bennet give Institution and Induction unto Sam. Wells clerk, to the vicarage of Banbury, in the County of Oxon.' ('JHL', 10, 1647-8, 501), although it carried far less remuneration Wells took this ministry opportunity with enthusiasm and eager expectation. 
One of Wells's early accomplishments in Banbury was organizing an anti-regicide campaign in which he, along with eighteen other ministers in Oxfordshire and Northamptonshire, condemned the proceedings of the high court of justice against Charles I. This resulted in a pamphlet, 'The humble advice and earnest desires of certain well-affected ministers... of Banbury in the county of Oxon... to his Excellency Tho. Fairfax: presented 25 January 1649 by two of the subscribers' (1649). The two presenting subscribers were Wells and John Bayley of Fringford, Oxfordshire. In 1654 Wells, along with John Owen, Thomas Goodwin, and others, was appointed a member of the commission for Oxfordshire to reject incompetent and scandalous ministers. Moreover, the trustees for maintenance of ministers granted an annual augmentation of $30 to his salary. As the Quakers gained greater numbers of converts, including some within Oxfordshire, Wells became affected by this overtly anti-clerical movement. In 1654 he brought charges against Anne Audland, who had called Wells a 'false prophet' and was incarcerated for blaspheming against the Lord's servant. In a letter dated 27 July 1655 Thomas Curtis, a former captain in the parliamentary army, accused Wells of being unnecessarily severe in his dealings with Audland. The same year Wells was reprimanded by a certain Sarah Timms who called him to 'fear the Lord'; in return Timms was imprisoned for six months. 
On 20 May 1661 Wells wrote to Richard Baxter enquiring of Baxter's view on the imminent and increased pressure to conform exerted by the Restoration Church of England, so as to 'reduce the publick worship of God to the forme of that Liturgy which was formerly in use in England' (Keeble and Nuttall, 2.15). Eventually, refusing the terms of conformity set forth by the Restoration church settlement, Wells was ejected from his living in November 1662. However, he soon became the leader of the group which, having seceded from the parish church, formed a presbyterian conventicle. He continued to live and minister in Banbury until the 'Five Mile Act' of 1665, which prohibited former parish incumbents from coming within a 5 mile distance of their parishioners, forced him to move to Deddington, Oxfordshire. Although removed from Banbury he wrote weekly letters of encouragement and spiritual counsel to his erstwhile congregation, and in 1669 he was preaching at Adderbury, Bicester, and elsewhere in Oxfordshire. Wells's farewell sermon at Banbury, 'The Spiritual Remembrancer', based on 'Acts' 20: 27 was published in 1676, along with the regular letters to his former flock. 'The Spiritual Remembrancer' shows the typical puritan casuistical genre of epistolary counselling and pastoral guidance. 
After Charles II issued the indulgence of religion on 15 March 1672, Wells returned to Banbury and, being a man of considerable means, bought a house and took a licence to preach as presbyterian at his residence or that of James Sutton of Banbury, on 20 April 1672. He is said to have kept a cordial relationship with the new incumbent of Banbury, Dr Richard White, maintaining a 'very fair and friendly correspondence' in which White said, 'I pray God bless your Labours in private, and mine in publick'. Wells died in June or July 1678 in Banbury, and was buried there on 7 July. His wife survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 29018


Wells, Sir Thomas Spencer, first baronet (1818-1897), gynaecological surgeon, was born at St Albans, Hertfordshire, on 3 February 1818, the eldest of the four sons and one daughter of builder Joseph William Wells (1794-1856) and his wife, Harriet (died 1846), daughter of William Wright, of Bermondsey. Wells's formal education began at St Albans Abbey School. On leaving St Albans in 1835, Wells decided on a surgical career, undertaking a year's pupillage with Dr Michael Sadler in Barnsley. Wells followed Sadler on rounds, used his mentor's library, and learned medical bookkeeping and dispensing. Wells then moved to Leeds and was apprenticed to the parish surgeon Mr Marsden. Attending the poor, Wells, still only nineteen, gained substantial surgical experience and assisted in numerous childbirths. He also attended Leeds medical school for lectures and demonstrations, including those of Joseph Garlick, William Hey, and Thomas Pridgin Teale senior. Like many ambitious would-be surgeons, Wells recognized the importance of travelling to hospitals and schools to broaden his education. Despite limited moneys, he went to Trinity College, Dublin, in the summer of 1837 to study with physicians Robert Graves and William Stokes, surgeon Philip Crampton, and ophthalmologist Arthur Jacob. 
At Dublin, one of the leading British medical schools, the traditional emphasis on identification of symptoms was giving way to revolutionary changes generated from the Paris clinics, where prognoses and diagnoses were increasingly based on correlations between physical signs and autopsy findings. These French methods helped to elevate the status of surgery just as Wells entered the profession. He absorbed this new approach and in 1839 received recognition for his prize-winning essay on bronchotomy (tracheotomy) delivered at the Dublin Medico-Chirurgical Society. 
After two years in Dublin, Wells moved to London to walk the wards of St Thomas's Hospital. During his two years there, he amassed experience in hospital practice and surgery. He was congratulated for completing the best series of post-mortem reports for 1839-40, and in 1841 was admitted as a member of the Royal College of Surgeons. 
Wells was enamoured of the London medical environment, but on leaving St Thomas's he still lacked the financial and social resources to acquire a metropolitan appointment. In September 1841 he accepted the Royal Navy post of assistant surgeon, with a guaranteed salary and the opportunity to hone his skills. Wells was dispatched to Britain's main foreign naval hospital in Malta, where he treated a wide range of infectious diseases and injuries, as well as establishing a civilian practice and publishing in Britain's leading medical journals. In 1844 he became a fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons. 
Wells left Malta in 1846, and for the next decade led a nomadic life. From mid-1846 until mid-1848 he undertook several voyages aboard HMS 'Ceylon', 'Locust', 'Hibernia', and 'Trafalgar' -- and compiled reports that were published in British medical journals. On shore leave Wells reinforced his professional profile by presenting foreign findings to his London colleagues. In 1848 he was promoted to surgeon and granted two months' leave in Paris to study the treatment of gunshot wounds. At this point his career took a noticeable turn toward civilian practice. 
Following his initial Parisian stint, Wells requested a further six months' break for continental travel. In Paris he attended Dupuytren's and Malgaigne's clinics and became interested in the work of Bernard and Magendie, especially in pathology and ophthalmology. Wells also visited Vienna and other leading centres of clinical and laboratory medicine. Shortly afterwards the navy again granted him leave, this time to accompany the ailing marquess of Northampton to Egypt, where Wells became interested in malaria. By then he was clearly looking beyond the navy and towards a more comfortable London existence. Nevertheless, in 1851 he was commissioned as surgeon and sanitary officer to HMS 'Modeste' with the Mediterranean Fleet. Again, Wells made the best of the opportunity and further developed his interest in public health, becoming a strong proponent of quarantine and vaccination. 
By 1853, however, Wells had tired of naval life. On 16 July that year he married Elizabeth Lucas Wright, daughter of James Wright, a solicitor; they had five daughters and a son, Arthur Spencer Wells, private secretary to the chancellor of the exchequer from 1893 to 1895. Ambitious and accomplished, Wells wanted to return to London permanently. Furthermore, his health was poor, and he obtained leave to visit mineral springs in Germany. On his return to London he continued to receive half pay from the navy while establishing a private practice in prestigious Grosvenor Square, where he at first concentrated on ophthalmic surgery. What Wells still lacked at this time was one of the highly desirable hospital appointments that usually guaranteed metropolitan success. Wells, it appears, lacked the necessary social connections. However, in 1854, he received two lesser, but crucial, appointments: he became attached to the Grosvenor Place school of medicine (affiliated with St George's Hospital) as lecturer in surgery and gained a position as surgeon to the dispensary of the Samaritan Free Hospital for Women and Children. 
The Samaritan was Wells's making. There, over the next two decades, Wells developed a reputation as Britain's leading 'women's surgeon', as well as helping to develop gynaecology as a distinct medical specialism. The Samaritan was one of the first generation of small hospitals that specialized in the treatment of women. They were commonly started as shoestring affairs and, in this instance, the hospital had no in-patient facilities. Wells's professional standing enabled him to experiment, carrying out innovative surgery that would eventually place the Samaritan among the world's leading gynaecological institutions. In addition, he became editor of the 'Medical Times and Gazette', a position that further enhanced his professional standing. 
At this juncture, then, it seems curious that Wells should have volunteered for a civilian posting with the army in the Crimean War. Perhaps an annual salary of $1500 appealed to a young man whose other positions were chiefly honorary. He and his wife went initially to the large hospital in Smyrna and later to Renkioi in the Dardanelles. Their first child, Helen, was born there in 1855. This sojourn was curtailed in April 1856, when the British Admiralty discovered that while still receiving half pay Wells was in full army employ. Ordered back to London to prepare for duty, he resigned. 
During his time at the military front line Wells had come to rethink the limits of surgery. He now saw the abdomen as operable. In civilian practice, abdominal surgery was largely viewed as tantamount to murder, yet in battle the abdomen was frequently ripped open, and the surgical attempts to save lives sometimes succeeded. Wells returned to the Samaritan with a new confidence in the potential of abdominal surgery and the conviction that new approaches could be applied to the treatment of women. 
Wells's place in medical history is most securely attached to his pioneering work in abdominal surgery, particularly in the development of ovariotomy, an operation that entailed removing diseased ovaries and Fallopian tubes. While a handful of surgeons had previously attempted this dangerous procedure with minimal success, Wells placed it within the surgical canon. Although ovariotomy was highly controversial, in a small hospital like the Samaritan Wells had greater autonomy than would have been the case in one of the larger, more hierarchical teaching hospitals. On his return from the Crimea he obtained his own hospital beds. The Samaritan was beginning to draw attention from leading consultants such as Sir William Fergusson and Wells was willing to demonstrate his techniques to them. Enormous ovarian cysts had been beyond the surgical scope and were frequently treated palliatively by repeated tapping. Wells sought a cure and turned to ovariotomy, a move that won him the backing of James Young Simpson, the renowned Edinburgh obstetrician who himself had already attempted ovariotomy. 
Wells had witnessed his first ovariotomy while assisting Isaac Baker Brown at the Middlesex Hospital in 1854. The patient died, and Wells was discouraged, but nevertheless he attempted his own ovariotomy in December 1857. The operation was disappointing because the consulting surgeons Wells had gathered to observe and assist persuaded him to abandon the procedure when they discovered the extent of adnexal masses. That woman died from the cyst and on autopsy Wells decided the tumour would have been operable. He improved his technique, and shortly afterwards in February 1858 a patient of his survived the operation. This launched Wells on a series of operations that would over three decades establish ovariotomy as an acceptable procedure. He utilized the 'Medical Times and Gazette' to publicize his own and other cases, applying cumulative medical statistics to demonstrate that mortality rates resulting from the surgery were declining and that ovariotomy was a justifiable, life-saving procedure. Wells was meticulous about presenting his failures as well as his successes. By 1880 Wells had completed his thousandth ovariotomy and had made an immense contribution to the development of gynaecology. 
Although ovariotomy continued to be a controversial procedure, it came to be used as a 'cure' for a variety of female maladies. By the 1870s and 1880s some surgeons began to carry out oophorectomies, the removal of healthy ovaries, in the belief that these could cure uterine fibromata, dysmenorrhoea, and 'menstrual epilepsy' (Moscucci, 157). Opponents argued that this led to the 'unsexing' of women, as it 'deprived women of their true essence and prevented them from fulfilling their proper role in society as mothers and moral leaders' (Moscucci, 159). Wells, too, denounced oophorectomy, claiming in 1891 that 'The oophorectomists of civilization touch hands with the aboriginal spayers of New Zealand' (Moscucci, 158). He was also vociferously opposed to the salpingo-oophorectomy (removal of the ovaries and fallopian tube) devised by Robert Lawson Tait. The two were bitter rivals and the dispute over 'Tait's operation' did nothing to help matters; it also divided the medical profession for many years. 
Wells also maintained his interest in public health. In London he pleaded for legislation to govern waste disposal, water supply, and housing. He also became a prominent proponent of cremation as a more efficient, hygienic method of disposing of the dead. In surgery, he adopted Listerian antisepsis from 1878. 
Although Wells performed controversial surgery and supported such causes as cremation, he was none the less a man of the establishment. In 1871 he became a member of the council of the Royal College of Surgeons, was the Hunterian professor in 1877, vice-president in 1879, and president in 1883, when he gave the Hunterian oration. In Ireland in 1886 he was made an honorary fellow of the King and Queen's College of Physicians and of the Royal College of Surgeons. Leiden and Bologna universities presented him with honorary medical degrees. Wells, who was acutely mindful of social as well as professional conventions, was awarded a baronetcy in 1883. From 1863 to 1896 he served as surgeon to Queen Victoria's household. Wells's publications include 'Diseases of the Ovaries' (1865), 'Diagnosis and Surgical Treatment of Abdominal Tumours' (1885), 'Surgery Past, Present and Future' (1872), 'The Revival of Ovariotomy...' (1884), and 'Modern Abdominal Surgery: with an Appendix on the Castration of Women' (1891). 
In addition to his house in London, Wells owned a country house with substantial gardens at Golder's Hill, North End, Hampstead, and became an accomplished horseman. He died from an apoplectic fit at the Hotel du Cap d'Antibes, near Cannes, on 31 January 1897. Wells's body was cremated at Woking and his ashes were buried in Brompton cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 29019


Wells, William (1818-1889), agriculturist and politician, was born on 15 March 1818, the eldest son of Captain William Wells RN, of Holme, Huntingdonshire, and Elizabeth, daughter of John Joshua Proby, first earl of Carysfort. After being educated at Harrow School he went to Balliol College, Oxford, where he matriculated on 16 June 1836 and graduated BA (1839) and MA (1842). He then entered the army, holding a commission in the 1st Life Guards. 
In 1826 Wells inherited an estate of 8000 acres in the fens. He is chiefly remembered for his efforts as a practical agriculturist to improve and develop this area, and especially for the draining of Whittlesea Mere. This was a shallow sheet of stagnant water, a little more than 1000 acres in extent, surrounded by another 2000 acres of bog and marsh. The drainage of the mere was begun by Wells in 1851. In the following year, as a result of heavy rain, the mere flooded on 12 November. All the water was, however, discharged a second time with the help of an 'Appold' centrifugal pump, which Wells was one of the first to utilize for land drainage. By the autumn of 1853 the bed of the mere was under cultivation. The surrounding peatland proved more intractable, however, and it was found necessary to go through a process of warping, or overlaying with fertile soil. This work had hardly begun when Wells contributed his account of the draining operations to the 'Journal of the Royal Agricultural Society', in 1860. On 7 December 1854 Wells married Louisa, daughter of Francis Wemyss-Charteris-Douglas, seventh earl of Wemyss. 
Wells also inherited the Redleaf estate in Kent from his great-uncle William Wells (1768-1847) in 1847. He rebuilt Holmewood House in 1874 to designs by William Young, who later also altered Gosford for Wells's brother-in-law, the tenth earl of Wemyss, and designed the War Office in Whitehall in 1898. He continued his great-uncle's picture collecting and was a friend of Sir Edwin Landseer, of whom he was a sporting companion. Like his brother-in-law Lord Wemyss he was a champion rifle shot and active in the volunteer movement. He was an original member of the National Rifle Association council (1860) and was a captain of the English eight (1868-77). He had a rifle range at Redleaf and commanded the 23rd (Kent) volunteer rifles based at Penshurst. 
The operations at Whittlesey were brought to an end about 1866, after fifteen years of incessant labour. Much of the cultivation of the reclaimed land, and most of that of the two home farms reserved by Wells, was performed by means of steam power. With the object of encouraging the intelligent use of steam for agricultural purposes, Wells offered annual prizes, beginning in 1864, at the meetings of the Peterborough Agricultural Society; these were awarded to the drivers of agricultural portable steam engines, for skill and care in the management of the machines, coupled with a clear record with regard to accidents. 
Wells became a member of council of the Royal Agricultural Society in 1861. In December 1862 he was a member of the chemical committee, of which he was elected chairman in 1866. This post he continued to hold up to the time of his death. He was president of the Royal Agricultural Society in 1880, and of the Shire Horse Society in 1885. He represented Beverley in parliament from 1852 to 1857, and Peterborough from 1868 to 1874. He was justice of the peace for Kent and Huntingdonshire, and high sheriff of the latter county in 1876. 
Wells died at his London residence, 12 North Audley Street, Grosvenor Square, on 1 May 1889, and was buried at Holme, Huntingdonshire, on 6 May. He had no sons and was succeeded by his brother, Grenville Granville Wells. 


@@@@@


doc= 29020


Wells, William Charles (1757-1817), physician, the second son of Robert Wells (1727/8-1794), and Mary Wells, who had emigrated from Scotland, was born in Charles Town, South Carolina, on 24 May 1757. The author Helena Wells (1761?-1824) was his sister. His father, who had settled in Carolina in 1753, was a printer and bookseller. A fervent loyalist, he made his son wear a tartan coat and blue bonnet, so that he might be known to be a Scot at heart and not an American. Wells was sent to school at Dumfries in 1768, and then went to the University of Edinburgh in 1770, but in 1771 returned to Carolina, and was apprenticed to Alexander Garden, a physician and botanist in Charles Town, with whom he remained until the American War of Independence broke out in 1775. Wells then returned to Britain and began regular medical studies at Edinburgh, where he lived until 1778. He attended William Hunter's lectures on anatomy and midwifery in London, and became a student of St Bartholomew's Hospital. He went to the Netherlands in 1779 as surgeon to a Scottish regiment in the Dutch service, but resigned, owing to a disagreement with the colonel. He studied medicine at Leiden in 1780 for three months, and prepared a thesis, 'De frigore', before graduating MD at Edinburgh on 24 July 1780. 
Wells returned to Carolina in 1781 to look after his father's property, and went from there in December 1782 to St Augustine, East Florida, where he put together a press, which he had brought in pieces, and published a weekly newspaper. He was also a volunteer captain, and acted, from his recollection of Garrick's performance of the role, the part of Lusignan in 'Zara'. 
Wells returned to England in May 1784, and, after three months in Paris in 1785, borrowed money to set up a practice in London. He passed several years without receiving a fee, and at the end of ten years had an income of $250. He was admitted a licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians in 1788, was elected physician to the Finsbury Dispensary in 1789, and held office until 11 December 1799. In 1795 he was elected assistant physician to St Thomas's Hospital and in 1800 physician, an office which he held until his death. Wells published in 1792 'An Essay upon Single Vision with Two Eyes', and in November 1793 he was elected FRS, becoming a fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1814. 
Wells published widely, including 'An Essay on Dew' in 1814, for which he received the Rumford medal of the Royal Society, and in 1818, an 'Account of a Female of the White Race of Mankind, Part of whose Skin Resembles that of a Negro', in which he has been thought to anticipate Darwin. 
The largest annual income Wells received was $764. He never had a bank account and left about $600, including his books, furniture, and gold medal. Wells's struggle to build a practice meant that he lived very frugally, but he managed to maintain a keen interest in his research. Astley Cooper considered him to be 'ingenious but irritable' (Cooper, 307). Wells had a difference with the College of Physicians, the grounds of which he explained in a published letter to Lord Kenyon, and never became a fellow. However, Matthew Baillie, David Pitcairn, and William Lister, all fellows of the college, were his friends, and they helped him as much as was possible in practice. 
Wells died of hydrothorax on 18 September 1817 in London, at his lodgings in Serjeants' Inn, Chancery Lane, and was buried in St Bride's, Fleet Street, where a tablet was erected to his memory. He was unmarried. During his final illness he dictated to his friend Samuel Patrick an autobiography, which was published with his chief works in 1818. 


@@@@@


doc= 29021


Wells, William Frederick (bap. 1764, d. 1836), watercolour painter, was baptized at Chislehurst, Kent, on 24 April 1764, the son of William Wells (died in or after 1815) and his wife, Ann (died 1815). He was educated at Robert Harper's school in Queen Anne Street, London -- premises later owned by J. M. W. Turner -- and by the age of eleven he was being taught drawing by either John James Barralet or his brother John Melchior Barralet. Wells married his wife, Mary (died 1807), about 1786 and lived for a period in Northampton, where four of his nine children (three sons and six daughters) were born; two children died in infancy. By 1795 he had returned to London and was living at 34 Mount Street. In 1796 he published 'A New and Compendious Treatise of Anatomy', 'designed principally for... ladies'. A set of studies of female heads, by Wells, was engraved by George Townley Stubbs in 1800; between 1802 and 1805 Wells and the artist John Laporte made a series of seventy-two etchings after drawings by Thomas Gainsborough; and about 1809-10 Wells etched the Revd Joseph Wilkinson's views of the Lake District. 
Wells was a successful drawing-master; his pupils included two of the daughters of the duke of Clarence (later William IV). In 1792 a former pupil, Robert Ker Porter, introduced Wells to Turner, who was then aged about seventeen, and the two became intimate friends. Wells's daughter Clara recalled: 'Turner loved my father with a son's affection -- to me he was an elder brother' (Hamilton, 41). It was Wells who, in 1806, suggested to Turner the idea for the 'Liber Studiorum', which Turner began at the cottage that Wells owned at Knockholt in Kent. Wells travelled extensively, his pictures including English, Scottish, and Welsh scenes; after the peace of Amiens, in 1802, which made it possible to travel abroad again, he went on a sketching tour of Norway, Sweden, and Denmark, an undertaking which was exceptional at the time. 
Wells was 'a sound though not brilliant painter' (Hardie, 3.132); his drawings were nearly all landscapes in the tradition of Claude, and show a feeling for nature but his work is marred by poorly drawn figure groups. The Victoria and Albert Museum holds four of his works, two signed W. F. Wells. Wells is more significant as the instigator, in 1804, of the Society of Painters in Water Colours, which he founded in an effort to raise the status of watercolour painting, since drawings in the medium were poorly presented at Royal Academy exhibitions. He served from 1806 to 1807 as its second president, but resigned from the society in 1813, when its exhibition began to include oil paintings. In all Wells exhibited ninety-one pictures with the society (thirty-seven of Scandinavian scenes) and, between 1795 and 1813, forty-two drawings at the Royal Academy. His pictures were priced from 2 to 15 guineas. 
In 1813 Wells was appointed the first drawing-master for the East India Company's cadets at Addiscombe College, near Croydon in Surrey; it was said that he had difficulty in controlling his students. Portraits of Wells from middle age show a round-faced, genial man, clean-shaven, his domed head nearly bald. The Italian poet Ugo Foscolo wrote that he had seen Wells in a blue overcoat, 'habille en dandy' (Wheeler, 'Old Water-Colour Society', 1971, 18). Highly hospitable, Wells frequently hosted parties, often fancy dress ones. The Revd Robert Finch recorded in his diary that he had 'Conversed upon the subject of 'Twelfth Night' at Wells's. He [Wells] will support the characters of a Chinese Mandarin, Mr. Noodle or Doodle, and a Beau of Fashion' (Wheeler, 'Old Water-Colour Society', 1971, 14). Wells also gave music lessons and played the piano and the 'harmonica' (or musical glasses). 
Wells moved from 33 York Buildings to a house on Mitcham Common in 1819. In 1829 he was commissioned by Finch to do a series of drawings of English scenery (now mostly lost), and in 1832 he made a sketching tour of Jersey. He died, at his home, on 16 November 1836 and was buried in Mitcham churchyard. To the elder of his sons he left only 5's'. and the hope 'that he would see the error of his ways'; each of Wells's three surviving daughters was bequeathed $100 by Turner on his death in 1851. 


@@@@@


doc= 29022


Wellsted, James Raymond (1805-1842), surveyor and traveller, was in 1828-9 secretary to Sir Charles Malcolm, superintendent of the Bombay marine. In 1830 he was appointed second-lieutenant of the East India Company's ship 'Palinurus', then engaged, under Captain Moresby, in making a detailed survey of the Gulf of 'Aqabah and the northern part of the Red Sea. She returned to Bombay early in 1833, and was then sent, under the command of Captain Haines, to survey the southern coast of Arabia, Wellsted being still her second-lieutenant. In January 1834 she crossed over to Socotra, and on the 10th anchored in the Bay of Tamarida. Wellsted spent the following two months travelling in the island, returning to his ship on 7 March. He published the results of his journey as 'Memoir on the island of Socotra' ('JRGS', 5, 1835, 129). 
In November 1835 Wellsted had permission to travel in Oman, and went to Muscat on the 21st with Lieutenant F. Whitelock, also of the Indian navy. The imam gave them every assistance in his power, but their fever and the disturbed state of the country curtailed their plans. None the less, the two reached areas which no European had previously seen and which were not visited again by Europeans for another hundred years. Wellsted published preliminary results of this journey in the 'Journal of the Royal Geographical Society' (7, 1837, 102). 
Wellsted seems to have made another attempt to explore Oman in the following winter, and to have arrived at Muscat in April 1837 in an acute stage of fever. 'In a fit of delirium he discharged both barrels of his gun into his mouth, but the balls, passing upwards, only inflicted two ghastly wounds in the upper jaw'. He was carried to Bombay, and thence returned to Europe on leave. He retired from the service in 1839, 'and dragged on a few years in shattered health and with impaired mental powers, chiefly residing in France' (Low, 2.85-6). He died on 25 October 1842 at his father's house in Molineux Street, London, aged thirty-seven. 
Wellsted's papers read before the Royal Geographical Society procured him immediate recognition in the scientific world, and he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 6 April 1837. He was also a fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society. As well as writing several scientific papers, he was the author of 'Travels in Arabia' (2 vols., 1838) and 'Travels to the City of the Caliphs' (2 vols., 1840), an account of the travels of his friend Lieutenant Ormsby. Wellsted was an acute observer and not blinded by prejudice or ignorance in his description of the local people. His accounts of the geography of Oman, particularly the irrigation systems and the way of life in remote mountain tracts, continue to be important as a unique description of the country at an early date. 


@@@@@


doc= 29023


Welwood, James (1652-1727), physician and writer on politics, was born in Dunfermline, Fife, Scotland, the third son of John Welwood ('c'.1603- 'c'.1680) and Margaret Dury ('c'.1620-1659). Formerly a teacher, the elder Welwood began preaching on a rota basis at Leuchars in 1643, and by 1659 had procured a parish near Annandale, Dumfriesshire. Mrs Welwood died that same year. In 1663 the Revd John Welwood, an ardent Presbyterian, was dismissed for refusing to accept episcopacy in Scotland. Both of James Welwood's older brothers, John and Andrew, became irreconcilable covenanters. In 1668 Welwood enrolled at St Andrews University (St Salvator's College), receiving his BA and MA degrees by 25 July 1671. He probably taught at a school in Fife for a few years. Welwood later acknowledged that his brother John's sermons against Archbishop James Sharp implicated the Welwood family in Sharp's murder in 1679, forcing him to flee Scotland (appendix to 'Mercurius Reformatus', 1692). 
Welwood studied medicine on the continent, apparently at Leiden and Paris, and spent some time at the court of William of Orange in the Hague before graduating MD from Rheims in 1684. His experience in France during the years when the government of Louis XIV eroded the policy of religious toleration and persecuted Huguenots instilled in him a desire for religious accommodation under a protestant king. On his return to Scotland that year Welwood was arrested for corresponding with Scottish exiles in the Netherlands, but he was released and practised medicine for a time in Edinburgh. In 1685 he married Barbara Armor ('c'.1665- 'c'.1700), who in 1686 gave birth to Mary Welwood Maxwell, the first of their three daughters. 
Welwood moved across the border to Newcastle upon Tyne in 1687 and after the arrival in England of William of Orange the following year, engaged in a published war of words with John March, vicar of Newcastle. Their letters appeared in March's 'Vindication of the Present Great Revolution in England' (1689). Welwood strongly supported the revolution of 1688, mainly because he viewed the Dutch prince as a champion of protestantism against the twin dangers of the Roman church and Catholic France. In the first weeks of 1689 Welwood migrated to London and began publication of the twice-weekly Williamite journal 'Mercurius Reformatus'. He caught the attention of Bishop Gilbert Burnet, who admired his writing style and political views; Welwood proved useful in the campaign to deflect Jacobite propaganda emanating from the continent. Welwood was appointed an extra-physician to William and Mary in March 1690, and elevated to physician to the person by warrant from the lord chamberlain in April of that year. Accordingly the Royal College of Physicians welcomed him as a royal doctor when he became a fellow in 1690 (annals, RCP Lond.). In January 1691 he was named superintendent of surgeons in the fleet, the first of many government medical appointments. From the spring of 1691 he also functioned as a reformist commissioner for the sick and wounded, and as principal physician to the forts along the Thames. 
Despite the favour shown him by William and Mary, Welwood and his printer, Richard Baldwin, were castigated by the House of Commons in November 1691 for criticizing in 'Mercurius Reformatus' the parliamentary management of war appropriations. Welwood ceased publication of the paper immediately thereafter, and, at the request of Queen Mary, started to write a history of the reign of Charles I. Disturbed by a number of critical works on her grandfather's life, the queen charged Welwood with writing for her private edification an honest account, which he expanded to a hundred-year survey after her death, and published in 1700. 'Memoirs of the most Material Transactions', generally sympathetic to Charles I, went through multiple editions and influenced later whig historians. 
Welwood's first wife died about the turn of the century and in 1703 he married Elizabeth Tregonwell Seymour ('c'.1670-1732), daughter of John Tregonwell, and widow of Henry Seymour. The Welwoods lived in the York Buildings just off the Strand. During the next two decades he wrote an almanac (1705); authenticated Bulstrode Whitelocke's manuscript on early English history (1709); translated Xenophon's 'Symposium' as 'The Banquet' (1710); and wrote a lengthy preface to an English verse rendition of Lucan by Nicholas Rowe (1718). Welwood was also active in the Royal College of Physicians, becoming a censor and an elector in 1722. In 1726 he acted as a go-between in the tumultuous triangle that included Prince George, his mistress and friend of the Welwood family Henrietta Howard, and her husband Charles. Before a settlement was reached Welwood died, on 2 April 1727 at his home in York Buildings, and was buried in the vault of his parish church, St Martin-in-the-Fields. He was preceded in death by his daughter Barbara Welwood Molesworth, but nominated his unmarried daughter Jane Welwood as executor of the estate. Most of Welwood's wealth was distributed to family and friends. His wife's dowry was returned to her as part of a pre-nuptial agreement; she died in 1732. 
The James Welwood of this article should not be confused with the 


@@@@@


doc= 29024


Welsby, William Newland (1803-1864), legal writer, was born at Acton, near Nantwich in Cheshire, the only son of William Welsby, a barrister of the Middle Temple and land agent, and his wife, formerly Miss Newland. He received his schooling at Acton grammar school and Dr Doncaster's, Oakham, before being admitted on 28 October 1818 as a pensioner at St John's College, Cambridge, where he graduated BA in 1823 and MA in 1827. On 22 April 1823 he was admitted as student at the Middle Temple, and was called to the bar on 10 November 1826. He went the north Wales and Chester circuit, in time becoming the leader, and in 1841 was appointed recorder of Chester by Lord Cottenham, to whom his father was agent. He became junior counsel to the Treasury and was chosen to hold an inquiry into Birmingham borough prison in 1853. He enjoyed the reputation of being an accomplished scholar and lawyer, but while contemporaries acknowledged that he was just and upright, they found 'a certain roughness of manner and indifference to general opinion which at times caused him to be misunderstood' ('Law Times', 418). 
An industrious and prolific writer, Welsby edited, with Roger Meeson, seventeen volumes of 'Exchequer Reports', beginning with 1837, and collaborated with E. T. Hurlstone and J. Gordon in nine subsequent volumes ranging from 1849. In conjunction with John Horatio Lloyd he published in three parts 'Reports of Mercantile Cases in the Courts of Common Law' in 1829 and 1830, and with Edward Beavan he edited the second edition of Chitty's 'Collection of Statutes' (1851-4, 4 vols.), superintending also the third edition, which appeared in 1865, after his death. He 'seemed to have a peculiar talent for re-arranging and improving old textbooks and adapting them to existing needs' ('Law Times', 418). Among works which benefited from his attentions were 'Archbold's Summary of the Law on Pleading and Evidence in Criminal Cases' (tenth and fifteenth editions) and Jervis's 'Treatise on the Office of Coroner' (1854). Welsby also edited a volume of sixteen 'Lives of Eminent English Judges of the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries', which originally came out in the 'Law Magazine'; nine of them were from his pen. 
Renowned for his capacity for hard work, Welsby eventually overtaxed his strength. On 1 July 1864 he died at his home, 19 Holland Villas Road, Kensington, London. He left a widow, Mary, but no children. 


@@@@@


doc= 29025


Welsh, David (1793-1845), Free Church of Scotland minister and author, youngest son of David Welsh, sheep farmer, of Earlshaugh and Tweedshaws, was born at Braefoot, Moffat, on 11 December 1793. He was educated at Moffat parish school, the high school of Edinburgh, and Edinburgh University, and on 7 May 1816 was licensed to preach by the presbytery of Lochmaben. On 22 March 1821 he was ordained minister of the parish of Crossmichael in Kirkcudbrightshire, and on 6 September 1827 he was translated to St David's Church, Glasgow. He married, probably in 1830, Isabel, sister of William Hamilton, provost of Glasgow. In 1825 Welsh published a biography of Thomas Brown MD, following it with an edition of Brown's philosophical lectures in 1834. In October 1831 he was appointed professor of ecclesiastical history in the University of Edinburgh, and, on leaving Glasgow, received from the university the degree of DD. He was a painstaking lecturer. In 1834 he visited Germany and in 1844 published 'Elements of Church History'. He wrote articles on Jesus and on the Jews for the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica' (1841). 
At the meeting of the general assembly of 1842 Welsh was chosen moderator of the assembly, which adopted 'the claim of right', and he was one of the leaders of those who, on 18 May 1843, formed themselves into 'the general assembly of the Free Protesting Church of Scotland', with Dr Thomas Chalmers as its first moderator. It was Welsh who laid their protest on the table of the assembly. 'The Limits and Extent of the Right of Private Judgement' (1843) records his opinions. He had to resign his chair, and his appointment as secretary to the Bible board, made in 1839, was cancelled. In two months he collected $21,000 for building New College at Edinburgh for the education of Free Churchmen. In 1844 he was appointed librarian of the college and professor of church history; he left his books to the library. Also in 1844 he was first editor of the 'North British Review', the Free Church's journal. He died suddenly at Camis Eskin on the Clyde on 24 April 1845, survived by his wife and four children. 


@@@@@


doc= 29026


Welsh, James (1775-1861), army officer in the East India Company, was born in Edinburgh on 27 October 1775, the son of John Welsh, writer to the signet, and his wife, Primrose Hook, 'nee' Gascoigne. He obtained a commission as ensign in the army of the East India Company on 22 May 1790, and arrived at Madras on 23 January 1791. He joined the 3rd European regiment at Vellore, and in November went with Colonel Floyd's detachment to serve in the grand army under Lord Cornwallis. 
Welsh was promoted to be lieutenant in the 24th native infantry on 1 November 1792, and took part with it in the siege of Pondicherry in July and August 1793. He married at Calcutta, on 28 December 1794, Sarah (1779-1839), second daughter of Francis Light, first governor of Prince of Wales's Island, Penang, and Martinha Rozells. They had several children, of whom six daughters and a son survived to adulthood. 
Transferred in 1795 to the 9th native infantry at Mandura, Welsh served at the capture of Colombo and Ceylon in February 1796, and remained at Point-de-Galle as fort-adjutant until the end of 1798, when he was transferred in the same capacity to Masulipatam. 
On 10 December 1799 Welsh was promoted to be captain, and appointed adjutant and quartermaster of the 3rd native infantry, which in 1803 formed part of a force under Major-General Arthur Wellesley to operate against the Marathas. He marched with it across India to Poona, and was present at the assault on the great hill fort at Ahmednagar, which was captured on 12 August 1803. 
Welsh served on the staff at the battle of Argaon (29 November) and in the siege and assault (15 December) of Gawilgarh, and led a body of 250 men, after a forced march of 54 miles, to the capture of Mankarsir on 6 February 1804. He was appointed judge-advocate and assistant surveyor to the Poona subsidiary force, and with it on 10 August 1804 took part in the assault and capture of Chandur, and the occupation of Dhurp on 14 October. He commanded a party of 300 men at the capture of Galna on 26 October, and on 13 November went with a small force to open communications with Surat, where he arrived on 25 November. In December Welsh was sent on a mission to a Bhil chief by an unexplored pass to the northward, and caught a malignant fever from which he suffered for many years. 
On 15 May 1805 Welsh succeeded to the command of his battalion of native infantry at Poona, continuing to hold his staff appointment until the end of the year, when he marched with his regiment to Palamcottai in the Carnatic, arriving on 27 March 1806. He was in command there on 19 November, when, as the garrison were assembling under arms, he discovered a plot among the sepoys to murder the Europeans at the station. Acting with promptitude he seized the leaders, disarmed the sepoys, and expelled trouble-makers from the fort. He was tried by court martial at Madras, beginning 24 February 1807, charged with precipitate conduct in having disarmed the sepoy garrison with insufficient cause, for expelling Muslim troops in the garrison without sufficient reason, and creating false alarms of rebellion 'stimulating measures of the most injurious tendency to the general interest of the state' (Welsh, 'Memorial', 11). Welsh was honourably acquitted on 7 March 1807, and congratulated by government on this vindication in general orders from the governor of Madras, Lord William Bentinck, on 20 March. However, the governor added in the general orders that Welsh's conduct 'must necessarily tend to the degradation and distrust of a large portion of a most loyal and faithful branch of our Army... To involve the innocent with the guilty, and include in a sweeping implication of guilt, a numerous body of men, on the ground of general suspicion or apprehension, is a mode of proceeding which... no just Government can tolerate. (ibid., 15)' Welsh felt this comprised an 'unqualified censure' (ibid., 2) by the governor, and protested to the governor and the directors of the East India Company in London. Following a recurrence of his illness he embarked for Britain in July, having been promoted major on 22 May 1807, but his efforts to convince the directors of the East India Company to speedily vindicate him were unsuccessful. 
Welsh rejoined his regiment on 5 February 1809 before the lines of Travancore, where it formed part of a force under Colonel St Leger, and led the storming party in the successful assault on the formidable defences on the night of 10 February. He was mentioned in dispatches, and the court of directors of the East India Company praised his services on the occasion. On 19 February 1809, leading the advance from the south, Welsh was successful in capturing several hill forts, arriving at Trivandrum, the capital of Travancore, on 2 March. Welsh and a fellow officer, Captain Lindsey, were appointed prize agents for the campaign by their colleagues, and successfully sold off property seized during the Travancore conflict. Welsh hoped to use his agent's commission to pay off debts incurred in connection with his court martial and subsequent campaign to clear his name, but the government ruled that the taking of prize was not valid during this campaign, as it had never declared war on the raja. In April 1812 he commanded a small force sent to quell a rising in the Wainad, which he accomplished after a month of heavy marching and desultory fighting. He was promoted lieutenant-colonel on 25 January 1813, and was appointed deputy judge-advocate-general, residing at Bangalore. 
On 6 February 1821 Welsh was appointed to command the troops in the provinces of Malabar and Kanara; on 6 May 1823 to command at Vellore; on 23 January 1824 to command in Travancore and Cochin; and on 1 August 1826 to command the Doab field force. He arrived at Belgaum in September, and was immediately engaged with the resident in measures which were successful in preventing a threatened rising at Kolhapur. 
Early in 1829 Welsh went to England on furlough and was promoted colonel on 5 June. He published his informative 'Military Reminiscences' (2 vols., 1830) with more than ninety illustrations, and also 'A Memorial, Addressed to the Court of Directors of the Honourable East India Company' (1830), presenting, with commentary, an account of his actions at Palamcottai in 1806, his court martial and unsuccessful attempts to obtain a complete vindication of his conduct, together with the government's refusal to allow him to act as a prize agent at Travancore in 1809. The preface to the volume shows that he was living in Cheltenham in 1830. 
Welsh did not return to India until his promotion to major-general on 10 January 1837. He was appointed on 1 June to the command of the northern division, Madras presidency, to which was added, in November 1838, the command in Cuttack. He was promoted lieutenant-general on 9 November 1846, and relinquished his command on 16 February 1847. When he left India the governor in council praised his gallantry and zeal in his remarkable service of fifty-eight years. He was promoted general on 20 June 1854. He died at his home, 10 North Parade, Bath, on 24 January 1861. 


@@@@@


doc= 29027


Welsh, John (1824-1859), meteorologist, eldest son of George Welsh of Craigenputtoch, and his wife, Margaret Kissock, was born at Boreland, Kirkcudbrightshire, on 27 September 1824. His father, who held a small estate which had been long in the family, died in 1835 and his mother settled at Castle Douglas, where Welsh received his early education. In November 1839 he entered the University of Edinburgh with a view to becoming a civil engineer, and studied under professors Philip Kelland, James David Forbes, and Robert Jameson. In December 1842 Sir Thomas Brisbane, on the advice of Forbes, engaged Welsh as an observer at his magnetical and meteorological observatory at Makerstoun under John Allan Broun, then director. In 1850, the magnetic observations being terminated, Welsh was appointed assistant to Francis Ronalds, superintendent at Kew observatory. Welsh read, at the Ipswich meeting of the British Association in October 1851, a report on Ronalds's three magnetographs, and described two sliding rules which he had devised for reducing hygrometrical and magnetic observations. In 1852 he read an important report on the methods used in graduating and comparing standard instruments at the Kew observatory, and subsequently standard thermometers and barometers destined for scientific use were verified and certificated at the observatory. 
Ronalds retired in 1852 and Welsh succeeded him as superintendent of the observatory. Between August and November 1852 Welsh and Charles Green made four balloon ascents from Vauxhall in order to make meteorological observations. In March and May 1854 Welsh and the barometer maker Alexander Adie made several voyages to investigate and remedy the pumping, or motion, of mercury in marine barometers. In 1855 Welsh supervised at the Paris Exhibition the exhibit of magnetic and meteorological instruments used at Kew. In 1856 he began at Kew a series of monthly determinations of absolute magnetic intensity and magnetic dip with instruments provided by General Edward Sabine. In the same year a set of self-recording magnetic instruments was constructed, based on the models devised originally by Ronalds and improved by Welsh. 
In 1857 Welsh was elected FRS. In the same year, the society's Kew committee having decided on a magnetic survey of the British islands, Welsh was appointed to undertake the north British division, and he spent part of the summers of 1857 and 1858 on this work. But he suffered from lung disease during the intervening winter and this became worse during the following year. Acting under medical advice he spent the winter of 1858-9, accompanied by his mother, at Falmouth, and died there, at Woodlane Terrace, on 11 May 1859. 


@@@@@


doc= 29028


Welsh, Thomas (1781-1848), singer, was born at Wells, Somerset, the son of John Welsh and his wife, who was a daughter of the elder Thomas Linley (1733-1795). At the age of six he became a chorister at Wells Cathedral, where his singing soon attracted an eager audience. Sheridan heard of him, and persuaded Linley to engage him for the 1792 Bath concerts. His first opera appearance was in 1792 in Thomas Attwood's 'The Prisoner', written especially for him, and he performed at Drury Lane Theatre in 1795 in Attwood's 'The Adopted Child' and Storace's version of 'Lodoiska'. John Kemble promoted him as an actor, and coached him in the part of Prince Arthur in Shakespeare's 'King John'. Meanwhile Welsh was continuing his musical education under Karl Friedrich Horn, Johann Baptist Cramer, and Karl Friedrich Baumgarten. In 1802 he was admitted as a gentleman of the Chapel Royal. 
Welsh, who was a bass, was most renowned as a singing teacher. His pupils included John Sinclair, Charles Edward Horn, and Catherine Stephens. 


@@@@@


doc= 29029


Welsted, Leonard (bap. 1688, d. 1747), poet, baptized on 3 June 1688 at Abington, Northamptonshire, was the eldest child of Leonard Welsted (1649?-1694), rector of Abington, and Anne Staveley ('bap'. 1663, died 1694), daughter of Thomas Staveley (bap. 1626, d. 1684), the Leicester antiquary. Both parents died in 1694, two years after the father became vicar of St Nicholas, Newcastle upon Tyne: Anne was buried on 18 July, her widower on 15 November; so the orphaned Leonard and his younger brother and sister were brought up by Staveley relatives in Leicestershire. Leonard followed his father to Westminster School (queen's scholar, 1703) and Trinity College, Cambridge (admitted pensioner on 12 June 1707), but, unlike his father, he never graduated. His clandestine 'Fleet' marriage on 25 February 1708 to Frances Purcell ('bap'. 1688), daughter and residuary legatee of Henry Purcell ended his university career. The only offspring of this union of under-age orphans was a daughter, Frances, baptized on 2 September 1708. 
Welsted's first wife died young. On 4 December 1712 he married Anna Maria Walker (died 1747), sister of Admiral Sir Hovenden Walker; she was called Zelinda in poems by Welsted and his friends, and was said to be a great beauty. There were no children from the second marriage. Welsted's daughter, Frances, died in her eighteenth year and was mourned in his fine 'Hymn to the Creator' (1727). 
Welsted's earliest verse was written at school. His longest known poem, 'Her Majesty's Success' (praising the third earl of Peterborough's campaign in Spain), was completed, in 507 lines, before April 1707 and remains unpublished. It was addressed to Robert Harley and was the first of a number of unpublished poems -- written between 1707 and 1711, and bidding for tory patronage -- which survive among the Harley papers in the Portland collection. Two poems by Welsted in praise of the first duke of Marlborough and his elegy on the poet John Philips were published in 1709. His 'Apple-pye, a Poem', in 'The Tory Tatler' (1710), which achieved several reprints because it was attributed wrongly to William King, is the only early poem by Welsted that is neither panegyric nor an exercise in patron-hunting. In 1712 he published a translation of Longinus with appended 'Remarks on the English Poets' addressed to Addison, after which his enrolment among the whigs was confirmed in 1714 when he published 'The Prophecy', a satire on Harley, and 'An Epistle to Mr Steele on the King's Accession'. He became Steele's secretary or assistant and in that capacity carried $500 of government secret service money to Steele, though Pope, in 'The Dunciad', falsely claimed that Welsted received the money for himself. Welsted contributed to such whig periodicals as Steele's 'Town-Talk' (1715-16) and Ambrose Philips's 'Free-Thinker' (1718-19); he wrote a prologue and epilogue for Steele's 'The Conscious Lovers' (1722). Bezaleel Morrice's satirical verse 'Epistle to Mr. Welsted' (1721) characterizes him, on the strength of his poems in 'The Free-Thinker', as a smooth, lightweight, fashionable love poet. 
Between 1720 and 1726 Welsted addressed complimentary poems to the duke of Chandos, the duke of Dorset, Earl Cadogan, General Wade, Dr Garth, and the countess of Warwick (on her marriage to Addison). Welsted's comedy, 'The Dissembled Wanton', was acted with James Quin in the lead in December 1726, at Lincoln's Inn Fields; it earned the author $138 7's'., together with $60 for the printed copy. In 1727 Welsted published proposals for editing and translating the whole works of Horace in five volumes by subscription at a guinea a volume; a few specimens were published, but he soon abandoned the project. 
Samuel Garth included Welsted's work in the well-known collective translation of Ovid's 'Metamorphoses' which he edited in 1717. In April of that year Garth asked the duke of Newcastle to find an allowance or a place worth $100 a year in the custom house for Welsted -- 'a scholar and very modest, your Schoolfellow, and has dedicated things to you' (BL, Add. MS 32658, fol. 12) -- but Welsted's place, secured by 1725 and worth $50 p.a., proved to be an extraordinary clerkship in the Ordnance office and was probably owing to the favour of Earl Cadogan, master-general of the ordnance, to whom the poet had also dedicated things. 
Welsted described his official residence at the Tower of London in 'Oikographia' (1725), an engaging poem in octosyllabic couplets where he dwells with relish on his furniture, the family portraits (including his bewhiskered grandsire, the antiquary), the view from an alcove on the roof, and the parlour furnished for a levee of humble bards: altogether a well-appointed dwelling except for the emptiness of its cellar. In 1730 Welsted was advanced to the post of clerk-in-ordinary at the Ordnance office ($70 p.a.), probably through the interest of Bishop Hoadley; in May 1731 he became a commissioner and manager of the national lottery ($150 p.a.), by the favour of Bubb Dodington. 
In 1717 Welsted published 'Palaemon to Caelia, or, The Triumvirate', a lively verse satire on Pope, Gay, and Arbuthnot's 'Three Hours after Marriage'; in 1724 Welsted's 'Dissertation', prefacing 'Epistles, Odes, &c.', contained a slighting reference to a line in Pope's 'Essay on Criticism'; a year later Welsted was introduced as Pope's main antagonist in Thomas Cooke's 'The Battel of the Poets'. As a result Welsted's verse and servility to patrons were ridiculed in Pope's 'Peri Bathous' (1728) and in text and notes of 'The Dunciad' (1728, 1729): most memorably in the Denham parody beginning: 'Flow Welsted, flow! like thine inspirer, Beer' (A. Pope, 'The Dunciad', 3). Welsted responded with 'One Epistle to Mr. A. Pope' (1730), 'Of Dulness and Scandal', and 'Of False Fame' (both 1732): the first of these was a collaboration with another 'Dunciad' victim, James Moore Smythe. Pope had the last word in his 'Epistle to Arbuthnot' (1735). 
Welsted's verse address to the princess of Wales in 1737, at the height of the prince's quarrel with his father, suggests that he was flirting with the whig opposition, but he wrote very little thereafter. He turned to prose in 'The Scheme and Conduct of Providence' (1736), a conventional vindication of the justice and goodness of God. 
Welsted is best known today as a Pope dunce. His complimentary poems are obsequious, his translations, verse tales, and love lyrics are, at best, competent; he was massively outgunned by Pope in satire; but there is merit in his relaxed, conversational, convivial poems, such as 'The Invitation' ('Free-Thinker', 124, 1719), 'Oikographia', and his last published work, 'The Summum bonum, or, Wisest Philosophy' (1741), a poem in praise of simple pleasures, such as the sociable drinking of wine and spirits. Apart from such invitations, and the complaint in 'Oikographia' that he lacked wine for his spacious cellar in the Tower, there is no evidence for Pope's libel that Welsted was a drunkard or even a beer drinker. John Nichols wrote, 'a gentleman now living recollects hearing of Welsted's fame as a chess-player at the Temple Coffee House' ('Works', xxii). Welsted died intestate at the Tower in August 1747; his second wife survived him only for a few months; his brother, Thomas, had died in 1713, so letters of administration were granted on 24 May 1748 to his unmarried sister, Anne (died 1757). 


@@@@@


doc= 29030


Welsted, Robert (1670/71-1735), physician, was the son of Leonard Welsted of Bristol. He matriculated from St Edmund Hall, Oxford, on 4 December 1687, aged sixteen, and was elected in 1689 to a demyship at Magdalen College, which he held until 1698, graduating BA on 25 June 1691, and MA on 12 May 1694. He was admitted an extra-licentiate of the Royal College of Physicians on 11 December 1695. 
Welsted was then practising medicine at Bristol, where he remained for some years, but eventually moved to London, and was admitted a licentiate of the college on 3 September 1710. Welsted was one of 'the oldest and heartiest' friends of Bishop Hugh Boulter, primate of Ireland, who described him as a true Hanoverian and supporter of the revolution, and thought that because of this 'he has been distressed in his business by the disaffected' ('Letters', 1.94). He was the author of a number of philosophical works and was admitted a fellow of the Royal Society on 20 March 1718. With Richard West (1671-1716), the father of Gilbert West (1703-1756), Welsted edited the works of Pindar with notes and a paraphrase (1692). His practice was not successful in his later years and he was obliged to rely on the generosity of Bishop Boulter, who allowed him $200 a year and maintained his son at Hart Hall, Oxford ('Letters', 1.94). Welsted died at Tavistock Street, London, on 1 February 1735. 


@@@@@


doc= 29031


Welton, Richard (1671/2-1726), clergyman of the nonjuring Church of England, was born at Framlingham, Suffolk, the son of Thomas Welton, druggist, of Woodbridge, Suffolk. First educated at Woodbridge, he was admitted on 3 March 1688 to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, aged sixteen, and graduated BA (1692), MA (1695), and DD (1708). He was married to Temperance Goodwyn, and they had at least one child, Richard, who was baptized at Whitechapel in 1708. 
Welton was ordained in 1695 and served as rector of St Mary's, Whitechapel, London, from 1697 to 1715. To his rectory, the vicarage of East Ham, Essex, was added in 1710. A friend and supporter of fellow London minister Henry Sacheverell, in 1710 Welton preached the controversial sermon 'The Wise Man's Counsel upon the Test', which attacked occasional conformity, which he claimed 'abused and perverted' the Lord's supper 'to countenance and secure the PATRIOTS of Resistance, in places of great station and power' (R. Welton, 'The Wise Man's Counsel upon the Test', 1710, Preface). The sermon also defended absolute monarchy and urged active obedience to the monarchy, except where contrary to God's word, in which circumstances one 'must submit and yield Passive Obedience unto them', withstanding the government only with tears and prayers (ibid., 9). The sermon drew an anonymous response entitled 'Solomon Against Welton' (1710), which raised the spectre of Jacobitism. Further controversy arose in 1713 when Welton had the portrait painter James Fellowes create a new altarpiece for Whitechapel which portrayed Bishop White Kennett as Judas at the last supper. Kennett appealed to the bishop of London to have the painting removed and in April 1714 he succeeded, despite Welton's claim that the bishop's own chancellor had asked only that minor changes be made to the painting. Welton's response to the controversy, a sermon entitled 'Church Ornament without Idolatry Vindicated' (1714), defended the piece, suggesting that opposition to it was political in nature for it had offended 'the very scum of a whigg-faction' (Welton, Preface). Welton's Jacobite sympathies were also expressed in his sermon 'The shipwreck of faith', preached in honour of Queen Anne's memory. There he spoke of the Stuart name being 'hateful to our Enemies, but the glory of our Country' (R. Welton, 'The Substance of the Christian Faith and Practice', 1724, 261-2). He then suffered deprival from his clerical positions on 3 March 1715 after he failed to appear and take the oath of allegiance in October 1714. 
After his deprival Welton led a nonjuring congregation in Whitehall, London. In 1717 government agents raided his chapel in Goodman's Fields, finding there a gathering of 250 people. Those assembled were requested to take the oaths of abjuration, which Welton and forty others refused. Consecrated irregularly to the nonjuring episcopate in 1722 by Ralph Taylor of the nonusager party, he went to America in 1724 and was called as rector of Christ Church, Philadelphia, on 27 July 1724. There he published a collection of eighteen sermons, including a reprinting of 'Church ornament without idolatry vindicated', published at the request of the Whitechapel congregation, under the title 'The Substance of the Christian Faith and Practice' (1724). Welton also translated, as 'The Sufferings of the Son of God' (1720), the 'Trabalhos de Jesus' written by the Portuguese mystic Thomas of Jesus (1529-1582). He served at Christ Church, despite the objections of William Keith, the governor of Pennsylvania, until he was requested to return to England by royal writ in January 1726. There is no evidence that he exercised episcopal jurisdiction, and at his request the church in Philadelphia prepared a testimonial to his conduct. He went instead to Lisbon, in Portugal, where he seems to have had some connections. He died there on 22 July 1726. 


@@@@@


doc= 29032


Welwitsch, Friedrich Martin Josef (1806-1872), botanist, was born at Maria-Saal, near Klagenfurt, Carinthia, Austria, on 5 February 1806, to a large family of a prosperous farmer and surveyor. While at school he was encouraged by his father in the study of botany, and when sent to the University of Vienna with a view to the legal profession, he was so devoted to the study of natural history as to make no progress in the study of the law. His father thereupon withdrew his allowance, but Welwitsch transferred to the medical faculty of the university, continued with his botanical studies, and supported himself by writing critiques of theatrical productions. In 1834 he gained a prize, offered by the mayor of Vienna, for his 'Beitrage zur cryptogamischen Flora Unter-Oesterreichs', and his appointment about the same time to report on the cholera in Carinthia reconciled his father to his new profession. After travelling as tutor to a nobleman, he returned to Vienna, and graduated MD in 1836, his thesis being published in that year as 'Synopsis Nostochinearum Austriae inferioris'. 
Welwitsch spent much of his time in the botanical museum at Vienna, and became intimate with Fenzl and other botanists. In 1839, 'an act of youthful indiscretion on his part, in the course of enjoying too freely the gaieties of Vienna, rendered it expedient for him to leave Austria' (Hiern, 1.xvii) and he accepted a commission from the Unio Itineraria of Wurttemberg to collect the plants of the Azores and Cape Verde Islands. With this object he travelled to England, from where he sailed to Lisbon, arriving in July 1839. He learned Portuguese in six weeks, and, becoming attached to Portugal, he did not leave that country until 1853, except for short visits to Paris and London. During these years he had charge of the botanical gardens at Lisbon and Coimbra, and of those of the duke of Palmela at Cintra, Alemtejo, and elsewhere. He was also engaged as demonstrator and curator at the Lisbon Polytechnic. He explored most of Portugal, forming a herbarium of nine thousand species fully represented by specimens in all stages of growth, with descriptive notes and synonymy; he sent eleven thousand specimens to the Unio Itineraria and deposited sets with the academies of Lisbon and Paris. In 1841 Welwitsch had a three days' excursion to the Valle de Zebro with Robert Brown (1773-1858), and in 1847 and 1848, with Count Descayrac, he explored the southern province of Algarve, then little known to botanists. Between 1847 and 1852 he added 250 species of the larger fungi from the neighbourhood of Lisbon to those enumerated in Brotero's 'Flora', while in his zeal for algae (of which in 1850 he published a list in the second volume of the 'Actas' of the Lisbon Academy) he spent hours day after day up to his waist in water. In 1851 he sent twelve thousand specimens of flowering plants and six thousand cryptogams to England for sale; the fungi and mosses collected by him were described by Miles Joseph Berkeley and Mr Mitten in 'Some Notes upon the Cryptogamic... Plants Collected in Portugal, 1842-50' (1853). He also studied and collected molluscs and insects, especially Coleoptera and Hymenoptera, and in 1844 was one of the founders of the Horticultural Society of Lisbon. 
In 1851 Welwitsch was engaged to prepare the Portuguese collections for the Great Exhibition, and accompanied them to London, where he sought the advice of Robert Brown and others as to the exploration of Portuguese West Africa, for which he had been chosen by the government of his adopted country. He started from Lisbon on this seven years' journey on 8 August 1853, visited Madeira, the Cape Verde Islands and Freetown, Sierra Leone (where he spent nine days in making his first acquaintance with tropical vegetation), and reached Luanda on 30 September. Nearly a year was devoted to the exploration of the coast zone from the mouth of the Quizembo, lat. 8 degree 15' S, to that of the Cuanza, lat. 9 degree 20' S. He had been given $270 for his scientific equipment and voyage, and was paid $45 a month, but finding that bearers and other expenses of his fieldwork far exceeded this allowance, he sent large collections of insects, seeds, living plants, and dried specimens to England for sale. In September 1854 he ascended the River Bengo to Sange in Golungo Alto, 125 miles from the coast, where he met David Livingstone, living with him some time, and remaining in this district of dense jungle in all for about two years, during which he suffered much from fever, scurvy, and ulcerated legs. In 1856 he travelled south-westward to Pungo Andongo in the Presidio das Pedras Nigras. After eight months' exploration from this centre he returned to Luanda, having in the course of three years explored a triangular area with 120 miles of coast as its base, and its apex at Quisonde on the Cuanza, and collected over 3200 species of plants. 
Welwitsch drew up a summary of his geographical and botanical findings under the title of 'Apontamentos phyto-geographicos sobre a flora da provincia de Angola', which was published at Lisbon in 1859 in the 'Annaes do Conselho Ultramarino'. In this work he divided Angola into three botanical regions: the coast, up to an altitude of 1000 feet, the mountain woodland, from 1000 to 2500 feet; and the highland, above 2500 feet. In September 1858 he took a trip to Libongo, to the north of Luanda, and in June 1859 went to Benguela and thence by sea to Mossamedes. There the subtropical climate did much to reinvigorate him, and he found a flora near the coast more like that of Cape Colony, though only a mile inland it was more purely tropical. As he approached Cape Negro (in lat. 15 degree 40' S) the coast rose as a plateau of tufaceous limestone, covered with sandstone shingle, 300 or 400 feet high and 6 miles across, and it was there that Welwitsch discovered that remarkable plant which he named 'Tumboa', but which J. D. Hooker later renamed 'Welwitschia' in his honour. This unique plant is made up of an enormous underground stem, and a pair of strap-shaped leaves that lie along the ground. Welwitsch was so amazed by his discovery 'that he could do nothing but kneel down on the burning soil and gaze at it, half in fear lest a touch should prove it a figment of the imagination' (Hiern, 1.xiii). 
Welwitsch collected more than two thousand specimens in Benguela, but a tribal rebellion stopped his work; fifteen thousand Munanos attacked the colony of Lopollo in Huila, where he then was, and blockaded it for two months. After this Welwitsch, wounded and in bad health, returned to Mossamedes and Luanda, and from there in January 1861, he sailed to Lisbon, taking with him what was undoubtedly the best and most extensive herbarium ever collected in tropical Africa (Hiern, 1.xiv). He was placed on Portuguese government committees for the improvement of cotton cultivation in Angola and for collecting the products of Portuguese colonies for the London International Exhibition of 1862, in connection with which he published one of his more important independent works, 'Synopse explicativa de madeiras e drogas medicinaes' (1862). In November 1861 his patron King Dom Pedro V died, leaving Welwitsch at the mercy of the Portuguese bureaucracy. Finding it necessary to compare his specimens, a very large proportion of which were new to science, with those in English collections, he obtained permission from the Portuguese government in 1863 to take his collections, which are estimated to have comprised five thousand species of plants and three thousand species of insects, to England. He arrived in London on 20 October 1863, and devoted the remaining nine years of his life to the task of studying and arranging his collections. In connection with this work he maintained an extensive correspondence with many of the leading specialists among the naturalists of Europe, and received honourable recognition from many learned societies. However, the Portuguese government became impatient with his rate of progress, and ultimately, in February 1866, suspended his salary of $2 a day. Welwitsch worked on in London, paying out of his own means the expenses of various publications which he had begun, the most important of which was his 'Sertum Angolense' ('Transactions of the Linnean Society', 27, 1869, 1-94), which cost him $130. 
Poverty eventually forced him to consider returning to Portugal, but he had insufficient funds for the voyage. His health deteriorated further, and he died on 20 October 1872 at his home at 15 Fitzroy Street, London, and was buried on 24 October in Kensal Green cemetery, where he is described on his tomb as 'Botanicus eximius, florae Angolensis investigatorum princeps'. By his will, dated three days before his death, Welwitsch directed that the study set of his African plants should be offered to the British Museum (whose natural history departments were soon to be accommodated separately in the Natural History Museum, South Kensington), for purchase. The Portuguese government, however, claimed the whole of the collections, a claim which was resisted by the executors. The resulting chancery suit, the 'King of Portugal v. Carruthers and Justen', was eventually settled, the study set being returned to Lisbon, and the museum receiving the next best set with a copy of the explanatory notes and descriptions made by Welwitsch. A highly regarded catalogue of the collection, edited by William Philip Hiern (2 vols., 1896-1901), contains an engraved portrait, biography, and full bibliography not only of Welwitsch's own work, but also of that of others relating to his collections. 
Although Welwitsch's achievements in economic botany disappointed his Portuguese employers, and as a man he could be 'difficult... impatient, and tactless' (Swinscow, 278-9), his collections 'far exceeded in number, quality and documentation any made before then in tropical Africa and remain a valuable source of information' (Stearn, 101). 
Of Welwitsch's many papers the more important were the 'Apontamentos', the 'Synopsis nostochienearum', the 'Synopse explicativa', and the 'Sertum Angolense' already referred to. His most important other work concerned the cultivation of cotton in Angola, and a translation by A. R. Saraiva was published in London in 1862. 


@@@@@


doc= 29033


Welwood, William (fl. 1566-1624), legal writer and mathematician, was the eldest son of Thomas Welwood (died 1583), a prominent merchant burgess of St Andrews, and his wife, Janet Geddie (died 1616); he had at least four sisters and three brothers. He matriculated at St Leonard's College, St Andrews, in 1566 and graduated BA in 1569 and MA in 1570. In October 1573 he matriculated at the University of Wittenberg, where he may have taken the degree of LLD. In the early 1570s, his family was high in the favour of the regime of the regent, James Douglas, earl of Morton, and on 26 December 1575 he was gifted the office of third master in St Mary's College. His duty was to teach the mathematical sciences. At an unknown date he married Christina Cunningham; they had at least one son, David. 
Welwood belonged to a cultivated group of scientists in the university and taught not only arithmetic, geometry, geography, and astronomy, but also map making, the use of the astrolabe, calendars, and horology, practical disciplines of interest to the son of a merchant. It is possible that he was an early influence on the distinguished map maker Timothy Pont, then a student at St Andrews. In 1577, with John Geddie, former servitor to George Buchanan, a skilled mathematician and probably a relative, he gained a patent for an improved method of raising water from wells, about which he later published 'Guilielmi Velvod de aqua in altum per fistulas plumbeas facile exprimenda apologia demonstratiua' (1582). Dedicated to the earl of Bothwell, 'De aqua' probably gained Welwood the title 'his hienes mathematicien' that he held by 1583, when, with Edward Bruce, advocate and future courtier of James VI, he gained a licence for an engine to pump out coalmines. 
This success came in the context of attempts by the masters of St Mary's, who had been opposed to Welwood's admittance, to remove him from his post. A visitation of the university in 1579 transferred the mathematician and lawyer to St Salvator's College, but here too the appointment was unpopular with the masters, this time ostensibly because of its financial implications. However, while there may have been genuine grounds for grievance here, the unremitting hostility he encountered from the provost, James Martin, seems to have derived from or been intensified by a feud between Martin's family and that of Welwood. The origins of the feud are unknown. On one side were the Arthurs, who included several sons of Margaret Martin, the provost's cousin. These brothers were also the brothers-in-law of the new archbishop of St Andrews, Patrick Adamson; they were supported by the powerful Learmonth of Dairsie family, whose members were regularly elected as provosts of the burgh. On the other side were the Welwoods, with their relatives the Geddies and the Smiths. Enriching the brew of hostility was the Welwoods' strong support for Andrew Melville, the noted advocate of presbyterianism in the reformed kirk in Scotland and powerful reforming principal of St Mary's College, who had also provided introductory verses for Welwood's 'De aqua'. 
In 1584 the 'Black Acts' had asserted crown authority over the kirk, marking the temporary eclipse of the Melville faction. In 1587 Welwood transferred to the chair of law, replacing John Arthur, one of the brothers; whether this move had any connection with the feud is unknown. In the hothouse atmosphere of religious and family tension in St Andrews, however, these political and local developments resulted in the attempt of Henry Hamilton, servitor to the archbishop, to murder Welwood (whom he had earlier assaulted) as he went to lecture. In the general tumult, James Arthur, one of the brothers, was killed. The dispute between the families was put to arbitration, resulting in the banishment from Scotland of James Smith, John Welwood, and John Geddie and the banishment of some others from St Andrews, including Thomas Geddie. This was a severe punishment on a set of families who made their living as merchants; John Geddie, for example, had six children to support. 
In 1590 Welwood published in Edinburgh 'The sea law of Scotland. Shortly gathered and plainly dressit for the reddy use of all seafairing men'. In a dedication to King James, this short work called for a reformation of justice. Indeed legal reform was much in the air in Scotland at this time and Welwood's convinced presbyterianism induced him no doubt to hope for a godly reform. The work is essentially aimed at explaining the law underpinning the type of trading carried on in the small vessels that characterized Scottish shipping, focusing on the duties of the master of the vessel. Politics now favoured the Welwoods. In 1592 Archbishop Adamson died, while parliament recognized the Melvillian structure of the kirk. The financial disputes between Martin and Welwood and Homer Blair (the new mathematician) were settled. The municipal elections of 1593 in St Andrews favoured the supporters of Melville. In 1594 James Melville, nephew of Andrew, solicited the king for the return of John Welwood and James Smith from exile, although the men had either to submit to trial or to satisfy the Arthurs with compensation. In 1595 King James recommended to the provost and council of St Andrews that there should be a reconciliation between the Welwoods and the Arthurs. By September 1596 it appears that considerable progress had been made in this through negotiations involving the presbytery of St Andrews. 
In 1594 Welwood published a number of works abroad, perhaps to escape the control of the privy council. That summer he spent time in Leiden, where he issued two works concerned with the relationship between Jewish law and Roman law. 'Juris divini Judaeorum, ac juris civilis Romanorum parallela', dedicated to John Kennedy, earl of Cassillis, and John Lindsay, Lord Lindsay, supporters of the presbyterians, had an appendix on ecclesiastical law. This appendix contained a letter to Welwood from Franciscus Junius while the two radical ministers of St Andrews, David Black and Robert Wallace, were addressed by Welwood in a letter. 'Filios Lucis esse prudentiores filiis huius seculi', dedicated to the great Dutchman Oldenbarnevelt, devoted considerable attention to the issue of sale. These works of Welwood deserve further study but evince a concern with the links between 'jus scripturae' (biblical law), 'jus scriptum' (written law), and 'jus humanum' (human law), connecting his study of Roman law with certain biblical and religious concerns. In the same year he also published, this time at Middleburg, 'Ars Domandarum perturbationum ex solo Dei verbo quais transcripto constructa', a theological treatise also dedicated to the earl of Cassillis. 
The tide now turned once more against the Melvilles and their supporters, bringing further problems for Welwood and his family. In 1596 Black and Wallace were removed from their charge; in the aftermath of the resulting disturbances, Welwood's brother Andrew and brother-in-law Henry Smith were among the men in St Andrews who had to find caution for their good behaviour. In 1597 there was a royal visitation of St Andrews, the main object of which was to curb the authority of Andrew Melville. Welwood was removed from the chair in law which was suppressed. At almost the same time, the general assembly moved against Black, Wallace, and Melville, with a series of charges. Black in particular was charged with usurping the power of the civil magistrate in dealing with the blood feud between the Welwoods and the Arthurs. At this point the Welwoods once more found themselves under physical threat in St Andrews. William Welwood's brother-in-law James Smith was murdered in September 1597, the day before a meeting arranged to seek a settlement of the feud. There ensued difficult negotiations involving the kirk session, which evidently favoured the Arthurs, and the presbytery, which sympathized with the Welwoods. In this tense period Esther Welwood, William's sister, was shot at. The Welwoods eventually succeeded in securing the excommunication of some of the Arthurs and their relatives. By late 1599 pressure had succeeded in securing another arbitration and decreet-arbitral settling the disputes between the two families, although relationships clearly remained tense. Probably as part of the negotiated settlement, King James restored Welwood to the chair of law in St Salvator's College, but he had to sign a bond for his good behaviour. No more is heard of the blood feud. 
In 1605 Welwood published in London an elementary work on Roman law dealing briefly with the topic 'de verborum obligationibus' in Justinian's compilation. This was dedicated to Chancellor Seton as Welwood manoeuvred for supporters. The following year saw the beginning of a concerted attack on the presbyterians, involving treason trials, the deprivation and imprisonment of Andrew Melville, and the re-erection of a full diocesan episcopacy. By 1611 one of Welwood's earlier opponents was an archbishop of St Andrews, now with full powers to complement his position as chancellor of the university. Welwood's resignation from the chair of law was engineered that year and he departed for England. His years there are obscure. In 1613, in the hope of patronage, he published, with a dedication to the king, 'An abridgement of all sea-lawes; gathered forth of all writings and monuments, which are to be found among any people or nations, upon the coasts of the great ocean and Mediterranean Sea'. This work contained an early attack on Grotius's 'Mare liberum' of 1609. Patronage came, and Welwood was employed on behalf of Queen Anne to expand this attack into 'De dominio maris, juribusque ad dominium praecipue spectantibus assertio brevis et methodica' (1616). This contributed to the considerable legal debate over freedom of the seas at this period; its reprinting in 1653 elicited a reply the same year from the Dutchman Dirk Graswinkel. 
By 1619 Welwood was ill and seeking patronage from Lancelot Andrews, bishop of Winchester. He may have singled out this Arminian-leaning cleric, who was a member of both the Scottish and English privy councils, because his brother was currently involved in an international legal dispute over a ship attacked by the Dutch in 1618. Welwood's final work, 'Dubiorum quae tam in foro poli quam in foro fori occurrere solent, brevis expeditio' (1622), appeared in London and was dedicated to Sir Julius Caesar and John Williams, bishop of Lincoln. Welwood obviously had some association with Caesar, a devout Calvinist, as the latter's papers contain an opinion by Welwood dated 7 May 1624 on the legal status of ambassadors. By mid-1630 Welwood was dead: on 4 June his son David was retoured as heir to his grandfather in lands in Fife and was settling other aspects of the family affairs. 


@@@@@


doc= 29034


David Wemyss, second earl of Wemyss (1610-1679), army officer, whose mother was Jean Gray (died 1640), daughter of Lord Gray. He was born on 6 September 1610. As Lord Elcho, a title he held between 1633 and 1649, he commanded a regiment of Fife infantry in the Scottish army which reached Newcastle upon Tyne in August 1640. On 1 September 1644, at the head of about 6000 men, he was routed by Montrose at Tippermuir, and in August 1645, as supernumerary commander to Lieutenant-General William Baillie, again suffered defeat by Montrose's forces at Kilsyth. 


@@@@@


doc= 29035


Wemyss, David, fourth earl of Wemyss (bap. 1678, d. 1720), politician, was the eldest son of Margaret, countess of Wemyss and Cromartie (1659-1705), only surviving daughter of David Wemyss, second earl ['see below'], and her first husband, Sir James Wemyss of Caskieberran (died 1682), who was created a life peer as Lord Burntisland in 1672. He was baptized on 29 April 1678 and was styled Lord Elcho until his mother's death in 1705. 
Elcho was descended from a distinguished Fife family, which included Sir David Wemyss, who signed the letter to the pope in 1320 asserting the independence of Scotland, Sir John Wemyss, who assisted in repulsing an attempt by the English to land in Fife in 1547, and Sir John Wemyss (1586-1649), high commissioner to the general assembly, who was created earl of Wemyss, on 25 June 1633. 
The first earl of Wemyss's only son, the grandfather of the fourth earl, was 
The second earl was married three times: in July 1625 to Anna (died 1649), daughter of Robert Balfour, second Lord Balfour of Burleigh; in April 1650 to Helenor (died 1652), daughter of John Fleming, second earl of Wigtown; and on 13 January 1653 to Margaret (died 1688), daughter of John Leslie, sixth earl of Rothes, and widow of Francis Scott, second earl of Buccleuch. The third marriage produced one daughter, Margaret, the only child to outlive her father. He died in July 1679 at Wemyss Castle, whose estate he had done much to develop. 
The fourth earl of Wemyss, in succession to his mother, entered parliament on 28 June 1705, and was the same year sworn of the privy council and named one of the commissioners for the treaty of Union with England. In 1706 he was appointed high admiral of Scotland, and this office having been abolished at the Union, he was then constituted vice-admiral of Scotland, and nominated one of the council of Prince George of Denmark, high admiral of Great Britain. Following the Union he was on 13 February 1707 chosen as one of the sixteen representative Scottish peers; he was re-elected in 1708. 
The fourth earl was also married three times. His first wife, Anne (died 23 Feb 1700), whom he married on 13 August 1697, was the only daughter of William Douglas, first duke of Queensberry. The marriage produced two sons, David, Lord Elcho (died 1715), and James (1699-1756), who became fifth earl of Wemyss. He remarried on 5 January 1709 at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London. His second wife was Mary (died 1711/12), daughter of Sir John Robinson and his wife, Mary Dudley. His third wife, whom he married in July 1716, was Elizabeth (died 1721), daughter of Henry, Lord Sinclair; they had two daughters: Elisabeth, who married William Sutherland, seventeenth earl of Sutherland, and Margaret, who married James Stewart, eighth earl of Moray. 
Wemyss, whom Macky described as 'a fine personage and very beautiful', being a 'man of honour' with 'good sense' ('Memoirs of the Secret Services', 250), died at Wemyss Castle on 15 March 1720. 


@@@@@


doc= 29036


Wemyss, David, styled sixth earl of Wemyss (1721-1787), Jacobite army officer, was born on 21 August 1721, probably at Wemyss Castle, Fife, the first son and heir of James, fifth earl of Wemyss (1699-1756), and his wife, Janet (died 1778), daughter of the notorious Colonel Francis Charteris and Helen Swinton. The parents of Wemyss, who was known by his father's subsidiary title Lord Elcho, separated in 1732. Educated at Winchester College, which he attended from 1734 to 1738, and at the military academy at Angers, Elcho was in Rome from October 1740 until April 1741. There, like many young visitors to the city, he met James Stuart (Stuart claimant to the throne). However, unlike the audiences obtained by many such visitors, Elcho's sprang not from mere curiosity nor a wish to experience the frisson arising from the knowledge that he was committing an act of treason. Rather his two interviews were an expression of his family's traditional loyalty to the house of Stuart. Elcho's commitment had at one time in his youth wavered under the influence of the master of Sinclair, a third cousin of his father, who tried to persuade him to abandon the Jacobite cause and obtain a government post. It seems that Elcho considered this idea but was dissuaded from it by Sir James Stuart of Coltness and Goodtrees. The Pretender's response to Elcho's visits was to appoint him a colonel of dragoons in February 1744, having already admitted him a member of the Royal Company of Archers on 12 July 1741. He returned to England in October 1741 but was back in France again from September 1743 to April 1744, during which time orders were 'sent to Scotland to take up the earl of Wemys' son, and 'tis said, some others will be seized, to the number of 15' ('Egmont Diary', 3.287). 
Elcho's Jacobitism led him to join Prince Charles Edward at Gray's Mill, near Edinburgh, on 16 September 1745, when he became the prince's first aide-de-camp and an original member of his council. Elcho fought at the battle of Prestonpans on 21 September 1745 and was very likely in command of the 1st troop of the Horse Guards, which he had raised and then commanded throughout the time Charles was campaigning in England. Consisting of about 100 'gentleman of family and fortune... their uniform all blew and reed and all extreamly well mounted' ('Memorials of John Murray', 226), these Horse Guards formed the prince's personal bodyguard. Elcho was one of the majority who at a council of war held at Derby in December 1745 advised the prince to return to Scotland rather than advance further into England and face almost certain death. Later Elcho was present on 17 January 1746 at the siege of Falkirk and on 16 April 1745 at the battle of Culloden, at which Charles's army was defeated by English forces under the command of the duke of Cumberland. Elcho was of the same mind as Lord George Murray, lieutenant-general in the Jacobite army and Charles's second in command, in attributing this defeat to the prince's lack of military acumen. While there appears to be little basis for the story that Elcho vilified the prince as he left the field of battle as 'a damned cowardly Italian' (Marshall, 146), Elcho clearly had little regard for him and believed that he placed too great a trust in Irish advisers such as Sir Thomas Sheridan. Whatever the truth of this, the defeat marked for the time being the end of the hope that Charles would secure his father's succession to the British throne, and Elcho, together with the duke of Perth and other leaders of the Jacobite forces, escaped to France in the frigate 'Mars' on 3 May 1746. Elcho's 'Short Account of the Affairs of Scotland in the Years 1744, 1745, 1746', based on his manuscript journal, was published in 1907. 
Elcho never returned to England, and for his part in the rising he was subject to the act of attainder passed in 1746 and his titles and lands were forfeited. In spite of this legal bar, he assumed the title of sixth earl of Wemyss on his father's death on 21 March 1756, although he continued generally to be known as Lord Elcho. 
Elcho continued his military career in France, where he entered the service of Louis XV and held two unpaid offices. On 3 May 1756 he became a captain in Fitzjames's regiment, and from July 1756 until some time in 1763 held the rank of colonel in the Royal Scots. In the latter post Elcho was with his regiment at Gravelines from June to October 1757 and then at Dunkirk in 1758. Although he held no other military command, Louis XV conferred the order of military merit upon him in July 1770. Elcho divided his time between France and Switzerland, becoming naturalized in Neuchatel and purchasing a property there named La Prie. Although he had settled in France Elcho tried at various times to have his name removed from the act of attainder, and wrote from Paris on 27 June 1747 to the lord justice clerk 'if his Majesty will allow me to come home, I will give any assurance whatever for my making his Majesty a most loyall subject for the future' ('Memorials of John Murray', 414). These unsuccessful attempts to have the attainder lifted created an enduring sense of bitterness between the prince and Elcho. This feeling was reinforced on Elcho's side by the prince's failure to repay the moneys he had advanced to him in support of his campaign in England. 
On 9 September 1776 Elcho married at Beutal in Switzerland the daughter ('b'. 1756) of Baron d'Uxhull. She died in childbirth on 26 November 1777. Elcho himself died in Paris on 29 April 1787, aged sixty-five, and was buried with his wife at Bole in Switzerland. 


@@@@@


doc= 29037


Wemyss, David Douglas (1760-1839), army officer, went by the name of Douglas until about 1790, when he took the additional name of Wemyss, to the noble family of which name he belonged. He was commissioned ensign in the 49th foot on 27 April 1777, and joined them that year in North America, where he served first under General Howe, and then under Sir Henry Clinton, in the operations of the American war. In November 1778 he sailed with the 49th from New York in the expedition under Admiral Hotham and Major-General Grant to the West Indies. He took part in the capture of St Lucia on 13 December, and in the defence of the Vigie against the French under D'Estaing on the 18th. He was also in the naval engagement off the island of Grenada on 6 July 1779, and was promoted lieutenant on 15 August 1779. He returned to England in 1781. 
Wemyss was promoted captain on 31 May 1783, and shortly after, on reduction of his regiment, was placed on half pay. He was brought into the 3rd foot (the Buffs) on 9 June 1786, joining the headquarters at Jamaica. He was required by ill health to return home in 1789. On 16 March 1791 he was promoted major in the 37th foot. In 1793 he served with them under the duke of York in Flanders, where he took part in the affair of Saultain, the battle of Famars (22 May), and the siege of Valenciennes, which capitulated on 28 July. For his services he was promoted lieutenant-colonel in the 18th foot (Royal Irish) from 12 April 1793. He was aged thirty-three. He had purchased every step in rank from ensign to colonel. 
Wemyss commanded his new regiment in 1794, with the force under Sir Charles Stuart at the capture of Corsica, taking part in the sieges of Fiorenza in February, of Bastia in April, and of Calvi, where he was wounded, in August. He was mentioned in dispatches, and in 1795 was appointed governor of Calvi and its dependencies. He was promoted brevet colonel on 3 May 1796. On the evacuation of Corsica in October he accompanied the troops to Porto Ferrajo in Elba, whence he commanded a force (including the 18th) which landed on the Italian coast on 7 November, and succeeded in driving the French from Piombino, Campiglia, and Castiglione, but, the enemy receiving considerable reinforcements, the British troops were withdrawn from Italy and returned to Elba. On the evacuation of the Mediterranean in 1797 Wemyss took his regiment to Gibraltar, where he was employed as a brigadier-general on the staff until promoted major-general on 29 April 1802, when he returned to England. 
In April 1803 Wemyss was appointed to the command of the forces in Ceylon. He returned home in 1806, was promoted lieutenant-general on 25 April 1808, and on 27 May 1809 was appointed governor of Tynemouth Castle and Cliffe Fort. He was promoted general on 12 August 1819. He died on 5 September 1839 at his residence, Upper Gore House, Kensington, and was buried at Kensal Green cemetery. 


@@@@@


doc= 29038


Wemyss, James, of Caskieberran (c.1610-1667), army officer, was the son of James Wemyss, laird of Caskieberran, Fife, and his wife, Janet Durie, lady of Cardan in the parish of Auchterderran, Fife. He moved to London in the winter of 1629-30 with his uncle Colonel Robert Scott (d. 1631), probably receiving a grant of denization at the same time as his uncle's family. Scott, while in Swedish and Danish service, had developed a type of leather-covered cannon or leather gun, and Wemyss, who may also have served in the army of Gustavus Adolphus, an innovator in field artillery, was to refine his uncle's invention and more generally devote himself to gunnery and associated skills. 
At some point Wemyss married Katherine, widow of John Guilliams and daughter of Thomas Rayment, poulterer of St Botolph without Bishopsgate, with whom he had his son and heir, James, and other children, before her death in February 1649. On 26 February 1634 Charles I granted a warrant to the lieutenant-general of the ordnance, Sir John Heydon, 'for carrying such quantity of earth to Mr Wemyss's garden at Foxhall [Vauxhall] as should suffice for making a butt to prove ordnance at' ('DNB'). Three years later Wemyss's house was burnt down, leading to the loss of his scientific instruments and tools he had personally purchased to further his inventions. In the pursuit of his knowledge Wemyss had amassed debts of $2000 by 1637. The king, who had supported Wemyss for seven years, appears to have relieved him from his most pressing debts, and in 1638 made him master-gunner of England. 'Weemes, a Scotchman', Clarendon later sourly noted, 'had been as much obliged by the King as a man of his condition could be, and in a manner very unpopular'. His appointment as master-gunner, with 'a pension of three hundred pounds 'per annum' for his life,... was looked upon as some disrespect to the English nation' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 3.367). 
In the middle of 1638 Wemyss gained a contract to hire a ship and load it with light guns and powder to reinforce the royal garrison at Dumbarton Castle. On 12 February 1639, when the king was preparing militarily to suppress the Scottish covenanters, Wemyss explained to the king that England lacked gunners who understood the ranges of ordnance or the use of mortars. Wemyss accompanied the train of artillery which followed the royal army to Berwick in the summer of 1639. He also served with the army raised in 1640 to oppose the covenanters. 
The failure of the royal armies to defeat the parliamentarians, and the Scottish decision to ally with the latter, persuaded Wemyss to transfer his services to the English parliament (or as Clarendon glossed the defection, 'having never done the King the least service, he took the first opportunity to disserve him' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 3.367-8). Wemyss was appointed master of the ordnance to Sir William Waller. When Wemyss left London for Waller's army on 5 December 1643 his artillery train included the leather guns which he had developed from his uncle's invention: 'leatherne Musquets shooting bullets of one lb weight' (Sheffield University Library, Hartlib MSS, Ephermerides, 1643: 30/4/86a-93b). 'These leather pieces', a newsletter observed, predicting their value to Sir William's army, 'are of very great use, and very easie and light of carriage. One horse may draw a piece, which will carry a bullet of a pound and a halfe weight, and do execution very farre' ('The True Informer', 9 Dec 1643). In the event the royalist forces at the battle of Cropredy Bridge on 29 June 1644 captured both Wemyss and his eleven cannon, 'with two barricadoes of wood, which were drawn upon wheels, and in each seven small brass and leather guns, charged with case-shot' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 3.367). The leather guns at the time had a higher reputation than they generally have had since, and one royalist later claimed that the pieces captured at Cropredy 'proved very serviceable to the king' (J. Gwynne, 'Memoirs of the Great Civil War', 1822, 42). Nevertheless they seem to have had a relatively slight impact in the English context, one reason for which is probably the prolonged imprisonment of the inventor. 
The earl of Essex, Sir John Meldrum, Sir William Waller, and Sir Arthur Hesilrige made every effort to have Wemyss (whom Clarendon called 'a confessed good soldier') exchanged, but he remained a prisoner for many months (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 5.489). The king told Wemyss that the post of master-gunner remained vacant, and offered to reinstate him. By 12 June 1645 Wemyss had regained his freedom. Now an officer in the earl of Leven's Scottish army, he proved the ordnance and gunpowder for the English parliamentarian navy, and fitted out three new frigates with 100 pieces of cannon in 1646, for which he received $50. In March 1648 the navy commissioners awarded him the same sum for similar work done in the summer of 1647. 
In March 1648 Wemyss returned to Scotland. On 27 March the Scottish parliament passed an act 'granting to Colonel James Wemyss the privilege of making leather ordnance for three terms of nineteen years, with power to enforce secresy' ('APS', 6/2, 18-19). As an adherent of the anti-republican kirk party regime, Wemyss lost his post of master-gunner of England to Richard Wollaston after 5 February 1649. 
On 10 July 1649 the Scottish parliament appointed Wemyss general of artillery and engineering, and master of the ordnance of Scotland, replacing the senile engager Alexander 'Dear Sandy' Hamilton. Wemyss's pay was fixed at 600 Scots merks monthly. In July 1650 he received command of a regiment of foot. He fought at the battle of Dunbar (3 September 1650), but escaped the debacle that overtook most of the infantry. After the defeat he scoured Scotland for artillery, and produced a train of 29 field and 42 leather pieces for the Worcester campaign of August-September 1651. Wemyss fell prisoner at the battle of Worcester on 3 September. He was confined at Windsor Castle, and was bound over in $2000 in order to attend to private business in London for a few days in the summer of 1652. Early in 1654 he was permitted six months' leave for his health in Scotland. In May 1658 he petitioned the lord protector for an act to enable 'him to provide a place to erect his works for the making and practising certain inventions of light ordnance and engines of war, the fruits of his study and labour for thirty years' ('CSP dom.', '1658-9', 35-7). The petition included a list of his scientific inventions for naval and military gunnery, which allowed Britain to make considerable advances in ordnance. The dislocation of governmental functions following Cromwell's death delayed matters, but in 1660 Charles II granted a patent 'to James Wemyss, senior, and James Wemyss, junior, of the invention of the former for making light ordnance, and of a way whereby all motions caused by the force of a river, wind, or horses may be done by one or two men, and may be useful for lifting of weights, draining of mines, &c. ('DNB')' Charles II restored Wemyss to the post of master-gunner of England and general of artillery in Scotland in 1660. On 1 March 1661 the Scottish parliament renewed his monopoly of leather ordnance for fifty-seven years. That April he received a Scottish monopoly of mine draining equipment. In 1663 Wemyss received a royal patent for light ordnance. Owing to the cost of maintaining the affairs of these offices Wemyss resigned from them in 1666, and retired to Scotland on the king's permission. He received a payment for resigning the English position to Captain Valentine Pyne. Wemyss died in December 1667. 
Wemyss's son James inherited the estate of Caskieberran. On 15 April 1672 he was created Baron Burntisland for life, following his marriage on 25 December 1671 to Margaret Wemyss (1659-1705), countess of Wemyss in her own right. At his death in December 1682 he left a son David, who succeeded his mother as fourth earl of Wemyss. 


@@@@@


doc= 29039


Weemes, John (c.1579-1636), Church of Scotland minister and exegetist, was the only son of John Weemes of Lathockar, in Fife. He was educated at the University of St Andrews, graduating MA in 1600, and -- probably soon afterward -- married Margaret Cockburn. The couple had a son, David. Weemes was appointed minister of Hutton, Berwickshire, in 1608. In the same year he was one of several commissioners appointed by the general assembly to consult 'upon all maters standing presentlie in controversie... anent [the] discipline of the kirk' (Calderwood, 7.27-8), and took the side of those who opposed the imposition of episcopacy. Subsequently his proposed transfer to a vacant charge at Edinburgh was refused and he was admitted to the parish of Duns, Berwickshire, in 1613. At an unknown date Weemes lost both his wife and son. He married Janet Murray, and they had a son, John, and a daughter. 
Weemes remained steadfast in his opposition to royal policy. In 1617 he signed a petition condemning the king's attempts to curtail the 'power of... Generall Assemblies', and he was one of the 'cheefe reasoners' against the five articles -- both 'in conference', and in 'open assemblie' -- during the following year (Calderwood, 7.253, 332). In March 1620 Weemes appeared before the court of high commission for 'not ministering the Communion according to the order prescrived at Perth'. In answer to the charge he claimed that 'all the brethrein of the shire where he was minister agried with [his] judgement', that to administer the sacrament to kneeling communicants was 'evill... [and] directlie against the institution'. 'Therfor', he concluded, 'we will never doe it'. He was dismissed on his assurance that he would return to his parish, 'be quyet, and not hinder others' (ibid., 412-13, 425-6). 
True to his word Weemes retired from active opposition. He was considered 'one of the best learned' of ministers ('DNB'), and devoted the remaining years of his life to a study of the scriptures. His most famous work, 'The Christian Synagogue, Wherein is Contayned the Diverse Reading, Poynting, Translation, and Collation of Scripture with Scripture' (1623), was reprinted on five occasions during his lifetime. He wrote several other highly regarded books, including 'The Pourtraiture of the Image of God in Man' (1626), 'The Right Understanding of the Scriptures' (1632), 'The Right Understanding of the First Table of the Morall Law' (1632), 'An Explanation of the Ceremoniall Laws of Moses' [1632], 'An Explication of the Judiciall Lawes of Moses' [1632], and 'Observations, Naturall and Morall' (1633). At the latter date a three-volume set of the 'Workes of Mr John Weemse' was published at London. In 1634 his contribution to theological debate was recognized by no less an authority than Charles I, who recommended the minister to the second prebend of Durham Cathedral. Weemes accepted, and was installed honorary canon in the same year. His final work, 'A Treatise of the Foure Degenerate Sonnes, viz. the Atheist, the Magician, the Idolater, and the Jew', was published as 'the fourth volume of the Workes' in 1636. Weemes died, aged about fifty-seven, in November of that year; his wife apparently survived him. 


@@@@@


doc= 29040


Wendover, Roger of (d. 1236), historian and prior of Belvoir, was a monk of St Albans, who was probably associated with Wendover in Buckinghamshire and possibly a kinsman of Richard of Wendover, a physician to Pope Gregory IX ('r'. 1227-41). Roger became prior of Belvoir, a Leicestershire cell of St Albans, but was deposed in consequence of a visitation, conducted in or shortly after 1219, during which his abbot, William of Trumpington, is said to have concluded that Roger 'had wasted the property of the church in careless prodigality' ('Gesta abbatum', 1.270). After his departure from Belvoir, Roger of Wendover presumably returned to the monastic community at St Albans, where he died on 6 May 1236. It was probably in this last period of his life that he established himself as one of the most significant members of the St Albans school of historiography. 
From the available evidence it can only be demonstrated that Roger of Wendover started to write his 'Flores historiarum' at some date between 1204 and 1231, and that he had not ceased to work on the text by 1234. It is, however, probable that he was actually involved in the compilation of his chronicle in the period between about 1220 and his death in 1236. 
The 'Flores historiarum' is a work that can be divided into three sections whose analysis reveals that Roger of Wendover's original contribution to the text grew as its production became more contemporaneous with the events it describes. In the first section, the coverage of the period from the creation to 1202 is essentially based on a compilation of well-known authorities, such as Bede, Henry of Huntingdon, Roger of Howden, and Ralph de Diceto, which Roger of Wendover may have inherited from a single St Albans text to which one or more St Albans historians had already contributed. In the second section, which basically involves the description of John's reign after 1202, Roger of Wendover began to make his own mark on the 'Flores historiarum' by interlacing at least some of his own observations with those that he borrowed from such other works as the lost source that he shared with the thirteenth-century author of the 'Annales sancti Edmundi', and another set of annals which he found at the end of what is now BL, Royal MS 13 E. vi, the St Albans copy of the work of Ralph de Diceto. It is therefore only in the third and final section of the text, which covers the period from near the end of John's reign to May 1234, that there is unambiguous evidence that the chronicle is primarily based on Roger of Wendover's own historiographical approach. 
Commentators on Roger of Wendover's 'Flores historiarum' have often expressed their disappointment with the quality of various aspects of his historical writing. Inaccuracies in his identification of people and places and in his transmission of documents, such as 'Magna Carta', have been painstakingly indicated. His style has been described as clear, but bald. His learning has been denounced as shallow. His narrative has been found to be lacking in vigour. Such criticisms have largely arisen from the succession of comparisons that have been made between the 'Flores historiarum' and the work of Matthew Paris who succeeded Roger of Wendover as St Albans' principal historian. Although there can be little argument that the 'Chronica majora' of Matthew Paris is a more interesting piece of historiography than Roger of Wendover's 'Flores historiarum', it is, however, equally evident that Matthew Paris owed much to a predecessor whose work not only provided him with a wealth of material, which was similarly used by other authors, such as the anonymous annalists of Norwich and Waverley and Nicholas Trevet, but also introduced him to certain historiographical techniques which became important features of his own chronicle. It was, for example, through Roger of Wendover's knowledge of Roger of Howden's writing that Matthew Paris came to adopt the convention of beginning each annal with a record of where the king spent Christmas and ending each annal with a summary of the events of the year. 
Matthew Paris did not, however, only learn 'his profession, as a historian, from Roger of Wendover' (Vaughan, 34), for his reading of the 'Flores historiarum' also shaped Paris's political outlook by encouraging him to develop that set of grievances and beliefs that he parades so emphatically in his writings. On occasions the examination of these prejudices has been clouded by anachronistic attempts to endow them with the sort of constitutional coherence, as a systematic apologia for baronial opposition to Plantagenet despotism, that has given the St Albans scriptorium an undeserved place in the development of political theory. There can, nevertheless, be little doubt that Matthew Paris's homiletic defence of the Benedictinism of St Albans was, in part, a product of the inspiration that he derived from the intense interest shown by Roger of Wendover in miracles and other spiritual matters. The unqualified reverence accorded to St Francis in the 'Flores historiarum' is, for example, more than matched in the 'Chronica majora' in which, despite his growing hostility towards the mendicant orders, Matthew Paris chose to add a moving picture of the receipt of the stigmata to Roger of Wendover's unequivocally sympathetic account of the saint and his canonization. 
These common spiritual concerns have attracted relatively little attention from those historians who have committed themselves to detailed analyses of the extent to which Matthew Paris's anti-governmental attitudes were foreshadowed in the writing of Roger of Wendover. Such historians have, however, successfully demonstrated that, although the highly critical view of King John in the 'Flores historiarum' may well have been paralleled in a lost early version of Ralph of Coggeshall's 'Chronicon Anglicanum', and was certainly present in embryo in the works of such authors as Roger of Howden, Richard of Devizes, and Gervase of Canterbury, who did not have the benefit of knowing the later events of the reign, it was essentially Roger of Wendover's literary portrait of John that had most influence on Matthew Paris. That portrait was of a king who was so incapable of controlling himself that, shortly after the granting of 'Magna Carta', he went, dumbfounded and in great consternation, to the Isle of Wight, where he stayed for three months on the sea-shore and in the company of sailors, pondering how he might revenge himself upon his barons. This particular story is totally fictitious in that John never went near the Isle of Wight in the relevant period. Nevertheless it constitutes one of the most impressive images of John that St Albans produced. Furthermore, its treatment, in the 'Chronica majora', exemplifies the way in which Matthew Paris reacted to Roger of Wendover's work, in that the tale is as it is in the 'Flores historiarum' except that John now 'burns with rage', and 'plots' rather than 'ponders' his revenge. 
Matthew Paris's approach to Henry III was equally dependent upon Roger of Wendover's initial depiction of John's successor, since the basic elements of the 'Flores historiarum''s description of the king as a simple man who showed too much favour to foreigners and refused to live off his customary revenues are again adopted and then embellished, sometimes through the 'Chronica majora''s use of an apt quotation or an illustrative verse, but, more often, through its employment of a cluster of pejorative adjectives. As the 'Chronica majora''s coverage of events approaches the period during which Matthew Paris was himself active as a historian, his editorial enhancement of the 'Flores historiarum' becomes more substantial. It is nevertheless evident, from any comprehensive comparison of the two texts, that Roger of Wendover was the most influential mentor of the most readable, if not the most gifted, of England's late medieval chroniclers. 
Roger of Wendover's 'Flores historiarum' survives, in its own right, in Bodl. Oxf., MS Douce 207, of 'c'.1300, and BL, Cotton MS Otho B.v, of 'c'.1350. Important derivatives are, however, also extant in the first two of the three original manuscripts of Matthew Paris's 'Chronica majora' -- Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MS 26, and Cambridge, Corpus Christi College, MS 16 -- and in the shortest of Matthew Paris's abridged versions of the 'Chronica majora', of which a text, closely associated with its author, survives in BL, Cotton MS Vitellius A.xx. 
There is no complete printed edition of the 'Flores historiarum'. It has been edited from 'c'.447 onwards by H. O. Coxe and from 1154 onwards by H. G. Hewlett. H. R. Luard's edition of Matthew Paris's 'Chronica majora' also attempts to identify what the editor assumed to be its author's borrowings from the 'Flores historiarum'. None of these editions is, however, totally satisfactory, since it is clear that both the common source of the texts of the 'Flores historiarum' in Bodl. Oxf., MS Douce 207, and BL, Cotton MS Otho B.v, and the text that survives in the first two original manuscripts of the 'Chronica majora', share a lost common source in an early recension of the 'Flores historiarum', and this can only be reconstructed through the resolution of every conflict between the texts derived from it, and through a detailed analysis of the status of the borrowings from Roger of Wendover's work in BL, Cotton MS Vitellius A.xx. 


@@@@@


doc= 29041


Wendy, Thomas (1499/1500-1560), physician, born between May 1499 and May 1500, was the second son of Thomas Wendy of Clare, Suffolk. He was educated at Cambridge, graduating BA in 1519. In the same year he became a fellow of Gonville Hall (afterwards Gonville and Caius College), and continued as such until 1524. He proceeded MA in 1522, and then went abroad to study medicine. He graduated MD at Ferrara, and was incorporated in this degree at Cambridge in 1527. 
Wendy was able to build a lucrative medical practice and became a substantial landowner. In 1534 his services were retained by Henry Percy, sixth earl of Northumberland. As part of his duties for Northumberland he carried letters to Thomas Cromwell in 1536, and attended the earl during his final illness in 1537. 
Wendy was subsequently appointed physician to Henry VIII, who on 12 June 1541 granted to him and his wife, Margery, the manor of Haslingfield, Cambridgeshire. 
According to John Foxe, Wendy played some part in thwarting Stephen Gardiner's scheme to have Queen Katherine Parr condemned for heresy. Wendy was appointed physician to the queen in 1546. He attended Henry VIII on his deathbed, was one of the witnesses to his will, and was bequeathed $100 by the king. He was continued as royal physician with a salary of $100 by Edward VI, who made him further grants of land. 
On 12 November 1548 Wendy was appointed one of the ecclesiastical visitors of Oxford, Cambridge, and Eton College, and on 6 May 1552 was again commissioned to visit Eton. He was admitted fellow of the College of Physicians on 22 December 1551, and became an elect in 1552. In the same year he married his second wife, Margaret (died 1570), daughter of John Porter of London, and widow of Thomas Atkins of London. Wendy attended Edward VI on his deathbed, and was continued as royal physician by Mary, to whom he performed a similar service. 
On 26 March 1554 Wendy became member of parliament for St Albans, and on 10 October 1555 for Cambridgeshire. He was appointed an ecclesiastical visitor by Elizabeth in 1559. 
Wendy died at Haslingfield on 11 May 1560, in his sixty-first year, and was survived by his wife. He was buried at Haslingfield on 27 May. Having been a benefactor of Gonville and Caius College, he is commemorated there by a service held on 11 May. The college library has his collection of medical and classical books. Wendy had a stepson, but his nephew Thomas, son of his elder brother, John, was his heir. Thomas was sheriff of Cambridgeshire and Huntingdonshire in 1573-4, 1585-6, and 1602-3; in 1586-7 he was in trouble with the privy council for refusing the oath. He added his lands at Barrington, Cambridgeshire, to his uncle's endowment of Gonville and Caius College. 


@@@@@


doc= 29042


Wenham, Jane (d. 1730), last person convicted of witchcraft in England, details of whose upbringing are unknown, lived in Church Lane, Walkern, Hertfordshire, and for many years endured a reputation in the village not only for witchcraft but also for swearing, cursing, idleness, thievery, and whoredom. She was married twice, and had a number of children, but was a widow by the time of her prosecution in March 1712. Earlier that year a farmer named John Chapman called her a 'Witch and Bitch', blaming her for a spate of deaths among his livestock. Wenham decided to nip any further accusations in the bud, and on 9 February she applied to the local justice, Sir Henry Chauncy, for a warrant against Chapman for defamation. Chauncy declined to take any legal action, and instead the local minister, Godfrey Gardiner, was obliged to arbitrate. Much to Wenham's annoyance, Gardiner merely ordered Chapman to pay her a shilling in compensation, and took no further action. As she left the meeting Jane was heard to say 'if she could not have justice here she would have it elsewhere'. These were dangerous words for any suspected witch to utter, and, not surprisingly, when Gardiner's servant, a young woman named Ann Thorn, was subsequently afflicted with terrible fits and delusions Wenham was immediately identified as the culprit. 
Chauncy issued a warrant for her arrest and Wenham was searched for teats, which would prove her bond with the devil. None being found, Jane then offered to be swum in order to prove her innocence. Chauncy refused, but the vicar of the neighbouring parish of Ardley, Robert Strutt, proposed another test: to repeat the Lord's prayer, which it was thought no witch could achieve. Unfortunately, Jane faltered in her recitation. Her guilt was confirmed in the eyes of those present, and she was sent to Hertford prison to await trial at the next assizes. Her case was heard on 4 March before Sir John Powell. There were sixteen witnesses for the prosecution, including Gardiner, Strutt, and the Revd Francis Bragge, Chauncy's grandson and a friend of Gardiner. Bragge told the court that Wenham had confessed to him that she had practised witchcraft for sixteen years. Other villagers gave accounts of how she had bewitched them. Elizabeth Field, for example, stated how nine years earlier Wenham had cast a spell over a child in her care, and Thomas Adams swore that she had bewitched some of his sheep. Despite many damning testimonies and proofs, including the discovery under her pillow of a magic concoction said to be made from rendered corpses, the only indictment which the assize lawyers would accept was that she had conversed with the devil in the form of a cat. 
After hearing all the evidence Wenham could only say that 'she was a clear woman'. The court was adjourned and when it reconvened several hours later the jury announced that they found her guilty as charged. The punishment was death by hanging, but on Powell's orders the sentence was reprieved until further notice. The high-churchman Francis Bragge, who subsequently wrote three pamphlets on the case, asserted that even 'her nearest relations thinks she deserves to die, and that upon other accounts than witchcraft' (Bragge, 'Full and Impartial Account', 33). However, Powell, who throughout the trial had expressed his scepticism at the evidence, managed to obtain a royal pardon for Wenham. She was removed from Walkern for her own safety, and was given a home on the estate of a whig landowner, Colonel Plumer at Gilston. There she was visited by the Revd Francis Hutchinson, later bishop of Down and Connor, who thought her a good, pious woman. After Plumer's death she was looked after by Earl and Countess Cowper on their estate at Hertingfordbury. She died there on 11 January 1730, and was buried in Hertingfordbury churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 29043


Wenlock, John, first Baron Wenlock (d. 1471), diplomat, administrator, and speaker of the House of Commons, was the second son of William Wenlock (died in or after 1415), a Bedfordshire landowner, and his wife, Margaret Briton. John Wenlock inherited the family properties in 1429, following the death of his elder brother, Sir Thomas Wenlock. Before then he served in France under Henry V, and in 1422 was constable of Vernon-sur-Seine (Eure). Appropriately for a future diplomat, he proved adroit in securing powerful patrons at home; the first of these was Sir John Cornewall, Lord Fanhope (died 1443), a royal kinsman and Bedfordshire magnate, whom Wenlock was to support during the 1430s in a series of confrontations with Reynold, Lord Grey of Ruthin, and whose executor Wenlock later became. By then Wenlock was an usher in the king's chamber, and had begun to be active as a diplomat; closely identified with the peace policy of the duke of Suffolk, he took part from 1441 in the exchanges that in 1444 culminated in a two-year truce with France and, at a ceremony at Tours which Wenlock attended, in the betrothal of Henry VI to Margaret of Anjou. His rewards for his services included a number of offices on former Beauchamp estates in south Wales, and appointment as usher, and later as chamberlain, to the queen. Wenlock was knighted in 1447, while in the following year, when granted the office of constable of Bamburgh Castle, he was described as a 'king's knight'. Despite his membership of the royal household and association with Suffolk, he escaped attack by Cade's rebels in 1450, and managed to gain exemption from that year's 'Act of Resumption'. He sat as knight of the shire for Bedfordshire in six parliaments during Henry VI's reign -- those of 1433, 1437, 1439-40, 1447, 1449, and 1455-6. 
During the 1450s Wenlock's loyalty to Lancaster seems to have diminished somewhat; he probably shared the disgust felt by many veteran soldiers at the mismanagement of the French wars, and he had great difficulty in obtaining repayment of a substantial loan made to the crown in 1449. A letter from Henry VI, probably dating from 1453, castigated him for partiality to the duke of York, and suspended him from his office of queen's chamberlain while he went on pilgrimage. Although Wenlock fought for the king at St Albans in 1455 and was wounded, being afterwards carried 'in a carte sore hurt' (Gairdner, 'Paston Letters', 1.331), he may have owed his election as speaker of the Commons in 1455 to his not being firmly allied to either side; indeed, at that time he was associated in the foundation of a chantry at Staines, Middlesex, with John Bourchier, Lord Berners, a member of a family that favoured reconciliation. That in 1458 he went as an envoy with Viscount Bourchier and the Neville earls of Warwick and Salisbury to treat with Burgundy over breaches of a truce may point to further links with York, but he was ostensibly more impartially employed in late 1458 and early 1459, when he headed an embassy to arrange marriages for the prince of Wales, the earl of March (York's eldest son), and the duke of Somerset's son with either French or Burgundian princesses. But no marriages were negotiated, and in October 1459 Wenlock declared himself for York by joining the duke at Ludlow. He subsequently followed Warwick and March to Calais, sharing their penalties of attainder and forfeiture. 
In 1460 Wenlock took part in two raids on Sandwich, and then in the siege of the Tower of London, and early in 1461 he fought for the Yorkist cause at Mortimer's Cross, Ferrybridge, and Towton. At a time when that cause enjoyed limited support from the nobility and gentry, Wenlock's military skills, continental contacts, and diplomatic experience were great assets to Edward IV, and he received rich rewards for his desertion of Henry VI. He was appointed chief butler, chamberlain of the duchy of Lancaster, and steward of the duchy of Cornwall, and elected a knight of the Garter, while on 26 July 1461 he was summoned to parliament as Lord Wenlock. He also received numerous grants of wardships and custodies, and was given many of the estates of Chief Justice Sir John Fortescue. He continued to serve as a diplomat, playing a major part in negotiations that in the early 1460s led to a truce between England and France and the withdrawal of Scottish aid from the Lancastrian exiles. Not surprisingly, a series of deputies had to be appointed to carry out some of Wenlock's duties as butler, since he had 'not leisure to attend to the same' ('CPR', '1461-7', 332). 
Wenlock continued to be associated with Warwick in the embassies of the mid-1460s which treated with France over the question of Edward IV's marriage, and in a letter to the Franco-Burgundian agent Jean de Lannoy he expressed his disgust at the king's secret marriage to Elizabeth Woodville; this reverse, and his developing affiliation to Warwick, may explain his ultimate lapse of judgement in deserting Edward. In 1468 Wenlock's servant John Hawkins seems to have incriminated his master, along with other prominent Yorkists, in dealings with the Lancastrians. Yet Edward continued to show him favour, justifiably, it must have seemed, when in April 1470 Wenlock, as deputy captain of Calais, refused to admit a now rebellious Warwick into the town. Edward rewarded him by making him lieutenant of Calais, but a few months later, during the readeption of Henry VI, Wenlock is said by the Burgundian chronicler Commines to have encouraged Warwick to send several hundred men into the town, whose allegiance was thus swiftly transferred to Lancaster. Remaining in France, Wenlock joined Margaret of Anjou, and with her crossed to England in April 1471, but on 4 May was killed in the battle of Tewkesbury. A local chronicle notes that his body was 'take fro hens to be buryed' (Kingsford, 377). 
Wenlock's place of burial is unknown, though he had doubtless intended to be buried in the Wenlock chapel at St Mary's Church, Luton, which he extensively renovated in the 1460s in memory of his first wife, Elizabeth Drayton; the widow of Christopher Preston, she was probably married to Wenlock about 1441. She was dead by March 1466, and in 1468 Wenlock married Agnes Danvers, widow of Sir John Fray, who outlived him, and married Sir John Say of Broxbourne. Wenlock's changes of allegiance seem to have earned him a reputation for shiftiness and time-serving, but the suggestion that he was so widely distrusted that he was seldom called upon to act as a feoffee or executor is hardly borne out by the surviving evidence, which shows him to have been quite frequently employed in those capacities, and it is likely that his political movements were largely responses to changing circumstances, and were no more unprincipled than those of most of his contemporaries. Whatever the motives for his actions, he left little in the way of memorial to them. There were no children of either of his marriages, and his heir, had his possessions not been forfeited, would have been a remote cousin, one Thomas Lawley. 


@@@@@


doc= 29044


Wenman, Agnes, Lady Wenman (d. 1617), translator, was one of the two eldest of the sixteen children of Sir George Fermor (1550-1612), of Easton Neston, Northamptonshire, and his wife, Mary Curzon (died 1628), daughter of Thomas Curzon, of Addington, Buckinghamshire. In 1595 she married Richard Wenman (1572/3-1640) ['see under 'Wenman, Thomas, second Viscount Wenman], eldest son of Sir Thomas Wenman (died 1577) of Thame Park, Oxfordshire, and his wife, Jane ('fl'. 1572-1613), daughter of William West, first Baron De La Warr. He was knighted the following year. They had eight children. 
Wenman was suspected of involvement in the Gunpowder Plot of 1605. She came from a Catholic family, and was related to the known recusant Elizabeth Vaux, and, as the result of a misunderstanding over a letter of Vaux's, Wenman was examined twice. Although the charges against her were dropped, it is clear that Wenman had some knowledge of illegal Catholic activities, even if not of the Gunpowder Plot itself. John Morris identifies her as the lady with whom the Jesuit missionary Father John Gerard (1564-1637) was playing cards, disguised as a layman, when they were visited by George Abbot (1562-1633), future archbishop of Canterbury, who had recently published an attack on Gerard; as Gerard reports, Wenman 'could scarce keep her countenance, thinking within herself what he would have said if he had known whom he was answering' (Morris, 347). 
Wenman's 'The historyes and chronicles of the world by John Zonaras' (an English rendering of Jean de Maumont's French version of a thirteenth-century Greek text) makes her one of the many early modern women whose writing began to attract attention only towards the end of the twentieth century. It is arguable that evidence of Wenman's choice of text provides additional evidence of her Catholicism. Although De Maumont's preface stresses that the work is one of 'secular and humane learning' (CUL, MS Dd.i.18, fol. 2'v'), it describes rulers who 'seperated themselves' from 'the sincere and true doctrine of God' (ibid., fol. 9'v'), and its translation in the late sixteenth or early seventeenth century might well have been regarded as a political act. 
The work survives in only two manuscripts, neither of which preserves the full text. The first of these is one of Wenman's own notebooks; the second, a scribal publication in two large folio volumes, whose page layout and title-page imitate those of a printed text. The 'published' version of the 'Historyes' was evidently copied from Wenman's holograph; the scribe's annotations appear in the surviving notebook, and the majority of his more idiomatic renderings of Wenman's engaging but often extremely literal translation are incorporated in the later manuscript. It seems likely, therefore, that this manuscript was produced by a friend or relative, and that the work did not achieve a wide circulation; since the title-page records her as 'deceased', it is possible that the folios were intended as a private memorial. However, both translation and copying would have demanded considerable time and effort, and, in view of the religious climate, should be read as a form of self-identification or an affirmation of faith, even if a private one. 
Wenman was buried near other members of her husband's family at Twyford church in Buckinghamshire on 4 July 1617. 


@@@@@


doc= 29045


Richard Wenman, first Viscount Wenman (1572/3-1640), and his first wife, Agnes Wenman (d. 1617). His father was the eldest son of Sir Thomas Wenman (died 1577) of Thame Park, Oxfordshire, and his wife, Jane, daughter of William West, first Baron De La Warr (of the second creation). Richard Wenman matriculated at Oxford on 8 December 1587 as a scholar of John Case, formerly fellow at St John's College, but does not seem to have taken a degree. About 1595 he married Agnes, daughter of Sir George Fermor; they had eight children. For his bravery as a volunteer at the taking of Cadiz, Richard Wenman was shortly afterwards knighted by the earl of Essex, on 22 or 27 June 1596. Following Agnes's death in the summer of 1617, on 4 November 1618 at St Bartholomew-the-Great, London, he married Anne, the reputedly rich widow of Robert Chamberlayne, and previously of Thomas Roland. Wenman was returned as one of the MPs for Oxfordshire on 20 December 1620, and again in 1625. In 1627 he acted as sheriff for Oxfordshire, and in the following year, by letters patent dated 30 July 1628, was created Baron Wenman of Kilrainham, co. Meath, and Viscount Wenman of Tuam. Anne having died, he married twice more; his third wife, Elizabeth, was buried at Twyford, Buckinghamshire, on 27 April 1629, and his fourth wife, Mary, daughter and coheir of Thomas Keble of Essex, was buried there on 28 July 1638. He died on 3 April 1640, and was buried at Twyford on 7 April. 


@@@@@


doc= 29046


Wenman, Thomas, second Viscount Wenman (1596-1665), politician, was the elder of two surviving sons of 
Thomas Wenman matriculated from Balliol College, Oxford, on 23 November 1604, aged eight; he entered the Inner Temple as a student in 1614. Shortly before 5 July 1617 he married Margaret, second daughter and later coheir of Edmund Hampden of Wendover, Buckinghamshire, and Margaret Ball. He was knighted on 10 September 1617, and on 11 December 1620 was returned to parliament for Brackley in Northamptonshire, retaining his seat until August 1625. He was returned for Oxfordshire in February 1626 and for Brackley on 3 March 1628. In the 1630s he served in Ireland and on 20 December 1639 King Charles ordered that 'in return for his forwardness in serving the Crown in Ireland, his arrears of creation money be paid up, and the fee paid regularly in future' ('CSP Ire.', '1633-47', 229). It appears, however, that Wenman did not own property in Ireland, because in May 1641 his proxy vote conveyed to the earl of Thomond was contested on that basis by the peers sitting in Dublin. Perhaps soon after the death of his father in April 1640 and his succession as second viscount, Wenman had returned to England, where he was returned as MP for Oxfordshire on 28 October 1640. 
At the outbreak of the civil war Wenman was a moderate advocate of the parliamentarian cause, but quickly gravitated to the peace party. When Charles advanced on London in late 1642, he was one of the five commissioners who met him at Colnbrook on 11 November, with a petition from parliament proposing negotiations. Wenman and his fellow commissioners proceeded to Oxford on 1 February 1643 with proposals for an accommodation. In 1644 he was appointed a commissioner to carry new peace proposals to the king, attending him at Oxford on 24 November, and was present at the end of the year during the negotiations at Uxbridge. His anxiety for peace may well have been increased by the royalists' seizure of his estates, and on 3 June he obtained from parliament a grant of $4 a week for his maintenance pending their recovery. On 20 August 1646 the allowance was discharged by order of the house. In April 1647 Wenman was nominated to the parliamentary committee appointed to supervise the visitors of Oxford University. In this period he often visited Bulstrode Whitelocke's house and engaged there in discussions with other members of parliament. On 28 December 1647, Whitelocke 'and Mr Pierrpont dining with the Lord Wenman, they had much discourse about the Scotts proceedings in the Treaty of the Isle of Wight, and feared a new war' ('Diary of Bulstrode Whitelocke', 203). On 1 September 1648 he was once more appointed a peace commissioner, to treat with the king at Newport, and has plausibly been characterized as prepared for a peace on almost any terms. He was one of those who voted that the terms accepted by Charles were sufficient grounds for the house to proceed upon, and for this was secluded at Pride's Purge in December, and imprisoned. On his release in 1649 he retired to Thame, employing as his chaplain there Seth Ward, later bishop of Salisbury, who had been driven from Cambridge for opposing the solemn league and covenant. After the conquest of Ireland, Wenman became one of the adventurers, subscribing $600 and on 23 February 1654 received a grant of 1000 acres in the barony of Garricastle in King's county. 
Wenman was returned for Oxfordshire in the Convention Parliament of 1660, and was introduced by proxy to the Irish house of peers on 13 July 1661 in succession to his father. He died on 25 January 1665, and was buried at Twyford two days later. He was succeeded as viscount by his brother Philip (1610-1686). His wife, Margaret, had died on 1 May 1658 and been buried at Twyford. Their son Richard ('b'. 1621/2) died childless in 1646, so Wenman's substantial wealth was divided between his brother and the families of his daughters, Frances, wife of Richard Samwell of Upton, Penelope, wife of Sir Thomas Cave of Stanford in Northamptonshire, Elizabeth, wife of Sir Greville Verney of Compton Verney, Warwickshire, and Mary, wife of her cousin Sir Francis Wenman of Caswell in Oxfordshire, who was named as his father-in-law's executor. 


@@@@@


doc= 29047


Wenman, Thomas Francis (1745-1796), civil lawyer and botanist, was born at Thame Park, Oxfordshire, on 18 November 1745, the second son of Philip Wenman, sixth Viscount Wenman (1719-1760), politician and landowner, and Sophia (1715-1787), the eldest daughter of James Herbert of Tythrop, Buckinghamshire. He attended Westminster School from 1755 to 1762 and then proceeded to University College, Oxford, whence he matriculated on 22 October 1762. In 1764 he was admitted to the Inner Temple, and in 1770 was called to the bar. From 1765 until his death he was a fellow of All Souls, Oxford; he was awarded the degrees of BCL (1771) and DCL (1780). He stood unsuccessfully for the borough of Wallingford in 1774 but was returned to parliament in October of that year as MP for Westbury, largely through the influence of Lord Abingdon. During his six years as MP he played little part in parliamentary proceedings and made only one speech. 
Wenman was elected keeper of Oxford University archives on 15 January 1781 and appointed regius professor of civil law in 1789, posts that he retained until his death. He soon gave up his lectures in civil law 'for want of an audience' (Quiller-Couch, 147) and concentrated instead on his passion for natural history. He was a close friend of John Sibthorpe, professor of botany, who bequeathed to Wenman, for completion, his notes and materials for a 'Flora graeca'. Wenman died, unmarried, a few months later, on 8 April 1796, by drowning in a stretch of the River Cherwell near Water Eaton while seeking botanical specimens for his collection. He was buried in All Souls chapel on 15 April; according to the inscription on his tomb 'the whole university wept when he died'. Many of his writings are preserved among the warden's manuscripts at All Souls, including an unpublished history of the college. 


@@@@@


doc= 29048


Wentworth, Henrietta Maria, 'suo jure' Baroness Wentworth (1660-1686), royal mistress, the only child of Thomas Wentworth, fifth Baron Wentworth (bap. 1613, d. 1665), and Philadelphia Carey (died 1696), daughter of Sir Ferdinando Carey, was born on 11 August 1660. She was the mistress of James Scott, duke of Monmouth (1649-1685), accompanied him into exile in 1684, and guaranteed the loan which enabled him to launch his ill-fated rebellion in 1685. 
Henrietta Wentworth spent her early years at the family manor of Toddington in Bedfordshire, succeeding to the barony of Wentworth after the death of her father in 1665. By 1674 she was at court, taking part in 'Calisto', a masque by John Crowne. One of the 'men that danced' at the performance was the king's by then celebrated (though illegitimate) son James, duke of Monmouth, and it was probably then that she was introduced to him. Married in 1663 at the age of fourteen to Anne Scott, equally young and heiress to a Scottish title, Monmouth had ignored his young wife and gone on to a career as one of the Restoration's more notorious rakes: besides relationships with various actresses and court women, he had fathered several children by Eleanor Needham, daughter of Sir Richard Needham, by the time he met Henrietta Wentworth. 
Nothing seems to have come of any introduction immediately: for the next six years Monmouth was increasingly involved in public activity and there is no reference to a connection with Henrietta Wentworth until 1680. Characteristically (for Monmouth) it came in a scandal: in 1680, and within weeks of each other, two women were obliged to leave London in a hurry for the countryside, and Monmouth's name was associated with both. One was the wife of Ford, Lord Grey, a long-time friend and political associate of the duke, and here the quarrel (if such it was) was quickly patched up. But the other case involved Henrietta Wentworth and was more serious. She was being groomed to marry the young earl of Thanet when Monmouth, then at the height of his influence at court, took a hand. When her mother packed Henrietta off to the countryside 'in such haste that it makes a stir' ('Diary of... Sidney', 1.263), the duke followed her to the family manor at Toddington and moved in to begin a permanent relationship. A later plan of the house names two adjoining rooms as 'the Duke of Monmouth's Parlor' and 'the Lady's parlor'. When implicated in the Rye House plot in 1683, Monmouth retired to Toddington to spend most of that summer in hiding there, writing bad verse on the virtues of a private life, watching the local hunt, and carving Henrietta's name on an oak tree close to the house -- a tree thereafter known locally as the Monmouth oak. Restored briefly to favour again in 1684, but finally disgraced for refusing to testify publicly against his whig friends Algernon Sidney and John Hampden, Monmouth revisited Henrietta at Toddington before going into exile in Holland, where she soon joined him. 
Henrietta Wentworth was received by William, prince of Orange, as the duke's recognized mistress, and for nearly a year the two lived together in private domesticity, keeping well apart from the other English and Scots exiles and adventurers who thronged the Low Countries. There can be no doubt that the relationship between the two was deep and genuine: certainly Monmouth was a reformed man once his attachment to Henrietta began. Thomas Bruce, earl of Ailesbury, once in love with Henrietta himself, recorded the depth of the couple's attachment to each other, and their sincere belief that in the eyes of God they were man and wife. Their domestic happiness was one reason why Monmouth at first refused to take any action on the shattering news of his father's death in February 1685. But when he finally gave way to the arguments of his fellow exiles that his honour would be irretrievably compromised if he did nothing to stop the accession of his detested Catholic uncle James II, arguments reinforced by the independent preparations for a rebellion in Scotland by the earl of Argyll, Henrietta gave him her fullest support. Unable to raise any money from potential supporters in England, Monmouth had to borrow some $6000 from a Dutch merchant -- but could not do so until Henrietta had pledged her jewellery, cash, and credit as security: enough to hire a small ship and buy arms for a few hundred men. Only this backing made the rebellion possible, for Monmouth and his fellow exiles were nearly penniless, and the Dutch government kept a very prudent distance from the enterprise. 
On the scaffold after the rebellion's defeat Monmouth renewed his pledges of devotion to Henrietta. When the two bishops present badgered him over his conduct with her, he broke in angrily that he had been married to his wife when only a child, that Henrietta had reclaimed him from a licentious life and he had been faithful to her, and that she was a 'religious, godly lady' (Clifton, 228). Almost his last act was to ask an attendant to convey a memento of him to her. After the execution she remained in Holland until at least mid-August 1685, when she spoke with James II's envoy Bevil Skelton on the shore near Scheveling. According to his hostile account, she seemed mainly concerned about the $4000 of goods and plate of which she had been cheated by one of Monmouth's merchant creditors, haughtily asking him for his help in getting it back, and appearing indifferent to her lover's death: if true, it is likely to be as much a matter of the demeanour required by her situation and the face to be presented to the emissary of her lover's enemy as of a genuine reflection of her feelings. 
Not long after this she returned to England, but did not long survive her lover, dying on 23 April 1686: some said of a broken heart, but the vindictive, from over-painting her face with mercury. She was buried at Toddington church, where her mother erected a monument to her in the north transept. The barony passed to Henrietta's aunt Anne, Lady Lovelace, and on her death to her granddaughter Martha Lovelace. Lady Henrietta's estate at death was said to be some $4000 p.a.: her aunt fought her mother over the validity of her will. 


@@@@@


doc= 29049


Wentworth, Sir John, first baronet (1737-1820), colonial governor, was born on 9 August 1737 in Portsmouth, New Hampshire, America, the son of Mark Hunking Wentworth (1710-1785) and his wife, Elizabeth Rindge. He was born into a prominent New Hampshire political family; both his grandfather John Wentworth and his uncle Benning Wentworth had served as royal governors of the colony. The foundation of the family's success had been set by 
Wealthy and well connected, William's descendant John Wentworth was in a good position to enjoy a profitable and public career. However, John's adult preferences for a sybaritic lifestyle contrasted vividly with the Wentworth family's puritan roots. During the early 1760s Wentworth spent five years in London. This period was particularly revealing because it demonstrated that, in addition to being able to charm fellow colonials at home, Wentworth was equipped to mix effortlessly in English elite society. Indeed, so adept was he in this latter respect that he gained the support and patronage of the whig political leader and prime minister, Charles Watson-Wentworth, marquess of Rockingham. Wentworth was to flatter Rockingham further when, having married his cousin, Frances Deering Wentworth, on 11 November 1769, he named his only child Charles Mary after the Rockinghams, a childless couple. 
On his return to New Hampshire, Wentworth was appointed surveyor-general of the king's woods in North America, a position previously held by his uncle. He took his duties -- notably the provision of masts for the Royal Navy -- particularly seriously as well as enjoying the freedom of the outdoors. On 11 August 1766 he succeeded his uncle to become royal governor of New Hampshire. 
As governor Wentworth had to contend against a charge of corruption brought against him by one of his councillors, the disputatious Peter Livius. He managed to overcome this challenge to the Wentworth hierarchy by 1773, though not before incurring considerable legal costs. His disappointment in not benefiting from his uncle's will in 1770 rendered these costs even more burdensome. Yet in terms of the larger picture these occurrences were mere inconveniences compared with the turbulence then being created by the advancing tide of radicalism in the thirteen colonies which finally affected even quiet New Hampshire. Confident of his abilities, Wentworth fled the colony only in 1775. In order to continue the struggle, he then took steps to organize a volunteer corps of loyalists -- an effort which was abandoned only after the defeat at Saratoga in October 1777. His return to England found him hardly unique in being both an exile and, having lost his American possessions, in very much reduced circumstances. Wentworth made do by establishing the legitimacy of a loyalist pension and by a habitual effrontery in the face of creditors; though clearly angling for the post of governor of Nova Scotia, he eventually decided in 1783 to accept a resumption of the lesser role of surveyor-general. As before, he pursued his duties with vigour. On the occasions when he did return to Halifax, he was astute enough to remain aloof from the controversies surrounding the governor, John Parr. However, Wentworth's new position was not to the liking of his wife, Frances, who found solace in openly flaunting a relationship with the much younger Prince William Henry during his sojourns in harbour. Wentworth himself was to have one openly acknowledged natural son in addition to another child who was the result of a liaison with a woman of maroon origin from Jamaica in the 1790s. Despite these infidelities, however, John and Frances retained a genuine affection for each other. Fortuitously, they were in London together in 1791 when news arrived that John Parr had died. The resulting situation was ideally suited to Wentworth's lobbying skills. Thus it was that at a salary of $2300, Wentworth proudly set sail for Halifax in March 1792 and was sworn in as lieutenant-governor on 13 May. His record of achievement in the early years of his long term of office did much to efface the reputation of the colony as 'Nova Scarcity'. Helped immeasurably by the onset of increased economic activity resulting from the French Revolutionary Wars, the public debt had been wiped out by 1797. Unlike Parr, Wentworth established a co-operative relationship with the holder of the first colonial bishopric, Charles Inglis. As in New Hampshire, Wentworth again put himself in the forefront of educational change. In a manner consistent with their social pretences, if not with their finances, the Wentworths also entertained lavishly. Wentworth's importuning for a baronetcy was crowned with success on 16 May 1795. His coat of arms brandished his connection with the Rockinghams, a claim which was as politic as it was spurious. 
If these years marked the high point in terms of Wentworth's family's social status, they also saw his career beset with an increasing series of problems, that were mainly, if not entirely, of his own making. Faced with the need to balance the claims of earlier settlers and those who like himself had fled the American War of Independence, Wentworth did little to hide his partiality in gubernatorial appointments. Important posts went to his own kind. To this was added a bias in favour of the Haligonian merchants as opposed to agriculturists and outport interests. Wentworth also suffered in these years from his being a civilian governor during wartime. Nevertheless, he did not help his own cause by letting the expense of raising the Royal Nova Scotia regiment (after 1793) get out of control. Another controversial episode in Wentworth's later term of office was the result of his prolonged attempt (1796-1801) to settle a colony of maroons in Nova Scotia. The maroons were descendants of slaves who had escaped to form a community of 'de facto' independence in Jamaica; they had subsequently come to Nova Scotia after armed conflicts in 1795-6. Now they showed themselves unwilling to make many concessions to their supporters, who expected them to adopt a segregated, settled, and Christian existence. Undoubtedly Wentworth was prompted to uphold their cause more because he saw them as a means of solving an acute wartime labour shortage rather than from any degree of enlightened attitude on his part towards 'outsiders'. For example, in this regard he displayed only a tincture of concern for the Mi'kmaqs and the Acadians after the prospect of conflict with France became a real one. The debacle ended when the decision was made to send the unfortunate maroons to Sierra Leone. The whole affair had been an expensive experiment, soon to be exacerbated by the rising costs incurred in the building of a new government house. So unsatisfactory were matters at the turn of the century that it appeared for a time as if Wentworth's term of office might well be terminated. 
Aside from the disastrous financial implications of such a change for Wentworth, it might have been better had he been spared the acrimonious and bitter struggle which ensued with a member of the assembly by the name of William Tongue or Tong (1764-1832). The latter was an early settler who portrayed himself as representing 'country' interests against a corrupt and effete 'court' party. Tongue also donned the mantle of 'tribune of the people' -- a claim which Wentworth, given his own view of himself as at one with his subjects, was bound to resent. The personal feud became interwoven with constitutional disputes between the assembly and the council with Wentworth at its head. After what he had experienced in New Hampshire, Wentworth was apt to interpret any form of opposition as being potentially rebellious. Hence the lieutenant-governor became increasingly vindictive towards his tormentor. Ultimately, Wentworth did succeed in driving Tongue out of office and from the colony. But it was a pyrrhic victory. The record keepers in the new Colonial Office (1801) could hardly have failed to notice how much of Wentworth's official correspondence was obsessively related to Tongue. The completion of the elegant government house in 1808 at a cost of $30,000 was not enough to save him, and in the same year he was replaced as lieutenant-governor by Sir George Prevost. The couple returned in 1810 to England, where Frances died on 14 February 1813. Wentworth, even in his dotage, did not escape the indignity of having to run from his creditors once more. He returned in 1812 to Nova Scotia, where an annuity, the salary as surveyor-general, and a few firm friends provided for him until his death there on 8 April 1820; he was buried at St Paul's, Halifax. The baronetcy ceased upon the death of Charles Mary in 1844. 


@@@@@


doc= 29050


Wentworth, Paul (1534-1594), member of parliament, was the third son of Sir Nicholas Wentworth of Lillingstone Lovell, Oxfordshire, and Jane Josselyn. In 1563 he married Helen Tildesley, 'nee' Agmondesham, of Heston, Middlesex; they had four sons and four daughters. Together with his elder brother Peter Wentworth, Paul was frequently at odds with Queen Elizabeth over policy and questions of parliamentary privilege. He sat in three parliaments, consisting of five sessions: for Chipping Wycombe (1559), Buckingham (1563), and Liskeard (1572). Wentworth was identified in 1564 as being earnest in religion, and his puritan leanings came to the fore in the third session of the 1572 parliament when he moved 'for a publique fast to the end that it might please God to blesse us in our actions better then we had beene heretofore, and for a sermon to be had every morning' (Hartley, 1.526). The house debated the matter and Wentworth's motion passed rather narrowly. However, three days later the speaker reported that the queen strongly objected to their decision, because she had prohibited them from discussing religious matters. Vice-chamberlain Sir Christopher Hatton added that although the queen liked fasting, prayer, and sermons, on no account did the Commons have the right to order a public fast; this rested solely in her royal prerogative. Speaker John Popham was rebuked for allowing the house to be divided on the matter, Wentworth having failed to make a legislative proposal. The Commons apologized, pleading that they had not acted out of malice but lack of proper consideration. 
Wentworth was not one to mince words in his speeches. During a long debate on Mary, queen of Scots, in 1572, a diarist recorded Wentworth's contribution as follows: 'Wisheth it may be put to the question of the Howse whither wee should call for an axe or an acte' (Hartley, 1.376). However important might be regarded these later contributions to the history of Elizabeth's parliaments, there is no doubt that Wentworth's key intervention came early in his parliamentary career. In 1566, the second session of the 1563 parliament, the Commons was much preoccupied with the related questions of the queen's marriage and the succession. On Saturday 9 November, just over a week into the session, the queen ordered all discussion to cease on the matter. On the following Monday Wentworth rose to ask three questions: first, 'Whether hyr Hyghnes' commawndment, forbyddyng the lower howse to speake or treate any more of the successyon and of any theyre excuesses in that behalffe, be a breache of the lybertie of the free speache of the Howse or not?' Second, whether her ministers, in pronouncing her commandment to the house in her name 'are of awthorytye suffycyent to bynde the Howse to scylence in that behalffe, or to bynde the Howse to acknoledge the same to be a direct and sufficient commawndment or not?' And, last, whether her commandment 'be no breache of the lybertie of the Howse' or sufficient 'to bynde the Howse to take knoledge theroff, then what offence is it for anye of the Howse to err in declaryng his opynyon to be otherwyse?' (Hartley, 1.154). A later reader of the questions endorsed them as concerning 'the liberty of the Hows in freedom of speech for succession' (ibid.), and this is how most historians since have regarded them, most notably Sir John Neale. However, in the 1980s Sir Geoffrey Elton, among others, challenged the importance placed on the questions. Although they were much debated on the day, Elton suggested that, significantly, Wentworth's questions were left unanswered, and MPs quickly let the matter drop in their haste to turn to the major business of a parliament, legislation. Their interest may well lie, as one of Wentworth's biographers remarked, 'in the context of the centuries-long debate on freedom of speech in the Commons' (HoP, 'Commons, 1558-1603', 3.596) rather than in their significance for the history of the 1566 parliamentary session. Nevertheless, given the number of draft speeches and notes on the subject, there is little doubt that members were gravely concerned with the matter of the succession and the queen's marriage, the substantive issues which gave rise to Wentworth's questions in the first place. 
Unlike his brother, none of Wentworth's parliamentary activities seems to have caused the queen to take action against him. In 1569 Thomas Howard, fourth duke of Norfolk, was lodged at Wentworth's manor of Burnham, Buckinghamshire, before entering the Tower. Wentworth had secured the lease of Burnham through his marriage, his wife being widow to a groom of the chamber, William Tildesley, who was the first lessee of Burnham Abbey after its dissolution. In 1589 the queen, noting Wentworth's dutiful service, especially with regards to Norfolk, granted him an extended renewal of his lease. Wentworth was active in searching for Catholics in Oxford and Buckinghamshire and his will, drawn up in September 1593, bears the full flavour of an English puritan. He died on 13 January 1594, leaving his widow as sole executor. He was buried at Burnham, where the inscription in the church declared that he lived 'most Christian-like' and died 'most comfortably strong in faith, steadfast in hope, fervent in love, a zealous professor of the truth, and an earnest detester of all superstition'. 


@@@@@


doc= 29051


Wentworth, Peter (1524-1597), member of parliament, was the first son born to Sir Nicholas Wentworth (died 1553) of Lillingstone Lovell, Oxfordshire, chief porter of Calais, and his wife, Jane, daughter of John Josselyn of Hyde Hall, Sawbridgeworth, Hertfordshire. His early life remains obscure. Both Peter Wentworth and his brother Paul Wentworth (1534-1594) became famous for their interventions on the issues of parliamentary privilege, freedom of speech, and the succession to the crown. Trained at Lincoln's Inn, Peter entered parliament rather late in life, being selected for the first time in 1571 to represent Barnstaple. He sat for the Cornish borough of Tregony in 1572, and for the town of Northampton in the parliaments of 1586-7, 1589, and 1593. Wentworth owed his seat at Tregony to the influence of the second earl of Bedford, a well-known supporter of radical protestants. His sister Clare had been a Marian exile, and it is likely that Wentworth shared such views. His first wife, Lettice, was a daughter of Sir Ralph Lane of Horton, Northamptonshire, first cousin of Queen Katherine Parr. His second marriage, to Elizabeth Walsingham (died 1596), made the anti-Catholic secretary Sir Francis Walsingham his brother-in-law. In 1579 the privy council investigated a complaint that a puritan minister was administering the sacraments out of Wentworth's house at Lillingstone Lovell, similarly suggestive of radical protestantism. 
However, Wentworth was not a central figure in the key religious agitations of the parliaments in which he sat. He was certainly opposed to overbearing episcopal authority. In 1571 Wentworth was a member of a Commons delegation appointed to explain their omission of non-doctrinal articles (such as the reading of homilies and the consecration of bishops) from a bill confirming the articles of religion. Questioned by Archbishop Parker, Wentworth defended the omission on the grounds that the committee had not had the time to compare the articles with the scriptures. Parker insisted that this was a matter best left to the bishops. Wentworth would have none of it. 'Noe, by the faith I beare to God, wee will pass nothing before we understand what it is, for that were but to make yow popes' (Hartley, 'Proceedings', 1.432). Here Wentworth was defending the Commons' right to legislate on religious matters. Indeed, he noted that experienced MPs had informed him that the most important laws governing the protestant religion in England had been initiated in the lower house. This does not make Wentworth a puritan, but it indicates the strength of his commitment to the protestant cause, which was to form the overwhelming concern of his public life. 
Like so many MPs Wentworth was engaged with the agitation over Mary, queen of Scots, and Thomas Howard, fourth duke of Norfolk, in the first session of the parliament of 1572. He frequently urged their execution, and was clearly frustrated by the delay in ordering the duke's execution and by the queen's stalling on the fate of Mary Stuart. Her failure to approve the Commons' bill against Mary deeply distressed Wentworth. In his view, by ignoring their advice the queen had abused her people. This was the argument he advanced on the very first day of the new session in 1576. Wentworth must have taken everyone by surprise by offering a premeditated speech with the resounding introductory proposal: 'Sweet indeed is the name of libertye and the thing it selfe a value beyond all inestimable treasure' (Hartley, 'Proceedings', 1.425). Wentworth argued that without the ability to speak freely, parliament would become simply 'a very schoole of flattery and dissimulacion and soe a fitt place to serve the Devil' (ibid., 426). Two particular things prevented free speech. The first were rumours, such as 'the Queen's Majestie liketh not of such a matter' or that she liked a matter and would be offended by any who opposed it. The second impediment was the bringing of messages into the house 'either of commandinge or inhibiting' (ibid., 426, 427). In a speech punctuated with biblical references, Wentworth argued that MPs had to be able to speak freely properly to fulfil their constitutional role of advising the monarch and making laws. By resisting their legislative endeavours, the queen had put herself and the state in danger. At this point Wentworth was stopped in his tracks. On the order of the house he was taken into custody, examined by a committee, and imprisoned in the Tower. There he remained until the queen ordered his return two days before the end of the session. 
As its editor has remarked, the speech's most 'theoretically challenging part of the argument was denied the House' (Hartley, 'Elizabeth's Parliaments', 131). Wentworth did not seem to object to Elizabeth's deciding the parliamentary agenda, but rather her curtailing their ability to speak freely once summoned. His speech was no resounding call for the Commons to play a central constitutional role, but it certainly made the claim that, to fulfil their function, MPs had to be able to speak their mind. Indeed, in his closing section Wentworth directed his anger against those MPs who voted against matters for which they had spoken, and at the apparently common custom of waiting to see which way the more prominent members were voting in order to follow suit. The same preoccupation explains his vicious personal attack on Sir Humphrey Gilbert who had criticized Speaker Bell in 1571 for raising the issue of the queen's granting of monopolies. 
In 1586-7 Wentworth asked the speaker to put a number of leading questions to the house. Designed to be answered in the affirmative, the questions would have confirmed MPs' freedom of speech, prevented the reporting of words and actions to the queen, and stopped the speaker from interrupting speeches. However, his questions were never answered. Speaker Puckering simply pocketed them and informed the council, with the result that Wentworth found himself once again temporarily in the Tower. 
Wentworth's remaining days as a parliament man focused on the issue that lay at the heart of his concerns over religion and the security of England: the succession. Soon after Mary Stuart's execution in 1587, Wentworth drafted 'A Pithie Exhortation to her Majestie for Establishing her Successor to the Crowne'. He hoped to offer it in the parliament of 1589, but, having failed in that ambition, Wentworth lobbied for its presentation to the queen and found himself in temporary confinement once again. He was quite incorrigible, and his meeting with several MPs before the parliament of 1593 to discuss how they might pursue the subject in the Commons turned out to be a fateful decision. Wentworth found himself back in the Tower, and there he remained until his death. He never wavered in his belief that it was better to offer his queen a faithful lover's wounds, as he put it in 1576, than dissemble and flatter and offer her 'a detestable Judas his kisse' (Hartley, 'Proceedings', 1.428). Indeed, Wentworth took the opportunity of his imprisonment in the Tower to write against Doleman's tract on the succession. His response, 'A Discourse Containing the Author's Opinion of the True and Lawful Successor to her Majesty', was published alongside 'A Pithie Exhortation' a year after his death. 
Wentworth and his second wife, Elizabeth, had five daughters and four sons, including Walter and Thomas Wentworth (1567/8-1628) who both sat in later parliaments. Elizabeth was given permission to live with her husband in the Tower where she died in July 1596. Wentworth himself died there on 10 November 1597. Shortly before his death he composed a poem entitled 'The causes of my longe imprisonmente' in which he quipped: '
Syth I have said, and done my best 

meekly wth prayer, god grant me rest. 
(BL, Egerton MS 3139B)' Although his parliamentary agitations came to little, they led Wentworth to offer theoretical positions of some novelty and importance. 


@@@@@


doc= 29052


Wentworth, Sir Peter (1592-1675), politician, was the son of Nicholas Wentworth of Lillingstone Lovell, Oxfordshire (later Buckinghamshire), and his wife, Susanna, daughter of Roger Wigston of Wolston, Warwickshire. He was grandson of Peter Wentworth (1524-1597), the vociferous champion of free speech in the Elizabethan parliaments. He matriculated at Magdalen Hall, Oxford, in 1610 and became a student at Lincoln's Inn in 1613. He was made a knight of the Bath at Charles I's coronation and served as a JP in Oxfordshire. As sheriff in 1634-5 he experienced difficulties with the collection of ship money, which led to his being questioned before the privy council. He is the probable author of 'A pack of puritans, mayntaining the unlawfulness, or inexpediencie or both of pluralities and nonresidency... as also a defence of the authority of princes and parliaments to intermeddle with matters of religion' (1641). He was listed as having refused the king's summons to fight against the Scots in the first bishops' war and was elected to the Long Parliament for Tamworth, Staffordshire, in December 1641. He subscribed $100 and three horses for the defence of the realm in June 1642, and signed the solemn league and covenant in September 1643. 
Though evidence is sparse for Wentworth's wartime parliamentary activity, he was among the more radical of MPs. As such the 'presbyterians' accused him of self-interested, arbitrary abuse of committees, ordinances, and county influence. Denzil Holles called him one of the 'small Prophets' and attacked him over his involvement in the disputed manor of Wolston. Wentworth's father had purchased Perrie Mill on the estate in 1605, and George Warner of Wolston purchased the majority of the manor in 1612: Warner's failure to compound as a royalist within the three-month period of grace allowed under the conditions given at the surrender of Lichfield saw Wentworth able to purchase Wolston, valued at $6000, for $2038. Warner complained of obstruction from Wentworth, who was aided by the Somerset MP John Ashe, who later chaired the Commonwealth compounding committee. Wentworth was added to the committee on 9 April 1649, and was a trustee for the maintenance of ministers, by which he benefited from the estate of Richard Chamberlain of Temple House and Astley, Warwickshire, and Buriton, Hampshire. 
In September 1647 Wentworth joined Henry Marten as teller against a motion to make a further application to the king for a settlement, indicating membership of the minority group willing to settle the kingdom without the king. He was named to the high court of justice to try Charles I, but pleaded that a series of falls and subsequent ill health kept him at home. Although he may have been avoiding controversy, his subsequent Commonwealth career also displays erratic attendance. He was named to the second, fourth, and fifth councils of state, combining long, unbroken stretches in attendance -- when he invariably arrived early -- with similar periods of total absence. His friendships were typical of a committed republican. He combined an intimacy with John Milton, to whom he would bequeath $100 (referring to Milton's writing against the French monarchist Salmasius), with fellowship with Henry Marten. Marten and Wentworth were named during Cromwell's speech dismissing the Rump on 20 April 1653 for having disgraced the parliamentary process, resorting to alehouses and stews. Wentworth retorted that Cromwell's language to parliament was 'unbecoming', but his 'prating' was silenced ('Memoirs of Edmund Ludlow', 1.352-3). 
Wentworth withdrew from London during the protectorate but acted against Cromwell in the localities. His prosecution of a tax collector in Warwickshire, following the dissolution of the first protectorate parliament, brought him before the council. He claimed a constant commitment to the principle that 'no money ought to be levied upon the people without their consent in parliament', but then submitted to Cromwell and withdrew his suit, justifying himself to Ludlow that his age and infirmity had sapped his will to fight ('Memoirs of Edmund Ludlow', 1.413-4). With the fall of the protectorate he took his seat in the restored Rump, and again sat on the council of state. When the army dismissed the Rump for the second time, in 1659, he managed to break back into the Commons chamber from the Thames-side. The council of state assigned him Whitehall lodgings in January 1660, and he continued to sit when the Long Parliament was briefly reconstituted in February 1660. Having withdrawn from politics at the Restoration he died, unmarried, on 1 December 1675, and was buried in the church at Lillingstone Lovell. His Warwickshire property descended through his grandnephew, Fisher Dilke, on condition that he take the name of Wentworth. 


@@@@@


doc= 29053


Wentworth, Thomas, first Baron Wentworth (1501-1551), nobleman, was born at Nettlestead in Suffolk, the eldest son of Sir Richard Wentworth, 'de jure' fifth Baron Le Despenser (died 1528), and his wife, Anne, daughter of Sir James Tyrell of Gipping, Suffolk, the alleged murderer of the princes in the Tower who was executed in 1502. Originally from Yorkshire, Thomas's family had settled in Suffolk in the mid-fifteenth century. Through his father he was a cousin of Queen Jane Seymour and her brother Edward, later duke of Somerset. About 1520 he married Margaret, elder daughter of Sir Adrian Fortescue and his first wife, Anne Stonor (died 1518), with whom he had a large family, which numbered at least eight sons and nine daughters. The eldest son was Thomas Wentworth, second Baron Wentworth and de jure seventh Baron Le Despenser. The youngest known daughter, Dorothy, married, second, the privateer Martin Frobisher. 
The young Thomas Wentworth participated in the invasion of France in 1523, during which he was knighted by the duke of Suffolk (notwithstanding his associations with the Brandons, he should not be confused with Suffolk's vice-chamberlain, Thomas Wentworth of West Bretton). Wentworth's elevation to the nobility, in 1529, was probably unexpected. For the parliament of 1529 he was elected a knight of the shire for Suffolk, but on 2 December 1529 he joined three other MPs among a group of seven new barons created by Henry VIII, probably in part to bolster lay membership of the Lords in advance of attacks upon the church. 
As a peer Wentworth participated in the trials of Queen Anne and Lord Rochford in May 1536, and in those of Baron Montague and the marquess of Exeter in 1538. In 1539 he was absent from the session at which his own father-in-law, Sir Adrian Fortescue, was attainted for treason, but the act of attainder none the less included a clause safeguarding the interests of Wentworth and his wife. Wentworth's family woes continued in 1540, with the death of his wife's sister Frances, Lady Fitzgerald (whose husband had been executed in 1537). As Lady Fitzgerald died while in Wentworth's custody and his wife stood to inherit her estate, he begged Thomas Cromwell to conduct an investigation to dispel rumours of murder. 
Outside parliament, Lord Wentworth served the crown faithfully at home and abroad. At court he assisted at the baptism of Prince Edward (whose kinsman he was) on 15 October 1537. As well as a Suffolk JP (from 1531), he was regularly nominated to special commissions in the county, where he was the leading resident nobleman, and where he sometimes showed a domineering temperament in disputes with relations and neighbours. In 1545 he was an oyer and terminer commissioner (eastern circuit), as well as a commissioner to levy the benevolence in Suffolk. In the summer of 1543 Wentworth supplied fifty men for service in Flanders, and the following year he served under the duke of Norfolk at the unsuccessful English siege of Montreuil. He also headed the county musters commissioners. 
During the 1530s Wentworth actively advanced the cause of religious reform around Ipswich. He energetically investigated Suffolk clergy accused of preaching the papal supremacy, and assisted Archbishop Cranmer in pursuing Hugh Payne, a conservative preacher once curate at Hadleigh. In April 1538 he arranged the removal to London of an image of the Virgin at Ipswich, and that same month claimed possession (as a descendant of the founder) of the Ipswich Greyfriars, denouncing its residents as 'an idell neste of dranes' (Miller, 241). Wentworth was also a zealous promoter of local evangelicals. He intervened with Cromwell on behalf of an Essex man accused of heresy, and in 1538 he appointed the reformer Thomas Becon (who had ties to Nettlestead) to an Ipswich chantry. Most notably, the evangelical writer John Bale, previously prior of the Ipswich Carmelites, credited Wentworth personally with converting him to the reformers' cause. For Wentworth, as a leading figure in Suffolk, the conservative reaction that followed the fall of Cromwell presented difficult dilemmas, as in 1545 when he presided over the Ipswich trial of two men accused of denying transubstantiation. One of the prisoners, John Kirby, publicly accused Wentworth of acting against his conscience in condemning him; the clearly uncomfortable judge could only blush and stammer a lame reply. According to Foxe, during the subsequent executions in Ipswich market place, Wentworth 'did shroud himself behind one of the posts of the gallery, and wept' (Townsend, 5.532). Despite such damaging incidents, Wentworth retained his reputation as being sympathetic to reformers. With the accession of Edward VI the religious climate changed once more, and evangelical works appeared from the presses with Wentworth's support: Richard Argentine dedicated his translation of one of Luther's sermons (printed at Ipswich in 1549) to his former patron, while in the preface to his 1550 edition of the German Lutheran Johann Brenz, Richard Sherry praised Wentworth as a favourer of the scriptures. 
Under his cousin Lord Protector Somerset, Wentworth (who had had a grant under Henry VIII's 'unwritten will') was admitted to the privy council, apparently as early as August 1547. As a councillor resident in East Anglia, he played a leading part in pacifying the Suffolk rebels in July 1549, and immediately afterwards in Northampton's disastrous attack on Norwich. Following these troubles, Wentworth profited from Warwick's council coup against the protector. In October 1549 he was named one of six noblemen to attend upon the king in his privy chamber, and on 2 February 1550 he replaced the Catholic Lord Arundel as lord chamberlain of the household. In the previous month he had showed his support for Warwick, who shared his evangelical views, by taking part in the interrogation of Sir Thomas Arundell, a Catholic supporter of Somerset. 
In addition to his principal seat at Nettlestead, Wentworth inherited five manors in Suffolk and five in Yorkshire, to which were added lands in Lincolnshire and elsewhere. In 1538 he acquired the Ipswich Greyfriars (although his legal title remained contested), and three years later he and his wife secured some Stonor properties. With the plunder of the bishops' estates by Warwick's regime, in 1550 Wentworth obtained Cheyneygates (the former residence of the abbot of Westminster), together with the Middlesex manors of Hackney and Stepney. 
Lord Wentworth last attended the privy council on 14 February 1551, and died on 3 March following. His funeral at Westminster Abbey four days later was a lavish state occasion, and included a sermon preached by the royal chaplain Miles Coverdale, as befitted a prominent protestant nobleman. He was buried in the chapel of St John, but has no memorial. His wife briefly survived him. Wentworth's will, drawn up in 1544, was proved on 27 November 1551 by his son Thomas, who succeeded to the title. 


@@@@@


doc= 29054


Wentworth, Thomas, second Baron Wentworth and 'de jure' seventh Baron Le Despenser (1525-1584), soldier and administrator, was the eldest of at least eight sons and the heir of Thomas Wentworth, first Baron Wentworth (1501-1551), nobleman, and his wife, Margaret (died 1551), elder daughter and coheir of Sir Adrian Fortescue and his first wife, Anne. The younger Thomas Wentworth had nine sisters. He was educated at St John's College, Cambridge, but took no degree. 
Wentworth was not brought up at court and did not hold a household appointment, despite his father's regular attendance on Henry VIII. He may have served under his father in the campaigns of 1543 and 1544, when Lord Wentworth fought in France. He married his paternal cousin Mary (died 1554), daughter of Sir John Wentworth of Gosfield, Essex, and his first wife, Anne, at Gosfield on 9 February 1546. This match was designed to consolidate family property and influence. Within a year he had joined the retinue of his second cousin, Edward Seymour, duke of Somerset and lord protector to Edward VI, and followed the army on its invasion of Scotland in 1547, where he distinguished himself at the battle of Pinkie on 10 September. For this service he was rewarded with the rank of banneret by Somerset at Roxburgh on 28 September, having two days previously been elected MP for his native Suffolk. His return to parliament reflected his father's dominant position in the county after the fall of Thomas Howard, third duke of Norfolk. 
On 3 March 1551 Wentworth succeeded his father as second Baron Wentworth. He inherited extensive estates in Suffolk, Yorkshire, Oxfordshire, and Lincolnshire worth at least $560 per annum in 1546-7 and increased yet further during 1547-51. Wentworth, like his father, quickly became an adherent of John Dudley, earl of Warwick. He attended on Mary of Guise, dowager queen of Scotland, when she stayed at court in October 1551. He was among the peers who tried and condemned Somerset for felony on 1 December. He benefited from Warwick's patronage as a result, receiving a favourable tax assessment and a licence to retain eighty gentlemen or yeomen in his livery in March 1552. He was appointed lord lieutenant of Suffolk on 16 May, with practical oversight of military organization in the eastern part of the county, while also exercising strong influence over many aspects of civil affairs. He was reappointed on 24 May 1553. 
Wentworth witnessed Edward's settlement of the succession on Lady Jane Grey, but did not sign the document formally bastardizing Mary and Elizabeth or the engagement to oversee it because he was not a privy councillor. Geography as much as anything determined his course of action in July 1553. On the 11th he and his cousin Sir Thomas Cornwallis, sheriff of Norfolk and Suffolk, proclaimed Jane queen at Ipswich, Suffolk. Only a day or two later Cornwallis defected to Mary and winning over Wentworth became a prime aim of her East Anglian supporters. The legitimacy of her cause appears to have been decisive and on the 14th Wentworth agreed to support her, a decision he made public by joining her at Framlingham, Suffolk, with a sizeable body of men on the 16th. He was rewarded with immediate appointment to her privy council and as lord marshal of her army. After the failure of the coup by the duke of Northumberland (Warwick), Wentworth was among the privy councillors investigating the gentlemen pensioners who had supported it. However, generally his appointment as a privy councillor was honorary and reflected the queen's gratitude towards him for his loyalty. 
The next stage of Wentworth's career was determined by the decision in September 1553 to appoint as lord admiral the then lord deputy of Calais, Lord William Howard. On 13 September Wentworth was nominated his successor and he took up his post in December. His wife probably died at Calais in 1554. They appear to have had no surviving children. He married his late wife's cousin Anne or Agnes (died 1574), daughter of Henry Wentworth of Mountnessing, Essex, and his wife, Agnes, by 1556. They had two sons, Lord William Wentworth (1555/6-1582) and Lord Henry Wentworth (1558-1593), and a daughter. 
As early as March 1555 doubts were expressed about Wentworth's relative youth and inexperience as well as his previous protestant leanings, and the choice does seem an odd one. Simon Renard, the imperial ambassador, regarded him as 'rather lightweight' ('CSP Spain', '1554-8', 144). Political reliability appears to have been the primary reason, for the loyalty of the officers of the garrison was suspect, especially the highly respected William Grey, thirteenth Baron Grey of Wilton, captain of Guines, the only modernized fortification of the Calais pale. A definite tension can be detected between Wentworth and Grey of Wilton during the following years. It was Wentworth's misfortune to hold the command of Calais when Francois de Lorraine-Guise, second duc de Guise, invested it in the closing days of 1557. His surrender of the town to Guise at six o'clock in the morning of 7 January 1558 after a siege lasting only seven days sealed his historical reputation. The causes of the fall of Calais were many and various. Mary I's privy council bore a considerable responsibility, especially for its failure to act on Wentworth's requests in December 1557 for naval interception of French convoys of artillery and supplies up the English Channel. However, Wentworth himself was guilty of at least three major misjudgements. He believed that the French intended to attack the imperial town of Hesdin and not Calais -- a mistake that neither Grey of Wilton nor Philip II's administration in Brussels made. Second, when the French approached he refused to flood the plains round the town (the key to the defence system) on the grounds that he needed fresh water to brew beer for the garrison, and therefore expected a protracted siege. Third, only on 2 January 1558 did he request reinforcements from Philip, a delay that the latter's ministers later claimed absolved them from any responsibility for the disaster. Not irrelevant was a persistent rumour that Wentworth was personally opposed to allowing Habsburg troops into Calais if he could avoid it because of fear that they would seize the town on behalf of their master. George Ferrers in 1569, Thomas Churchyard in 1579, and others published vivid and full accounts that made the English public aware of the details of the siege and portrayed mid-sixteenth century warfare in all its viciousness. 
Wentworth's wife escaped from Calais in December 1557 but was sent to the Fleet prison on charges of a religious nature on 19 August 1558. She was released at the end of the month and sent to her mother's home in Essex. A prisoner of war in France after 7 January 1558, Wentworth was indicted on 2 July of conspiracy to deliver Calais to the French, adhering to Henri II, and failing to call the array for musters or to raise the levies. On 15 July papers were issued sequestering Wentworth's estates and taking an inventory of his goods. He was eager to remain in France. 
The accession of Elizabeth I in November altered Wentworth's position and the new government finally accepted his ransom. He returned to England in March 1559. He was arrested on 21 April on a warrant issued the previous day and William Parr, marquess of Northampton, organized his trial in his capacity as lord high steward. The trial took place on the 22nd. Lack of evidence and the unwillingness of the court to reopen questions relating to the Marian regime meant that Wentworth was acquitted: he 'quytt hym-seylff, thanke be God, and clen delevered, and whent in-to Wytyngtun colege, and there he lys' ('The Diary of Henry Machyn, Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of London, from 1550-1563', ed. J. G. Nichols, 'Camden Miscellany', CS, 1st ser., 42, 1848, 195). 
Wentworth did not hold nationally important military office again but remained significant in local affairs, while retaining strong ties with the court. Elizabeth did not retain him as a privy councillor but he, and his family, were still regarded as loyal. Two brothers, James and John Wentworth, were drowned when the queen's ship 'Greyhound' was lost carrying reinforcements to Le Havre in April 1563. Wentworth was part of the entourage that received Eric XIV, king of Sweden, on 8 September 1560. Like his wife, he was regarded as protestant and an English version of Heinrich Bullinger's 'Sermons' translated by John Day was dedicated to him in 1561. He was appointed lord lieutenant of Suffolk in 1560-61 and of Norfolk and Suffolk in 1569. This was possibly intended to counter the growing influence of Thomas Howard, fourth duke of Norfolk, whose pre-eminence in East Anglia eclipsed Wentworth's own. Wentworth organized the defence of Suffolk during the crisis years 1569-70. Having first been named JP for Suffolk in 1554, he was promoted of the quorum in 1558-9. He was appointed JP for Middlesex in 1561 and of the quorum in 1577. He used his influence to settle local disputes, maintained order, watching out for the activities of suspected Anabaptists, and regularly attended the Ipswich quarter sessions. Wentworth also busied himself in the early 1560s with the problem of insufficient numbers of ministers to fill vacant Suffolk parishes. He was trier of petitions in the House of Lords on a number of occasions and was a diligent legislator. He frequently served as a muster commissioner for London and sat on a variety of other commissions dealing with his locality. He still benefited from royal patronage, receiving a patent for concealed lands in 1570. Wentworth sat on Norfolk's trial in January 1572 and oversaw elections in Suffolk during the aftermath of the duke's fall. Rather surprisingly, his influence diminished after this. This was perhaps because he spent less time at the family seat of Nettlestead, Suffolk, and more time in Middlesex. 
Lady Wentworth died on 2 September 1574 and was buried in Stepney church, Middlesex, the next day. Wentworth's eldest son also predeceased him. Wentworth died intestate at Stepney on 13 January 1584, was probably buried with his wife, and was succeeded by his second son, Lord Henry Wentworth, who received administration of his father's goods on the 18th. Wentworth may have married a third time: the navigator William Borough married a Lady Wentworth in Stepney on 9 September 1589. 


@@@@@


doc= 29055


Wentworth, Thomas (1567/8-1628), lawyer and politician, was the third son of the Elizabethan parliamentarian, Peter Wentworth (1524-1597) of Lillingstone Lovell, Oxfordshire, and his second wife, Elizabeth Walsingham (died 1596), sister of Sir Francis Walsingham, secretary of state. He married into a puritan family. His wife, Dorothy, mother of their eight children, was the daughter and coheir of Thomas Keble of Newbottle, Northamptonshire. 
Wentworth matriculated at University College, Oxford, on 30 October 1584 and a year later entered Lincoln's Inn, where he was appointed Lent reader in 1612 and treasurer in 1621. His legal training is apparent in his parliamentary arguments from statute and precedent: he was called 'an honest lawyer' ('CSP dom.', '1623-5', 197). His connection with Oxford was never broken and he represented the city in every early Stuart parliament before 1640. In September 1607 he was elected recorder of Oxford but his term of office was not without difficulty. Said to have behaved 'turbulently', he was described as 'a fomenter and author of divers troubles between the University and the city' in their dispute over the night watch (Wood, 'Ath. Oxon.', 3rd edn, 2.414). The scholars called him 'Mr. Wantworth' ('Letters of John Chamberlain', 1.360). He was 'discommoned' by the university in 1611 but reinstated two years later. 
Parliament, puritanism, and the law were central themes throughout Wentworth's life. In these he followed in his father's footsteps, although Sir Henry Wotton when writing to Sir Edmund Bacon in 1614 said that Thomas had 'rather inherited his [father's] fortune than his understanding' (Smith, 2.37). In King James's first parliament Wentworth was on the committee to formulate the apology that presented the Commons' claim of privileges to the crown. Although it was never delivered, the apology stood throughout the early Stuart period as a confirmation of the rights of the lower house. He was often outspoken against crown policy: he opposed the proposed act of union with Scotland on ideological and practical grounds, saying that 'all changes in state are dangerous', and that the house was already full enough with as many members as 'one Speaker can moderate' ('Diary of Robert Bowyer', 278); in 1610 he sat on the committee to prepare arguments against impositions; and he spoke ardently for a rule of law, saying in November that year that 'If the King have a power over the laws, we cannot have security, therefore we must see if the law can bind the King' (E. R. Foster, 2.393-4). James would have punished Wentworth for his speeches, and went so far as to study Queen Elizabeth's arguments against Wentworth's father, searching for a precedent for imprisonment, but was dissuaded by members of the privy council. 
In 1614 Wentworth again argued against impositions but this time was unable to escape the wrath of the crown. For a speech on 21 May regarding the assassination of Henri IV of France he was imprisoned in the Tower, the crown's justification being that he had offended the French ambassador. Throughout his parliamentary career he supported legislation professing the need to rid the kingdom of recusants and Jesuits. Noting in 1614 that 'The root of the powder treason [is] not dead' (Jansson, 'Proceedings, 1614', 60), he said in 1621 that 'these walls (methinks) do yet shake at it' (Notestein and others, 2.489). 
In 1621 Wentworth spoke at length on religious grounds against a Spanish marriage, arguing that Catholicism would have its effect for 'wives take up a great part and room in the husband's heart' (Notestein and others, 2.491). A protestant queen would ensure a protestant succession, a subject familiar from his father's experience. Later, in 1626, he admitted that his father had been imprisoned in 1593 'about the matter of succession because he and others had [had] secret conference to move it in parliament' (Bidwell and Jansson, 'Proceedings, 1626', 3.245-6). In 1624 he was adamant against the Spanish marriage treaties on the same grounds regarding succession. In the following year he participated in the debate regarding Arminianism and Richard Mountague, canon of Windsor, reminding the Commons that King Alfred had read the 'Bible' fourteen times over. Wentworth held numerous committee appointments and spoke often in 1626 addressing issues of church and state. In considering the evidence against George Villiers, duke of Buckingham, he drew on his legal expertise for offering an explanation of 'common fame' and 'rumor' (ibid., 3.16, 46). Although he was returned for the parliament that convened in March 1628 it is unclear whether he went to London; there is no indication of his presence in the opening session. During his difficulties as recorder in Oxford he had moved to Henley, where he died in March or April 1628 and where he was buried. Martin Lister was one of his executors and may have been a relative by marriage. The authorship of multiple editions of 'The Office and Duty of Executors' is assigned to Wentworth, whose name appears on the title-page of the third printing in 1641. Although it was believed earlier that the work was written by Sir John Doddridge there seems to be no proof to that effect. 


@@@@@


doc= 29056


Wentworth, Thomas, first earl of Strafford (1593-1641), lord lieutenant of Ireland, was born on Good Friday, 13 April 1593, in a house in Chancery Lane, London, which belonged to his grandfather Robert Atkinson, a barrister of the Inner Temple. He was baptized on 22 April at St Dunstan-in-the-West. He was the second and eldest surviving son of William Wentworth (1562-1614) of Wentworth Woodhouse, a wealthy Yorkshire landowner, whose family had long been settled in the southern part of the West Riding, and Anne (died 1611), daughter and heir of Sir Robert Atkinson of Stowell in Gloucestershire. William Wentworth was made first baronet in 1611. His ancestors included the Nevills of Westmorland and the fifteenth-century judge Sir William Gascoigne of Gawthorpe, and Thomas himself always took great pride in belonging to a house which in wealth and lineage equalled many families raised to the peerage in the sixteenth century. 
Wentworth was educated at first by the dean of Ripon, Dr Higgins, in his house at Well. His fellow pupils included Henry, Lord Clifford, eldest son of the earl of Cumberland, and Christopher Wandesford, both close friends in later years. In November 1607 he entered the Inner Temple in London and in Easter term 1609 he matriculated from St John's College, Cambridge, where Richard Senhouse, later bishop of Carlisle, was his tutor. On 22 October 1611 he married Lady Margaret Clifford (died 1622), eldest daughter of Francis Clifford, fourth earl of Cumberland, at Londesborough, her father's seat. In December 1611, having been knighted by the king on 6 December at Royston, Wentworth left England for France to complete his education. He travelled widely and visited among other places Paris, Orleans, Bordeaux, and Saumur. He learned not only French but also -- to a lesser extent -- Italian and Spanish, and read a number of works fashionable at the time, such as Justus Lipsius's letters. After returning early in 1613 he became the head of his family and inherited the title of baronet through his father's death in September 1614. He now had an annual income of about $4000 at his disposal but was also saddled with the responsibility for the education and career of his eight younger brothers. 
Earlier in 1614 Wentworth had been elected one of the knights of the shire for Yorkshire (the other knight was Sir John Savile, soon to become his inveterate enemy) and represented his county in the so-called Addled Parliament in April 1614. Although he hardly raised his voice in the debates of this short-lived parliament two draft speeches among his papers testify to his attempt to reconcile the interests of king and country. In December 1615 Wentworth was appointed 'custos rotulorum' (keeper of the records) for the West Riding of Yorkshire. Savile, his predecessor in this office, had been forced to step down after having been ordered to appear before the court of Star Chamber to answer charges of fraud and intimidation. Apparently Savile himself suggested Wentworth as his successor on the assumption that a young man like Wentworth could easily be made to resign once Savile had managed to mend his reputation. Savile had, however, misjudged Wentworth's character. When George Villiers, the earl of Buckingham, with whom Savile had in the meantime successfully managed to ingratiate himself, asked Wentworth to resign as 'custos' in September 1617 Wentworth refused, arguing that such a demand was an attack on his honour as a gentleman; 'Itt might justly be taken as the greatest disgrace that could be done unto me', he wrote to Buckingham (Gardiner, 'Fortescue Papers', 26). He even denied knowledge of the fact that Savile had nominated him his successor. Buckingham withdrew his request for Wentworth's resignation, but the latter's relations with the ever more powerful royal favourite never quite recovered from the repercussions of this incident. Moreover, Wentworth now found himself involved in a bitter feud with Savile and his family, which was to last for more than a decade until Savile's death in 1630, and beyond. 
Wentworth was aware that he could prevail against Savile only if he managed to gain influence at court as well as in Yorkshire. At court his principal contacts about 1620 were Sir George Calvert, one of the two secretaries of state, and Sir Arthur Ingram, a London merchant, financier, and customs farmer of dubious reputation who was also a substantial landowner in his native Yorkshire. Wentworth, who now spent long periods of time in London, could also count to some extent on the patronage of the new lord treasurer appointed in September 1621, Lionel Cranfield, contacts with whom had been established by Ingram. In December 1620 Wentworth sought election as knight of the shire for Yorkshire with Calvert as a fellow candidate. In spite of strong opposition by Savile, who stood as a candidate himself, Wentworth and Calvert were elected, although the election was later (unsuccessfully) challenged in the House of Commons; Wentworth and his supporters were, probably not without some justification, alleged to have exerted undue pressure on the voters. In parliament Wentworth tried to mediate between the king and those who saw the crown's policy as a threat to the privileges of parliament and the ancient liberties of the king's subjects. Totally out of sympathy with those who tried to urge the king to pursue a more active anti-Spanish foreign policy, he discouraged the house from debating foreign affairs while at the same time defending the privilege of free speech. It was probably Wentworth who first suggested that the Commons should not only investigate the controversial monopoly patents granted by the crown but instigate proceedings to have the patentees punished by parliamentary judicature. During the spring and summer recess of 1621 Wentworth turned to his voters to explain the stance he had taken in Westminster and to reassure himself of their support. He spoke at Rotherham on 23 April emphasizing the 'harmonious union betwixt the kinge, the nobles and Commons' which he hoped for if the parliament were to achieve its real objective, successful legislation (Cooper, 'Wentworth Papers', 153-5). When parliament met once more in the autumn he implored his fellow knights and burgesses not to enter too deeply into disputes about their privileges and the king's prerogative. Their liberties, he argued in a draft speech of 23 November 1621, would be much safer if they remained 'wrapte up in a sacred and questionable doubtfulnesse' instead of being unravelled by an 'over precise curiosity' (ibid., 164, cf. 166). 
After the dissolution of parliament Wentworth tried to strengthen his contacts with the court. In April 1622 Lord Treasurer Cranfield offered him the receivership of crown lands in Yorkshire. He passed this office on, however, to a successor about a year later and it is possible that Wentworth resigned under political pressure. His standing at court was certainly not secure during these years, although the new lord president of the council of the north, Lord Scrope, had nominated him as a member of the council on 10 July 1619. Moreover, there were rumours in 1622 that he would be made comptroller of the household and be raised to the peerage. Nothing came of this; during the years 1622-4 Wentworth was often seriously ill, and was forced to give up his London residence. 
The death of his wife, Margaret, on 14 August 1622 marked a crisis in Wentworth's life. His marriage had been childless and it had not been marked at first by great passion, but he was nevertheless deeply afflicted by Margaret's death. During her fatal illness he prayed with her and read the 'Bible' and the 'Psalms' to her, as the detailed account of her death which he subsequently gave testifies; the religious sensibility which he displayed at this moment was clearly influenced by strictly protestant ideals. According to the biographical account by his friend Sir George Radcliffe, at moments of crisis Wentworth was no stranger to the religious self-examination which is often seen as typical for a particularly puritan variety of religious fervour, although he clearly did not share the wider political outlook associated with puritanism. After his wife's death Wentworth led a more withdrawn life than before. When he recovered his health and mental strength in the spring of 1624 the political scene had changed, becoming decidedly more unfavourable to his ambitions. The deterioration of relations with Spain made open war with the house of Habsburg (always rejected by Wentworth as pointless and dangerous) more than likely. At the same time the influence of his patron Cranfield, himself an opponent of war, was rapidly declining: parliament impeached the lord treasurer and forced him to resign in 1624. Wentworth represented the borough of Pontefract in parliament in 1624. He had not contested the election for the county seats of Yorkshire, and Savile and his son took both those seats unopposed. In the Commons Wentworth spoke cautiously and not without reservations in defence of Cranfield and against the contentious impositions. He also voiced his enthusiasm for action against recusants, but in general did not play a very prominent part in the proceedings of the parliament. 
Although Wentworth did not entirely give up his hope of finding favour at court he was about to enter into a closer alliance with men who were strongly opposed to the king's favourite, the (now) duke of Buckingham, and his policies. As Wentworth's enemy Savile was supported by the duke, it was natural for Wentworth to canvass the support of all those who rejected Buckingham's warlike foreign policy and especially the burdens with which it was likely to saddle the country -- all the more so as he genuinely believed this policy foolish. Personal attachments and connections drew Wentworth into the camp of those increasingly critical of official royal policy in the early years of Charles I's reign. After Margaret's death he looked for a new wife, if possible an heiress. Mary, daughter of the City magnate Sir William Craven, Lady Diana Cecil, daughter of the earl of Exeter's heir, and the dowager countess of Dorset were all wooed with varying degrees of intensity, but in the end Wentworth made suit for Lady Arabella Holles (1608/9-1631), daughter of John Holles, first earl of Clare (d. 1637), one of the richest landowners in Nottinghamshire. Arabella was a strikingly beautiful girl of sixteen and Wentworth seems to have fallen passionately in love with her. They married on 24 February 1625. Wentworth's new father-in-law had strong links with Bishop Williams of Lincoln, the lord keeper, who, however, lost his office shortly after Charles's accession. The earl of Clare, disappointed in his hopes for advancement, came to take an increasingly critical view of royal policy, and became a leader of the opposition to Buckingham in the House of Lords after 1625. 
In the elections for Charles I's first parliament in 1625 Wentworth again sought to obtain one of the county seats for Yorkshire, with Sir Thomas Fairfax as his running mate. The elections were hotly contested, as Savile had mobilized the weavers of Leeds and Halifax to defeat Wentworth. At the height of the turmoil on polling day the high sheriff, Sir Richard Cholmondeley, closed the poll and declared Wentworth and Fairfax elected. This decision was questioned in the Commons when parliament met. While the house debated the validity of the election Wentworth took his seat, a breach of the rules of procedure. He thereby provoked the anger of Sir John Eliot, who was speaking at that very moment, although Eliot's later account of this incident in which he claimed that he had denounced Wentworth immediately as a Catilina -- the Roman revolutionary defeated by Cicero -- is of questionable authenticity. The Commons did indeed declare the election invalid, but Wentworth returned to parliament in early August 1625 having been re-elected by a clear majority of the voters. 
Although Wentworth, who still hoped to find favour with the duke, refrained from openly attacking Buckingham in parliament, he felt to some extent 'obliged to be obstructive' because he was aware that too much compliance could lose him credit in his native Yorkshire (Salt, 155-6). He thus opposed the granting of further supply on 12 August until the two subsidies already granted had been fully collected. Nevertheless, he saw the king's decision, taken on Buckingham's advice, to have him appointed sheriff of Yorkshire in November 1625, with the intention of rendering him incapable of sitting in the next parliament, as a mark of disfavour which he had done nothing to provoke. In fact, his association with Bishop Williams and Archbishop Abbot, as well as with the earl of Arundel and to a lesser extent the earl of Pembroke, may have been responsible for Buckingham's desire to keep him out of parliament, as well as Savile's efforts to depict him at court as a dangerous troublemaker. Undeterred, the following spring Wentworth applied for the office of lord president of the north, which he thought would become vacant through the resignation of Lord Scrope. However, Scrope held on to his office, and, even more galling for Wentworth, his enemy Savile was subsequently appointed vice-president. Worse was to come. In July 1626 Wentworth was ordered to relinquish the office of 'custos rotulorum', which he had held since 1615, and was dismissed from the commission of the peace. He was deeply disappointed, as he believed that he had come to an understanding with Buckingham during a visit to Whitehall about Easter 1626 and that he had even contracted a 'friendship' with the favourite ('Strafforde's Letters', 1.34-5). This disgrace and humiliation affected him even more deeply, as he was notified of his dismissal while presiding over a session of the commission of the peace. 
Although Wentworth tried to remain true to the principle of not contending 'with the prerogative out of Parliament, nor yet to contest with a King but when I am constrained thereunto' (letter to Wandesford, 5 Dec 1625, 'Strafforde's Letters', 1.32), he was inexorably drawn towards a more radical position. The fact that Savile had been appointed comptroller of the household in 1627 and now dominated contacts between Yorkshire and the court left Wentworth little choice but to ally himself even more openly than before with those opposed to the king's favourite and his policies. In fact many of his closest friends and relations, for example, Wandesford, Radcliffe, and Clare, were among the most outspoken critics of royal policy during these years. When faced with a demand to pay the forced loan raised to finance the war against France in 1626-7 Wentworth refused, although he clearly hesitated to commit himself irrevocably to a conflict with the crown. Summoned to appear before the privy council he pleaded illness. In the end, however, he stood his ground and was committed to the Marshalsea prison in June 1627. Wentworth seems to have shared the concern of many of his friends about the grave constitutional implications of the forced loan, and if he did not want to lose all credit with his fellow Yorkshiremen he probably had little choice but to refuse to pay regardless of his convictions. However, he was careful not to do or say anything that would preclude eventual reconciliation with the king and his advisers. He was transferred from the Marshalsea to Dartford prison six weeks after his imprisonment and was finally released on 27 December, having petitioned the king in November to be allowed out of confinement to attend business. 
In 1628 Wentworth was once more elected as a knight of the shire to represent Yorkshire in parliament. His position as an acknowledged martyr for the cause of the liberties of the subject in itself ensured that he played a leading role in the proceedings of this parliament. On 22 March he spoke to the house asking them to vindicate 'our ancient, sober, vital liberties' in a speech that already contained much of the substance of the future petition of right (Johnson, 'Proceedings', 2.60). Wentworth, like others, however, insisted that only a proper law, not a mere petition, could safeguard the king's subjects against any future infringement of their rights, so that 'his Majesty's goodness' in promising to respect his subjects' traditional liberties in future would 'remain to posterity' enshrined in a public act of state (ibid., 2 May 1628, 3.211). Only very reluctantly did Wentworth accept the proposal to proceed by petition. At the same time, however, he continued to advocate the ideal of harmony between the crown and its subjects. He preferred to assume that only misguided advice had led the king to raise the forced loan, and expressed his hope that 'it shall never be stirred here whether the King be above the law or the law above the King' (ibid., 26 April 1628, 3.98). Wentworth was aware that only adequate financial resources would enable the king to govern in accordance with the law and tradition, and that any further refusal to grant him tonnage and poundage -- even after a bill or petition of right had been passed -- would only force the king to raise revenues by means incompatible with the letter of the law. 
There was, therefore, always room for compromise with the political forces dominant at court, in particular as Wentworth, even while in open conflict with official policy, had never adopted the rhetoric of violent anti-popery so popular with other leaders of opposition to an allegedly arbitrary government. Wentworth's moderation, based in part on a much more secular conception of politics than that of many contemporaries, now proved a valuable asset, as Charles I and Buckingham, concentrating on the war effort against France, had decided to seek peace with Spain. Buckingham tried to bring about a reconciliation with a number of influential proponents of a pro-Spanish policy after the parliament of 1628 and as part of this political reshuffle Wentworth was elevated to the peerage as Baron Wentworth of Wentworth Woodhouse and baron of Newmarch and Oversley on 22 July 1628. Sir Richard Weston, the recently appointed lord treasurer, had acted as a mediator between Wentworth and the favourite. However, the fact that Wentworth's old enemy Savile was created Baron Savile of Pomfret on the previous day indicates that the outcome of the contest for favour at court remained open, as long as Buckingham dominated the king's entourage. As Wentworth had played such a prominent part in leading the resistance to the forced loan and in the struggle for the petition of right his apparent change of sides was immediately commented on and seen as controversial. His friend Wandesford testified that in Yorkshire common opinion was now passing him 'under Sir John Savile's character, and that there is a Thomas as well as a John for the king' (Wandesford to Wentworth, 30 July 1628, Cooper, 'Wentworth Papers', 301). However, Wentworth had always with considerable consistency, though not with equal success, tried to act as a mediator between his county and the court: it was, therefore, not altogether surprising that he accepted advancement and office once the most blatant local and national grievances outside the religious sphere, which did not greatly preoccupy him, had to all appearances been redressed. 
Buckingham's death in August 1628 and Charles I's decision to end the war against France as well as the struggle against Spain removed the last obstacles to Wentworth's advancement. On 13 December 1628 he was created Viscount Wentworth and on 25 December Charles appointed him lord president of the north in Scrope's place. At the same time Savile, accused of having accepted bribes from recusants, was removed from office as vice-president. Finally on 10 November 1629 Wentworth was made a privy councillor. The delay between his appointment as lord president and his entry into the privy council may indicate that the king did not yet entirely trust him. However, later accounts, though uncorroborated by official records, maintain that Wentworth was sworn in as a privy councillor only after he had brought to the king's attention a libellous tract which was in essence a blueprint for arbitrary government by an absolute monarch. The tract had apparently been distributed with the intention of discrediting Charles by creating the impression that he wanted to govern permanently without parliament. Wentworth's father-in-law, Clare, was among those who had read and possibly circulated the tract and now faced prosecution in Star Chamber for conspiracy. Whatever Wentworth's part in this incident, his relations with his in-laws certainly deteriorated at this time. In fact they had already been strained before this incident, as Denzil Holles, one of Clare's sons, had been involved in the fracas which led to the dissolution of parliament in 1629 and was subsequently imprisoned while his brother-in-law was promoted by the king. 
On taking up his office as president, Wentworth, in a speech delivered to the council of the north, had again enunciated his political philosophy, stressing the old theme of harmony between the king and his subjects and condemning those who wanted to create a division between the two. In practice, however, the ruthlessness and vindictiveness which he demonstrated in his new office did little to foster the political harmony which he so often praised as his highest political ideal. By nature a man who believed in the need for strong authority he had, once in office, little sympathy for those who saw royal policy as a threat to long-established legal and constitutional traditions. He had, indeed, shared some of those concerns in the 1620s, but then England had been involved in an apparently futile war fundamentally undermining the country's traditional constitutional framework. 
As lord president, Wentworth immediately filled positions in the council and in the commission of the peace with his supporters, including Wandesford, Sir George Radcliffe (who became the king's attorney for the council), Sir John Hotham, Sir William Constable, and Sir Thomas Hoby. Moreover, he used the authority of his office to thwart the interests of his old opponents. Thus a scheme for draining Hatfield Chase promoted by Sir Cornelius Vermuyden and supported by the Savile family was systematically obstructed by Wentworth. In this case concern for the many smallholders who would have lost their land or grazing rights probably motivated Wentworth's action as much as enmity to the Saviles, but for his opponents personal animosities and higher political purpose were difficult to distinguish. As receiver of recusant fines in the north, an office in which he had succeeded Savile in June 1629, Wentworth increased the fiscal pressure on Catholic landowners who did not lack influence and friends in some parts of Yorkshire. In fact, his appointment as lord president had greatly disturbed Catholics in northern England, as the new president was known to be less tolerant than his predecessor -- 'the Papists already hang down their heads like bulrushes', as his friend Wandesford put it ('Strafforde's Letters', 1.49). However, as Wentworth was used to living among a sizeable Catholic minority his anti-Catholicism always remained more pragmatic and less fanatical than that of many fervent protestants from a different background. 
Even so, opponents who openly challenged Wentworth's authority in Yorkshire were harshly punished and humiliated. Sir Henry Bellasis, the son of Thomas, Lord Fauconberg, was imprisoned by the privy council and had to apologize publicly for not having shown the lord president proper respect during a session of the council of the north. While Wentworth energetically collected the knighthood fines which were to bolster Charles I's revenues, James Maleverer, a Yorkshire puritan, and Sir David Foulis, himself a member of the council of the north, tried to organize local resistance to the scheme. In 1632 Foulis accused Wentworth of having misappropriated the funds which he had collected as lord president. Wentworth was furious and on his insistence Foulis was not only dismissed from the council in 1633, but was heavily fined and imprisoned. 
Wentworth was hardly universally popular as lord president but he undoubtedly strengthened the authority of the council, which had declined under his predecessors. He deliberately emphasized the importance of his office by insisting on a great deal of pomp and ceremony when appearing in public in his official capacity and by embarking upon an extensive building programme which, among other projects, transformed the king's manor in York into a residence worthy of the monarch's representative in the north. In March 1633 the king confirmed Wentworth's success by issuing a new commission and instructions for the council which brought its powers into line with those of the Star Chamber in the south. 
The years following Wentworth's elevation to the peerage brought him success and prosperity. However, the death of his wife on 5 October 1631 was a major personal setback. While pregnant, Arabella had had a fall which brought on a premature confinement. She did not survive, and Wentworth felt this personal disaster all the more deeply because his wife's family held him responsible for her death as it was he who had asked her to travel in spite of her pregnancy. Rumours even accused him of having struck her, thus causing the accident. Together they had had four children, of whom three survived: William (1626-1695), Ann ('b'. 1627), and Arabella ('b'. 1630); a second son, Thomas, died as an infant in 1631. In spite of his grief at Arabella's death Wentworth soon married again, in October 1632. His third wife, Elizabeth ('c'.1614-1688), daughter of Sir Godfrey Rodes of Great Houghton in Yorkshire, came from a strongly puritan family and was about eighteen at the time of the marriage. The fact that the ceremony took place in secret and that Wentworth did not publicly acknowledge her as his wife until about a year after the wedding may indicate that he feared public reproach for having married again so soon. This marriage resulted in the birth of a daughter, Margaret (died 1681). 
At the time of his third marriage Wentworth was about to take up a new office, the position of lord deputy of Ireland. When his appointment was first debated in the summer of 1631, there was no lack of advice warning him against abandoning England for Ireland. One of Wentworth's friends, Sir Edward Stanhope, pointed out in September 1631 that the deputyship had always been 'a fatall place to pack men of eminancy into... for their overthrowe' (Zagorin, 315). Wentworth would have no clients or friends to rely on in Ireland, in contrast to his native Yorkshire. If he were to tackle the difficult problem of alienated royal rights and titles he would provoke uncontrollable animosity, not least among the influential protestant planters. Thus the problems that awaited a new lord deputy were clearly visible. Moreover, Wentworth was probably aware that Weston, the lord treasurer, and Lord Cottington, the chancellor of the exchequer, who were primarily responsible for the king's decision to offer him the deputyship in July 1631, though officially his friends, both saw him as a potential rival who could do less harm in Ireland than in England. Nevertheless, Wentworth clearly welcomed what he saw as an important promotion and eagerly accepted the position. Apparently he believed that he could govern Ireland as successfully as northern England, provided he had the king's full support. In fact he laid down a number of conditions, to which he asked the king to agree before he accepted the new office: he should be allowed to return to England and attend the court whenever he saw fit to do so; no grant relating to Ireland was to be made without his knowledge and consent; and the king was not to allow any appeals against his decisions unless a manifest perversion of justice could be demonstrated. Wentworth also expressed a wish to be created an earl before he left for Ireland but this wish, as opposed to his other demands, was denied. However, he was allowed to retain his office as lord president of the north and could delegate the actual functions of the office to his vice-president, Sir Edward Osborne, a wealthy Yorkshire landowner who enjoyed Wentworth's total confidence. Wentworth was appointed lord deputy on 12 January 1632 but did not leave England for Ireland until July 1633. This delay gave him the chance to sort matters out in Dublin through his political allies and agents, while still being able to exert personal influence on decisions in England, a vital precondition for not being outmanoeuvred at court by possible opponents before he had even taken up office. 
It was clear from the outset that Wentworth's appointment as lord deputy was intended to be a new start for the government of Ireland. As early as 1623 a royal commission sent to Dublin to examine the problems facing church and state in Ireland had revealed how far the king had been defrauded of income and property by his own office-holders. The commission's report had strongly advised, among other things, the re-endowment of the church because ecclesiastical property had been alienated on a large scale to laymen, mostly New English protestants. None of the commissioners' recommendations could really be implemented in the following years, but when peace with Spain was restored in 1630 the situation was more favourable and Wentworth was determined to make the most of this chance. He clearly mistrusted the class of protestant office-holders and planters (the New English) whom he found in power when he came to Ireland in 1633: 'I find myself in the society of a strange people, their owne privates altogether their study without regard to the publique' (Wentworth to Arundel, 19 Aug 1633, Wentworth Woodhouse muniments, Strafford papers, 8, fol. 11'r'). Wentworth deliberately antagonized vested interests in Ireland, including those of the protestants, confident that he need not care whom he pleased or displeased as long as he retained the support of the king. The problem of Catholicism was to be seen in a long-term perspective. The Catholic church was to be vanquished not by direct persecution but on one hand by a new series of plantations which would weaken Catholic landowners and bring new English settlers to Ireland, and on the other by a reform and financial re-endowment of the established church which would enable it to pursue its mission in Ireland successfully. To seek religious conformity without such prior internal ecclesiastical reforms would be to act 'as a man going to warfare without munitions or arms' (letter to Laud, 31 Jan 1634, 'Strafforde's Letters', 1.187). 
Even before Wentworth left England for Ireland he had prepared the ground for his administration in close co-operation with Francis Annesley, Lord Mountnorris, the Irish vice-treasurer, who had travelled to England to defend himself against accusations of administrative malpractice. In the past Mountnorris, who had many friends at the English court but had remained an outsider among the New English office-holders in Ireland, had often acted as a check on the Dublin administration on behalf of the king and his councillors. In the period between Wentworth's appointment and actual arrival in Dublin, Mountnorris proved a valuable ally for the new deputy. 
Prior to Wentworth's arrival the dominant faction in the Irish privy council led by Richard Boyle, first earl of Cork, the richest planter in Ireland and one of the two acting lords justices, tried to tie the new deputy's hands by pursuing a policy of more active persecution against Catholics. The fines for recusancy were to be strictly enforced and were to replace the contribution which the Catholic and protestant landowners alike had agreed to pay in 1628 to finance the army. Had Cork and his allies been able to implement this policy, Wentworth would have found even a limited and temporary co-operation with the Catholic Old English impossible. He would instead have remained dependent on the New English like his immediate predecessors. However, Wentworth entered into negotiations with the Catholic peerage and gentry. Under the threat of renewed persecution the leaders of the Old English agreed in December 1632 to extend for another year the payment of the contribution they had granted in 1628 and which was due to cease at the end of 1632. Later this contribution was further extended until December 1634. This gave Wentworth the necessary breathing-space to find other means (in the form of parliamentary grants and an improved income from the customs) to finance the army and other expenditure. 
When Wentworth finally arrived in Dublin on 23 July 1633 he had already formed a clear opinion of the problems awaiting him, and also to some extent of the men who dominated the Dublin administration. It is therefore not surprising that in his early reports from Ireland he found fault with almost everything he saw: the army, neglected by its absentee officers, ill-trained, insufficiently armed, and incapable of fighting; the church, without resources and with ecclesiastical benefices in the hands of badly paid clergy without a proper education who neglected their flocks; and the crown's finances in disarray, thanks not least to the cavalier attitude or downright corruption of the king's own office-holders. With great energy and determination, which he never failed to present to the king and his councillors in the most favourable light, Wentworth set out to put these matters right. Among his first priorities were the army and navy, the latter essential to protect shipping and trade, the former an indispensable instrument for enforcing his orders against those who sought to resist him. Characteristically Wentworth, ever conscious of his own honour and the dignity of his office, also sought from the outset to transform his own entourage in Dublin into a quasi-royal court. 
Most important in Wentworth's eyes, however, was an improvement in the state of the Irish revenues. Only if the income from these revenues produced a substantial and steady surplus could he guard Ireland against intervention from England, as he clearly desired, and realize his own political objectives. The foundations for a sound financial policy were to be laid by a generous grant of parliamentary taxation. Wentworth therefore asked the king in January 1634 for permission to convene the Irish houses of parliament; parliament met on 14 July 1634 and the first session lasted until 2 August of that year. A second session was held between November and December 1634, and a third from January to April 1635. The first session, in which Wentworth deliberately played protestants off against Catholics and vice versa, was a great success. This was made possible not least by the large number of candidates elected to the House of Commons who owed their seats to official patronage. In July parliament granted six subsidies, a very considerable sum by Irish standards. This grant was made all the more valuable as each subsidy was fixed at $40,000. Thus attempts to evade taxes by underassessing one's wealth (a common practice in England) were rendered largely futile. In fact, the richest man in Ireland, the earl of Cork, who had become accustomed to paying no taxes at all, later complained that he paid such a considerable sum in subsidies after 1634 that it would have been sufficient to 'have ransomed me if I had been prisoner with the turkes' (Grosart, 2.4, p. 186). 
In the second session of parliament, which first met on 4 November 1634, it became clear that Wentworth was not prepared to have the 'graces' of 1628 confirmed without major modifications. The graces were a catalogue of concessions which the king had made during the war against Spain and France to protestants and Catholics alike. They were, however, of particular importance to the Old English landowners as they gave them security of tenure. Until November, Wentworth had deliberately created the impression that all the graces would eventually be confirmed. Late in November, however, he could no longer conceal the fact that only a limited number would be given force of law by statute, while others would be implemented only at the deputy's discretion, and those confirming titles predating the completion of the Elizabethan conquest not at all. At this stage, however, Wentworth commanded sufficient financial resources for a number of years and no longer needed the co-operation of the Old English. In spite of some minor setbacks he was able to steer most of his legislative programme successfully through parliament with protestant support. 
The Irish convocation met at the same time as parliament. With the help of his closest assistant in ecclesiastical affairs, Bishop John Bramhall, who had originally accompanied him as his personal chaplain from Yorkshire to Ireland before being promoted to the see of Derry, the lord deputy managed convocation as successfully as parliament. A set of canons was passed by the assembled clergy which brought the Church of Ireland much more into line with the Church of England and with the peculiar ecclesiastical aspirations of Archbishop Laud. In fact, throughout the 1630s Wentworth and Laud co-operated closely in fighting for a political and ecclesiastical programme in Ireland and England respectively for which they used the catchword 'thorough' as opposed to the laxer approach favoured by Lord Treasurer Portland or the chancellor of the exchequer, Cottington. Wentworth may not have shared Laud's personal religious sentiments -- his enthusiasm for the 'beauty of holiness' and his concern for the continuity between the Church of England and the pre-Reformation universal church, let alone his alleged Arminianism -- but like Laud he was convinced that secular and ecclesiastical authority stood or fell together. Those who attacked the one committed as much of a crime against God as those who attacked the other. In fact, like Laud, Wentworth was convinced that to rob the established church of her rightful property and to undermine her dignity and authority was tantamount to sacrilege. In their concern for order and discipline and their conviction that the church and the clerical order had to be restored to their pristine splendour Laud and Wentworth were of one mind, different as their personal religious sensibilities and theological convictions may have been. United in their zeal for authoritarian reform, for a policy of 'thorough', Laud and Wentworth became close allies in the 1630s and it was largely due to the archbishop's influence at court that Wentworth could pursue his policy in Ireland successfully. Laud did have his reservations at times about the lord deputy's ruthlessness and his quest for personal profit, but the two men's alliance withstood the test of time, although Wentworth continued to co-operate on occasions with men who had no great love for the archbishop, such as Lord Cottington. 
In Ireland, as in England, Laud's ecclesiastical policy, which Wentworth tried to implement, was far from popular. Nevertheless, after some acrimonious debates the deputy persuaded parliament to pass a number of statutes which were designed to address the most pressing problem facing the Church of Ireland: its poverty. All bishops and clergy were forbidden in future to make leases of church lands for longer than twenty-one years to laymen. Another act made void all leases held by a minister or vicar who was absent from his cure for twelve or more weeks in the year. Thus the widespread practice by which lay owners of advowsons nominally appointed a clergyman to several benefices at the same time, while the income from the benefices remained almost totally in their own hands, became illegal. Armed with these statutes Wentworth and Bramhall could exert considerable pressure on laymen who had acquired church property or leased impropriate rectories. Faced with the possibility of a trial in the court of castle chamber, the Irish equivalent of the Star Chamber, many laymen preferred an out-of-court settlement or submitted, however grudgingly, to arbitration. Thus the financial situation of the established church improved markedly, although the success of this campaign for the re-endowment of the church was most clearly visible in the north, in the province of Armagh, where protestantism had been established only after 1603. 
Matters were more difficult in Ireland's other ecclesiastical provinces. Here greater resistance was encountered. One of the most prominent opponents of Wentworth's ecclesiastical policy was Richard Boyle, earl of Cork. Cork had arrived in Ireland in 1588 and acquired a vast fortune as a land speculator, thanks to his position as a minor official in Munster, which had provided him with valuable information about titles likely to be deemed defective by the Dublin administration. Created an earl in 1620 and elevated to the office of lord high treasurer of Ireland in 1631, his position in Ireland seemed secure before Wentworth's arrival. Nevertheless, Cork had offered the deputy the hand of his eldest daughter in marriage after the death of Wentworth's second wife; clearly this was meant to be the foundation of a lasting political alliance. Wentworth had not accepted this offer but had, however, helped to arrange a marriage between Cork's eldest son, Lord Dungarvon, and his own niece, Elizabeth Clifford. Cork included in his son's marriage portion one of his most controversial acquisitions, the lands of the former College of Youghal in Munster, an ecclesiastical corporation rich in estates and impropriate rectories. This provided him with insurance should the way in which he had acquired his enormous fortune come under closer scrutiny. 
Nevertheless, relations between Wentworth and Cork deteriorated rapidly after the deputy's arrival in Dublin. Wentworth's portrayal of Cork in his official reports as an avaricious social upstart and a pompous hypocrite may indeed be a caricature, but there can be no doubt that Wentworth's dislike of the successful planter was genuine and went beyond a mere conflict of interests. Cork's social pretensions may have been common enough among the New English but they could easily seem ridiculous from an English perspective. Cork's enormous wealth only confirmed Wentworth in his opinion that men like the earl were to blame for the poverty of the church and crown in Ireland. He therefore decided to humiliate Cork in public by forcing him in 1634 to dismantle the enormous funeral monument which he had built for his family in the choir of St Patrick's, Dublin. The official reason for having the monument taken apart was that it stood where the high altar ought to be. But Cork was soon to undergo an even more painful ordeal. In October 1634 he had to appear before the court of castle chamber to answer charges in connection with his possession of the College of Youghal. Although Cork was eventually allowed to retain the college and its lands he was forced in April 1636 to agree to pay a fine of $15,000, and to cede the rectories belonging to the college with all their revenues to the church. He had to make further concessions in 1637 with regard to the lands of the diocese of Lismore and the episcopal palace which he had acquired under very favourable but also highly questionable terms. Cork left Ireland for England in the following year. Raised to the status of privy councillor, he tried to come to an arrangement with Wentworth and did indeed manage to have his title to the lands of the College of Youghal confirmed. Both men tried to strengthen their contacts with the queen's entourage, now increasingly influential, in the late 1630s, and thus found a basis for limited co-operation. It was only in 1641, when Cork realized that Wentworth's downfall was a foregone conclusion and that the lord lieutenant's attempts to defend himself in his impeachment trial by bringing Cork's shady methods of acquiring property into the open posed a threat to himself, that the earl joined the ranks of Wentworth's enemies. 
The campaign for the re-endowment of the church which Wentworth and Bramhall pursued primarily affected protestant landowners. However, Wentworth's plans to confiscate vast tracts of land in areas which had not yet been planted threatened Catholic proprietors, Gaelic and Old English alike, much more than their protestant counterparts. After the parliament of 1634-5 Wentworth hastened the preparations for a new plantation in Connaught. This, contrary to older plans which the earl of Cork and other office-holders had tried to put into practice before Wentworth's arrival in Ireland, was to include co. Galway, an area traditionally dominated by Old English, not Gaelic, proprietors. Overall 4000 quarters of land were to be claimed for the king in Connaught, of which 1000 were actually to be confiscated and settled by planters from England. The original owners would receive a secure title for the rest, provided that they paid the necessary fees and charges to the king. 
The inquisitions undertaken in Roscommon, Mayo, and Sligo in the summer of 1635 went smoothly enough and the king's title to the relevant lands in these counties was established at the end of July under Wentworth's personal supervision. Matters were, however, far more difficult in co. Galway. Here the most powerful local magnate, Richard Burke, fourth earl of Clanricarde, was in the forefront of opposition to the plantation. Clanricarde lived in England, where he held the title of earl of St Albans, and where he could mobilize the support of a number of friends and relations, including his stepson, Robert Devereux, third earl of Essex. Clanricarde managed to persuade the king to receive a delegation from the Galway landowners in November 1635, but died soon afterwards. Nevertheless, a member of the delegation, the lawyer Patrick Darcy, remained active in England for some time and tried to shake the king's confidence in Wentworth's financial honesty by supplying him with damaging information about the Irish customs farm. In May 1636 Darcy was finally sent back to Ireland, where he and the other members of the Galway jury which had rejected the evidence presented by the crown's agents were thrown into prison, convicted, and each fined $4000. It was not until December of that year that the jurors submitted and acknowledged the king's title to the lands claimed for the crown in co. Galway. Even after this victory for the deputy, Ulick Burke, fifth earl of Clanricarde, and heir to his father's vast estates, remained a force to be reckoned with. On good terms with Secretary Windebank and other courtiers, he gradually managed to persuade Charles I by the end of the 1630s that it was unwise to antagonize one of the most powerful Catholic noblemen in Ireland while his own authority was threatened by radical protestants in Scotland. In February 1639 Charles finally confirmed Clanricarde's titles and thereby exempted his estates from any future plantation. It was not until October 1640 that Wentworth acknowledged defeat with ill grace and accepted the king's decision. Clanricarde never forgave Wentworth and rejoiced in the thought that 'when Parliament doth sit, the day will come [he] shall pay for all' (Clanricarde to Windebank, 9 Oct 1640, Yorke, 2.196). The earl of Essex's pronounced hostility towards Wentworth, which played no small part in bringing about the latter's downfall and execution in 1641, may owe something to the resentment Essex felt about the harsh treatment to which his Burke relations had been subjected by the lord deputy. 
Even without royal confirmation of Clanricarde's property rights, the plantation in co. Galway and in Connaught in general would probably have faltered. Rumours of an impending military conflict with Spain in 1637, the crisis in Scotland that came to a head in the following year, and also the fact that migration to New England now offered an attractive alternative to settlement in Ireland, made it next to impossible to find enough suitable settlers. Nor did another plantation scheme in co. Tipperary make much headway in the 1630s, although Wentworth had managed to gain the co-operation of the local magnate, the protestant earl of Ormond, one of the few members of the Irish peerage to be closely allied to him. The king's title to the baronies of upper and lower Ormond was confirmed by a jury in Clonmel in August 1637 with the earl's support. Similarly Wentworth relied on the support of Henry O'Brien, the protestant fifth earl of Thomond, for a projected plantation of co. Clare, another largely abortive project. 
When Wentworth first went to Ireland he had closely co-operated with the Irish vice-treasurer, Lord Mountnorris, but this association soon ended as Mountnorris controlled the considerable cash balances in the Irish exchequer, on which Wentworth himself wanted to lay his hands. Moreover, Mountnorris had a one-eighth share in the Irish customs farm. Wentworth, who considered the vice-treasurer dishonest and unreliable, and who resented the independent stance he had taken during the later sessions of the 1634-5 parliament, wanted to rearrange the customs farm. The covenant which in 1632 the crown had signed with the farmers, including Mountnorris, Sir Arthur Ingram, and Wentworth himself, had proved embarrassingly disadvantageous for the king because revenue from the customs had unexpectedly risen. Previous attempts to persuade Mountnorris to resign and to withdraw from the customs farm failed. However, in the spring of 1635 Mountnorris committed an indiscretion. A kinsman of his had, perhaps deliberately, dropped a stool on Wentworth's gouty foot shortly after Mountnorris's brother, an officer in the Irish army, had been struck with a cane by the deputy during a review because of insubordination. At a dinner given by Lord Chancellor Loftus, Mountnorris declared that the pain his kinsman had inflicted on the deputy had been in revenge for Wentworth's arrogance, and that his brother might take even more drastic revenge for the insult he had received. As Mountnorris himself held a commission as a captain in the Irish army such remarks could theoretically be seen as an offence punishable by a court martial. On 31 July Wentworth received the king's permission to sentence Mountnorris according to martial law at a time of his own choosing. For the time being, however, he merely investigated Mountnorris's malpractices as vice-treasurer. Only when Mountnorris still refused to resign and began to accuse Wentworth in letters sent to the king of making huge profits out of the customs farm at the crown's cost did Wentworth finally decide to convene a court martial and had Mountnorris condemned to death on 12 December 1635. Clearly, Wentworth had only wanted to force Mountnorris to resign; his death was not envisaged and the deputy set him at liberty once his resignation had been obtained. Nevertheless, such extreme measures did nothing to improve Wentworth's reputation in England, all the more so as his administration of the Irish customs increasingly came under scrutiny. At court the earl of Holland and Lord Wilmot supported the attacks on Wentworth. Holland was one of the many courtiers whom Wentworth had managed to antagonize by his arrogance and intemperate remarks. Wilmot was a New English landowner in Ireland who, like many others, had felt the lord deputy's heavy hand. 
Matters seemed to come to a head at the beginning of 1636, when there were rumours that the attorney-general would investigate the administration of the Irish customs farm. However, Charles's decision to appoint Bishop Juxon as lord treasurer in March 1636 defused the crisis. Nevertheless, Wentworth, who after Portland's death had denied all rumours that he wanted to become treasurer himself, decided to travel to England in 1636 to justify his proceedings in Ireland. When he arrived at court in June, he managed fully to restore the king's confidence in his actions. The six weeks he spent at court and in London in June and July 1636 have been called 'the most triumphant and unclouded of all his public life' (Wedgwood, 212). The contract for the customs farm was renewed: the lord deputy paid the same rent as before ($15,500); of the additional profit -- exceeding the rent -- he was to retain one-quarter; one-eighth was to go to his friend, Sir George Radcliffe; and all the rest to the king, as Mountnorris and Sir Arthur Ingram no longer had a share in the farm. 
However, Wentworth's actions were severely criticized by some in England. Clare, the father of his second wife, called his proceedings against Mountnorris 'blouddy, and tyrannicall' and found his behaviour all too 'Prince like in every particular' (Clare to Lord Haughton, 1 Feb 1636, 'Letters of John Holles', 3.477). Clare had no real influence at court but many members of the king's entourage shared his sentiments. In the past English courtiers had considered it as no less than natural that they could benefit from 'cast up in Ireland whereby so many are enriched' (earl of Ancram to Wentworth, 22 Dec 1635, Wentworth Woodhouse muniments, Strafford papers, 8, fol. 365'r'). But Wentworth was adamant in thwarting the suits of even those nearest to the king when he felt that his own long-term plans, the crown's revenues, or his own profits were threatened. Even the earl of Arundel, the influential earl marshal, had to abandon his plans to claim extensive estates in counties Waterford, Carlow, and Kilkenny, which had allegedly belonged to his and his wife's ancestors. Wentworth roundly rejected his claims, taking the side of the local magnate, the earl of Ormond, whose property in co. Kilkenny was threatened by Arundel's attempts to acquire land. It must, however, have been particularly galling for Arundel that Ormond passed Idough, one of the lordships he had claimed himself, on to the Irish master of the rolls, Christopher Wandesford, in 1636. Wandesford was Wentworth's close friend and a member of the small coterie of Englishmen -- often from Yorkshire -- who had accompanied him to Ireland, a group which included Wentworth's brother George and Sir George Radcliffe. Arundel did not forget this incident, and during Wentworth's impeachment -- over which Arundel presided as lord steward -- the use of force against landowners in co. Kilkenny in the course of the new plantation provided the prosecution with valuable material (article 15 of the impeachment). Arundel was not the only English or Scottish courtier who found that Irish grants had become much more difficult to obtain than in the past. Others such as the marquess of Hamilton fared no better. Secretary Coke, the earl of Carlisle, and the duke of Lennox were among the few courtiers who managed to co-operate successfully with the deputy in pursuit of their interests in Ireland. 
Perhaps Wentworth's reluctance to oblige courtiers by supporting their suits for grants in Ireland would have made him less unpopular if he had not made such a vast fortune in office himself. At the end of the 1630s he derived a profit of about $8700 per annum from the Irish customs farm alone. His overall income can be estimated at about $23,000, of which $6000 came from his estates in Yorkshire, largely lands he had inherited or bought in the 1620s. A further $5500 was the annual rent of his lands in Ireland, all of which he had acquired after his appointment as lord deputy, exploiting the opportunities his office offered for purchases on favourable terms. Moreover, before the collapse of the personal rule, Wentworth was in a position further to increase his income. In January 1638 a monopoly for the sale of tobacco was created for Ireland (parallel to a similar project for England). Wentworth farmed this monopoly himself for an annual payment of $7000 to the crown; a rival offer by the marquess of Hamilton had been rejected by Charles I, who furthermore allowed Wentworth to use money from the Irish exchequer to the tune of $40,000 to build up a stock of tobacco. It is unlikely that Wentworth derived any profit from this monopoly before the meeting of the Long Parliament, although there were unsubstantiated rumours that he had already made $100,000 from it. Under more favourable circumstances he could have expected an additional annual income of at least $2000 for his share of the farm. 
The years 1636-7 mark the high point of Wentworth's authority and success in Ireland, although later events revealed that the basis of this success was by no means stable. Even in 1637 political decisions taken at court which he was unable to control threatened to undo everything he had achieved. In the early months of 1637 it seemed as if Charles I, in alliance with France, would enter into a war against Spain. For Ireland the consequences of such a decision would have been disastrous as it would have forced Wentworth to make concessions -- in particular to the Old English -- which were incompatible with his own political objectives. In March in a long memorandum the deputy warned Charles against a warlike policy. He feared that a war could be financed in England only by resorting to extreme measures which would destroy the political consensus he apparently still saw as the ultimate objective. A war would: 'necessarily put the King into all the high ways possible else will he not be able to subsist under the charge of it, and if those fail the next but be the sacrificing those that have been his ministers therein. (Wentworth to Laud, 3 April 1637, 'Strafforde's Letters', 2.66)' This -- in retrospect prophetic -- remark clearly shows that he was still as strongly opposed to the 'high ways' a war would provoke as ten years earlier, despite the undeniable change in his stance on other issues. 
At the same time, however, Wentworth tried to establish closer contacts with members of the anti-Spanish and pro-French faction at court, who were close to the queen, probably realizing that the influence of his principal ally and friend at court, Archbishop Laud, would probably decline should Charles enter into an open alliance with France. Wentworth welcomed the earl of Northumberland's appointment as lord high admiral in February 1638 and also established connections with Northumberland's brother-in-law, the earl of Leicester, who was known to be no great friend of Laud's ecclesiastical policy. Leicester hoped to succeed Wentworth in Ireland, should he return to England. Northumberland's sister Lucy, widow of the earl of Carlisle, one of Wentworth's old allies at court, was among his closest friends, and helped to establish these contacts. Wentworth greatly admired Lady Carlisle for her beauty and charm. A few months before his death he said of her that: 'a nobler nor more intelligent friendship did I never meet with in all my life' (Whitaker, 221). Thus personal affection to some extent formed the basis of a possible political co-operation with members of the pro-French faction at court. 
In spite of his attempts to forge new alliances at court the crisis in Scotland, which assumed ever more menacing dimensions in 1638, threatened to undermine Wentworth's position in Ireland and his support in England. The king's master of the horse, the marquess of Hamilton, one of the few courtiers with any influence in Scotland, now emerged as a key figure at Whitehall. Wentworth mistrusted Hamilton, as he increasingly did almost all Scotsmen, and he and the marquess were also at odds over a number of the latter's projects in Ireland. Having already outmanoeuvred Hamilton over the Irish tobacco monopoly, Wentworth also opposed the marquess's attempt to gain control of the lands of the Londonderry plantation, forfeited in 1635 and surrendered to the crown in 1637. Desperately in need of cash, Charles looked for a syndicate which would farm the plantation at the highest rent possible. One offer for the land came from Randal MacDonnell, earl of Antrim, and his associates, and was backed by Hamilton. Antrim was a grandson of the last earl of Tyrone and a Catholic, but was also married to the duke of Buckingham's widow, Katherine. Hamilton himself had married one of the duke's nieces and closely co-operated with Antrim, who professed himself to be Hamilton's client. Wentworth, who wanted to become the principal farmer for the plantation lands himself, argued that Antrim, as an Irish Catholic, would eject the protestant English settlers living in co. Londonderry and replace them with native Irishmen. Antrim's and Hamilton's intentions are not quite clear, but they certainly considered extending the leases only of the smallholders (of whom many were native Irish) while replacing the more substantial landholders with new tenants. Wentworth also opposed another bid for the plantation lands which came from some of the wealthier existing tenants themselves. These were represented by Sir John Clotworthy, the son of an English soldier-adventurer settled in Ulster, but himself a presbyterian in sympathy with the covenanters and a man who had close connections with Wentworth's enemies in England, in particular the earl of Holland. Clotworthy, who was related by marriage to John Pym, was later to play a considerable part in the impeachment proceedings against Wentworth. For the time being the king rejected all offers made for the plantation lands -- including Wentworth's own -- and decided to administer the estates for his own account. 
However, the future of the Londonderry plantation was not the only problem Wentworth had to confront in 1638. While unrest spread from Scotland to Ulster, where the Scottish settlers, mostly presbyterians, sympathized with the covenanters, the earl of Antrim submitted a proposal to the king in the summer of 1638 to attack the covenanters in Scotland with an army recruited primarily among his own clan in Ulster and Scotland. The MacDonnells or MacDonalds (as they were called in Scotland) still maintained a foothold in the western highlands and in the isles. While Antrim could rely on Hamilton's support at court, Wentworth systematically obstructed and sabotaged the earl's preparations for the campaign in western Scotland. The deputy did not believe that Antrim could realize his ambitious military plans; the earl had in fact almost no ready cash to spend, and it would therefore have been the task of the Irish exchequer to finance and equip his army, a prospect Wentworth did not relish. Moreover, Wentworth pointed out that the very proposal to recruit an army of Irish Catholics in Ulster was politically highly explosive, all the more so as Antrim originally envisaged appointing professional Irish soldiers who had served abroad and fought for Spain as officers, men like his cousins Owen Roe O'Neill and Daniel O'Neill, who were both later to play a considerable role in the Ulster rising of 1641. Nevertheless, Antrim's potential ability to gain support in Scotland may have been greater than Wentworth was prepared to admit. After months of hesitation Charles I finally ordered the deputy to support the earl in April 1639. However, by now it was definitely too late and the MacDonnells were unable to attack before the pacification of Berwick in June 1639. 
Wentworth himself had been busy strengthening and enlarging the army in Ireland. The major part of the army was now stationed in Ulster to increase the pressure on the Scots settled there. In May 1639 they were required formally to abjure the covenant. The so-called 'black oath', administered to all adults of Scottish descent in Ulster in 1639, did nothing to endear Wentworth, who had already acquired a reputation as one of their most inveterate enemies, to either the presbyterian Scots in Ireland or their kinsmen in Scotland itself. 
However, Wentworth's very radicalism, which now became ever more apparent, recommended him to the king as chief councillor when Charles realized that the very foundations of his monarchy were about to crumble in the summer of 1639. At this moment of despair Charles I, who in spite of the support he gave him had never unreservedly trusted Wentworth in the past, turned to the lord deputy and asked him to return to England. Wentworth received Charles's letter, written in his own hand and delivered by the bishop of Raphoe, on 5 August 1639. Wentworth arrived in England late in September and became a member of the important war council in December. Two months earlier the privy council had dismissed an appeal which the Irish chancellor, Lord Loftus, who was involved in a long-standing judicial feud with the lord deputy, had launched against a sentence of the Dublin court of castle chamber. Loftus now lost his office and was replaced by a candidate of Wentworth's choosing, Sir Richard Bolton. In January 1640 Wentworth was elevated to the position of lord lieutenant of Ireland, which allowed him to govern the country during his absence through a deputy, and on 12 January he was created an earl, taking the title of Strafford. He was also created baron of Raby. Raby Castle was owned by Sir Henry Vane, who became Sir John Coke's successor as one of the two secretaries of state in February, so by taking this particular title Strafford insulted one of the most important members of the privy council at the very moment of his greatest personal triumph -- a personal slight which Vane never forgave. 
Strafford, who had managed parliament in Ireland so successfully in 1634-5, was confident that this success could be repeated and that with parliamentary support he would be able to mobilize an army in Ireland which would considerably strengthen the king's hand in a renewed confrontation with the Scottish covenanters. Moreover, the support Strafford expected to receive from the Irish parliament was to serve as an example for parliament in England, which he advised the king to summon as soon as possible. He clearly underestimated the resentment against the policies of the personal rule and, as someone from the north of England, perhaps still saw the Scots as England's natural enemies, thereby overestimating the popular support for a national war against Scotland. In any case, Strafford's own ability to guide the king's policy during these crucial months was considerably diminished by his failing health. Recurrent attacks of gout, dysentery, and other health problems almost crippled him. Nevertheless he returned to Ireland in March to preside over the session of the Irish parliament which had met on 16 March. The two houses granted four subsidies of $45,000 each, but considerable pressure and intimidation was necessary to achieve this result. The money was to finance a new Irish army of 9000 men, recruited over the coming months and transported from Ulster to Scotland at the end of June. As opposed to the army already in existence, this new force consisted mostly of Catholic soldiers, although the great majority of the officers were protestant. Some among the handful of junior officers who were Catholics, however, played an important part in the rising of 1641. Strafford, who had vehemently rejected the earl of Antrim's plans for a Catholic army in 1638-9, now pursued a very similar policy himself. The new army was not ready for action until the end of July, and even then means of transport were lacking, so it could not intervene in the second bishops' war. Its very existence did, however, greatly increase fears in England that the king might use force against open or passive resistance to his policies -- and, even more dramatically, fears that there might be a popish conspiracy against England's liberties and established religion. Strafford did little to deny rumours that the new Catholic army might be employed in England as well as Scotland, although this was clearly not the plan of action in the summer of 1640. 
The Irish parliament was prorogued on 31 March and Strafford immediately returned to England, where the Short Parliament assembled on 15 April. Due to his failing health the lord lieutenant did not arrive in London until three days later. When Charles's attempt to persuade parliament to finance a renewed war effort against the covenanters ran into difficulties Strafford advised the king to mobilize the Lords against those who rejected his demands in the Commons. However, he also spoke out in favour of a conciliatory attitude towards the Commons. Apparently he thought it best for the king to abandon ship money without an express demand for adequate financial compensation, on the assumption that the Commons would eventually grant supply once their mood had improved. Strafford's counsel was adopted by the privy council only in modified form, but on his insistence it advised the king to content himself with a grant of eight subsidies by the Commons in exchange for ship money. When Secretary Vane nevertheless insisted in parliament on twelve subsidies, negotiations broke down. In the council meeting early on the morning of 5 May, Strafford, like other members of the council, advised the king to dissolve parliament. When the eight members of the Scottish committee met after the dissolution on the same day, Strafford seems to have taken an even more extreme line, although the reliability of the records for this debate remains controversial. However, he clearly advised the king to pursue an offensive war against Scotland, convinced that Scotland's military strength was a mere facade and that 'the quiet of England will hold out long'. He thought that now parliament had refused supply, Charles was 'absolved from all rules of government', and was entitled to raise money to finance the war by the authority of his prerogative alone (Russell, 'Fall', 126). According to the existing record Strafford also said 'you have an army in Ireland you may employ here to reduce this kingdom' (ibid., 127). The immediate context of the debate makes it more than likely that 'this kingdom' referred to Scotland, all the more so as at this time Strafford clearly did not anticipate any open resistance in England. 
The lord lieutenant hoped that Spain could be persuaded to support Charles financially and entered into negotiations with the Spanish ambassadors. But Spanish power and financial solvency had reached its nadir in 1640 and nothing came of this. In July it was still envisaged that Strafford would take command of the Irish army, and on 3 August the king appointed him captain-general of the army which he was to lead into Scotland. Nevertheless, his patent also empowered him to suppress any sedition in Ireland, England, or Wales, should this prove necessary. In Ireland itself the situation was becoming increasingly critical as Strafford's friend Wandesford, who governed the kingdom as lord deputy in his absence, was confronted by an ever stronger and seemingly united opposition of Catholics and protestants. Strafford might have been able to quash this opposition, but he had to abandon his plans to go to Ireland, as Northumberland, the official commander of the king's forces in northern England, had fallen ill. As Northumberland's lieutenant-general, Strafford belatedly tried to create an army out of the scattered, ill-armed, unpaid, and demoralized troops which had been hastily recruited to fight against the Scots. In no condition to command an army, because of his failing health, not to mention his lack of military experience, he arrived in York on 26 August but soon recognized that the situation was utterly desperate. Indeed, he could do nothing to avert the impending catastrophe. After the battle of Newburn his authority declined rapidly and his attempts to steer the deliberations of the great council of peers which met on 24 September were largely futile, in spite of his hopes of renewing the war effort against the Scots. There were signs that he no longer enjoyed the king's wholehearted support. Many peers -- both courtiers and lords who had been out of favour with Charles during the 1630s -- held him responsible for the disastrous policies the king had pursued after the pacification of Berwick. Black Tom Tyrant as popular pamphlets called him was to foot the bill not only for these more recent political miscalculations but for all the mistakes and sins Charles I had committed over the past ten years. 
When parliament met on 3 November 1640 Strafford preferred to stay with the army in Yorkshire. He was clearly aware that he risked impeachment should he go to London. In spite of the king's defeat and his own political isolation he was not yet seen as a spent force but rather as the only man capable of tipping the scales and regaining the political initiative on the king's behalf. It was assumed, not without justification, that he was prepared to use force against his opponents, relying on the new Irish army still waiting beyond St George's Channel and the remnants of the king's army in Yorkshire. It was known that in the face of defeat his political outlook had become ever more radical and it was expected that he would not hesitate to have those he considered disloyal tried for treason, if given a chance to do so. Such assumptions explain the enormous hostility to him and the fear and hatred which his very name evoked. Moreover the Scottish covenanters, who saw him as their most dangerous enemy, wanted him out of the way. All the same Charles I, who now had few councillors he could rely on, asked Strafford to join him in London. The earl obeyed, very much aware of the danger awaiting him but too proud to reject the challenge to confront his enemies and perhaps also afraid that he would lose the vast fortune he had amassed in the king's service should he flee abroad. 
Arriving in London on 10 November Strafford proposed to accuse the members of either house who had invited the Scots into England of high treason. Nevertheless, when he took his seat in the Lords on the 11th he did not raise the issue of the pro-Scottish party in England. He left, having remained silent. His enemies, led by John Pym, alarmed by his presence in London, were therefore able to pre-empt the charges he might bring against them. On the same day a committee of the Commons accused him of high treason and impeached him before the Lords. When Strafford hurriedly returned from Whitehall to the House of Lords he was arrested and committed to the gentleman usher of the black rod. It was not until 25 November, when the Commons had assembled a list of preliminary charges against him, that he was sent to the Tower. The Commons took a considerable time to draw up a complete catalogue of charges, and the trial in the House of Lords did not open until 22 March. 
The impeachment obviously raised a number of complicated legal and constitutional issues. The traditional definition of treason enshrined in medieval and Tudor statutes made it difficult to consider treasonable actions which were not crimes against the king's person. Strafford's prosecutors could to some extent circumvent this problem by arguing that a councillor who advised the king to subvert the fundamental laws of the kingdom created a division between the monarch and the people and thereby undermined the very foundations of his rule. Strafford's actions were depicted not so much as actions against an impersonal state but against the legal order on which the king's rule was founded and therefore against his natural person -- inseparable from the legal order which constituted his kingship -- as well as against his body politic. Whatever the theoretical plausibility of such an argument, in practice it was not easy to sustain against a man who visibly still enjoyed the king's support. Even more serious than these legal problems was the difficulty of actually proving that Strafford had committed crimes which subverted the established legal order. The majority of the more serious charges against him related to his period of office in Ireland. The prosecution had been provided with abundant material by those who had suffered under his government, in particular the New English office-holders and planters. Nevertheless for the charges to stick it had to be assumed that the same legal rules were valid in Ireland as in England, and that the mere thought that Ireland was a 'conquered nation' inferior in status to England (article 3) constituted treason. Such an argument may have been popular with the Dublin parliament but was much less so with the English House of Lords. Although it could be shown that Strafford's rule in Ireland had often been high-handed and arbitrary, he could demonstrate that earlier chief governors had ruled the kingdom with similar methods, admittedly mostly at times more turbulent than the 1630s. However, even the charge that he had used soldiers to collect revenues for the crown, to confiscate property and to enforce his orders in peacetime, thereby 'levying war' against the king's subjects (article 15), lost some of its impact when the frequent use of military force and martial law in Ireland in the past was taken into account. More serious, however, was the charge that he had advised Charles I to use the Irish army against his English subjects on 5 May 1640, the day of the dissolution of the Short Parliament. On the other hand this accusation was supported only by the testimony of a single witness, Sir Henry Vane, the secretary of state. The other members of the Scottish committee of the privy council in which Strafford was said to have given the allegedly treasonable advice either could not remember the relevant sentence, or were convinced that the lord lieutenant had meant Scotland when he had spoken of 'this kingdom' against which the army should be sent. 
With enormous skill and great courage Strafford took apart most of the charges raised against him. He demonstrated that he was still the outstanding and charismatic orator who had dominated the House of Commons in 1628. He argued that if his opponents were allowed to create a new, unprecedented kind of treason out of individual actions which in themselves were at most misdemeanours, no man holding office could any longer feel safe. However, with the impeachment proceedings likely to collapse, Strafford's opponents changed their tactics. On 10 April the Commons decided to proceed by bill of attainder. Thus an act of legislation would declare Strafford's behaviour treasonable and at the same time condemn him to death. Clearly the stakes were now so high that it seemed impossible to abandon the attempt to have Strafford condemned. Moreover, less prominent members of the Commons seem to have feared that their leaders would come to some sort of fudged compromise with the king which would enable Charles to regain the upper hand politically, if Strafford was spared. The Commons passed the bill of attainder on 21 April by a majority of 204 to 59 votes. However, at the time the pressure on Strafford's supporters had already become very intense; the 'Straffordians', whose names were published soon after the division, were threatened by angry crowds, and feared for their lives. Although the Lords, who had come to resent the Commons' behaviour, had at first proceeded with the trial against the earl as if the bill of attainder had not been passed by the lower house, they were now exposed to the same popular pressure which had already intimidated many members of the other house. On 1 May the king appealed in person to the Lords not to condemn his former minister to death, stressing also -- much too late -- that he would never again employ him in his service. But at the same time he declared that he would never consent to a bill of attainder. He therefore offered an escape route to all peers who did not want to see Strafford executed but who were afraid to vote against the bill, for without the king's consent the bill could not become law. Charles committed a second mistake by sending soldiers to the Tower on 2 May to free Strafford, an attempt which failed. This incident, together with news about a much more wide-ranging plot to bring armed force to bear against parliament, created enormous excitement verging on hysteria in London. Strafford now released the king from his promise given in a letter on 23 April that he would save his servant's life, come what may. Strafford's letter to the king, which showed him willing to sacrifice himself, might have been used for a last appeal to the peers to show him mercy, but Charles failed to exploit this chance. On 7 May the Lords passed the bill in a thinly attended house. In all likelihood the majority in the crucial division was only 26 to 19, although some reports record a majority of 51 to 9 for the ultimate vote, when the matter of fact had already been decided. Fearing for the security of his family and for his crown, the king gave his assent to the bill of attainder on 10 May. When he heard of Charles's decision Strafford, in spite of his earlier willingness to lay down his life for the king, is reported to have remarked, 'put not your trust in princes' (Wedgwood, 380). He was executed by beheading (he was spared the traditional punishment for treason, to be hanged, drawn, and quartered) on the morning of 12 May 1641 on Tower Hill, facing death with great calm and courage. His body was later buried at Wentworth Woodhouse. 
Strafford's death was greeted with jubilation by the London crowds, and at the time was probably mourned by only a handful of close friends, including Archbishop Laud who was himself a prisoner in the Tower. Nevertheless, far from solving the political crisis which threatened monarchy and parliament alike, it made any lasting political settlement almost impossible, for the king could never forgive those who had forced him to abandon one of his most faithful servants. 
Strafford was a controversial figure in his own lifetime and remained so after his death. A poem, probably written by John Cleveland shortly after Strafford's execution, stated: '
he lived and died here in a mist 

A Papist and a Calvinist 

... 

The people's violent love and hate. 
('Poems of John Cleveland', 66)' In Ireland he was almost universally unpopular at the time of his fall. The Catholics were not alone in seeing him as a great oppressor who, shortly after his arrival in Dublin, 'began to play rex' and had behaved like a Turkish 'Bashaw' (Clarke, 'Discourse', 167, 169). In England, on the other hand, royalists naturally considered him a martyr of their cause, although the judgement of his character which 'Eikon basilike' gave in the king's name remained ambiguous, depicting Strafford as a man whose overweening self-confidence was likely 'to betray him to great Errors' ('Eikon basilike', 5-6). Clarendon to some extent shared this assessment of Strafford's personality as flawed, 'a nature too elate and arrogant of itself' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 1.341), while David Lloyd, who devoted the first chapter of his 'Memoires' to Strafford as the 'Proto-martyr for Religion and Allegiance', was less reserved in his praise (Lloyd, 20). 
Whereas Nalson's 'Impartial Collection' gave an account of Strafford's trial in the Restoration period which was intended to clear him of all charges raised against him, Rushworth documented the arguments of the prosecution as extensively as the lord lieutenant's own defence. The publication of Wentworth's letters by Knowler in the eighteenth century was an important landmark, but was highly selective, as Knowler's patron, the first marquess of Rockingham, Strafford's great-grandson, wanted to restore his ancestor's reputation by the edition. It nevertheless provided the essential foundation for all later historical works on Strafford's political life until the second half of the twentieth century. In his 'History of England' David Hume came to the conclusion that Strafford's execution was an act of judicial murder, as his conduct in office was 'innocent, and even laudable' (Hume, 5.312). The prevailing liberal mood of the nineteenth century, however, was not favourable to Strafford's historical reputation. Macaulay called him 'a man of great valour and capacity, but licentious, faithless, corrupt, and cruel' (Macaulay, 1.119), though he was impressed by the force of the personality so vividly captured in Van Dyck's portraits of the lord lieutenant. Strafford's tragic end appealed to the romantic imagination of nineteenth-century authors, even to seemingly sober academic historians like S. R. Gardiner. For Gardiner, Wentworth's real tragedy lay in the fact that his political ideals were remnants of a bygone era: 'he attempted to maintain the Elizabethan constitution, long after it was possible to maintain it, and when the only choice lay between absolute government, and Parliamentarian supremacy' (Gardiner, 'History', 9.370). 
In the first half of the twentieth century the decline of classical liberalism as a dominant political force and the increasing sympathy for authoritarian forms of government noticeable even in Britain gave rise to a more positive assessment of Strafford's personality and policies. Hugh O'Grady's 'Strafford and Ireland' (1923) offered a very detailed, though clearly partisan, account of his period as lord deputy. He depicted Strafford as a great and high-minded reformer, whose downfall was brought about by narrow-minded proponents of 'particular interests' and the forces of sectarian fanaticism which did much more harm to Irish national interests by appealing to the English parliament against him than Strafford had ever done. The three biographies published in the 1930s by Lady Burghclere (1931), Lord Birkenhead (1938), and C. V. Wedgwood (1935) all showed a great deal of sympathy for Strafford. He emerged as a heroic though not necessarily flawless figure. The most scholarly and influential of the three is that by Wedgwood. It was reissued in a second edition in 1961, when Strafford's unpublished correspondence had finally become accessible, and has in its revised form remained the standard account of his life. However, the period after the Second World War witnessed a much more critical assessment of Strafford's personality. The fact that the Strafford papers could now be consulted, rather than the misleadingly selective edition of his letters by Knowler, revealed the less high-minded side of his character. Both Terence Ranger and Hugh Kearney exposed the ruthlessness and, as they thought, hypocrisy of his actions as lord deputy in Ireland, holding him responsible for the crisis which led to the outbreak of rebellion in 1641, an account which has only recently been qualified or contradicted by other historians. 
No complete reassessment of Strafford's personality and policies has emerged during the past decades, but historians looking for a politician who in his opinions and actions embodies Charles I's alleged political agenda as an absolutist ruler still see him as the man best qualified to play this role. However, these historians face the same problem as their nineteenth-century predecessors or, indeed, the men who brought Strafford to trial in parliament in 1640-41. Being absent from London, Strafford's influence on the politics of the personal rule in England before the autumn of 1639 was very limited. Although his ruthlessness and autocratic cast of mind were already visible during his period of office as lord president of the north, this was arguably more a matter of political style than of principle. Matters were certainly different in Ireland, but given the traditions of English government there he was no exception in employing ruthless methods, often with scant regard for legal niceties, to achieve his objectives. What distinguished his policy from that of earlier governors was primarily his determination to attack the vested interests of the protestant office-holders and settlers just as radically as those of the Catholic landowners. Although he clearly took great pride in his achievements as lord deputy, there is no real evidence that Strafford really believed that Ireland could serve as a model for England -- Scotland was potentially a different matter -- unless extraordinary circumstances totally changed the traditional framework of government in England. Strafford's fate was determined by the fact that he returned from Ireland under exactly such extraordinary circumstances, when Charles I was fighting a war in which his political survival was at stake and which could, it seemed, be won only by desperate means. Strafford was prepared to resolve this crisis with the same ruthlessness which he had shown in Ireland, but it is unlikely that he would have pursued a similar course of action had he returned to England under less extreme circumstances. In fact, until the very end parliament remained a natural part of the political order Strafford tried to uphold. He was indeed convinced that parliaments could and needed to be 'managed', and should not attempt to give direction to government policy, but at least the latter conviction was no more than a traditional view shared by many contemporaries. 
Looking at Strafford's correspondence from the 1630s one encounters an autocratic ideal of government and high-sounding denunciations of meddlesome common lawyers, but in the last resort his political apprenticeship in Yorkshire offers a more important key for understanding his personality and political position than the ideal of absolutism to which he allegedly subscribed. He began his political life in the poisonous atmosphere of faction-ridden Yorkshire county politics where to win political battles court connections were exploited just as ruthlessly as opportunities to appeal to popular sentiment against one's opponents. Early on he himself became the victim of public humiliations and attacks. Once in office he remained prone to pursuing personal vendettas against real or suspected enemies, a pattern that persisted in Ireland. Moreover, he was singularly incapable of understanding the convictions of men who did not share his own political outlook, be they Irish Catholics or radical English protestants who saw the pope's hand in every setback they suffered. Rejecting the comprehensive anti-popery so widespread among strict protestants at the time, he saw English puritans or Scottish presbyterians primarily as rebels against the established order in church and state. Being obsessed even more than other members of the early seventeenth-century gentry and peerage with status, honour, and the defence of the traditional social hierarchy, the 'Puritan popular humour' (letter to Radcliffe, 5 Nov 1640, Whitaker, 219) was clearly anathema to him, not so much, it seems, for theological or religious but for political reasons. 
Strafford was a man who played many parts in his life, most of them as a truly accomplished actor, who, depending on the stage he was acting on, unreservedly identified himself with his role: 'honest patriot' and defender of the subject's liberties; conscientious office-holder and autocratic governor of a country half-province, half-colony; potential favourite and leading minister relentlessly in search of personal advancement and profit; and, finally, his last role -- as the allegedly 'evil councillor' sacrificed to atone for his master's misguided policies and as a man who after defending himself with great courage and skill against his enemies stoically faced the inevitable. Some of these roles he chose and devised himself, others he found ready-made, or accepted because political circumstances and social conventions forced him to do so. Perhaps the twenty-first century is better qualified to understand such a complex personality than earlier periods of history, which tended to believe in the ideal of the autonomous individual inspired in his actions by a consistent set of values and principles. Yet in the end Strafford's life, in spite of the many roles he played, had a greater consistency than many of his enemies or later critics were prepared to admit. 


@@@@@


doc= 29057


Wentworth, Thomas, fifth Baron Wentworth (bap. 1613, d. 1665), royalist army officer, was baptized at Toddington, Bedfordshire, on 12 February 1613, the eldest son of Thomas Wentworth, fourth Baron Wentworth (1591-1667), and his first wife, Anne Crofts (died 1638). He was made a knight of the bath at the coronation of Charles I on 1 February 1626; upon the elevation of his father as earl of Cleveland four days later he was styled Lord Wentworth. In 1631 he was at The Hague, attending the court of Elizabeth of Bohemia. Back in England, in May 1635 he fought a duel with Thomas Weston, son of Lord Treasurer Portland. The following year he fought another duel, with Lord 'Beny'; for this and for intemperate words reported by the lord chamberlain he found himself in the Tower of London briefly in the summer of 1636. He and his father joined the king's army during the first bishops' war in 1639 and accompanied him to Berwick in October of the following year. Notwithstanding he was returned to the Commons in both the Short and Long parliaments, and was formally translated to the upper house on 25 November 1640 in his father's barony of Wentworth. 
At the outset of the civil war Wentworth was with George Goring in Portsmouth, but after the fall of that garrison he joined the king's main field army, and as Lord Wentworth raised a company of dragoons. He fought at Marlborough, Wiltshire, in December, and at Cirencester, Gloucestershire, on 2 February 1643 he became major-general of dragoons, in succession to Sir Arthur Aston. In the early part of the civil war dragoons formed a substantial part of the mounted arm, although merely infantrymen set on ponies and other small horses initially regarded as unsuitable for cavalry troopers. As the war progressed, however, standards dropped and with all riding horses, irrespective of size or condition, going to the cavalry, dragoons dwindled in both numbers and importance. All too often they simply discarded their muskets and started calling themselves troopers. Consequently Wentworth followed suit and on 5 February 1644 succeeded Sir Thomas Byron as colonel of the Prince of Wales's regiment of horse. At Cropredy Bridge he commanded a cavalry brigade with such good effect that he was afterwards appointed major-general of horse in succession to Lord Wilmot, when the latter was dismissed before the battle of Lostwithiel. However, on 14 November 1644 he relinquished this post in order to join Lord Goring's army in the west country. After Goring's defeat at Langport and subsequent dismissal Wentworth was appointed major-general of horse under the western army's new commander, Lord Hopton. Unfortunately Hopton, whose reputation owes more to his very readable memoirs than to his overrated abilities, was soon on bad terms with Wentworth and contrived to get himself badly beaten at Torrington on 14 March 1646. As a result the already demoralized western army surrendered soon afterwards, but Wentworth escaped with Prince Charles first to the Isles of Scilly and then to Jersey. 
In 1649 Wentworth accompanied Charles to Paris and in the following year both he and his father, the earl of Cleveland, sailed with him to Scotland. Charles was compelled to subscribe to the covenant as a condition of being recognized as king, but many of his followers neglected to do so. Despite the defeat of the Scots army at Dunbar on 3 September 1650 both Wentworth and his father were as non-subscribers accordingly ordered out of the country on 17 October, but like the earl of Forth and other prominent royalists they ignored this edict and subsequently fought at Worcester on 3 September 1651. Although his father was afterwards captured Wentworth got safely away and until the Restoration in 1660 attended Charles II's emigre court. In 1656 he was responsible for organizing and commanding a regiment of foot guards, which served with the Spanish army at the battle of the Dunes in June 1658. There is some doubt as to whether he fought there, but after the Restoration he brought the regiment home to England and it became the 1st foot guards (afterwards the Grenadier Guards). He had married by mid-March 1658 Philadelphia Carey (died 1696), daughter of Sir Ferdinando Carey; their only child, Henrietta Maria Wentworth, was born on 11 August 1660. Wentworth died on 1 March 1665 and was buried six days later at Toddington. He predeceased his father by two years. His daughter succeeded to the barony upon the latter's death. 


@@@@@


doc= 29058


Wentworth, Thomas, earl of Cleveland (1591-1667), royalist army officer, was the elder son of Henry Wentworth, third Baron Wentworth of Nettlestead (1558-1593), and his wife, Anne Hopton (died 1625). Wentworth matriculated, with his brother Henry, at Trinity College, Oxford, on 12 November 1602, and they appeared before James I at Christ Church on 27 August 1605. Thomas was created a knight of the Bath on 4 June 1610, and in 1611 he married Anne Crofts (died 1638). Their eldest son was Thomas Wentworth, fifth Baron Wentworth. On the death of his great-aunt Jane Wentworth, widow of Henry, Lord Cheney, on 16 April 1614, he inherited the estate of Toddington in Bedfordshire, which henceforth became his principal residence. He became 'custos rotulorum' for Bedfordshire in 1619, and was admitted to Gray's Inn on 9 March 1620. He was appointed lord lieutenant of Bedfordshire on 5 May 1625, an office that he continued to hold until 1642. 
Wentworth regularly attended the Lords throughout the parliaments of the 1620s, although there is no evidence that he was a frequent speaker. He nevertheless secured Buckingham's patronage and this helps to explain his creation as earl of Cleveland on 7 February 1626. The following year he served under Buckingham in the expedition to La Rochelle, and in August 1628 he was present when John Felton assassinated the duke at Portsmouth. As the 1630s progressed, Cleveland's extravagant lifestyle led him deeper and deeper into debt and prompted him to raise loans from various notable figures. For example, in September 1634 he borrowed $10,000 from Anne, Viscountess Dorchester, while the following year he obtained a loan of $2000 from Mary, countess of Home. By 1637 many of his lands in Bedfordshire and Middlesex were heavily encumbered (especially the manors of Stepney and Hackney), while his debts were thought to stand at $19,200. Three years later his total debts were estimated at $60,100. When the Long Parliament met, Cleveland introduced a private bill that would have enabled him to sell some of his lands and use the proceeds to pay off his debts, but a number of individuals submitted petitions against the bill pointing out that by this time the earl leased, rather than owned, many of his lands and was therefore not entitled to sell them. 
Cleveland's first wife died on 16 January 1638, and by 25 October that year he had married his second wife, Lucy Wentworth (died 1651), daughter of Sir John Wentworth, baronet, of Gosfield, Essex. The following year Cleveland joined the king with ten troops in the first bishops' war, and he also was present during the second war. He was friendly with his distant kinsman Thomas Wentworth, earl of Strafford, and in January 1641 was sworn as a defence witness in Strafford's trial. On 10 May 1641 the Lords ordered Cleveland to convey to Strafford the king's consent to his attainder, and two days later he attended the earl to the scaffold. On 5 March 1642 he was among the sixteen peers who entered protestations against the militia ordinance, and at the beginning of the civil war he became captain of the gentlemen pensioners. He may have been at Edgehill, and he was wounded at the first battle of Newbury on 20 September 1643. 
Cleveland sat in the Oxford parliament which assembled in January 1644, and during the following summer he emerged as a highly successful cavalry commander. On the night of 29 May 1644 he surprised Abingdon with a party of 150 horse, but he was forced to retreat and lost his prisoners. This was a bold move that prompted Clarendon later to characterize Cleveland as 'a man of signal courage, and an excellent officer upon any bold enterprise' (Clarendon, 'Hist. rebellion', 3.352). At Cropredy Bridge on 29 June Cleveland led a cavalry charge against Sir William Waller, and then, after a second charge, succeeded in driving Waller back over the bridge. He was then sent to Cornwall, where on 30 August near Fowey he made an unsuccessful attempt to prevent the flight of Essex's cavalry after their defeat at Lostwithiel. He helped to relieve Portland Castle on 14 October, and on 27 October he commanded the left wing of the royalist cavalry at the second battle of Newbury. During the charge his horse fell under him and he was captured and imprisoned in the Tower. The houses refused requests for him to be exchanged for a parliamentarian prisoner, although he was periodically granted bail for three or four months at a time. In July 1647 he wrote to Prince Charles pledging his loyalty despite his confinement, and the following year he was in Colchester during the siege. In September 1648 -- after producing a doctor's certificate stating that he needed fresh air and more exercise -- he was granted bail for a further three months. Shortly before that period expired in December he escaped to the continent, and by June 1649 he had joined Charles II at The Hague. 
By April 1650 Cleveland was in attendance on Charles II at Beauvais, where it was reported that he threatened to cane or beat anyone who called him a presbyterian. He sailed for Scotland with Charles on 2 June 1650, but he and his son were required to leave Scotland in October for refusing to take the covenant. He commanded a regiment of horse at the battle of Worcester on 3 September 1651, and by a daring charge in the streets of the city gave Charles enough time to escape. Cleveland himself was captured on 13 September at Woodcote in Shropshire and was committed to the Tower. At his trial on 29 October he narrowly escaped the death sentence through the casting vote of Lord Mordaunt. Shortly afterwards Cleveland's second wife died on 23 November and was buried at Toddington. He remained a prisoner until 20 July 1658, although he was granted the liberty of the Tower on 16 February 1652. On his release he may have retired to Lord Lovelace's house at Water Eaton, near Oxford, and in 1659 royalist agents listed him as a possible activist in Booth's rising. 
Early in the civil war Cleveland's estates had been sequestrated, and on 17 November 1645 the committee for the advance of money set his fine at $2000. In August 1650 the total debts of him and his son were estimated at $100,000. Proceedings in the committee for compounding with delinquents dragged on until 1655, by which time nearly all his landed property was leased or sold to creditors. 
Cleveland re-emerged at the Restoration, and at the king's entry into London on 29 May 1660 he led a regiment of 300 horse from Buckinghamshire and Hertfordshire. On 20 June he was reappointed captain of the gentlemen pensioners, and the following month lord lieutenant of Bedfordshire; he continued to hold both offices until his death. He was appointed colonel of a regiment of horse on 1 September 1662. John Evelyn described a review in Hyde Park on 4 July 1663 in which 'the old Earle of Cleveland trail'd a pike, and led the right-hand file in a foote company, commanded by the Lord Wentworth, his son, a worthy spectacle and example, being both of them old and valiant souldiers' ('The Diary and Correspondence of John Evelyn', ed. W. Bray, new edn, ed. H. B. Wheatley, 4 vols., 1906, 2.159). In January 1666 Cleveland was instructed to raise a regiment of 500 horse for use in the Second Anglo-Dutch War, but in August the regiment was disbanded without seeing military action. 
Cleveland was not permitted to repossess lands that he had sold in order to pay his composition fine, and between 1660 and 1667 three private acts of parliament were passed enabling him to sell certain settled lands for the benefit of his creditors. On 13 March 1667 Lady Wentworth wrote that only a 'litle remnant of Lord Cleveland's estate' was left (Lady Wentworth to [Joseph Williamson], TNA: PRO, SP 29/193/109). Less than two weeks later, on 25 March, Cleveland died; he was buried on 4 April at Toddington. 
One leading military historian has described Cleveland as 'a much underrated field commander' (Newman, 403), and his relative posthumous obscurity belies the positive impression that he made on a number of contemporaries. Clarendon's favourable assessment has already been quoted, and Sir Philip Warwick similarly regarded Cleveland as 'a nobleman of daring courage, full of industry and activity, as well as firm loyalty, and usually successful in what he attempted' (Warwick, 270). 


@@@@@


doc= 29059


Wentworth, Thomas, first earl of Strafford (1672-1739), diplomatist and army officer, the second son and surviving heir of Sir William Wentworth (died 1692) of Northgate Head, Wakefield, Yorkshire, and the grandnephew of Thomas Wentworth, the minister of Charles I, was born at Stanley Hall, near Wakefield, and baptized on 17 September 1672. His father was the son of William Wentworth of Ashby Puerorum, Lincolnshire, who died at Marston Moor, and his mother, Isabella ('c'.1653-1733), the daughter of Sir Allen Apsley, the treasurer of the household of James, duke of York. Isabella, who gave birth to four girls and five boys, served as lady of the bedchamber to James II's queen, Mary of Modena. 
His mother's position helped secure Wentworth's appointment as page of honour to the queen consort in 1687. The next year he switched allegiances and careers; he followed his brother into the military service of William III and served as cornet (31 December 1688) in the expedition against Lord Dundee. His bravery during the Nine Years' War, particularly at the battles of Steenkerke (1692) and Landen (1693) and at the siege of Namur (1695), secured his appointment as aide-de-camp to the king in August 1692, promotion to guidon and major in the first troop of Life Guards (4 October 1693), cornet, first major (20 January 1694), groom of the bedchamber (6 May 1695-8 March 1702), and colonel of the Royal regiment of dragoons (30 May 1697 - June 1715). After 1697 he served in the military only intermittently, although he was later promoted brigadier of the horse (7 January 1703), major-general (1 January 1704), and lieutenant-general (1 January 1707). He served under Marlborough in Flanders in 1702, and during one skirmish had his horse shot from under him. In 1706 he narrowly escaped being captured by the French while on a foray near Menin. The loss of three brothers in war did not diminish his enthusiasm; his elder brother, William, died in 1693 from a fever contracted while on guard duty, and his two younger brothers, Paul and Allen, were killed in action respectively at the siege of Namur in 1695 and in the storming of Liege in 1702. 
Wentworth was always importuning the court for some honour or promotion. Upon hearing the news of his elder brother's death, he immediately rode to Breda to request his sibling's former position but arrived too late. The need to secure his fortune may partially account for his unabashed self-seeking. On 16 October 1695, on the death of his cousin William, earl of Strafford, Wentworth succeeded to the peerage as fourth baronet and third Baron Raby. Although he inherited the title, the earl had bequeathed most of his estates to his nephew Thomas Watson, the son of Lord Rockingham. 
A courageous man, Raby enjoyed the challenge of battle and claimed to have 'often repented the hour I left the army' (Raby to Marlborough, 8 March 1710, BL, Blenheim MSS, M37, Berlin), and later regretted 'being in inaction when all the world is in arms' (Raby to Cadogan, 16 Feb 1709, BL, Add. MS 22196, fol. 181). His physical courage was unquestionable, as illustrated by his having singly attacked a wild boar while hunting which nearly killed him. Although he left the army to embark on a diplomatic career, at least one contemporary thought that he carried that spirit into the antechamber of the court and 'rushed an enterprize like a colonel of dragoons' (Roussel, 1.284). 
Raby's diplomatic career began when he accompanied the duke of Portland to Paris in 1698. In March 1701 William III dispatched him to Berlin to convey his congratulations to the elector Frederick III of Brandenburg on the latter's becoming king in Prussia as Frederick I. The success of that mission led to his appointment in 1703 as envoy and in 1706 as ambassador-extraordinary to Brandenburg-Prussia, where he served until April 1711. His suspicions that John Churchill, duke of Marlborough, was circumventing him at Berlin, first through Friedrich Wilhelm von Grumbkow, who served as liaison officer to Marlborough and to Dutch officials during the War of the Spanish Succession (1702-13), and later through special emissaries such as General Francis Palmes, were not unfounded. Raby became increasingly jealous of Marlborough's authority, and relations between the two men deteriorated. Their estrangement undermined Raby's position at court and aggravated the difficulties inherent in his position. Marlborough's remark that Raby was 'both impertinent and insignificant' (Marlborough to F. Godolphin, 31 May 1709, BL, Add. MS 9105, fol. 60) was coloured by that rivalry. 
Despite Marlborough's assessment, Raby was shrewd enough to understand the political and personal maze of intrigues at the Berlin court and to exploit them in order to secure Prussian troops for the coalition against France. However, his alliance with the prime minister, Johann Kasimir Kolbe, Graf von Wartenberg, and his liaison with the countess of Wartenberg, the mistress 'en titre' of the king, intertwined his fate with that faction. He must also have been a man of some charm, for he won over not only the countess but also Frederick and his queen, Sophie Charlotte. Raby was a tall, well built, good-looking man; both Kneller and D'Agar depicted him with large eyes, an aquiline nose, and full lips in an oval face. Punctilious in most things, he was well suited to the court of Berlin, where Frederick sought to endow his newly established kingship with the magnificence and etiquette found in Paris. Unkindly dubbed 'le singe de Louis XIV', the ape of Louis XIV, Frederick, a weak and indecisive man, was crippled by a sense of fatalism, an ingrained timidity, and a capacity for self-delusion. Enmeshed in the great power rivalry, he often found his options limited. In this environment Raby could play a key role. Certainly a man who sought to guide rather than be guided, he bombarded the secretary of state with long letters. He so fiercely defended Prussian interests that he laid himself open to the criticism that he was a 'Prussian because of the liberty I have several times taken of giving my poor advice of what is to be done' (Raby to Marlborough, 4 Feb 1710, BL, Add. MS 9108, fols. 41-2). 
Over time Raby's influence was threatened at court in part because of the king's increasing dissatisfaction with the allies, but also because of the ministerial intrigues, his equivocal relations with the countess of Wartenberg and her own unpopularity, and the enmity of powerful individuals. Raby's friendship with the king saved him from being recalled in 1706 and sent to Vienna as English envoy. This position would have meant a loss of station for Raby, who had been promoted to ambassador at Berlin. A fiscal crisis in Berlin coupled with overwhelming evidence of fraud and embezzlement led to the dismissal of Wartenberg in 1711. Uncomfortable with the changing power alignment at court, Raby welcomed his appointment in March of that year as ambassador-extraordinary and plenipotentiary to the states general of the United Provinces, where he served until 1714. Even St John, the secretary of state, felt constrained to apologize for the choice: 'You will find him to be the best we could at present send you', he confided to his agent John Drummond ('Letters and Correspondence', 1.52-3). St John acknowledged Raby's weaknesses, especially his 'warmth' but noted that the queen had promised him the appointment (ibid.). 
On 6 September 1711 Raby married Anne (died 1754), the only daughter and heir of Sir Henry Johnson of Bradenham, Buckinghamshire, a wealthy shipbuilder with estates in Suffolk and Bedfordshire. She brought with her a substantial fortune, and the marriage produced three daughters, Anne, Lucy, and Henrietta, and a son, William (1722-1791). In the same year as his marriage Raby was sworn of the privy council (14 June) and created Viscount Wentworth of Wentworth-Woodhouse and of Stainborough and earl of Strafford (29 June). He became elder brother of Trinity House on 3 September 1712 and master thereof on 1 June 1713. He served as first lord of the Admiralty (30 September 1713 until September 1714 for which he received a $2000 bonus on his salary) and as one of the lords justices (1 August until 18 September 1714). On 25 October 1714 he was created a knight of the Garter. Strafford's seemingly unbridled ambition coupled with his hauteur antagonized many. Jonathan Swift described him as having 'some life and spirit; but... infinitely proud and wholly illiterate' (Swift, 2.489). These qualities did not serve him well at The Hague. He was instructed to maintain the illusion of Anglo-Dutch co-operation and at the same time to insist that the Dutch should fulfil their obligations to the coalition. A pretence of co-operation with the Dutch was necessary in order to allow the tories to extract the best possible terms from France and to ensure that the Dutch did not conclude a separate peace. By no means partial to the Dutch, Strafford often angered them by his hectoring and tactlessness. The Dutch in turn reviled him. On occasion his windows were smashed and the tories denounced as disguised papists. Undoubtedly he was not as popular as his predecessor, Charles, Viscount Townshend, because Strafford helped coerce the Dutch into signing a new barrier treaty (1713), which created an artificial military frontier in the Southern Netherlands. This agreement, however, represented a significant reduction from that of 1709. Strafford, who argued that 'We have been the dupes of the Warr and must take great Care that We are not so of the Peace...' (Strafford to St John, 2 June 1711, BL, Add. MS 31135, fol. 388), did not hesitate to threaten that the British would conclude a separate peace. 
On 23 December 1711 Strafford was appointed ambassador-extraordinary and second plenipotentiary to the Utrecht peace congress jointly with John Robinson, bishop of Bristol, lord privy seal, the first plenipotentiary. Most of the important issues were handled in London or Paris rather than Utrecht. Strafford was often not told of certain concessions that had already been given; he was not informed of the secret Anglo-French negotiations or of all the details of the London preliminaries. Still, he could intermittently influence the negotiations; he ensured that Tournai was not ceded to France and that Upper Guelders went to Prussia. 
In May 1712 Strafford was called back to London, and on his return to The Hague personally delivered the suspension of arms to James Butler, second duke of Ormond, captain-general of the British forces in Flanders. These orders enjoined Ormond not to co-operate in any siege or battle with Prince Eugene, commander of the imperial forces, and meant Britain's abandonment of her allies. Ormond's withdrawal of 12,000 British troops from the allied army left it vulnerable to the manoeuvres of the French. Although in July 1712 he referred to the allies as 'new enemies' (Herman, 117), Strafford, along with Robinson, ignored orders in March 1713 to sign separately with France. Because he wanted the peace to be a general one he delayed the signing until many of the allies' demands were met. 
Although he always contended that he was 'of neither party called wig or Tory' (Strafford to W. Cadogan, 16 Feb 1709, BL, Add. MS 22196, fol. 184), Strafford's participation in the peace earned him the vilification of the whigs. After the death of Queen Anne in August 1714 and the accession of George I, he was criticized for abandoning Britain's allies and formally recalled from The Hague, although he did not leave his post until December. In January 1715 the privy council requested that he turn over his official papers on the Utrecht negotiations. The whig-dominated committee of secrecy examined them and voted to impeach not only Strafford but also Harley, St John, and James Butler, duke of Ormond. Ultimately the six articles of impeachment against Strafford charged that he had been instrumental in promoting 'separate, dishonorable, and destructive negotiations' and that he had 'prostituted the honour of her majesty... and grossly violated her powers and instructions'. Strafford professed his innocence and contended that he had always acted with 'the utmost integrity' and claimed that he was 'totally ignorant of any treacherous correspondence with the emissaries of France' ('State trials', 15.1014-44). Although the House of Commons was not convinced by his defence, Strafford was never prosecuted. Still, many shared the view of Lord John Hervey that Strafford 'had the double honour of being a very dirty executor of a very dirty errand' (Herman, 201). He was specifically excluded from the 'Act of Grace' granted by George in 1717 and never held another office. 
Strafford then turned to the Jacobites and corresponded with the Pretender, who appointed him commander-in-chief of the Jacobite forces north of the Humber and bestowed on him the title duke of Strafford (5 June 1722). He still spoke in the House of Lords, alternately exasperating and amusing his colleagues. Lord Hervey described him in 1735 as a: 'loquacious, rich, illiterate, cold, tedious, constant haranguer in the House of Lords, who spoke neither sense nor English... in short there was nothing so low as his dialect except his understanding, nor anything so tiresome as his public harangues except his private conversation. (Hervey, 2.148-9)' In 1737 Strafford admitted that he 'was bad with the last ministry, worse with this, and he did not doubt but he should be worse with the next should he ever see another; therefore as an unbiased man, he gave his vote for the king' ('DNB'). After his retirement from public life Strafford devoted himself to his estates in Yorkshire and his family. His correspondence reveals a deep affection for his family and their myriad pets. He died 'of the stone' at Wentworth Castle on 15 November 1739 and was buried on 2 December in Toddington, Bedfordshire. He was survived by his wife, who died on 19 September 1754. When his son, William, died without an heir, the titles passed by special remainder to Frederick Thomas Wentworth (1732-1799), the second earl's cousin and the grandson of Peter Wentworth (died 1739), brother of the first earl. When he died without an heir, the earldom was temporarily extinct. 


@@@@@


doc= 29060


William Wentworth (bap. 1616, d. 1697), landowner in America, who was baptized on 15 March 1616 at Alford, Lincolnshire, the eldest son of William Wentworth of Rigsby and Susannah, 'nee' Carter, widow of Uther Fleming. Wentworth was a close friend of John Wheelwright (1592?-1679), who was then vicar in the neighbouring parish of Bilsby. Both men were committed puritans who became embroiled in religious controversy. In April 1636 Wentworth and Wheelwright travelled to Boston, Massachusetts. Two years later Wentworth once more joined with Wheelwright after his earlier ejection from Boston, again following religious controversy. Together they founded the settlement of Exeter in New Hampshire, before settling in Wells, Maine, in early 1643. After a spell in Dover, Massachusetts, Wentworth finally returned to New Hampshire, where he remained for the rest of his life and became a ruling elder of the Congregational church. He died at Dover on 16 March 1697. 


@@@@@


doc= 29061


Wentworth, William Charles (1790-1872), politician and landowner in Australia, was born on 13 August 1790 on board the 'Surprize', in harbour at Cascade Bay, Norfolk Island, Pacific Ocean, eldest son of D'Arcy Wentworth (1762-1827), a surgeon from Portadown, co. Armagh, and his mistress, Catherine Crowley (1772-1800), a felon. 
The family went to Sydney in 1796 and thence to Parramatta, where they settled. Catherine Crowley died in 1800. Late in 1802 Wentworth was sent with his brother D'Arcy to England, where they were educated from 1803 at the Revd Mr Midgley's school at Bletchley. From 1805 to 1809 Wentworth attended Dr Alexander Crombie's institution at Greenwich. Having abandoned ideas of becoming a naval midshipman or a cadet in the East India Company, Wentworth embarked for New South Wales in October 1809, rather at a loss as to his future. A familiar figure in Sydney, he was tall and broad, and wore his auburn hair like a mane. He could speak with a brilliance that befitted a scion of the whig aristocracy and seemed something of a Gulliver in Lilliput. And yet his features were coarse, his appearance was untidy, his gait was clumsy, and his language at times resembled that of a convict brat. In October 1811 Governor Lachlan Macquarie appointed him acting provost-marshal and in 1812 Wentworth established his estate, Vermont, on a grant of 1750 acres by the Nepean River. Knowing that a number of the free immigrants (the 'exclusives') wanted to exclude former convicts (the 'emancipists') from positions of trust and influence in the colony, he set out to become more powerful than those who had slighted his family. 
In May 1813 Wentworth accompanied William Lawson and Gregory Blaxland in the first great feat of inland exploration, the crossing of the Blue Mountains. The discovery enabled pastoral expansion, and Wentworth was rewarded with a further 1000 acres. To help his father secure valuable sandalwood from a Pacific island, he joined a schooner as supercargo in 1814. He was nearly killed by natives at Rarotonga while courageously attempting to save a sailor whom they clubbed to death. Wentworth helped to bring the ship safely to Sydney. If much of what he did was stamped with majesty, he could none the less be mean and underhand. In 1816 a scroll of satirical verse was found in the streets of Sydney. It lampooned the lieutenant-governor, Colonel George Molle, not least for being Macquarie's secret enemy. Protracted enquiries revealed that Wentworth had composed the lines before departing for London in March. 
To prepare himself to be 'the instrument of procuring a free constitution for my country', Wentworth entered the Middle Temple in February 1817. For a time he was characteristically restless. He petitioned the Colonial Office to allow him to explore Australia, but was told that his services were not required. He spent over a year in Europe, chiefly in Paris, where he roistered by night and squandered his money. In 1819 he published 'A Statistical, Historical, and Political Description of the Colony of New South Wales'. His hopes of marrying John Macarthur's daughter Elizabeth came to nothing. Then Henry Grey Bennet MP declared in his 'Letter to Lord Sidmouth' (1819) that D'Arcy Wentworth had been sent to Sydney as a convict. Cut to the quick, Wentworth challenged Bennet to a duel and later rebuked Commissioner John Thomas Bigge for repeating the libel in his report on the state of the colony; but his pride had suffered a shock, and he more resolutely identified himself with the emancipists' cause. 
Wentworth's book was reissued in revised and enlarged editions in 1820 and 1824. In proposing reforms for New South Wales, he pressed for a nominated legislative council and an assembly elected on a small property franchise; former convicts were to be denied neither membership nor the vote. No taxation should be imposed without parliamentary sanction. There should be trial by jury and free immigration. Yet the book was no tract for democracy. Landed property was 'the only standard', he conceived, 'by which the right either of electing, or being elected, can in any country be properly regulated'. The council bore 'many resemblances to the House of Lords': it formed a 'just equipoise between the democratic and supreme powers of the state', and was 'necessary not less to repress the licentiousness of the one, than to curb the tyranny of the other'. 
After being called to the bar in February 1822, Wentworth entered Peterhouse, Cambridge, where he competed for the chancellor's gold medal for a poem on Australasia. His entry, placed second, speedily published and dedicated to Macquarie, ended with the hope that Australasia, with flag unfurled, would become 'A new Britannia in another world'. 
Wentworth returned to Sydney in 1824, determined 'to hold no situation under government': 'As a mere private person I might lead the colony, but as a servant of the Governor I could only conform to his whims.' He had had some influence on the 'New South Wales Act' of 1823, which instituted a nominated legislative council and permitted trial by jury in civil actions, when demanded by both parties. With Dr Robert Wardell, a lawyer who had edited the London newspaper 'The Statesman', he planned, in journalism and at the bar, to champion the emancipists and smaller free settlers, and to campaign for self-government, a free press, and trial by jury. Meanwhile, disputes and litigation flourished in the unsettled colony, and Wentworth and Wardell built up a lucrative practice. 
On 14 October 1824 the first issue of their newspaper, 'The Australian', appeared. They had not sought permission to publish the paper, but Governor Brisbane thought it 'expedient to try the experiment of full latitude of freedom of the Press'. Despite Colonial Office objections, approval continued well into the reign of his successor. The exclusives bitterly prophesied a nation of freebooters and pirates, but could do nothing while 'The Australian' retained Government House favour. 
Wentworth pilloried the exclusives as the 'yellow snakes of the Colony' and awaited a pretext for attacking autocratic government. In October 1825 he reworded a farewell address to Brisbane, acknowledging his emancipist sympathies, and demanding the 'two fundamental principles of the British constitution': trial by jury and representative government. Then in November 1826 -- after a soldier, Joseph Sudds, convicted of felony, died after being put in irons and drummed out of his regiment on the orders of Governor Darling -- Wentworth seized on the alleged illegality of Darling's act and, with violent invective, demanded his recall. 
At a meeting on 26 January 1827, which resulted in a petition calling for an elective assembly of at least 100 members, Wentworth also called for trial by jury and taxation by consent. Convinced that the licentiousness of the press should be restrained by laws, Darling submitted two bills to the legislative council to regulate newspapers and impose a stamp duty. Chief Justice Forbes regarded the licence clauses as being 'repugnant to the laws of England' and refused to certify them. Wentworth vilified Darling, who then prosecuted the 'vulgar ill-bred fellow' for seditious libel. In his defence, Wentworth overwhelmed the lamentably weak crown prosecutors with torrents of invective and masterly arrangement of his facts. Darling wrote that Wentworth and Wardell kept 'the Court and the Bar by their effrontery and talent equally in subjection', but, largely as a result of Wentworth's insistent demands, the 1828 'New South Wales Act' allowed civilian juries in civil cases, on the application of either party and the approval of the Supreme Court. Wentworth prepared articles of 'impeachment' against Darling but never followed them up. They did little damage to the governor's reputation at the Colonial Office, but they certainly undermined Wentworth's, so intemperate was their language. None the less, by taking up the fight against autocracy, and by his defence of the emancipists, Wentworth had awakened a political instinct among the people of Sydney and become their hero. 
The swelling tide of immigration lowered the proportion of former convicts in the population, and the exclusive-emancipist issue gradually receded into the background of politics. A larger fight remained -- to achieve self-government. Changes in Wentworth's status and activities began to cause disillusion among many who only partially understood his aims. Bequests from his father had added substantially to his landholdings. On 26 October 1829, at St Phillip's Church, he married Sarah (1805-1880), the daughter of an emancipist blacksmith, Francis Cox. Their cottage at Vaucluse was rebuilt into a stately mansion. It was adorned with the trappings of the Old World and became a symbol of the new era that was coming to the rich in New South Wales. With his large legal earnings, Vaucluse, his father's estate at Homebush, and up to fifteen sheep- and cattle-stations, Wentworth increasingly considered himself the prototype of a new nobility, a governing class which would re-create in the Antipodes the way of life of the whig aristocracy of eighteenth-century England. His own way of life became spacious, even to the point of lapses from his marriage vows. 
With Darling's successor, Richard Bourke, Wentworth had much in common, and in 1835 his name was on Bourke's list of possible legislative councillors. In London there was growing support for Wentworth's policies: the 'Reform Act' and events in Canada fostered a climate of opinion favourable to constitutional change. At the foundation-day meeting in 1833 another petition for self-government was drafted, which Henry Bulwer presented to the House of Commons. In 1835 the Australian Patriotic Association was formed to agitate for an amended constitution. Wentworth was its vice-president; Bulwer and Charles Buller were employed as its agents in the Commons. With help from William Bland, who was his chief local supporter after Wardell's murder in 1834, Wentworth drafted two alternative bills for the consideration of the British government, and the second, considerably modified, formed the basis of the 'New South Wales Act' of 1842 which granted a degree of representative government. In an enlarged legislative council two-thirds of the members would be elected, though the electors' property qualification was high enough to exclude two-thirds of the adult male population. The governor ceased to preside over the council and was replaced by an elected speaker. 
As Wentworth's whiggism intensified, he increasingly identified political capacity with property and poverty with ignorance. He had given up his legal practice to concentrate on his landed interests. His wealth increased rapidly. The onset of middle age, his experience of the crowd, and the shift in the balance of population caused by assisted immigration all strengthened his conservatism. Lord John Russell's decision to abolish convict transportation to New South Wales in 1840 and to raise the price of crown land drew the exclusives and leading emancipists into united opposition to any change in the conditions allowing them cheap land and cheap labour. When Wentworth supported the idea of importing 'coolies' from Asia, he alienated many former supporters and was spurned by newly arrived radicals. In January 1842 'The Australian' summed up popular feeling: 'Mr Wentworth... first taught the natives of this colony what liberty was, but he has betrayed them.' 
Gipps recommended Wentworth's appointment to the legislative council in April 1839, but was soon at enmity with him. In 1840 Wentworth and some associates bought from seven Maori chieftains, for a pittance, nearly one-third of New Zealand. Aghast, Gipps persuaded the council to block the scheme. It would have made Wentworth the greatest landowner on earth. In his frustration, he swore 'eternal vengeance'. Gipps withdrew his nomination to the council. The enmity between the two was to bedevil almost every issue until the governor left in 1846. Wentworth was elected to the legislative council in 1843 to represent Sydney. With his unrivalled knowledge of parliamentary procedure and colonial affairs, he led the council against Gipps. As an orator, he could marshal arguments brilliantly, but he relied little on subtlety or logic. He created a mood, and stormed rather than seduced the mind. Careless and even slovenly in manners and dress (he now wore corduroys with his badly fitting morning-coat), he knew his power and was unconsciously arrogant. 
Wentworth led the squatters in their demands for new land regulations and the surrender to the legislative council of imperial control over crown lands. Seeking security of tenure so that they could improve their runs without fear of displacement, they waged unceasing war against Gipps's policies. They won most of their demands in the 'Imperial Act' of 1846, which gave them security, for varying periods, in the 'settled', 'intermediate', and 'unsettled' districts, and they could thwart most would-be purchasers by buying key points on their runs, such as the land around waterholes. Henceforward the graziers could build spacious homesteads and develop the way of life of a landed, governing class. Because pastoral interests were strong in the partly elected council, Wentworth held a firm position there, but he was never again popular as he had been in 1831. In the 1848 election, despite the public outcry over the renewal of transportation, he again headed the Sydney poll, but in 1851 -- when his unpopularity stood at its height through his insistence on a preponderance of squatter-controlled rural representation over that of Sydney, and his opposition to a wide franchise and to the 'spirit of democracy abroad' -- he came in third. 
Wentworth's fury against unintelligent officialdom or military autocracy sprang from the same source as his distrust of mob rule: a hatred of anything which shackled the human spirit. He was no democrat and no leveller. Individuals must be free, but free to rise. The welfare of the community depended on men of substance. Like his father, he was a monopolist at heart. The realities of the Australian economy, combined with his whiggism, taught him that the landed interest was the one to which, as he told them in 1851, the inhabitants of Sydney 'were indebted for all their greatness, all the comforts, all the luxuries, that they possessed'. He told them, too, with no little courage, that he 'agreed with that ancient and venerable constitution which treated those who had no property as infants, or idiots, unfit to have any voice in the management of the State'. The way out of infancy, or idiocy, was through education. 
Wentworth played a leading part with Robert Lowe (Viscount Sherbrooke) in establishing in 1848-9 the first real system of state primary education in New South Wales. The colony was on the brink of gaining responsible government, which, he argued, would be workable only through national education. He went on in 1849-50 to lead the movement that resulted in the founding of the first colonial university in the British empire, the University of Sydney. In his view, tertiary education should be open to all, regardless of religious denomination, and would serve two ends: 'to enlighten the mind, to refine the understanding, to elevate the soul of our fellow men'; and to train men to fill 'the high offices of state'. Wentworth helped to endow the university and was a member of its first senate. 
When leading the opposition to Gipps in the legislative council, Wentworth had wanted to make ministers responsible to the elected representatives of the people, but he lost enthusiasm for this reform after Gipps's successor, Sir Charles FitzRoy, eased the friction between executive and legislature. Wentworth then turned to demands that the colony should control crown lands, official appointments, colonial revenue, and all local affairs. These demands, expressed in the remonstrances of 1850 and 1851, remained urgent when gold was discovered and the pastoral ascendancy seemed likely to be seriously threatened by 'pure democracy'. Although the Colonial Office finally agreed in 1852 that New South Wales should have responsible government, the council's select committee which drafted the constitution in 1853 provided only a limited form of individual responsibility for some members of the executive. With Wentworth as chairman, it recommended a lower house of fifty members elected on a $10 property franchise, and a nominated upper house consisting of members with hereditary titles. The rural bias of the proposed lower house and the idea of a peerage were vociferously opposed in Sydney, and despite Wentworth's vigorous defence, the bill, as eventually passed, provided for a nominated legislative council (shorn of the hereditary principle) and an elected legislative assembly. With Edward Deas Thomson, Wentworth sailed for England in 1854, and in July 1855 had the satisfaction of seeing the new constitution made law. The General Association for the Australian Colonies -- which he formed in London in 1857 to induce the Colonial Office to inaugurate a federal parliament for Australia -- died an early death. 
His life's work triumphantly achieved, Wentworth spent his remaining years in England, except for a brief return to Sydney in 1861-2, when he was prevailed upon to accept the presidency of the council. He had consolidated his fame more by staying away and being remembered for his great achievements than if he had returned, been drawn into the political fray, and tried to halt the democratic tide. In England he became a member of the Conservative Club and lived at Merly House, near Wimborne, Dorset. There he died on 20 March 1872, survived by his wife, five of their seven daughters, and two of their three sons. His estate was sworn for probate at $96,000 in Sydney and $70,000 in London. As he had wished, his body was taken to Sydney and, following a state funeral on 6 May 1873, was laid to rest in a vault on his estate at Vaucluse. 
Wentworth was an heir to the whig tradition and a child of the Romantic movement. The chief intellectual influence upon him was Edmund Burke. Emotionally, however, he was Byronic. The subjection of his proud and romantic nature to the classical restraints of law and politics, though sometimes imperfectly achieved, increased rather than diminished his achievement. In his determination to secure for his own country those free institutions which in eighteenth-century England bore an aristocratic form, he may have regretted that their very freedom would allow them to become democratic, but their freedom meant more to him than their form. His love of Australia was, he confessed, the 'master passion' of his life. It is his chief claim to greatness that he played a significant part in securing in Australia, in one lifetime, that which he and other contemporaries revered as the fundamental liberties of the British constitution. 


@@@@@


doc= 29062


Werburh (d. 700x07), abbess, was the daughter of Wulfhere, king of Mercia ('r'. 658-75), and of Eormenhild, daughter of Eorcenberht (d. 664), king of Kent, and St Seaxburh. Her career is the subject of a number of not wholly consistent traditions. According to the Worcester chronicle and to her life, Werburh early showed a disposition towards the religious life and after Wulfhere's death entered the monastery of Ely where her great-aunt AEthelthryth (died 679) was abbess. Later she was recalled to Mercia by her uncle AEthelred, Wulfhere's brother and successor, and given authority over the nunneries of his kingdom. She performed miracles while living on her father's estate at Weedon, in the later Northamptonshire, and died in her monastery of 'Triccengeham' (almost certainly Threekingham, Lincolnshire). After some dissension she was buried in accordance with her wishes in the monastery of Hanbury, in west Mercia, where nine years later her body was elevated at the command of her cousin, the Mercian King Ceolred ('r'. 709-16), and found to be miraculously uncorrupted. Her relics remained enshrined at Hanbury until the Danish invasions, shortly after which they were removed to Chester. By then the body had crumbled into dust. 
A different tradition, first recorded in Old English writings from Kent and elaborated at Ely in the mid-twelfth century, alleges that Werburh succeeded her grandmother and mother as abbess in turn of Seaxburh's Kentish foundation of Sheppey and of Ely. Such a claim, however, is difficult to reconcile with the short space of time that elapsed between the deaths of Seaxburh (after 695) and Werburh herself (700x07). More dubious still are William of Malmesbury's assertion that the saint was a nun at Chester and the story linking her with Wulfhere's supposed sons, venerated at Stone. 
Werburh's cult appears to have been promoted by Mercian kings both in their own homelands and in Kent; her origins made it an obvious vehicle for attempts to foster links between the two kingdoms. Later she was venerated at Ely where her maternal relatives were buried and where her life, traditionally attributed to Goscelin, was composed in the late eleventh century. From the tenth century, however, the main focus of her cult was Chester, where her remains were enshrined in the minster later known as St Werburgh's, probably at the command of AEthelflaed (died 918), lady of the Mercians. The cult was especially active in the twelfth century after the refoundation of the minster as a Benedictine monastery in 1093. In addition to the saint's early feast day (3 March), a new commemoration, St Werburh 'in summer', was celebrated there on 21 June. In the earlier fourteenth century the saint was housed in an elegant shrine, and in the early sixteenth a life in English verse, based on local sources since lost, was composed by Henry Bradshaw, a monk of Chester. 
Some thirteen medieval parish churches and two chapels were dedicated to the saint. They included several minsters in the Mercian heartlands, one in Kent, and an early church in London, perhaps reflecting the early promotion of the cult at major centres, ecclesiastical and urban, in the Mercian kingdom. Other dedications, such as those at Dublin and Bristol, were probably diffused from the cult centre in Chester. 
At the Reformation, St Werburgh's Abbey became the cathedral of the new see of Chester. The shrine, dismantled by 1635, was reconstructed in 1888 and placed behind the high altar of Chester Cathedral. 


@@@@@


doc= 29063


Werden, Sir John, first baronet (1640-1716), diplomat and politician, was born on 25 March 1640, the eldest son and heir of Robert Werden (1621/2-1690), of Burton Hall, Cheshire, and his first wife, Jane Barnham. Werden entered the Middle Temple in 1653 and was called to the bar on 9 February 1660. He became baron of the exchequer for Cheshire in November 1664, but owed his fortunes to his father's close connections with James, duke of York. He joined the earl of Sandwich's flagship in 1665 as a volunteer, recommended by James, and was soon sent to Copenhagen to confirm a diplomatic arrangement. In 1666 he joined Sandwich's entourage on his embassy to Madrid, providing drawings of the approaches to Corunna for later naval use and other sketches of Spain which are preserved in Sandwich's journal. In November Sandwich sent him to Lisbon with unsuccessful proposals for a Portuguese truce with Spain, and he was left at Madrid as charge d'affaires when Sandwich returned to England in July 1668. 
In November 1669 Werden was sent to the Netherlands to instruct Sir William Temple to moderate his zeal for the triple alliance. He became envoy-extraordinary to Sweden in July 1670, and on his return two years later was appointed the duke of York's secretary and secretary to the Admiralty. He passed on the duke's instructions to naval commanders, and received their replies, arousing the ire of Prince Rupert, who preferred his captains to deal directly with James. Werden was granted a baronetcy on 28 November 1672, shortly after his marriage on 22 October to Lucy Osbourne (died 1679), daughter of a Gloucestershire rector. He relinquished his Admiralty post when his patron had to resign in 1673, but continued as James's secretary and as commissioner for the navy, in which capacity he was admitted freeman of Portsmouth in 1675. 
Werden was returned MP for Reigate on 31 January 1673 in the duke of York's interest; the election was declared void but he was immediately re-elected. He was reckoned a court dependent in Danby's lists of 1675 and 1678 and was moderately active, sitting on thirty-seven committees. He was denounced by Shaftesbury and in opposition propaganda as a supporter of popery, but was crucially named to the committee to investigate the Popish Plot, where on 25 October 1678 he recorded Titus Oates's evidence in shorthand for his fellow MPs. 
Werden was defeated at the first election of 1679, and accompanied James to Brussels as his secretary. In May 1681 his prestigious lodgings at the Stone Gallery in Whitehall were burgled. He was appointed a trustee to provide funds for Prince George of Denmark on his marriage to Princess Anne, and himself had a brief second marriage from about 1682 to Mary Osbourne, who died in August 1683. On James's accession he was returned unopposed as MP for Reigate; he also became commissioner for customs and in August 1687 a lieutenant for the City of London. He did not choose to try for parliament in autumn 1688 or oppose the revolution; James excluded him from those he was prepared to pardon. 
Werden retained his post at the customs under William III, possibly through Sidney Godolphin's influence, but in June 1694 Somers successfully recommended his replacement in the remodelling of the commission, saying that although Godolphin had claimed 'he had experience, and was uncorrupt' ('CSP dom.', '1694-5', 179) his own intelligence indicated 'he does show great partiality in preferring officers who are disaffected to the Government'. In 1700 Werden unsuccessfully tried to become a commissioner for Irish forfeitures. He was restored to the customs commission in June 1703, remained in office throughout Anne's reign, and was finally removed in November 1714. He died on 29 October 1716, probably in his house in Pall Mall, and was buried at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 7 November, being succeeded by John, his son from his second marriage. His daughter Lucy married Charles Beauclerk, second duke of St Albans. 


@@@@@


doc= 29064


Werden, Robert (1621/2-1690), army officer, was the son of John Werden (died 1646), attorney, of Chester, and his wife, Katherine, daughter of Edward Dutton, governor of Barbados. He was aged fifteen when he matriculated from Christ Church, Oxford, in 1637. Roger North described John Werden as 'an incomparable courtier, cavalier, and a most faithful servant in the royal family' (North, 374). Following his father's example, Werden was one of the most active royalists in Cheshire during the early 1640s, serving as colonel of a troop of horse under John Byron, first Baron Byron. He took part in the defence of Chester, but was wounded and taken prisoner at Christleton on 18 January 1645. His father assisted in the negotiations for the surrender of the town, and signed the articles of surrender on 3 February 1646. On 26 March John Werden begged to be permitted to compound for his delinquency. The commissioners for compounding accepted this application, and, although he had not come in within the prescribed terms, they only imposed on him the small fine of $600. When their sentence was confirmed by the House of Commons on 9 July, Robert was included in the composition, causing the Cheshire county committee to protest that Robert had caused 'general astonishment and terror to the whole country' (Green, 1154). Parliament, however, upheld the original decision and he was finally cleared by an ordinance of February 1647, by which time his father was dead. In 1648, however, his estates were again sequestered on the suspicion that he harboured treasonable designs, a fifth being allowed his wife for maintenance. They were discharged for a second time on 27 January 1652. 
So far Werden had seemed a steadfast royalist, but there is evidence that from the mid-1650s he was playing a double game. In April 1655, in the aftermath of Penruddock's rising, during which he had been arrested, he told John Thurloe that he had offered the protectoral government his assistance before the rebellion. Later that year he asked for his decimation assessment to be waived in view of unspecified past services (Thurloe, 3.337, 4.315-16). Other members of the royalist underground were suspicious, and their doubts about him became all the stronger when he participated in the ill-fated uprising organized by Sir George Booth in August 1659. Werden was arrested and his estates sequestered for a third time. When, on his release, he joined the court in exile, Roger Whitley denounced him as the traitor who had betrayed their cause, but by March 1660 Charles II had accepted his professions of innocence. After the Restoration he sought a pardon for his erratic loyalties in the 1650s and gained the endorsement of Booth. The claims by Cromwell's spymaster Thomas Scott that Werden had tried to betray the king in 1651 and that he had indeed betrayed Booth in 1659 were ignored. 
The doubts about his past loyalty failed to hamper him after 1660. The lands in Pembrokeshire belonging to the regicide Thomas Wogan were granted to him, and by 1661 he had become one of the duke of York's grooms of the bedchamber. This link with York then served to advance his military career. On 4 June 1665 he was appointed a lieutenant in York's regiment of guards. He was later promoted, becoming a major on 29 June 1667 and a lieutenant-colonel on 2 October 1672. On 10 February 1673 he was returned to parliament for Chester, retaining his seat until the dissolution in 1679. He sat again for this constituency in 1685. On 1 May 1678 he received the commission of brigadier of the horse, and in the summer served in Flanders against the Dutch. From 1675 he served as comptroller of York's household. 
In 1685, in the reshuffle of his senior servants following his accession, James II rewarded Werden with the office of treasurer and receiver-general to the queen. Other appointments soon followed. On 19 June 1685 he was promoted to become the senior brigadier in the army, and on 31 July was appointed major-general. On 24 October he received the command of a regiment of horse (later the 4th dragoon guards), and on 8 November 1688 attained the rank of lieutenant-general. James's trust in him was well founded -- until the king's flight in December 1688 Werden remained loyal to him. 
Werden was twice married: first, before 1640, to Jane Barnham; secondly, before 1679, to Margaret Towse. By his first marriage he was the father of Sir John Werden; Robert, a captain in the Royal Navy, who was killed fighting against the Dutch at Sole Bay on 28 May 1673 while in command of the 'Henrietta'; and Katherine, who married Richard Watts of Muchmunden in Hertfordshire. Werden died on 23 January 1690. 


@@@@@


doc= 29065


Werferth (d. 907x15), bishop of Worcester, was literary assistant to Alfred the Great, at whose instigation he translated the 'Dialogues' of Gregory I. 
Werferth first appears as bishop of the important and well-endowed see of Worcester in a charter of 872, as the Danish menace was starting to spread into western Mercia. Subsequent diplomas show him zealous in furthering the material interests of his diocese. He seems soon to have become more widely known, and in probably the early 880s was brought into the circle of King Alfred of Wessex. Chapter 77 of Asser's life of Alfred, apparently written in 893, describes Werferth as 'thoroughly learned' ('bene eruditum') in scripture, and a suitable person for Alfred to turn to as he sought churchmen to translate into English the works he had selected for his 'great books' programme. Werferth was allocated the 'Dialogues' of Gregory the Great, a key work in spreading both knowledge of St Benedict's life and miracles and lore about the fate of souls after death which contributed greatly to the evolution of the medieval notion of purgatory. Werferth's work was among the earliest of these translations to have been undertaken; it must have been complete by 893, for it is mentioned by Asser as having been done 'meticulously and stylishly' ('lucubratim et elegantissime'). 
Whether or not Werferth made the entire translation single-handed (it is possible that he was assisted by a priest called Werwulf, also mentioned by Asser), it reflects clear Mercian characteristics. Alfred seems to have been pleased, for he supplied the translation with his own (prose) preface; there is an alternative preface in verse by Bishop Wulfsige of Sherborne. As it is known that the other work of Gregory's which Alfred selected (and translated himself), the 'Cura pastoralis', was to have been sent to all the bishops in England (it happens that the best-known extant copy is that sent to Werferth) it is reasonable to suppose that the translation of the 'Dialogues' had similarly wide circulation, but no manuscripts of it earlier than 1000 survive whole. In the early eleventh century it was reworked thoroughly to reflect changes in the language; the result is such a drastic alteration of Werferth's original as to be almost an independent translation. 
Alfred's respect for Werferth is shown by the benefaction of 100 mancuses made to him (by name, not just as bishop of Worcester) in the king's surviving Old English will. Werferth outlived his royal patron by fifteen years or so; evidence for his activity in the reign of Edward the Elder is confined to charters, which suggest that he died between 907 and 915. 


@@@@@


doc= 29066


Wesham, Roger of (d. 1257), bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, probably derived his name from Weasenham, Norfolk. A close associate of Grosseteste, Wesham was educated in Oxford and had graduated MA by 1233. In that year he became prebendary of Elstow, Bedfordshire, and may have held this benefice until 1235-6. Still a deacon, he was admitted rector of Walgrave, Northamptonshire, on 21 March 1234, but held this cure only until some time in the following year, presumably because he was pursuing a teaching career in Oxford, where he was third secular lector in theology to the Franciscan convent (1235-40). This would have required the holding of benefices without cure of souls. Probably in May 1237 he became archdeacon of Oxford, an office he held until some time between 17 June and 13 July 1240. On the authority of Le Neve it is said that he was concurrently archdeacon of Rochester (from 1238), but this is unlikely, and probably the consequence of confusion with a man of the same name who was both chancellor of Oxford and archdeacon of Rochester. He held the prebend of Weldland in St Paul's for a time between 1229 and 1248, but this was probably concurrent with his next office, the deanery of Lincoln, to which he had been appointed by Grosseteste following the chapter's refusal to elect a successor to Master William of Thornac', who had resigned and become a Cistercian at Louth Park in 1239-40. Wesham is first recorded as dean on 21 August 1240. In that office he became embroiled in the litigious struggle between his chapter and Grosseteste concerning the latter's right of visitation, a contest that shifted to the papal court at Lyons. The subsequent settlement, almost entirely in Grosseteste's favour, led to charges of Wesham's having betrayed the chapter. However, before this, Wesham had been provided, on Grosseteste's recommendation, to the see of Coventry and Lichfield, following yet another disputed election. Consecration by the pope occurred between 17 May and 4 July 1245, but Wesham did not receive the temporalities until 25 March 1246, which probably reflected the king's anger at his not being consulted. 
It is hard to assess Wesham's conduct of diocesan affairs, since neither registers nor rolls were as yet kept at Lichfield. Given Wesham's close links with Grosseteste, who did keep rolls at Lincoln, this is perhaps surprising. What evidence there is suggests his engagement with the affairs of his diocese was real. As might be expected, he gathered learned men around him, for instance the Franciscan Brother Vincent, John of Basingstoke, a noted scholar of Greek, and Ralph of Sempringham, chancellor of Oxford University in the early 1250s. He arbitrated carefully in a dispute between Haughmond and Ranton abbeys concerning jurisdiction in 1247; he was careful about the endowment of Hillmorton, Warwickshire. In 1252 he issued thirty-five visitation articles, touching on every aspect of church discipline. He also prepared the 'Instituta', a document instructing his clergy in dogma and suggesting topics for sermons in the vernacular. At Lichfield he augmented the income of the senior archdeaconry, that of Chester, by annexing to it the prebend of Bolton, as well as founding the prebends of Bubbenhall and Ryton, and endowing a chantry to benefit the bishops of Lincoln and Lichfield and the deans of Lincoln. 
By 1253 Wesham was already ill, for on 7 August 1253 he was granted a faculty to appoint a coadjutor by reason of infirmity by Pope Innocent IV ('r'. 1243-54). In 1256 he was stricken with paralysis and sought permission from Alexander IV ('r'. 1254-61) to resign his office. Henry of Lexinton, bishop of Lincoln (died 1258), was appointed to receive his resignation, which he did at the episcopal manor of Brewood, Staffordshire, to which Wesham had retired, on 4 December 1256. He lingered there until Sunday 21 May 1257, when he died. He was buried on the following Tuesday at Lichfield, with Fulk of Sandford (died 1271), archbishop of Dublin, officiating. 


@@@@@


doc= 29067


Wesley, Charles (1707-1788), Church of England clergyman and a founder of Methodism, was born on 18 December 1707 at Epworth rectory, Lincolnshire, the sixteenth or seventeenth child and third surviving son of Samuel Wesley (bap. 1662, d. 1735), rector of Epworth, and his wife, Susanna Wesley (1669-1742), daughter of Samuel Annesley and his second wife, Mary White. Among his elder siblings was Hetty ['see 'Wright, Mehetabel], who later achieved prominence as a poet. 
Wesley was born prematurely, wrapped in soft wool, and opened his eyes and cried only at two months. He was subjected to Susanna's strict and methodical child-rearing, based on subduing the child's will to its parents. Charles entered Westminster School in 1716 where he was overseen by his brother Samuel, one of the ushers, who imbued him with his own high-church tory principles. He became king's scholar (1721) and captain of the school (1725), and protected William Murray (the future lord chief justice the earl of Mansfield), who was persecuted for his family's Jacobite associations. Charles also did some acting, and his lively personality sometimes led him into difficulties. An often repeated story, now thought to be accurate, states that during his schooldays Garrett Wesley of Dangan, co. Meath, Ireland (most probably a relative), offered to make Charles his heir and supported him financially at school. Charles, however, refused the offer and Garrett adopted his cousin Richard Colley, the grandfather of the future duke of Wellington. The claim to a family relationship is almost certainly mistaken. However, the rest of the story first appeared in print in John Whitehead's biography of the Wesleys (1793), citing John Wesley's manuscript biography of Charles, which a letter proves he began in 1788 -- though it has since disappeared. Charles's daughter Sarah Wesley claimed that her father told the story to his friend Lord Mornington, father of Wellington, before Mornington's death in 1781. There is therefore probably real substance to the story. 
On 13 June 1726 Wesley matriculated and in 1727 was elected a student of Christ Church, Oxford, with a Westminster scholarship of $100 p.a. He graduated BA in 1730 and proceeded MA in March 1733. Freed of family restraints Charles now led a more relaxed life, including excursions to London and emotional entanglements with London actresses. To his brother John Wesley's attempts to make him more serious he objected: 'What? would you have me to be a saint at once?' (Moore, 1.151). 
But by January 1729 Wesley was prepared to reform: 'My first year in college I lost in diversion. The next I set myself to study. Diligence led me into serious thinking. I went to the weekly sacrament and persuaded two or three young scholars to accompany me and to resume the method of study prescribed by the statutes of the university. This gained me the harmless nickname of Methodist. (letter to Dr Chandler, 29 April 1785, Methodist church archives, DDWES/1/38)' Later that year John Wesley 'came to our assistance' (ibid.). It is on the basis of this letter that Charles is sometimes credited with being the first 'Methodist', though this probably overplays the significance of the term. Charles in 1785 wished to claim that Methodism had been an organization loyal to the church until its betrayal by John Wesley's ordinations of 1784. There is no known contemporary reference to 'Methodists' before August 1732, and Charles's informal efforts were systematized by John. 
As a student Charles Wesley told John that he was 'very 'desirous' of knowledge but can't 'bear' the drudgery of coming at it near so well as you could.... My head will by no means keep pace with my heart' (Baker, 'Charles Wesley', 12). Like John, he was attracted by the Kirkham circle, centred on John's close friend Sally Kirkham (Varanese), in Stanton, Oxfordshire, Charles's nickname being Araspes; as late as February 1736 he addressed an emotional, self-critical letter to Kirkham. Serious concerns did not stifle Charles's ebullience or jokes about his poverty. John Gambold was told in 1730 about 'the whimsical Mr Wesley, his preciousness and pious extravagancies'. He found Charles 'a man made for friendship', vivacious but considerate for a friend's needs, though deferential to his brother who 'was always the chief manager' (Tyerman, 'Oxford Methodists', 157). Both brothers were influenced by the nonjurors even, to some extent, after their conversions in 1738. 
Wesley was ordained deacon and priest on 5 and 12 October 1735. At this point he 'only thought of spending all my days in Oxford. But my brother, who always had the ascendant over me, persuaded me to accompany him and Mr Oglethorpe to Georgia'. Charles's letter also makes clear that John had been instrumental in pushing his brother towards an ordination which he 'exceedingly dreaded' (letter to Chandler, 29 April 1785, Methodist church archives, DDWES/1/38). In Georgia from 1736, Charles acted as secretary to James Edward Oglethorpe. However, designing women and pastoral naivety divided the brothers from Oglethorpe by mutual suspicions of misconduct. Despite an emotional reconciliation, Charles was so shattered by physical illness and emotional and spiritual depression that he offered his resignation on 25 July 1736, when Oglethorpe perceptively advised him that, being 'of a social temper', he would find 'in a married state the difficulties of working out your salvation exceedingly lessened, and your helps as much increased' ('Journal', ed. Jackson, 1.35). Charles left for England and after a difficult voyage landed there on 3 December 1736. 
Wesley continued to think that he should return to the colony, though as a minister rather than secretary, but finally resigned his Georgia post on 3 April 1738, swayed by medical advice and by his mother's and brother's opposition to his return. Meanwhile he had visited friends, and from July to November 1737 descanted frequently on 'the new birth' and 'inward change' which affected some of his hearers, reflecting the ideas of the devotional writer William Law. Early in 1738, however, the Moravian Peter Bohler persuaded the Wesleys to accept the idea of justification by grace through faith, experienced through a sudden conversion. It was Charles who first received the gift, on 21 May, in a way at once less clear-cut and more apparently supernatural than did his brother. Inspired by a mysterious voice (in fact that of a Moravian adherent) 'I found myself converted, I knew not how nor when' and 'found myself at peace with God and rejoiced in hope of loving Christ' ('Journal', ed. Jackson, 1.91-2). John's conversion followed on 24 May, and shortly afterwards Charles's poetic gift was released in his 'conversion hymn' 'When shall my wondering soul begin'. 
Wesley's health and temperament seemed poorly fitted for the hardships of a travelling evangelist. A return to Oxford or parish life appeared more suitable options even to his demanding brother. Yet Charles seemed relieved when a prospective living fell through in February 1739. Instead he spent his time in testifying to his new-found faith to individuals and small groups and in preaching. In July 1738 he began what became a lifelong interest by speaking to condemned prisoners at Newgate gaol and achieved startling results despite initial doubts about deathbed repentances. From then until August 1739 he was also an unlicensed curate to George Stonehouse in Islington, finally being forced out by the bishop and churchwardens. On 25 October he began to preach without notes, which gave him greater freedom and made a greater impact upon his hearers; and on 29 May 1739 he followed George Whitefield and John Wesley by preaching in the open air. 
Despite his successes Wesley frequently longed for retirement or even death. He was troubled by converts' convulsions and encounters with the French prophets who claimed divine inspiration and healing powers. Though far from denying supernatural influences, Charles became more sceptical than his brother, for he saw some convulsionaries as exhibitionists and put them aside, after which they quietened down. Soon there were also conflicts with Moravians who taught 'stillness', the notion that people must wait passively for God to convert them. Charles, who was more open to mystical impulses than John, may have briefly wavered on the issue. But on 20 July 1740 John Wesley broke with the Moravians and Charles purged the 'still brethren' in Bristol. In March 1741 a similar break occurred with the predestinarian followers of George Whitefield in Bristol and London, which provoked Charles to write hymns on the universal offer of salvation. He nevertheless often acted as peacemaker and tried to maintain friendly relations with those estranged by his brother. 
At first the Wesleys ministered to their followers by shuttling to and fro between London and Bristol. From 1740 the work expanded to Wales, then northern England, Cornwall, Ireland, and finally, in 1751, to Scotland. Except in Cornwall, John usually preceded Charles. It appears that the general plan was for each brother in turn to attend to London and Bristol while the other visited the more remote areas. Lay preachers filled the gaps between the brothers' visits and met in an annual conference from 1744. 
The Methodists often faced mob violence, which provided some of the most dramatic passages in the Wesleys' journals. In the edgy mid-1740s they were suspected of being Jacobites, Charles being cited before the magistrates at Wakefield in March 1744 for praying 'that the Lord would call home his [spiritual] banished' ('Journal', ed. Jackson, 1.361). However, he dissuaded John from issuing a declaration of Methodist loyalty which might identify them as a sect. 
On 28 August 1747 Charles Wesley first met Sarah Gwynne ['see below'], the twenty-year-old daughter of Marmaduke Gwynne of Garth, Brecknockshire, a magistrate who supported the Methodists. In September 1748 Charles expressed his love plainly in verse: '
Two are better far than one 

For counsel or for fight! 

How can one be warm alone 

Or serve his God aright? 
(Baker, 'Charles Wesley', 58)' Fortunately John Wesley supported his brother's suit and was able to satisfy members of the Gwynne family, concerned about Charles's income, by guaranteeing him $100 p.a. from their book profits. Charles had concluded by December that the marriage was indeed God's will for him, and he and Sarah were married at Llanllywenfel parish church, Brecknockshire, on 8 April 1749. 'A stranger that intermeddleth not with our joy said 'It looked more like a funeral than a wedding'. My brother seemed the happiest person among us' ('Journal', ed. Jackson, 2.56). It was a love-match of rare harmony and achieved a degree of happiness seldom seen in the marriage of a Wesley. 
In that same year, 1749, came the confused and painful attempt by John Wesley to marry Grace Murray (who subsequently married the Methodist preacher John Bennet), followed by his disastrous marriage to Mrs Mary Vazeille in 1751. To both Charles Wesley reacted with alarm and high emotion. The rights and wrongs of the Murray affair remain debatable. Charles believed that John Bennet had the prior claim to Grace Murray, that her union with John Wesley would split Methodism, and that she was socially unsuitable. He therefore hustled Bennet and Murray into marriage. The account handed down by Charles's wife, Sarah, to her daughter depicted Grace Murray as at best an unstable woman torn between love for Bennet and a prestigious marriage to her leader, but this probably exonerates the Wesley brothers, and especially Charles, too easily. John's marriage to Mary Vazeille dismayed Charles, and he and his sister-in-law remained mutually distrustful until she left her husband in 1771. It may well be that the strained relationships between the brothers over the Murray affair and John's marriage continued to aggravate disagreements on policy over the next few years. 
Certainly these personal disturbances coincided with tensions within Methodism. John Bennet's decision to break away was followed by the charge of sexual misconduct by the preacher James Wheatley which led the brothers to agree that Charles should from now on investigate preachers' characters and abilities. Although Charles reluctantly sanctioned lay preachers he doubted their talents and competence. In response to his criticisms in 1751 John Wesley said they needed all the men they could recruit and that 'I prefer grace before gifts' ('Works of John Wesley', 26.472). Charles wrote on this subject to Selina, countess of Huntingdon, in intemperate terms. The preachers, he insisted, should live by their trades and only occasionally take preaching journeys; in addition new recruits would be thoroughly tested by the Wesleys. In making these comments Charles confided his underlying interest that these measures 'will break his [John's] power, their [preachers] not depending on him for bread' and so 'reduce his authority within due bounds as well as guard against that rashness and credulity of his which has kept me in continual awe and bondage for many years' (Baker, 'Charles Wesley', 84-5). 
Wesley was even more alarmed about preachers' lack of loyalty to the Church of England. In the mid-1750s a crisis erupted which recurred periodically for the next thirty years. Some preachers registered under the 'Toleration Act' as a defence against persecution and some pressed for the right to administer sacraments. Both actions appeared to imply separation from the church. In October 1754 a preacher administered communion in London and, according to Charles, John maintained that ''We have in effect ordained already'. He urged me to sign the preachers' certificates: was inclined to lay on hands, and to let the preachers administer' (Baker, 'Charles Wesley', 92). Charles was only partly reassured at the conference of 1755 when John issued a statement concluding that, whether or not separation was 'lawful', it was not 'expedient'. Doubting John's resolution, Charles urged his evangelical friends to put pressure on his brother, even sympathizing with suggestions that the lay preachers should become mere assistants to evangelical clergy. John Wesley believed that to curb them in this way risked losing the evangelistic effectiveness of Methodism. 
Between September and November 1756 Wesley made his last tour of the midlands and north of England and then ceased to itinerate. Although family responsibilities, recurring ill health, and depression restricted his movements, his daughter Sarah later claimed that his main concern was not to create discord within the Methodist movement. This was a discreet indication that Charles's doubts about the quality of their preachers and fears about separation from the church would lead to conflict with his brother. She may have been correct in this interpretation, for some of the preachers were certainly hostile to him. On the other hand, Charles's retirement from itinerancy did not prevent him from criticizing his brother. 
John Wesley deplored his brother's abandonment of itinerancy. In a revealing letter in October 1753 he had already demanded that Charles 'either act really in connexion with me: or never pretend to it'. In reality, he complained, 'Either you move (quite contrary to me) by those impressions which you account divine or which is worse, 'pro ratione voluntas' [will instead of reason]'. Charles, he said, had not acted in concert with him 'for ten years last past and upwards' ('Works of John Wesley', 26.527-8). Though John's complaints were coloured by his desire to control preachers' movements, it does look as though Charles's focus, particularly after his marriage, was more on problem areas (especially where there was disaffection towards the established church) rather than on a co-ordinated approach with his brother. He never visited Scotland, nor Ireland after 1748, nor Cornwall after 1753. While seemingly free to interfere where his prejudices were threatened, Charles appeared unwilling and unable to accept regular responsibilities of leadership. 
Charles Wesley remained in Bristol until 1771, though he frequently visited London as well as, on occasions, friends and relatives elsewhere in the south. During this period he continued to worry over the issue of preachers and possibility of separation from the Church of England. In February 1760 three preachers in Norwich administered communion, but John Wesley proceeded as planned to Ireland, merely asking Charles to look into the matter. Charles reacted violently, going so far as to tell the veteran preacher John Nelson: 'John, I love thee from my heart: yet rather than see thee a dissenting minister, I wish to see thee smiling in thy coffin' (Baker, 'Charles Wesley', 101). While acknowledging that preachers faced uncertain prospects after the Wesleys' deaths, he could only promise (unrealistically) that he would use his 'interest' to obtain Anglican orders for them. His priorities contrasted sharply with his brother's: 'My chief concern upon earth... was the prosperity of the Church of England; my next, that of Methodism, my third that of the preachers'. He would in effect give up the preachers for the good of the Methodists and the Methodists for the good of the church (ibid., 101, 102). During 1760 he was, in addition, at odds with John over the outbreak of claims to Christian perfection and was much distressed by the trial and execution of Lady Huntingdon's homicidal cousin, Lord Ferrers. 
Wesley's growing interest in the careers of his precocious musical sons, Charles Wesley (1757-1834) and Samuel Wesley (1766-1837), helped to influence his decision to move to the London area in 1771. He was given the remaining lease on a fully furnished house, 1 Chesterfield Street, in Marylebone (including a cellar of wine), by his friend Mrs Gumley, whose sister-in-law was married to the earl of Bath. Despite his misgivings about Methodism, Charles seems to have been content to act as resident minister in Bristol and then in London, and showed no sign of wishing to settle in an Anglican parish despite rumours of offers. He regularly preached and administered communion in church service hours, using the 'Book of Common Prayer'. A diligent pastor and prison visitor, he also enjoyed social relationships with the upper classes more than his brother, partly to further his sons' careers. 
Wesley took little direct part in the Calvinistic controversy of the 1770s, though he did provide support for his friend John Fletcher, the main protagonist against the evangelical Calvinists. In 1771-3 and again in 1786 he attempted a reconciliation with the Moravians, hoping to combat Methodist separatism. In June 1777 he was greatly exercised over the trial and execution of the popular clergyman William Dodd for forgery. Like his brother, he attacked the American revolutionaries and the Wilkite radicals, though in his case in verse rather than prose. In 1780 he witnessed the anti-Roman Catholic Gordon riots, which he vividly described in letters, poems, and hymns. He furthered the careers of his musical sons by concerts in his home to save them from a more worldly environment, though this also brought Methodist disapproval. 
Despite his interventions when the interests of the church seemed threatened, Wesley always made it clear that he dreaded taking on full leadership responsibilities himself. The fate of Methodism after John Wesley's death was a recurring problem. Both Wesley brothers had hopes of a clerical successor, John Fletcher of Madeley being the most favoured candidate. However, in 1773 Fletcher not only refused, but even suggested Charles as his brother's successor. In the end John had to turn to the preachers. In 1784 he enrolled a deed of declaration, fixing the composition and powers of the annual Methodist conference as his legal successor. Meanwhile the American War of Independence had temporarily severed ecclesiastical relations with England, and John seized on the opportunity in 1784 to supply the American Methodists with an ordained ministry together with a revised version of the 'Book of Common Prayer' and articles of religion. He ordained two of his preachers, together with his clerical colleague Thomas Coke as a 'superintendent', and Coke was to ordain Francis Asbury as his co-superintendent in America. In the last years of his life John also ordained for Scotland and, finally, three preachers apparently in reserve for England. 
Wesley, who had not been consulted, was outraged at what he took to be the final seal on separation, though John denied this. Charles's disgust was expressed partly in letters, partly in verse: '
W -- himself and friends betrays, 

By his good sense forsook, 

While suddenly his hands he lays 

On the hot head of C --. 

' Still more insultingly: '
A Roman emperor 'tis said 

His favourite horse a consul made 

But Coke brings other things to pass, 

He makes a bishop of an ass. 
('Representative Verse', 367)' It was in this context that Charles wrote his autobiographical letter to Dr Chandler in April 1785 to portray Methodism as a church movement betrayed by his brother. He quoted Lord Mansfield's assertion that ordination meant separation. The brothers had to agree to differ, Charles leaving John to his own devices. Yet despite their differences he continued his London ministry and summed up his feelings by writing: 'Thus our partnership here is ended but not our friendship. I have taken him for better for worse till death do us part -- or rather re-unite in love inseparable' (letter to Chandler, 29 April 1785, Methodist church archives, DDWES/1/38). 
In 1788 Wesley's health deteriorated, and despite John's characteristic optimism that travel and folk-remedies would revive his brother, Charles died at home, aged eighty, of exhaustion on 29 March 1788. It is symptomatic of the brothers' ecclesiastical differences that John was buried behind his City Road Chapel, denying the notion of consecrated ground. Charles, however, was interred in the graveyard of his parish church, St Mary's, Marylebone, on 5 April, his pall borne by eight clergymen of the Church of England. The claim that, ironically, this churchyard was unconsecrated appears to be an error. Charles's family had so little money at the time of his death that his funeral expenses were defrayed by his friends. 
John Wesley described himself as 'an high churchman, bred up from my childhood in the highest notions of passive obedience and non-resistance'. He was also a 'tory', meaning 'one that believes God, not the people, to be the origin of all civil power' ('Letters', ed. Telford, 7.305-6, 6.156). So too was Charles Wesley, yet both violated church order. Likewise, Charles shared John's general view of evangelical theology plus a belief in a form of sacrifice and real presence in the Lord's supper, which he expressed with dramatic physicality in his hymns. But Charles thought Christian perfection scarcely attainable before death. John, operating with a restricted view of sin as 'a voluntary transgression of a known law which it is in our power to obey' ('Works of John Wesley', 25.289, 318), claimed that the gift could be received at any time, by faith. Charles, by contrast, visualized a gradual and incomplete growth in holiness. He also believed that God used suffering as a purifying agent and might discipline individuals by withholding assurance of salvation, a view which John rejected as unscriptural. These divergences clearly reflected their respective temperaments. Elsewhere, John neatly hit off their differences in preaching style thus: 'In connexion [reasoned argument] I beat you; but in strong pointed 'sentences' you beat me' ('Letters', ed. Telford, 5.16). Charles was liable to open his 'Bible' and select a text at random. Even in old age he sometimes recovered his old fire, and once accidentally knocked the 'Bible' off the pulpit to be fielded by Thomas Coke. Equally, though, he could also fall into long introspective pauses or announce a hymn if he felt faint. Some thought both brothers were liable to offer poor fare in old age, and Charles's monopoly of the City Road pulpit was resented by some lay preachers. 
Charles Wesley has long been regarded as the greatest of English hymn writers, yet in range and intention he was really a writer of 'sacred poems' as well. Of his 9000 poems, 'hymns' (depending on definition) form between one- and two-thirds of the total. It is only fairly recently that he has received recognition as a poet because hymns have commonly been regarded as too limited in content, metre, and purpose to be assessed as poetry. Charles habitually expressed his feelings and beliefs on a wide range of religiously orientated private and public concerns in verse, including charming pieces for his children: '
There was by fond mamma supplied 

Six reasons against Sammi's ride.... 

Because 'tis wet, because 'tis dry... 

Or any other reason why 

' and on the family cat: '
I sing Grimalkin brave and bold 

Who makes intruders fly... 
('Unpublished Verse', 1.280)' Charles's mind was pervasively furnished with material and images from the classics, the 'Book of Common Prayer', and English poetry, but above all from the 'Bible'. All these materials were adapted to express Christian experience, above all the love of God. The boundary between sacred and secular here was easily crossed -- some poems to his future wife were later adapted as hymns. What has been termed his 'physicality', even 'carnality', did undoubtedly cause uneasiness in later minds. However, to early Methodists Wesley showed that body as well as mind and feelings could express religion, a belief which informed some of the dancing metres and rhythms used in his writing. Like Isaac Watts he adapted literary culture to the needs of less educated readers, but with a much more remarkable range of metres and technical poetic skills. Ideas and images were transmuted and compressed into a few compelling words, simplicity being varied with dramatic use of Latinate words to express feelings or theological paradoxes: 'indissolubly joined', 'inextinguishable blaze', '
Our God contracted to a span, 

Incomprehensibly made man. 

' Methodists unaware of Charles's subtle skills nevertheless unconsciously absorbed a measure of theology and culture as well as expressing their faith and feelings. 
Charles Wesley was short but somewhat stouter in face and figure than John. In college days: 'full of the muse, and being shortsighted, he would sometimes walk right up against his brother's table and, perhaps, overturn it. If the 'fine phrensy' was not quite so high, he would discompose the books and papers in the study, ask some question without always waiting for a reply, repeat some poetry that just then struck him, and at length leave his brother to his regularity. (Moore, 2.368)' In old age he would compose hymns on horseback in shorthand, and on reaching the City Road house rush in 'crying out 'Pen and ink! pen and ink!'' and write out the hymn he had composed (ibid.). His handwriting was neat, he kept accounts meticulously, but his wife had to attend to his clothes. He wore full clerical dress, preached in gown and bands even in the open air, but unlike his brother wore a clerical wig. 
Temperamentally Wesley was subject both to extreme exaltation (especially after preaching successfully) and extreme despair, expressing a desire for death with regularity throughout his life. Yet he also showed considerable moral and physical courage when confronting mobs critical of Methodism. Though a warm friend and tender consoler to the grieving, John Wesley claimed that Charles 'suspects everybody, and he is continually imposed upon, but I suspect nobody, and I am never imposed upon' (Tyerman, 'Wesley', 3.297). This was an exaggerated response to Charles's claim that John was too trusting. Charles could be suspicious of those suspected of hostility to the church, and John thought he was liable to be influenced by the person to whom he had last spoken. His sense of public duty conflicted with his modesty and desire for retirement. An affectionate husband and father, he was anxious to imbue his children with the strength of his own evangelical beliefs. 
Except as a hymn writer Charles Wesley's reputation has been overshadowed by that of his brother and has been clouded by their disagreements on policy. Unfortunately his journal survives only from 1736 to 1756, with gaps, and the complete text has never been published, though a modern edition is now in preparation. There is no complete or modern edition of his letters or even of his poetry. The fullest biography by Thomas Jackson (1841) is uncritical and, with the exception of Frank Baker (1948) and J. R. Tyson's 'Reader' (1989), later biographers have largely tended to recycle published material. 
Charles Wesley's overall significance for Methodism and the eighteenth century revival remains difficult to estimate, but he was clearly more than a hymn writer, however distinguished he proved in this field. Liable to be seen as a well-intentioned but misguided drag on his brother's mission, he deserves to be judged as an independent personality and in terms of his own vision of Methodism. His early journeys for evangelism and oversight significantly aided Methodism's take-off, while his role as pastor stabilized the important Bristol and London societies. John Wesley's pragmatic attitude to irregularities was probably necessary for Methodism's dynamism, yet it is arguable that Charles's restraints on his brother's 'rashness' helped to raise preachers' standards and warded off the risk of a premature break with the church in the 1750s which would have narrowed the appeal of the movement at a critical stage. Recent research suggests that his opposition to his brother's ministries was supported by a significant body of leading laymen especially in London. 
Charles's wife, 
Sarah was devout from an early age, receiving communion at fourteen and accompanying her father to hear Harris. She first met Charles Wesley on 28 August 1747 and it appears to have been a case of love at first sight. They were married at Llanllywenfel on 8 April 1749. Sarah had agreed to allow Charles to maintain his vegetarian diet and travels, even to Ireland, against her mother's protests. The journeys recommenced almost at once, though they took a house in Bristol in September 1749. Sarah became a willing hostess to visiting preachers, saying that these plain men 'were proofs that grace supplied all the felicitous aid of education and good breeding' (Methodist church archives, DDWES 1/59). Her sweet singing sometimes surprised and delighted visitors and Methodist meetings. 
At first Sarah Wesley patiently endured the privations of travelling with Charles, including mob violence. Late in 1753 she was struck down with smallpox, having refused vaccination apparently through religious scruples, and was left so disfigured as to be almost unrecognizable. She ironically commented that this 'afforded great satisfaction to her dear husband who was glad to see her look so much older and better suited to be his wife' (S. Wesley, 'Memoir of Mrs Sarah Wesley', 509). Their first child also died of smallpox on 7 January 1754. They had eight children but only three survived to maturity: a daughter, Sarah, and the precocious musicians Charles and Samuel. 
Sarah Wesley enjoyed friendship and correspondence with socially prominent people, especially evangelical peeresses. Her circle widened further with the family's move to Marylebone in 1771. Following her husband's death in March 1788, she was left with recurring financial problems. Accounts of the reasons for this vary. It appears that capital equivalent to her husband's $100 p.a. from Methodism was invested for her, but other money was realized and spent, and she received an annuity from William Wilberforce and occasional income from legacies and the Methodists. Her son Samuel's debts also drained her resources. 
Despite her own difficulties, Sarah was conspicuous for her care of the poor and pity for evil-doers, since she thought anyone might fall but for divine grace. She had a strong sense of her sins and a recurring fear of death except in her last illness. Sarah's reading was confined to religious books, for she did not relish any others. Her daughter thought her chief faults were excessive hospitality and indulgence of her children. In fact Sarah's life was principally devoted to her husband's welfare and her care probably prolonged his life. She provided a much needed balance to his fluctuating temperament and his brother's demands, while her social contacts aided her sons' careers. Her quiet personality masked a strength of will expressed in her marriage despite family doubts. She insisted that she be allowed to attend George Whitefield and other 'gospel ministers' despite the Wesleys' opposition to their Calvinism. Solicitous of the brothers' reputation she passed on family traditions favourable to them to her daughter and so to later biographers, and her short memoir of Charles prefaced a volume of his sermons (1816). She died on 28 December 1822, weakened by a cold and old age, and was buried with her husband in the churchyard of St Mary's, Marylebone. 


@@@@@


doc= 29068


Wesley, Charles (1757-1834), musician, was born in Bristol, possibly at 19 Charles Street, on 11 December 1757, the son of Charles Wesley (1707-1788), Methodist preacher, and his wife, Sarah Gwynne (1726-1822). He was the third of eight children and the oldest of three who survived to maturity. It would appear to have been primarily from his mother that Charles and his brother Samuel Wesley (1766-1837) inherited their musical aptitude; Sarah was an accomplished performer on the guitar and harpsichord and had a particular love of Handel's oratorios, a taste which she passed on to her son. According to his father's account Charles was aged two and three-quarters when he began to display musical precocity, imitating his mother's playing on the harpsichord 'without study or hesitation' ('Journal', 2.151). John Broderip, organist at Wells Cathedral, heard the boy at an early stage and predicted that he would be a great musician. 
At the age of four Charles was taken to London by his father and Broderip's opinion was confirmed by the blind organist John Stanley. John Beard, manager of Covent Garden, offered to procure Charles a place among the choristers of the Chapel Royal, but the boy's father refused as he had no intention of raising his son to be a musician. After his return to the family residence in Charles Street, Bristol, Charles was placed under the tutelage of an organist named Rooke, although in his father's words, Rooke 'sat by, more to observe than control' ('Journal', 2.152). Charles's parents oversaw other aspects of education, and without other children to interact with Charles and his sister Sarah (Sally) Wesley, his junior by almost two years, developed an exceptionally close relationship which was never to diminish. 
It became clear that Charles and his younger brother Samuel wished to become professional musicians and in furtherance of this aim the family moved in 1771 to 1 Chesterfield Street, Marylebone, Middlesex. Charles received lessons from Joseph Kelway and William Boyce, and from 1779 to 1786 the brothers performed in subscription concerts at the family home. Charles also gave command performances for George III and the prince of Wales. His career did not live up to its early promise. He made his living by giving recitals and more regular employment as organist at several Anglican chapels in the London area, namely Surrey, South Street, Welbeck, Chelsea Hospital, and finally Marylebone parish church. 
Wesley's output as a composer was almost negligible. His earliest published works were five string quartets which he wrote about 1778 and six keyboard concertos from the same period. He also wrote organ voluntaries dedicated to the prince regent and a set of variations for the piano dedicated to the Princess Charlotte. His other published compositions include the cantata 'Caractacus' and a number of glees and anthems. His work made little impact in his own day and is largely forgotten. His abiding musical characteristic was conservatism and he paid little attention to contemporary developments. 
Wesley never married, but lived with his parents and afterwards with his sister Sally in rented lodgings in the capital until her death in 1828. One of his final addresses, in 1830-33, was on Edgware Road in London. He also made regular visits to Bristol and Brighton. He died on 23 May 1834 and was buried alongside his parents at Marylebone parish church. 
The life of Charles Wesley is an excellent example of precocious talent which does not live up to expectation. He appears to have lacked ambition and to have been somewhat eccentric. One contemporary described him: 'C Westley is as good natured a soul as ever breathed: brimful of vanity he is nevertheless three times as agreeable as any other person that had so large a share. He possesses quickness of thought and sharpness of apprehension which cultivated in his earlier periods of life would probably have settled into poignancy of wit and inexhaustible memory... he knows no heaven beyond his harpsichord and unemployed with that, he passes his time in dress mimicking ridiculous characters... or recounts the anecdotes of people of fashion. (JRL, Charles Wesley MSS, DDCW 6/85A)' It is possible that had his parents taken at an earlier stage the opportunity of a musical education in London, he might have progressed, but as it is his musical legacy is insignificant compared with that of his brother, and his nephew Samuel Sebastian Wesley (1810-1876). 


@@@@@


doc= 29069


Wesley, John (1703-1791), Church of England clergyman and a founder of Methodism, was born on 17 June 1703 at Epworth rectory, Lincolnshire, the thirteenth or fourteenth child and the second of three sons to reach maturity of Samuel Wesley (bap. 1662, d. 1735), rector of Epworth, and his wife, Susanna Wesley (1669-1742), daughter of Samuel Annesley and his second wife, Mary. He was baptized on 3 July at Epworth church (that he was named John Benjamin at his baptism, as sometimes stated, is a nineteenth-century error). Samuel still spelt the family name Westley in 1694 and others occasionally did so later. Both parents, though children of dissenting ministers ejected in 1662, became high-church Anglicans early in life, and puritan influence on John's upbringing is debatable. 
Though much is known about the Wesley family, little but anecdote survives about John himself in this period. It has often been observed that his cool intelligence and passion for order reflect his mother's character, while his brother Charles Wesley's mercurial temperament echoed his father's, but John could be hasty too. Both brothers were junior to their precocious and talented sister, Hetty ['see 'Wright, Mehetabel]. Several events in John's early life have commonly been emphasized as significant for his later development. His parents saw as providential the rescue of their children from a rectory fire in 1709. In 1711 Susanna resolved 'to be more particularly careful of the soul of this child that thou hast so mercifully provided for'. Later tradition related this to Wesley's adoption of the motto 'a brand plucked from the burning' to claim that he was seen as singled out early for a special destiny. However, Wesley's sense of a providential calling came much later (Heitzenrater, 'Elusive Mr Wesley', 1.40-43). Tight maternal discipline applied to all the children, though with variable results. Regularity was enforced in eating, sleeping, education, and religion. This was a severe, religiously focused version of John Locke's educational principles, and 'breaking the will' was seen as the foundation of religion and morality. In 1712, during her husband's absence at convocation, Susanna Wesley conducted informal meetings in the rectory which some have seen as an anticipation of later Methodist practice. In 1716-17 there appeared the Epworth ghost, Old Jeffery, apparently a poltergeist with Jacobite sympathies who knocked loudly when George I was prayed for. The family only gradually concluded that Jeffery was a supernatural visitant, but John Wesley, though absent at the time, believed this from the first, thus signalling a lifelong belief in divine and diabolical intervention. He also seems to have shown early the habit of a reasoned approach as the way to solve even the most personal problems. His father wisely remarked 'you think to carry everything by dint of argument, but you will find how little is ever done in the world by close reasoning'. John, he said, 'would not attend to the most pressing necessities of nature unless he had a reason for it' (Clarke, 2.321). 
On 28 January 1714 Wesley became a foundation scholar at the Charterhouse on the nomination of his father's patron, the duke of Buckingham. Little but anecdotal traditions survive from this period. Thus Wesley is said to have justified preferring the company of younger boys with the Miltonic assertion 'Better to rule in hell than serve in heaven' (Tyerman, 1.20), which probably reflects later charges of ambition. His claim in 1738 that he had not sinned away the grace of baptism until he was ten years old may reflect the brutal impact of a contemporary public school, but he acknowledged even so that he was not guilty of outward sins. 
Wesley entered Christ Church, Oxford, on 24 June 1720 with a Charterhouse exhibition of $20 p.a. He matriculated on 18 July, was awarded a scholarship, and proceeded BA in 1724. Until 1725 his letters suggest a cheerful and dutiful son without pressing religious problems, though short of money. Like other undergraduates he wrote poetry and adopted the temperate diet recommended by the physician George Cheyne. His serious pursuit of religious discipline began in 1725 when his father urged him to seek holy orders, and in April he began a private diary as a means of self-examination. Correspondence with his mother shows that he was reading Jeremy Taylor's 'Holy Living and Holy Dying' and Thomas a Kempis's 'Imitation of Christ'. (It was probably only in 1730-32 that he encountered his contemporary William Law's 'Serious Call' and 'Christian Perfection'.) Though repelled by some of their severities, Wesley was convinced by these guides of the necessity of inward as well as outward holiness and the possibility of 'Christian perfection', which became his central concern. Though Wesley's diary records ever more elaborate rules and schemes of self-examination, his pursuit of holiness did not exclude playing cards, reading plays, and, as late as July 1733, dancing. He also cultivated a deeply affectionate, though also religious, friendship with Sally Kirkham ('Varanese') of Stanton, Oxfordshire, despite her marriage at the end of 1725. The effect of this relationship on his religious development is a matter for speculation. Between 1730 and 1734 he corresponded with her friend Mary Pendarves ('Aspasia'), the later Mrs Delany, in a pseudo-classical style. 
On 17 September 1725 Wesley was ordained deacon, and with the help of friends and Lincolnshire connections was elected fellow of Lincoln College on 17 March 1726. He proceeded MA on 9 February 1727, and was ordained priest on 22 September 1728. After acting as his father's curate at Wroot (near Doncaster) he was recalled to college for tutorial duties in November 1729. 
In the same month Wesley began to organize the so-called Holy Club, initially as a study group. This was not, as traditionally portrayed, a single organization under his leadership but a network of groups in several colleges, members varying in their commitment. Among the nicknames levelled at the club was Methodist (first recorded in August 1732). An old term with varying uses, it was taken up later by Wesley, eventually with some pride. Suspicion over the club's activities deepened following the madness and death of William Morgan in 1732, blamed on Methodist excesses. They were attacked in 'Fog's Weekly Journal' (December 1733), though described more sympathetically in 'The Oxford Methodists' (1733; often accredited erroneously to William Law). Wesley's defence was circulated privately but published in the preface to the first instalment of his 'Journal' in 1740. The club's activities included religious exercises and visiting sick people and prisoners. From 1732 Wesley was much influenced by high-church and nonjuror circles in Manchester through his Oxford friend John Clayton. He taught Wesley advanced notions of primitive Christianity based on early church practices such as fasting twice weekly and triple immersion for baptism, and introduced him to mystical writers. The fruit of this was his first publication, 'A Collection of Forms of Prayer' (1733). 
Looking back on this period after his conversion in 1738, Wesley dismissed his Oxford disciplines as a vain attempt at salvation by works. He later modified this judgement, concluding that he had had 'the faith of a servant, though not that of a son' ('Journal of John Wesley', 1 Feb 1738, 'Works', 18.215 n.). By 1734-5 he probably felt in need of a fresh start. He was pressed to succeed his father at Epworth to secure his mother's home but was reluctant to do this, arguing at length that he could be more holy and useful at Oxford. However, in 1735 he responded positively to an invitation to go to Georgia as a missionary to the Native Americans for the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts. Significantly, he asserted that his chief hope was to save his own soul by starting primitive Christianity afresh in a spiritual state of nature and an idealized wilderness. 
Wesley was accompanied by his brother Charles and his friends Benjamin Ingham and Charles Delamotte, and the published version of his 'Journal' begins with the voyage to Georgia. It was to become a major, though partly misleading, source for future biographers, for it was not the simple and objective record that is often assumed. Appearing in three instalments from 1740, often several years after the events recorded, the selection and interpretation of material often reflects Wesley's views at the time of publication, though written up from his private diary and other materials. The first three instalments were designed to defend his conduct in Georgia, towards the Moravians and in his first evangelical work. Thereafter it became a vehicle for presenting his version of the religious revival of which he was a part and for expressing his views on many matters, both religious and secular. It was more a work of high-class propaganda and a travelogue than the diary of a soul. 
Georgia was founded with a mixture of humanitarian idealism, a concern to defend an exposed frontier, and hopes of profit. The leading figure was James Oglethorpe, the colony's first governor, who evidently hoped that the Wesleys and their friends would help to discipline and civilize the unruly settlers. Wesley indeed soon turned from the Native Americans to work among the colonists. 
As a minister in Georgia, Wesley revived traditional Anglican disciplines with some nonjuror additions; he experimented with small devotional groups and published his first hymnbook, 'A Collection of Psalms and Hymns' (1737). Despite some positive response from individuals, he offended more by his austere demands. Then he compounded his offences by an unsuccessful courtship of Sophia Hopkey, the niece of Thomas Causton, a leading figure in the colony. After much vacillation Wesley drew back from a formal proposal, deterred by the opposition of friends, religious scruples, and, perhaps, psychological inhibitions. Tired of his hesitations, Sophia married William Williamson on 12 March 1737. After further attempts to influence her, Wesley concluded that she had been deceitful and excluded her from holy communion. Williamson and Causton then indicted him for ecclesiastical irregularities and excluding Sophia from communion, though Wesley gained supporters among those disaffected against the colony's leaders and Causton himself was suspected of financial irregularities. Wesley left Georgia in December 1737, virtually as a fugitive from justice, arriving in England on 1 February 1738. 
While in Georgia, Wesley's religious doubts had been deepened by encounters with Moravian refugees who had accompanied him on the outward voyage. He was impressed by their calm during a storm and their example of primitive Christianity, order, and piety. Soon after landing he was challenged by the Moravian leader A. G. Spangenberg, who asked: ''Do you know Jesus Christ?'... 'I know he is the saviour of the world'... 'True... but do you know he has saved you?'... 'I hope he has died to save me'' ('Works', 18.146). Though Spangenberg privately recorded that he thought grace was at work in Wesley, Wesley himself clearly had growing doubts. On the voyage home he recorded on 24 January 1738 how he had been confused by different theological guides, and concluded 'I went to America to convert the Indians, but Oh! who shall convert me?' (ibid., 18.211). 
Back in England Wesley was gradually convinced by his Moravian friend Peter Bohler that the 'saving faith' he sought could be received in a sudden experience, and meanwhile he was urged to preach faith until he received it. On 1 May he helped to found a new religious society in Fetter Lane, London, with some Moravian features. Charles Wesley received the gift first on 21 May. On 24 May 1738 John went 'very unwillingly' to a religious society in Aldersgate Street, where 'one was reading Luther's 'Preface to the Epistle to the Romans''. 'About a quarter before nine, while he was describing the change which God works in the heart through faith in Christ, I felt my heart strangely warmed. I felt I did trust in Christ, Christ alone for salvation, and an assurance was given me that he had taken away 'my' sins, even 'mine', and saved 'me' from the law of sin and death. ('Works', 18.248-50)' Wesley preceded this account with a review of his previous religious life which he judged a vain attempt at salvation by works; in later editions of the 'Journal' he added footnotes modifying this judgement. 
The significance of Wesley's conversion for his later life and theology has been subject to conflicting interpretations. Methodists and other evangelicals have generally seen it, like Wesley himself at the time, as completely and permanently reversing his previous beliefs. At the opposite extreme, Roman Catholics, Anglo-Catholics, and others have located his real conversion in the turn to seriousness and search for holiness in 1725, with May 1738 marking a temporary surrender to Moravian ideas or, at most, a psychological stimulus giving him confidence for evangelism. 
It is true that Wesley rarely referred to the May experience later, and in his accounts of Methodism often traced it back to the Oxford search for holiness. However, this needs to be set against the fact that he tended to play down Moravian influences on Methodism after he broke with them and that his views of the process of salvation also changed later. Nevertheless, he refused to abandon his belief in justification by faith as a gift of God which could be received in a moment, by grace, while maintaining his belief in the pursuit of holiness. He also retained his high valuation of the sacraments, but dropped his prejudices in favour of apostolic succession in bishops and committed many breaches of Anglican church order. 
The event of May 1738 seems at first to have suggested to Wesley that justification, assurance, and perhaps even perfection could be received in a single experience. During the next few years, however, he developed a view of salvation as a process moving from conviction of sin, through repentance, to justification, followed by assurance, and on to the pursuit of holiness culminating in perfection, which may be cultivated but also received in a moment, by faith. In 1746 he wrote: 'Our main doctrines, which include all the rest, are three: that of repentance, of faith and of holiness. The first of these we account, as it were, the porch of religion; the next the door; the third, religion itself' (J. Wesley to T. Church, 17 June 1746, 'Letters', ed. Telford, 2.268). To 'John Smith' he wrote: 'I regard even faith itself not as an 'end', but a 'means' only. The end of the commandment is love.... Let this love be attained, by whatever means, and I am content' (J. Wesley to 'J. Smith', 25 June 1746, 'Works', 26.203). 
The long-term significance of the conversion for Wesley's personal experience is less clear. It seems that such moments of intense religious emotion were rare for him, difficult to retain or repeat. Some have suspected that he found his teaching confirmed more by observation of others' emotional experience than by his own. 
Wesley was indeed soon troubled by doubts about the completeness and reality of his conversion. Between June and August 1738 he visited the Moravians in Germany and from them found evidence that full assurance of faith could be delayed. On his return in September he busied himself with preaching and visiting societies in a highly charismatic atmosphere, recalling that of apostolic times, complete with conversions, visions, demon possession, and spiritual healing. Yet in the last self-examination published in his 'Journal' on 4 January 1739 he still lacked assurance of his own condition. Churches now began to be closed to him, and old friends like John Clayton lamented his irregularities, but Wesley, disclaiming hope of a normal Anglican ministry, proclaimed 'the world is my parish' (J. Wesley to J. Clayton?, 28 March 1739?, 'Works', 25.616). 
George Whitefield, the most electrifying orator of the revival, was evangelizing the neglected miners of Kingswood, near Bristol, and urged Wesley to consolidate the results. Still under Moravian tutelage, Wesley drew lots and, with considerable misgivings, arrived in Bristol on 31 March 1739. On 2 April, following Whitefield's example, he 'submitted to 'be more vile'' ('Works', 19.46) by preaching in the open air, a practice he was to continue for the rest of his life. Screaming, fainting, and convulsions affected his audiences here, as they often did in newly evangelized areas. Wesley interpreted cases as variously due to natural, diabolic, and divine causes. 
In 1740-41 disputes broke out that divided the emerging revival. In October 1739 a Moravian visitor, Philip Molther, encouraged the Fetter Lane society to accept 'stillness' -- that is, to avoid all means of grace and wait passively for God to give justification. Wesley urged active pursuit of salvation and appealed to cases of people being converted while receiving communion. On 20 July 1740 he abandoned Fetter Lane with his followers to occupy the refurbished King's Foundery. He had already in May built the New Room in Bristol for society and preaching meetings. He then fell out with Whitefield over the latter's belief in predestination, which Wesley rejected. In February 1741 Wesley published a sermon on free grace to which Whitefield replied in an open letter. Early in 1741 Wesley purged the societies in Bristol, Kingswood, and London and broke with the predestinarians. Though he was later personally reconciled with Whitefield and occasionally attempting until the 1760s to form a common front with other evangelicals, for the next three years Wesley consolidated his own following. 
At the same time orthodox Anglicans were attacking Wesley on three charges which would often be repeated: 'enthusiasm' (claims to special revelations); teaching salvation by faith to the neglect of good works; and breaches of church order. These issues were the substance of a confrontation with Joseph Butler, bishop of Bristol, in August 1739. The irregularities began to include the use of lay preachers, lay converts who moved from private testimonies to public speaking. Early in 1741 Thomas Maxfield offended Wesley in this way but Susanna Wesley is said to have convinced him that 'the Lord owns him as truly as he does you or your brother' (Moore, 2.11). 
In October 1739 Wesley first entered Wales, though his influence there was restricted by the prior emergence of Welsh-speaking Calvinistic Methodism from 1735. In the midlands and north of England he had been preceded by Benjamin Ingham and the Moravians, but in May 1742 he reached Newcastle upon Tyne, where he soon created his northern headquarters. From 1743 he began work in Cornwall, which became a strong Methodist area to be visited as an offshoot of his regular annual journeys round the London-Bristol-Newcastle triangle. Ireland was added in 1747 and Scotland in 1751, though his success was limited there. To a significant extent, however, Wesley's connexion grew by absorbing networks created by local evangelists. 
'Methodism', in eighteenth-century usage, was applied almost indifferently to Welsh Calvinists, the connexions of Whitefield and Lady Huntingdon, Anglican evangelical clergy, and even clergy appearing 'serious', as well as to Wesley's followers. Wesley's organization, however, was distinctive for its development of a centrally directed national network with common loyalties, in contrast with the localized independence of most English religious bodies of its day. 
This organization emerged piecemeal between 1738 and 1748 by a mixture of borrowing and improvisation. Local societies were open to all who 'desired to flee from the wrath to come' and evidenced this in conduct ('Works', 9.70). Unlike the old Anglican societies they were open to all denominations and, importantly, to women. Within them the more earnest were organized in bands, borrowed from the Moravians, and by December 1740 there were select bands or select societies, which apparently came to contain those claiming perfection. Class meetings, originally a fund-raising device, were added from February 1742. Unlike the more exclusive bands and select bands, they were used to divide the whole society into small pastoral groups. 
Until 1744 the scattered societies were held together by the personal supervision of the Wesley brothers. Attempts in 1739 and 1743 to co-ordinate work with other evangelical groups having failed, in June 1744 Wesley summoned a conference of his own assistants: Charles Wesley, four other clergy, and four lay preachers. Doctrine, organization, and discipline were discussed. The conference became an annual event, and evolved from a meeting ostensibly for free discussion into a ruling and regulatory body capable of surviving Wesley's death. Wesley selected its membership, and its decisions, despite disagreements, clearly expressed his will. Proceedings were conducted in question-and-answer form like Wesley's self-examinations at Oxford. Annual minutes began to be published from 1765, but from 1753 a selection of decisions (''Large Minutes'') were published as the basis for Methodist discipline. From 1746 societies were grouped in large circuits or rounds, which from 1748 began to be governed by a quarterly meeting of leaders. Preaching-houses were run by trustees, who from 1763 were urged to use a model deed securing control of the pulpit to Wesley and his successors, though not all complied. The system was run by full-time travelling preachers, stationed for up to two years and assisted by part-time local preachers. Though not officially recognized, from the 1760s Wesley allowed some women to preach, about forty so doing during his lifetime. This organization was designed not simply for administration, evangelism, and pastoral care, but as a vehicle for members to pursue the desired goal of holiness and Christian perfection. 
In the 1740s growing publicity and hostility led to literary attacks on Methodism on the issues already raised by Bishop Butler in 1739. Wesley replied publicly by pamphlet and open letter, notably to Bishop Gibson in 1747; to Bishop Lavington's 'Enthusiasm of Methodists and Papists Compared' (1749) in 1750-51; and in private correspondence in 1745-8 to John Smith (often erroneously identified as Thomas Secker). At a lower social level, though sometimes led by local clergy and gentry, Methodism also suffered mob violence. This was provoked by local xenophobia, alarm at the disruptive effects of Methodism on communities and families, and, in 1744-5, by suspicions that they were 'popish' Jacobites. Wesley did not hesitate to appeal to the higher courts against the prejudices of local magistrates. 
In 'A Thought on Marriage and Celibacy' (1743) Wesley expressed a preference for celibacy, and in a letter to Charles on 25 September 1749 he gave a history of his opinions on the subject. At first he thought he would not marry 'Because I should never find such a woman as my father had' ('Works', 26.380-82). Later, he was deterred by financial reasons; by primitive teachings that the physical taint on marriage excluded perfection; and by fears of hindering his mission. Now, however, the objections had been removed, the purpose of the letter being to defend his proposed marriage to Grace Murray (1715-1803). 
Murray was a widow who became Wesley's housekeeper at Newcastle. Wesley claimed that she agreed to marry him, and in July 1749 formally contracted to do so. But meanwhile she seems to have agreed to marry John Bennet, one of Wesley's leading lay helpers. After meeting them at Epworth on 1 September 1749 Wesley wrote sharply to Bennet asserting his claim. Charles Wesley, believing that Bennet had the prior claim, that Grace was socially unsuitable, and that her marriage to John would disrupt the societies, married Grace to Bennet at Newcastle on 3 October 1749. Wesley's private account of the story minutely justified his conduct and expressed his grief at the debacle (published by A. Leger as 'Wesley's Last Love', 1910). Yet it is doubtful whether his intentions were as clear to Grace as he claimed, and his tortuous conduct curiously resembled that with Sophia Hopkey years before. By 1752 Bennet had left Wesley and become an Independent minister in Cheshire. 
Wesley was probably persuaded by his friend Vincent Perronet, vicar of Shoreham, that marriage would be a wise precaution against scandal, and he chose Mrs Mary (Molly) Vazeille, 'nee' Goldhawk (1709/10-1781), the widow of a London merchant. On 9 February 1751 Wesley secured her fortune of $3000 to her use, no doubt to deter suspicions of fortune-hunting. They were married on 18 or 19 February, it is said by Charles Manning, vicar of Hayes, Middlesex, at an unknown location. 
Wesley's attitude to marriage was perilously exacting, following his principle that no married preacher should travel less than a bachelor. His wife complied for a time but tired of travel. She has generally been regarded as pathologically jealous and possessive, but she had cause for complaint. She particularly resented Wesley's fondness for female friendships and correspondence. Naively innocent though these relationships were, they were indiscreet in his position. Mrs Wesley was particularly hostile to Sarah Ryan (1724-1768), Wesley's housekeeper at Kingswood. Ryan had a bigamous past, despite her impressive spiritual experiences and close friendship with the Methodist saint Mary Bosanquet. By 1755 the Wesley marriage was visibly in trouble. Mrs Wesley opened his letters and, according to John Hampson, once dragged Wesley round by his hair (Hampson, 2.127). Wesley's attempts to placate and control her were eventually marked by more logic than understanding, and on 23 January 1771 she left him. In his published 'Journal' Wesley wrote, without naming her: 'non eam reliqui, non dismissi, non revocabat' ('I have not left her, I have not sent her away, I will not recall her'; 'Works', 22.262). Though returning for a time in 1772 she left him finally in 1776, and allegedly tried to publish doctored versions of his letters to damage him. She died on 8 October 1781 leaving him a gold ring 'in token that I die in love and friendship towards him' ('DNB'). Wesley heard of her death only some days later. His preference for celibacy among Methodists was reiterated in 'A Thought upon Marriage' (1785), and though most did not agree he often discouraged their marriages. 
While Wesley's marriage was being strained he had to face a crisis over Methodist relationships with the Church of England. He always claimed that Methodism was merely an auxiliary to the Church of England and did not separate from it so long as Methodists attended its worship and taught its doctrines, but his irregularities seemed to contradict these claims and many Methodists criticized the church. The 1744 conference defined the Church of England restrictively, following article 19 of the Anglican articles of faith, as 'the congregation of English 'believers' in which the 'pure word' of God is proclaimed and the sacraments 'duly' administered'. This ignored establishment and canon law, and Methodists were to obey bishops only in 'things indifferent'. The 1745 conference sketched a pragmatic account of the origins of different ecclesiastical polities in a way which seemed to justify Wesley's creation of Methodism. In his 'Journal' for 20 January 1746 Wesley claimed that Peter King's 'Enquiry into the Constitution... of the Primitive Church' (1691) convinced him that bishops and presbyters were originally of one order, and at some point Edward Stillingfleet's 'Irenicum' (1654) convinced him that no church order had divine sanction. The 1747 conference pronounced a 'national church' to be 'a merely political creation'. In the last resort Wesley subordinated church order to the needs of his mission. To John Smith he wrote on 25 June 1746: 'What is the end of all 'ecclesiastical order'? Is it not to bring souls from the power of Satan to God? And to build them up in his fear and love? 'Order', then, is so far valuable as it answers these ends; and if it answers them not it is nothing worth. ('Works', 26.206)' The parish system, he implied, was inferior to his own.In the early 1750s there were complaints of Wesley's authoritarianism, and purges of unsatisfactory preachers and of those who attacked the church. In October 1754 Charles Wesley complained that Charles Perronet had administered communion without authority and others followed suit. John said 'We have in effect ordained already' and was 'minded to lay on hands and to let the preachers administer [communion]' (Tyerman, 2.202 n.). For the conference of 1755 John prepared a paper 'Ought we to separate from the Church of England?'. He urged that, whether or not it was lawful, separation was not expedient, believing that as a result Methodism would dwindle into an ineffective sect. But in September 1755 he admitted to Samuel Walker, the evangelical curate of Truro, that he could not answer all the preachers' objections against Anglican canon law and the liturgy. He also (unlike Charles Wesley) defended the use of preachers and societies even in evangelical parishes. 
From 1756 Charles Wesley virtually ceased to itinerate and settled first in Bristol and then in London as minister to the Methodists in those places. Charles had married in 1749, and though his retreat from itinerancy has often been ascribed to family cares, he had also alienated many of the preachers by his criticisms of them and suggestions that they be subordinated to evangelical parish clergy. 
In 1760 Methodist preachers in Norwich once again administered communion. Though still refusing to ordain, John Wesley treated the offenders more calmly than Charles, who also condemned preachers who took licences under the 1689 'Toleration Act' to defend themselves against attack, while denying that they were dissenters. In 1764-5 a questionable Greek bishop, Erasmus of Arcadia, ordained some Methodist preachers, not all with Wesley's knowledge, and it was rumoured that Wesley had asked to be ordained as a bishop. The scandal this caused forced Wesley to disown those ordained. 
Much more to Wesley's taste, and more central to his vision of Methodism's mission, was an outbreak of perfectionist experiences late in the 1750s. Perfection had been preached, experienced, and discussed in the 1740s, but Wesley claimed that such cases had ceased for twenty years. Though he always argued for perfection from scripture, in 1759 he went so far as to claim that he would give up the doctrine if there were no living witnesses. The new outbreak apparently began in some places in the middle of 1758. Certain preachers had placed it in an alarming light by claiming that believers are in a state of damnation unless they have achieved it and could perish if they died before obtaining it. This led Wesley to elaborate his paradox that perfection could co-exist with infirmities of various kinds, since its essence is an unbroken relationship of love towards God and one's neighbour. 
From 1760 the experiences proliferated, sometimes accompanied by shrieks and groans reminiscent of the early days of the revival. Wesley thought these experiences favourable to the growth of the movement. By 1761 some were speaking of third blessings or of separate experiences of the sanctification of the mind and of the heart by faith. The movement culminated in Thomas Maxfield and George Bell, former guardsman, and their followers claiming that God was to be found only in their meetings, that they were restored to the purity of Adam and Eve, and that they were incapable of falling away. They also claimed gifts of healing, and Bell attempted to cure blind people and raise the dead. Always attracted by perfectionism, Wesley was at first slow to act. But he was hurt when Maxfield left him, and finally repudiated Bell when he prophesied that the world would end on 28 February 1763. 
The Maxfield and Bell secession may have numbered only 200 people, but more serious was the legacy of distrust of perfection among Methodists and the sharpened suspicions of Calvinists. The controversy also led Wesley to define his doctrine more and more carefully in 'Thoughts on Perfection' (1759), and he reviewed the history of his teaching in his 'Plain Account of Christian Perfection' (1767). He continued to teach it, however, and to emphasize more than ever that it could be received in a moment by faith. In 1790 he claimed that it was 'the grand depositum which God has lodged with the people called Methodists, and for the sake of propagating this chiefly he appeared to have raised us up' (J. Wesley to R. Carr Brackenbury, 15 Sept 1790, 'Letters', 8.238). 
Conflicts, literary and personal, between Calvinistic Methodists and Wesley and his followers had surfaced periodically ever since the breach with Whitefield. In the early 1770s the old dispute erupted violently. Wesley was typical of the Anglicans of his day, though unusual among English evangelicals, in his rejection of Calvinism and especially the doctrine of predestination. Most evangelical Calvinists were moderates, and their Calvinism came more from experience than a detailed knowledge of earlier Western debates of predestination, though A. M. Toplady and some of Lady Huntingdon's followers were more extreme and more informed. Wesley's view of Calvinism was brutally simplistic: predestination makes God appear unjust and unfeeling and it undermines any incentive for morality. 
Lady Huntingdon, though now a Calvinist, still aspired to aid all evangelical parties. She used Wesley's preacher Joseph Benson and John Fletcher, vicar of Madeley, to serve her college at Trefeca, founded in 1768 -- a project which seems to have excited some jealousy in Wesley. Already on 1 December 1767 he recorded some remarkable reflections in his 'Journal' to the effect that people could have the experience and effects of justification without using the correct language; even that they could (like William Law, he said) deny the doctrine and yet possess its reality. 'He that feareth God and worketh righteousness is accepted with him' ('Works', 22.114). But public controversy broke out over a minute from the 1770 conference which emphasized the goal of holiness, with an enhanced role for good works, while dismissing what Calvinists regarded as essential technical distinctions about merit as mere hair-splitting. Moreover, Whitefield had died in America on 30 September 1770 and in November Wesley preached a memorial sermon for him, emphasizing only the doctrines on which they had agreed. 
Lady Huntingdon dismissed Benson from her college and Fletcher resigned. She and her supporters threatened to attend the conference of 1771 to insist on the retraction of the offending minute. Although a revised version appeared to satisfy both parties, Wesley reignited the controversy by publishing a manuscript by Fletcher defending the original offending statement. In the literary battle that followed, Wesley, though replying to pamphlets by Toplady and Richard Hill, left most of the work to other friends and, above all, to Fletcher in his 'Six Checks to Antinomianism' (1771-5; the alleged neglect of moral law ascribed to Calvinists). In the course of the controversy Fletcher and Wesley appeared to go as far as to teach a 'second justification' by works as necessary for final salvation. This confirmed Calvinist suspicions that Wesley had abandoned salvation by grace through faith. 
Individual Methodists had evangelized in the West Indies since 1759 and there was talk of an African mission in 1778, but the missionary enthusiast Dr Thomas Coke found little support from Wesley for organizing such projects until 1786. Wesley thought they had sufficient to do at home unless they had a clear call from Providence. But voluntary activity in America from the early 1760s led Wesley to allow ten preachers to travel there to oversee the work between 1769 and 1774. 
It was the American War of Independence and reformist agitations at home that provoked Wesley into his most active interventions in politics. Despite early high-church and even Jacobite associations, his advice in 1747 had been to vote for 'one that loves God' or at least one who 'loves King George who has been appointed to reign over us' ('Works', 11.196-8). Between 1768 and 1778 he took sides more decisively by opposing Wilkite cries for 'liberty' in 'Free Thoughts on the Present State of Public Affairs' (1768) and 'Thoughts on Liberty' (1772). 
On America, in 'Free Thoughts', Wesley conceded that the ministry's actions could not be defended and in 1775 privately warned ministers against coercion and the dangers of war. But in his 'Calm Address to our American Colonies' (1775; based largely on Samuel Johnson's 'Taxation No Tyranny', 1775) and in 'Some Observations on Liberty' (1776) he condemned the Americans and portrayed them as allied with English radicals. This volte-face provoked charges of hypocrisy and plagiarism. The French alliance with the Americans aroused in Wesley a fear that this 'popish' power was conspiring with the Americans and radicals to ruin England. 
Despite Wesley's remarkable 'Letter to a Roman Catholic' (1749), pleading for mutual tolerance on the basis of a few shared basic principles, Wesley more characteristically displayed the traditional English protestant paranoia towards Catholics as people who would become persecuting political subversives if given the opportunity. He was personally tolerant of individuals and the practice of Catholic worship, but resisted the granting of political rights. Hence he opposed the 'Catholic Relief Act' of 1778 and defended Lord George Gordon's Protestant Association which landed him in controversy. He actually signed a petition against the act (Treasury Solicitor's MSS, TS11/389/1212; English, 362 and n. 70). 
War and suspicion of loyalism forced all the English Methodist preachers out of America by 1778 except Francis Asbury, who was to become a kind of American Wesley. Independence, however, set Wesley free to plan American Methodism's future, which coincided with new arrangements for England as well. 
Though heartened by signs of fresh local revivals and the more rapid growth of Methodism in the 1780s by evangelism and population changes, Wesley now had to face more urgently the question of what would happen to Methodism after his death. The problem was not new. The 1763 model deed was designed, where used, to secure control of preaching-house pulpits to the Wesley brothers, followed by William Grimshaw, vicar of Haworth, and finally the 'yearly Conference of the people called Methodists'. Grimshaw died that year, and in 1769 Wesley guessed that only a third of the preachers would stay with Methodism after his death. They should be led by a small committee, taking turns to be 'moderator'. In 1773 he proposed that John Fletcher should be his successor but Fletcher refused. In 1775 Joseph Benson proposed purging the preachers and ordaining some of them. Fletcher then proposed that if the bishops refused to ordain preachers, Wesley should ordain some himself, and set up a 'Methodist Church of England' with a revised prayer book and articles, his successors in leadership to be a body of moderators. 
Nothing came of these proposals, but by 1784 not only the succession but control of the preaching-houses (nearly 400 of them by now) had become a problem, for it was found that the 'yearly Conference' had never been legally defined. Early in 1784 Wesley enrolled a deed of declaration in chancery defining the conference and its powers. It was to consist of 100 named and self-perpetuating preachers who were to elect an annual president. The hundred included some young preachers but omitted some senior ones. Some of the omitted, including Wesley's first biographer, John Hampson, then left the Methodist movement. Despite the deed, Wesley continued to select and control the conference, though in his last years he sometimes gave way to the majority and used a cabinet of advisers. 
The same year Wesley devised a scheme for an independent American Methodist church, complete with a revised 'Book of Common Prayer' and reduced articles of religion. Relying on his old claim that bishops and presbyters were originally of one order, he claimed to be a scriptural 'episkopos' with the right to ordain. On 1 and 2 September 1784, with the help of Thomas Coke and James Creighton, he ordained two preachers for America and then Coke as a superintendent, with a view to his ordaining Asbury as co-superintendent for America. This was evidently designed to secure Wesley's control over American Methodism. The Americans, however, insisted on approving the appointments for themselves and by 1788 had annoyed Wesley by labelling their superintendents 'bishops'. 
Wesley argued that he was free to ordain for America since the Church of England no longer exercised jurisdiction there after independence. From 1785 he also ordained for Scotland, where the established church was presbyterian. Those ordained for Scotland were forbidden to administer sacraments in England. Wesley's further plans for England were and are a matter of controversy. Though some alleged that he regretted ordaining at all, others denied this, or claimed that he was pressurized by unscrupulous preachers. In 1788 he ordained three men who remained in England, one of them, Alexander Mather, allegedly as a superintendent. It seems arguable that Wesley was holding these men in reserve in case he needed to concede Methodist sacraments for some places in England. 
Despite these actions, Wesley continued to claim that he had not separated from the Church of England, though he was finally forced to define separation as applying only to a formal secession. His apparent inconsistency may best be explained as a policy of limited concessions where pressures for separation were greatest, with a view to keeping Methodism as united as possible, thereby reducing the pressure for a concerted and formal separation. This, in effect, is what he claimed himself, however paradoxically. 
In Wesley's last years he observed, with a mixture of surprise and wry appreciation, that he had become almost respectable. His journeys continued almost to the end, though latterly in a chaise, and became almost triumphal processions with people anxious to catch their last glimpse of an almost legendary figure. H. Crabbe Robinson in October 1790 said that Wesley's voice was barely audible. But 'his reverend countenance, especially his long white hair, formed a picture never to be forgotten... It was for the most part a pantomime, but the pantomime went to the heart' (H. C. Robinson, 'Diary', ed. T. Seddon, 1899, 1.19-20). 
Despite many illnesses and in 1753 the conviction that he was about to die of consumption, Wesley marvelled in his 'Journal' on his birthday on 28 June 1776 NS that he was 'far abler to preach' than when he was twenty-three. He ascribed the 'natural means God has used' for this as constant exercise and travelling, early rising, ability to sleep at will, and evenness of temper ('Works', 23.21). In the later 1780s he regularly described his health on his birthday; only on 28 June 1789 did he concede that 'I now find I grow old', and not until the following year did he admit to failing sight and strength. Though he could still be sprightly, observers at his last conference in 1790 noted that he was nearly blind, with his memory much decayed so that Mather conducted the business. Yet he could still intervene sharply if opposed. 
In July 1790 Wesley finally gave up keeping his accounts, saying that 'I save all I can and give all I can, that is all I have' ('Journal of John Wesley', 8.80 n.). In October he preached his last sermon in the open air, and his final sermon on 23 February 1791. On 24 February he wrote his last recorded letter, urging on William Wilberforce in his anti-slave trade campaign. The same day he entered his house in City Road, London, for the last time. His friend Miss Ritchie later wrote a detailed account of these days, unfolding in a series of 'pleasing, awful scenes'. Among his last recorded words were 'The best of all is God is with us' and an attempt to sing Isaac Watts's 'I'll praise my Maker while I've breath' (ibid., 8.131-44). John Wesley died at his home on 2 March 1791 and was buried behind his City Road chapel on 9 March. By his will he ruled that there should be no hearse, no coach, no escutcheon, no pomp except the 'tears of those that love me'; and that 20's'. should be paid to each of six poor men to bear his body to the grave. His papers were left to three executors and the management of his books to other trustees. Both provisions led to unseemly wrangles later. The funeral service was read by his assistant Revd John Richardson, who substituted 'father' for 'our dear brother here departed', thus emphasizing the filial relation in which the preachers stood to him (Moore, 2.394). The funeral sermon was preached by his physician John Whitehead, another later biographer. 
Wesley's theological position has been variously described. He produced no systematic theology and was highly eclectic in his selective borrowings from patristic writers, Roman Catholics (notably the seventeenth-century French quietists), high-church and puritan Anglicans, as well as Moravians. Following Anglican tradition, he appealed to the combined authority of scripture, early church tradition, and reason, though increasingly also to experience. Though giving scripture primacy, he allowed for some textual criticism in his 'Expository Notes' on the 'Old' and 'New' testaments (1761, 1755), based chiefly on J. A. Bengel's 'Gnomon' (1742). His use of reason was influenced by John Locke's 'Essay Concerning Human Understanding' (1690), though even more by Peter Browne's 'Procedure, Extent and Limits of Human Understanding' (1728). He was strongly empiricist in principle, rejecting innate ideas. However, he stretched empiricism to cover 'a new class of senses' 'opened in your souls' by God, 'not depending on the organs of flesh and blood' ('Works', 8.276). His belief in the supernatural was strong, for he claimed it was justified by scripture and credible witnesses. His debt to the eighteenth-century temper also shows in his impatience with traditional protestant scholastic systems of theology and his toleration of those agreeing with him on fundamentals, though he was not always consistent here in his treatment of Calvinists and Roman Catholics. 
Rejecting predestination, Wesley saw salvation as being open to all through prevenient grace, with freedom to accept or reject the offer. Unlike Calvinists, Wesley believed salvation once gained could be lost and had to be pursued actively. Similarly, assurance of salvation is usually obtainable, partly by recognition of a changed life, partly as a direct gift from the Holy Spirit, but there is no guarantee of Calvinist final perseverance. 
Despite his acceptance from 1738 of justification by grace through faith as the basis of salvation, Wesley's mature doctrine of salvation shifted away from the Reformation's stress on justification and towards the development of a holy life. Justification begins this process of sanctification, which culminates in the attainment of a 'perfection' characterized by unbroken love to God and humanity. This gift may even be received in a moment, by faith. Thus Wesley seems to have combined the Moravian understanding of an instant gift with the more 'Catholic' notion of the systematic cultivation of holiness. Wesley evaded charges of 'salvation by works' by saying that even the 'perfect' depend every moment on grace and faith. Wesley denied that he taught 'sinless' perfection. This seems to rely on his definition of sin 'properly so called' as being limited to 'a voluntary breach of a known law' (J. Wesley to M. Pendarves, 19 June 1731, 'Works', 25.289). 
Wesley retained his high-church beliefs in frequent communion and in a version of the real presence and a kind of sacrifice in the eucharist, expressed in vivid physical terms in his brother Charles's hymns. In matters of worship he was less conservative. While regarding Methodist worship as only supplementary to Anglican services he provided much else for Methodists. Hymns and extempore prayer were freely used. From various sources he adapted the love feast (a kind of folk sacrament with bread and water and religious testimonies); the covenant service, which became an annual act of rededication; and the watch-night, which became a new year counter to secular celebrations. Wesley edited 'Hymns for the Use of Methodists' (1780), arranged to follow the pattern of Methodist religious experience, and he claimed for it the 'spirit of poetry' as well as of 'piety' (preface). 
Wesley's mother was a Jacobite, his father a tory who supported the new Hanoverian dynasty. Though possibly flirting with Jacobitism and certainly criticizing the Walpole administration during his Oxford period, Wesley soon adopted his father's position. In 1775 he said he was 'an high churchman, the son of an high churchman, bred up from my childhood in the highest notions of passive obedience and non-resistance' (J. Wesley to earl of Dartmouth, June 1775, 'Letters', 6.156). In 1785 he claimed that he and his brother Samuel were, like their father, 'Tories' but not Jacobites ('I am no more a Jacobite than I am a Turk'). In a letter to the editor of the 'Gentleman's Magazine' (24 December 1785) Wesley stated that a tory is 'one that believes God, not the people, to be the origin of all civil power' (ibid., 7.305-6). This was in contradiction of social contract and natural rights ideas, and explains his opposition to John Wilkes and the American revolutionaries in the 1770s. He was influenced by scriptural injunctions to obey the powers that be as ordained by God; by the consideration that the Hanoverian kings upheld religious toleration (important for Methodists); and by his fears in the 1770s of disorder. But the description of his family traditions suggests that, like other tories, he had transferred earlier ideas of divine right to the Hanoverian dynasty. 
On social matters Wesley was a philanthropist and an occasional critic of contemporary economic vices and prejudices. His sermon entitled 'The use of money' (1760) expounded the aphorism 'gain all you can, save all you can, give all you can' ('Works', 2.263). The first point only partially endorsed aggressive capitalism, for it was restricted by prohibitions on speculation and bill broking. The second was directed against conspicuous consumption and elaborated in later sermons against luxury -- Wesley was particularly exercised against women's hats. Gaining and saving were only in order to give -- sacrificially. In 1744 Wesley had even planned a kind of apostolic community of goods, though this was not achieved. As to his own finances, on marrying in 1751 he lost his fellowship of Lincoln and its income. His allowances from Methodism were not above $30 p.a. and some gifts, but his publications eventually realized an income which enabled him to give away $1000 annually. 
Wesley was in his century unusual for his distrust of the rich (who did not respond well to his evangelism) and for his love of the poor, whom he treated with respect. He did not believe their poverty was due to their improvidence. He organized collections in times of distress and in 1747 set up a free dispensary, including electric shock treatment. His 'Primitive Physick' (1747, and later editions to at least 1840), though often mocked for its folk remedies, also drew on respectable medical authorities while avoiding their more lethal prescriptions. He also recommended fresh air, cold water, a quiet mind, and prayer. 
Wesley was an early supporter of the anti-slave trade campaign, adapting Anthony Benezet's attack in his 'Thoughts on Slavery' (1774). In education he supported Methodists' schools and the rising Sunday school movement, as well as founding his own Kingswood School (1748), though he often despaired of making it truly 'Christian'. More negatively, he praised the refounded Society for the Reformation of Manners in a sermon in 1763 and attacked the wasteful luxury of tea drinking and the poison of spirit drinking. (Wesley, however, was not a teetotaller, and among his more curious letters are those describing the debilitating effects of tea but also inveighing against the adulteration of honest English ale by hops.) Given his multifarious activities and the humble status of many of his followers it is not surprising that Wesley, while supporting the efforts of others, did not organize large-scale moral and social campaigns on the lines of the Clapham Sect. 
Though inferior to Whitefield as a popular orator, Wesley could often create highly emotional effects in his audiences. He contrasted his own style with his brother's by saying that he excelled in 'connexion' (reasoned argument), Charles in 'strong pointed sentences' (J. Wesley to C. Wesley, June 1766, 'Letters', 5.16). He preached extempore for an hour or more, striving for plain language but rising to controlled rhetoric in his concluding appeals. Horace Walpole in 1766 thought him 'as evidently an actor as Garrick. He spoke his sermon but so fast, and with so little accent, that I am sure he has often uttered it, for it was like a lesson'. Despite 'parts and eloquence' at the end he 'exalted his voice' and 'acted a very ugly enthusiasm' ('Selected Letters of Horace Walpole', ed. W. S. Lewis, 1973, 119). Sir Walter Scott heard him tell excellent stories, but for some he fell too readily into anecdotage in old age, and Hampson thought he only preached well if he prepared, and too often he did not. He preached too frequently and insisted on doing so 'if he could stand on his legs' (Hampson, 3.169-71). 
As an author Wesley was astonishingly prolific on secular as well as religious subjects. He valued conciseness and plain language, and much of his output consisted of extracts from, or condensations of, other men's works, not always acknowledged. His 'Christian Library' (1749-55) included condensed versions of devotional classics both Catholic and protestant. 'A Survey of the Works of God in Creation' (1775), based on Buddeus of Jena, was a 'natural philosophy' to display what the title suggested, but it also showed his empiricism in his claim 'barely to set down what appears in nature, not the causes of the appearances' (preface); but while he distrusted Sir Isaac Newton's hypotheses he loved to record 'wonders'. Similarly, in 'Primitive Physick' he looked only for remedies that allegedly worked, criticizing traditional medical systems. His 'History of England' (1776) was based on Goldsmith, Rapin, and Smollett, and he criticized historians for not showing God as the supreme ruler of the world. He wrote history, he said, 'to bring God into it' (J. Wesley to C. Wesley, 13 Jan 1774, 'Letters', 6.67). This was more obvious in his 'Ecclesiastical History' (1781), based on Archibald Maclaine's translation of Mosheim. He criticized Mosheim for treating church history like secular history and omitting the role of the Holy Spirit, though he acknowledged that few saints would be found in the history of the church. 
Wesley's 'Arminian Magazine' (from 1778) was begun as a counter to Calvinist magazines, but included Methodist biographies, travel literature, snippets of science, poetry, and many accounts of witchcraft and providential interventions. In his 'Appeals to Men of Reason and Religion' (1743-5) he addressed a cultured audience; in his short 'Words' for various moral offenders, a more popular readership. 
In controversy Wesley was generally courteous, though he could be unfair, and some complained that he evaded substantive issues by nice logical distinctions. His 'Journal', whatever problems it poses as an objective historical source for his life, is the record of a tireless traveller and observer of a wide range of people and manners. It was also a vehicle, like so much of what he wrote, not only for his confident opinions but also for educating his people and (he no doubt hoped) a wider audience. He never lost the instincts of an Oxford tutor. He was, it may be claimed, a kind of cultural mediator between the educated world and the moderately literate people of Methodism and even beyond them. 
Wesley was less of a gift to caricaturists than Whitefield, and satirical attacks on him were most prominent during the political and Calvinist controversies of the 1770s. He was typically portrayed as a hypocrite in sheep's clothing or an aged lecher. More objectively he appears as the austere Methodist of John Williams's portrait (1742), the persuasive preacher of Nathaniel Hone's ('c'.1766), or the benevolent patriarch of George Romney's (1789). Physically, he was short (5 feet 3 inches), slim, muscular, with piercing blue eyes, a fresh complexion, and hair (until it turned white in old age) variously described as brown or auburn. Though dispensing with a wig (except possibly in later life) his hair was curled at the ends. He had a passion for cleanliness and neatness in his person and surroundings. 
Hampson's much quoted description of Wesley in old age emphasized his 'cheerfulness mingled with gravity, a sprightliness which was the natural result of an unusual flow of spirits and was yet combined with... the most serene tranquillity'. 'His manner in private life... was sprightly and pleasant to the last degree', unlike that of Methodists 'who seemed to have ranked laughter among the mortal sins'. (The preacher John Pawson thought Wesley's conversation edifying only if a serious friend kept him to the point.) Wesley dressed in 'a narrow plaited stock, a coat with a small upright collar, no buckles at his knees, no silk or velvet in any part of his apparel' (Hampson, 3.166-8, 178-9). He habitually preached in gown and bands. 
In 1776 Wesley wrote: 'I 'feel' and 'grieve', but, by the grace of God I 'fret' at nothing' ('Works', 23.21). The younger Wesley was less tranquil. Observers agreed that he had achieved control by discipline over a naturally warm and impetuous temperament which sometimes still erupted in old age. His judgements on people could be hasty and he tended to take them at face value, particularly if they displayed apparent spiritual gifts. Some thought him open to flattery. Judgements of this kind, however, were coloured by dislike of his policies or advisers. There are many testimonies to his wit and charm, but his isolated position as leader of a movement with few members of his own social status hindered close friendships, while his affectionate correspondence with female disciples provoked gossip and scandal, despite its essential innocence. His rigorous timetable, as Samuel Johnson complained, inhibited relaxed conversation. Behind the charm, too, there was an iron will: 'granite in aspic' (V. H. H. Green, 'John Wesley', 127). 
The chief charges against Wesley, even by some friends, were that he was obsessed with absolute power and that he was excessively credulous. His authoritarianism and confidence in his own judgement are undeniable, though they could be defended as necessary to control an ebullient movement and, in his own eyes, as a providential charge. His credulity refers to his keen interest and outspoken belief in the supernatural as evidence of the unseen world and intervention by God or the devil. Reading as he rode on his travels, he made snap judgements on books, pronouncing on the most diverse subjects with the utmost confidence, especially against conventional wisdom. Thus he defended Mary, queen of Scots, and Richard III, but condemned Elizabeth I as a persecutor. 
Wesley's spirituality is evidenced by his lifelong disciplines of devotion, though his inner life becomes hard to gauge after 1739. He said he had 'more need of heat than of light' ('Works', 26.161 n.), and one of his bolder associates told him that he had 'the 'knowledge' of all 'experience' but not the 'experience' of all you 'know'' (ibid., 26.415). This and passing remarks of Wesley himself may suggest that he lacked the capacity for the felt spiritual raptures experienced by many of his followers. Despite his enthusiasm for perfection he never claimed the experience for himself, whether from prudence or lack of conviction that he possessed it. Yet his writings give glimpses of considerable spiritual insight and, if he judged himself severely, even non-Methodist obituarists agreed that he had led a life of extraordinary selflessness, discipline, and devotion to religion and the care of the poor. 
For Methodist biographers the standard interpretation of Wesley evolved from the crop of studies up to 1825 by men who had known him, though their judgements were affected by current controversies about Methodism. Henry Moore's 'Life of John Wesley' (1824-5) established the consensus that Wesley was a faultless paragon of many-sided abilities whose religious position was settled by his conversion in 1738. Moore rejected or omitted the critical observations of other biographers. An alternative view has recurred since Anglo-Catholic writers in the 1870s claimed 1725 as his 'real' conversion, playing down Wesley's conversionist evangelism. G. C. Cell's 'Rediscovery of John Wesley' (1935) was unusual in that, while emphasizing justification by faith and religious experience, he concluded that Wesley achieved 'a necessary synthesis of the Protestant ethic of grace with the Catholic ethic of holiness' (Cell, 361). The accumulation of fresh information and editions of the 'Journals' and 'Letters' in the first half of the twentieth century inspired numerous studies of special aspects of Wesley's beliefs and activities -- as evangelist, sacramentalist, mystic, puritan, and social reformer. Biographers, however, tended to recycle and popularize the traditional material without altering the overall interpretation, though non-Methodists were more critical of him. From the early 1960s use of the Oxford diaries and their more accurate decipherment revived interest in Wesley's early development. Other studies related him more closely to the continental revival. American Methodists have recently attempted to develop a distinctive 'Wesleyan' theology and apply it to present-day religion. The basis of future biographies has been laid by the first critical edition of Wesley's 'Works' (1975-). The latest biographers have re-evaluated the sources and related Wesley more closely to his social and intellectual environment. 
On wider issues of interpretation, Wesley has been seen as challenging and reviving the moribund Church of England and ministering to the neglected poor. It has been claimed that Methodism helped to save England from violent revolution and provided a home for people uprooted by the industrial revolution. He has been credited with a role in social reform along with Wilberforce and the Clapham Sect. His doctrine of perfection has been seen as an original contribution to theology. 
None of these claims can be readily substantiated. Wesley's long life and voluminous 'Journal' have tended to exaggerate his role as initiator and leader of a revival which was part of an international 'awakening'. His organization, with its mixture of formal and informal worship, centralization yet flexibility, was, however, distinctive and a challenge to the localized and static character of most English churches. His perfection doctrine, though also distinctive, survived only within Methodism and as an element in later 'holiness' and Pentecostalist movements. Methodism's counter-revolutionary role is now debatable and some would rather see Methodism as emerging from opposition to whig hegemony. 
How far Wesley affected the unchurched poor is unclear. Methodist membership was stronger among skilled than unskilled workers and perhaps appealed to, or helped, the upwardly mobile. Autobiographies also suggest that the committed membership had early concerns about religion. The movement, however, had a diffused effect beyond the membership and did attract people who found no satisfaction in conventional churches. Methodist experience of lay organization arguably helped to influence working-class movements in later times. Despite Wesley's hostility to democracy, Methodism gave much scope to male and female lay activity in contrast to the clergy-dominated churches of the day. The irony is that Wesley's stated aim was 'not to form any new sect but to revive the nation, especially the church [of England] -- and to spread scriptural holiness through the land' ('Large Minutes', 1763, 1789, in 'Minutes of the Methodist Conferences', 446). Yet his most tangible legacy was the later creation of the largest new family of churches to be thrown up by the revival in Britain and in the rest of the English-speaking world. 


@@@@@


doc= 29070


Wesley, Samuel (bap. 1662, d. 1735), Church of England clergyman and poet, was baptized on 17 December 1662 in Winterborne Whitechurch, Dorset, probably the third of at least four children of the Revd John Westley (1635/6-1671), vicar of Winterborne Whitechurch until his ejection, in 1662, under the 'Act of Uniformity', and his wife, the daughter of John White (1574-1648) and allegedly the niece of Thomas Fuller, the church historian. His grandfather Bartholomew Westley was also ejected in 1662. The family name was spelt Westley by Samuel as late as 1694 and by others until much later. 
Samuel Wesley was educated at Dorchester grammar school under Henry Dolling and was sent to be prepared for the Independent ministry, under Theophilus Gale, at Newington Green but he reached London on 8 March 1678, after Gale's death. He then attended another grammar school before entering the academies first of Edward Veel (or Veal) in Stepney and after two years that of Charles Morton in Newington Green, where his fellow students included Daniel Defoe. There he wrote lampoons against Thomas Doolittle, head of a rival presbyterian academy. 
Dr John Owen, the former vice-chancellor of Oxford University, believing that degrees would soon be open to dissenters, urged Wesley to study at a university. According to his son John Wesley (1703-1791) it was an attempt to vindicate dissent that led instead to Wesley's move towards the Church of England; apparently he slipped away early one morning to Oxford to avoid opposition from his strongly dissenting family. Though he had mixed feelings about Oxford behaviour he was also disgusted by dissenting ribaldry against the church and the Stuarts, while he admired the latitudinarian John Tillotson. However, he resolved to turn Anglican only after three months in London. 
Having paid off some debts with the help of dissenting funds Wesley returned to Oxford, on 22 September 1684, and, as a servitor, entered Exeter College, where he matriculated on 18 November. After three months he found himself destitute and mocked by his fellow undergraduates for his dissenting background. He felt himself at risk of moral collapse and, in a letter of 22 August 1692, wrote: 'had not God by providence recall'd me to myself by those kind afflictions, I believe I had grown as ill a man as most in the university' (Beecham, 104). Despite his financial difficulties he told his brother Matthew, in 1731, that he had entered Oxford with $2 5's'. 0died yet left with $10 15's'. 0died While at Oxford he published anonymously, through his brother-in-law John Dunton, a volume of verse, entitled 'Maggots [Whimsies], or, Poems on Several Subjects Never Before Handled' (1685). He later claimed to have ceased to support James II, over the expulsion of the fellows of Magdalen (16 November 1687), while being unwilling to oppose him actively. But in 1688 he contributed verses to 'Strenae natalitatiae Oxoniensae' (1688), in honour of the birth of James's son on 10 June. However, he soon transferred his allegiance to William and Mary, Queen Anne, and George I. 
Having graduated BA on 19 June 1688 Wesley reached London on 1 July and was offered a chaplaincy place in Cornwall. He was ordained deacon at Bromley on 7 August 1688 by Thomas Sprat, bishop of Rochester. He then acted as curate of St Botolph, Aldersgate, for about ten months. On 12 November 1688 he married Susanna Annesley (1669-1742) ['see 'Wesley, Susanna], youngest daughter of Dr Samuel Annesley, a leading dissenting minister, and his second wife. Susanna had also abandoned dissent for Anglicanism. On 24 February 1689 Wesley was ordained priest by Henry Compton, bishop of London. 
Next Wesley had an unhappy six months at sea as a naval chaplain, at $70 per annum, from about June to late November 1689. Then, after some months as a literary hack, he obtained, during the first half of 1690, a curacy at Newington Butts, Surrey, at $30 per annum. His first son, Samuel Wesley the younger ['see below'], was born on 10 February 1690 or 1691 in Spitalfields. Early in the 1690s he wrote a letter which described in critical terms the tone and education of dissenting academies, and which was to be published, with damaging effects, in 1703. 
Though offered a post in Virginia, Wesley refused this in favour of the living of South Ormsby, Lincolnshire, which came to him from the Massingberd family, probably through the influence of John Sheffield, marquess of Normanby. He was presented on 25 June 1691 and instituted on 9 July. He returned to London to raise money and first signed the parish register at South Ormsby on 25 August 1691. He had added a nearby curacy, probably Maltby-le-Marsh, by March 1692. 
While at South Ormsby Wesley wrote a good deal. With John Dunton he contributed to the 'Athenian Gazette' (1691-7) and to the 'Young Student's Library' (1692), probably mainly on religious subjects. His heroic poem 'The Life of our Blessed Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ' was published in 1693 (and dedicated to Queen Mary in 1694). Lord Normanby made Wesley his chaplain in 1694 and recommended him, unsuccessfully, for an Irish bishopric. Also in 1694 Wesley was incorporated MA at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge. He resigned from South Ormsby following his refusal to allow the mistress of James Saunderson (later earl of Castleton) to visit his own wife. 
On 15 March 1695 Wesley was appointed rector of Epworth, Lincolnshire, a crown appointment, probably on account of his political support (Wesley said it was for the dedication of his life of Christ to Queen Mary but she had died before the appointment). He was inducted on 24 April but appears to have acted as curate at South Ormsby until May 1697, so he probably did not move to Epworth until then. According to Wesley, Epworth was a town of 1100 people in 1701, the living being nominally worth $200 per annum, though he did not always receive this amount. There were no 'papists' or presbyterians in the parish but about 40 Quakers, more than 70 Anabaptists, and about 100 of no religion. He complained of the children's ignorance of the Lord's prayer and creed. Already in debt on his arrival, by 1700 he owed $300. Despite efforts to make money, admittedly while supporting his mother, he was a poor manager as well as suffering many misfortunes. His wife remarked that he was 'not so wise in their generation as the children of this world' (Stevenson, 200). He was visited with a series of natural disasters as well as attacks on his property, possibly even arson in the case of the rectory fires of 1702 and 1709. In 1705 he backed tory candidates in a disputed county election, believing that the opposition was being supported by dissenters against the church. As a result, during the election there was 'drumming, shouting and firing of pistols and guns under the window where my wife lay, who had been brought to bed not three weeks'. A clergyman in Lincoln heard them cry 'if they got me in the castle yard they would squeeze my guts out'. At Epworth they threatened to 'turn ye all out of doors a-begging' (Clarke, 104). His enemies engineered Wesley's imprisonment for debt but he was eventually released with the help of a university brief and of government supporters. 
The family itself was politically divided. Unlike Samuel, Susanna adhered to the divine right of the exiled Stuarts. Early in 1702 she refused to say 'amen' to her husband's prayer for William III. John Wesley claimed that Samuel flew into a rage and vowed not to cohabit unless she submitted. He left for convocation and threatened to take up a naval chaplaincy but the accession of Anne reconciled them. This account understated Susanna's resolution and her agonies of conscience. She consulted the nonjuror bishop George Hickes and refused mediation. The crisis continued after Anne's accession and was only resolved when Wesley, persuaded by a friend, returned. In 1709 Susanna still maintained that a king by divine right could be judged only by God and not by his subjects. 
In 1703 there was published anonymously 'A letter from a country divine to his friend in London concerning the education of dissenters in their private acadaemies'. This was the letter written privately by Wesley in the 1690s to a friend, probably Charles Goodall; it was now published by Robert Clavel. Wesley claimed that it was originally provoked by a meeting he attended in 1693, where dissenters expressed scurrilous hostility to the church and to the memory of Charles I. (It was probably not, as is usually claimed, a meeting of the so-called Calve's Head Club, whose reputation in any case may owe much to tory propaganda.) Samuel denied that he had authorized publication, though in a somewhat equivocal fashion. Publication was timed to reinforce the current attacks on dissenters and especially on their academies. A pamphlet war ensued over the next four years, yet in the midst of this, in 1705, Wesley actually proposed to offer to serve as a missionary overseas. 
In 1709 the rectory was burnt for the second time and the young John Wesley was rescued, as if by a miracle. In March 1710 came the trial of Dr Henry Sacheverell and, according to John Wesley, Wesley wrote his speech for the defence. There is no other evidence for this, though it is generally believed that Sacheverell did not write it himself. During Wesley's absence at convocation in 1710-12 Susanna held meetings in the rectory for prayer, religious readings, and conversation, upholding her duty to do so, despite opposition from the curate and doubts on Wesley's part. Methodists often saw this as foreshadowing John Wesley's later class meetings. In 1714 John was sent to the Charterhouse on the recommendation of the duke of Buckingham (Wesley's old patron, the former marquess of Normanby) but with the accession of George I this tory nobleman lost influence and with it went Wesley's last hopes of preferment. 
In 1716-17 came the remarkable episode of Old Jeffery, the Epworth ghost whose knockings and door slammings would now identify him as a poltergeist but, in this instance, identified him as a Jacobite who knocked loudly when the king was prayed for. The family at first suggested natural explanations but finally settled for a supernatural power. John Wesley, though absent, had no doubt that it was a punishment for his father's rash vow in 1702. 
From 1722 Wesley added the rectory of Wroot, at $60 per annum, to Epworth but with little profit, and in 1724 came the unhappy episode of his daughter Mehetabel (Hetty) Wesley ['see 'Wright, Mehetabel], later fictionalized by Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch in 'Hetty Wesley' (1903). Wesley opposed her proposed marriage and, when she was seduced and pregnant, married her to a drunken plumber, William Wright. Wesley refused to be reconciled with her and John Wesley obliquely criticized him from the pulpit. Hetty lost all her babies, expressing her suffering in poignant verses. Wesley consoled himself for his misfortunes with literary labours in prose and verse, his later years being devoted to a massive volume of dissertations on the 'Old Testament' book of 'Job'. It was published in 1735, after his death, and was dedicated to Queen Caroline, who is said merely to have admired its pretty binding. 
In 1731, still apparently in debt, Wesley was taken to task by his brother Matthew, a London physician, who blamed him for his improvidence and for his large family: 'a black account; let the cause be folly, or vanity or ungovernable appetite' (Clarke, 5). To this Samuel replied with a rather jocular but not ineffective account of his years of financial misfortune. Despite his misfortunes and shortcomings Wesley was a dedicated and zealous parish priest, utilizing all the contemporary Anglican initiatives to improve parochial morality and religion. In 1698 he preached in support of the reformation of manners, and from March 1699 he corresponded with the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, which supported parish schools and the distribution of religious literature. In 1702 he told the society that he had considered creating a local society for the reformation of manners but instead he formed a religious society on the pattern of those pioneered by Josiah Woodward from 1678, for prayer, religious reading, the reformation of manners, and correspondence with similar societies abroad. He had in mind the continental pietists, the Halle orphan house, and the Danish overseas missions. It is not known what became of this venture but Wesley certainly upheld the more traditional disciplines of the church. His 'Pious Communicant Rightly Prepared' (1700) advocated frequent communion and included a discourse on baptism, reproduced by John Wesley as 'A Treatise on Baptism', in 1756, without acknowledgement. In 1701 he initiated a monthly communion, though only twenty people attended, and in 1734 he even offered to pay for a weekly communion for a friend. Initially he catechized all the year round though later, as was customary, only during Lent. He held two services every Sunday with weekday services on Wednesdays, Fridays, and feast days and he imposed public penance for sexual offences. At a mass confirmation at Epworth in 1712 he told Bishop Wake that it would have been more proper 'for my parish to have come by themselves and none to have been confirmed but those whose names had been given in by the minister' (Sykes, 173-4). He expressed his ideals for the clergy in 'A Letter to a Curate' (1735). He was a proctor in convocation in 1703 and in 1710, a duty which he took very seriously. 
Despite difficulties and differences Wesley was deeply attached to his wife, a woman of exceptional intelligence and of a character very different from his. They had a large family, commonly reckoned at nineteen children though now thought more likely to have been seventeen. Of these, ten (three sons and seven daughters) reached maturity. The daughters were lively and cultured and all but one married, nearly all unhappily, in part through Wesley's interventions. Apart from Mehetabel the most unfortunate case was that of Martha, who married the unstable Revd Westley Hall, once a Methodist but later a practising polygamist. As a widow Martha became a friend of Dr Samuel Johnson. 
On 4 June 1731 Wesley was injured by a fall from a wagon and never fully recovered. On his deathbed he is reported to have foretold the coming religious revival. John Wesley claimed, in support of his doctrine of assurance, that his father said 'The inward witness, son, the inward witness, that is the proof, the strongest proof, of Christianity' ('Works of John Wesley', 26.288-9). Samuel Wesley died at Epworth rectory on 25 April 1735 and was buried three days later in Epworth churchyard. In person he was short, a family characteristic; in character he was learned, zealous, pious, courageous for his principles, affectionate where his prejudices were not aroused, and devoted to his sons' welfare. But he was also obstinate and partisan. 
Wesley's literary works were in part a bid for preferment and a consolation for misfortunes, but some were dedicated to improving clerical standards. He is likely always to be remembered mainly as the father of his famous sons. He was only a very minor poet, a mere item in the first edition of Alexander Pope's 'Dunciad', though his hymn 'Behold the saviour of mankind' would not be unworthy of his son Charles Wesley. His scholarly ambitions were not fulfilled for his volume on 'Job' was largely a monument to misplaced and conservative erudition, though Adam Clarke, who published 'Memoirs of the Wesley Family' in 1823, thought its polyglot collations valuable. He nevertheless remains worthy of attention as an example of the best type of clergyman of his time in his attempts to implement the early eighteenth-century high-church movement for parochial renewal, and not without success. The 20 communicants of 1701 had risen to 100 by 1733, and John Wesley allowed that some had been influenced by his father. 


Wesley became friendly with tory politicians and poets such as Robert Harley, earl of Oxford, Alexander Pope, and Jonathan Swift, but the Atterbury connection ensured that he would receive no ecclesiastical preferment. In 1722 Atterbury was arrested for complicity in Jacobite plots and, in 1723, exiled to France. Wesley never wavered in his loyalty to Atterbury and wrote squibs against Sir Robert Walpole. This association branded him a Jacobite though there is no evidence that this went beyond literary opposition. In 1785 John Wesley claimed that he and Samuel, like their father, were tories but not Jacobites, Samuel only differing from him in believing it to be legitimate to oppose the king's ministers. 
In 1732-3 (the exact chronology is not entirely clear) Samuel failed to secure the under-mastership at Westminster School through political prejudice, though ostensibly this was because he was married. He was offered the headmastership, apparently unsolicited, of Tiverton grammar school, Devon. The school had kept down the fees for fear of losing pupils but Samuel boldly raised them to $20 per annum. His first year added forty boys to the school and numbers increased in the following years. In February 1733 he refused to follow his father at Epworth to provide a home for his brothers and sisters. John Wesley also refused, with lengthy reasons for remaining in Oxford, to which his brother responded: 'I see your love to yourself but your love to your neighbour I do not see' ('Works of John Wesley', 25.411). 
Wesley took his responsibilities as eldest son and surrogate father with great seriousness. In 1733 his father acknowledged: '[you have been] a father to your brothers and sisters, especially the former, who have cost you great sums in their education' (Stevenson, 136). He kept an eye on John at Charterhouse and, in 1785, Charles recalled that he was 'placed under the care of my eldest brother Samuel, a strict churchman, who brought me up in his own principles' (Baker, 'Charles Wesley', 7). After his father's death he helped to pay his debts and shared in the care of Susanna until she settled in London in 1739. Samuel supported James Oglethorpe's work for the Georgia colony and supplied it with communion plate. But he disapproved of Charles voyaging there, seeing in this John's will rather than God's. He clashed repeatedly with John's conduct and beliefs after the latter's conversion, in 1738, and lamented his mother's countenancing his new ideas. In October 1739 he wrote: 'Is it not enough that I am bereft of both my brothers, but must my mother follow too?' (Longworth, 34). 
As a poet Samuel produced satirical and political as well as religious verse. He was a competent, if uninspired, neo-classical poet, unusual only in substituting Christian for pagan personifications. More attractive were his verses on his wife for, unlike most of the Wesley family, he had a happy marriage. Though deserving respect for his political and religious integrity and for his devotion to his family, Samuel was only a very minor poet. His influence shows in the persisting high-churchmanship of his brother Charles, and his early death removed the one person capable of standing up to John Wesley as an affectionate equal. He died at Tiverton grammar school, after a short illness, on 6 November 1739 and was buried in Tiverton churchyard. 


@@@@@


doc= 29071


Samuel Wesley the younger (1690/91-1739), Church of England clergyman and poet, was born in Spitalfields, London, on 10 February 1690 or 1691, the eldest child of Samuel and Susanna Wesley. The uncertainty over his date of birth stems from a letter in which he gave 1690 as his year of birth (Beecham, 84'n'.) but his gravestone says that he was in his forty-ninth year when he died. The fact that he gave his age on matriculation at Oxford as eighteen only adds to the confusion. It is said that he scarcely spoke until he was nearly five, when he suddenly said, 'Here I am, mother' (Clarke, 363). He became a precocious learner, mastered the alphabet in a few hours, and was able to learn words at first sight. He entered Westminster School in 1704, under Dr Busby, was elected king's scholar in 1707, and became devoted to the classics. He matriculated at Christ Church, Oxford, on 9 June 1711, proceeding BA in 1715 and MA in 1718. He became head usher at Westminster School, probably from 1713, and took orders soon afterwards on the advice of Francis Atterbury, bishop of Rochester. He was also active in founding the first Westminster Infirmary, in 1719, which later became St George's Hospital. He married, about 1715, Ursula Berry, daughter of the Revd John Berry, vicar of Walton, Norfolk. Of their six children, four died in infancy and only a daughter outlived her parents. Ursula fell out with Samuel's brothers and his mother and was still estranged at her death about 1742. 


@@@@@


doc= 29072


Wesley, Samuel (1766-1837), composer and organist, was born on 24 February 1766 at Charles Street, Bristol, the youngest of the three children to survive infancy of the Methodist hymn writer Charles Wesley (1707-1788) and his wife, Sarah, 'nee' Gwynne (1726-1822). He was the grandson of Samuel Wesley (bap. 1662, d. 1735), the younger brother of Charles Wesley (1757-1834), the nephew of John Wesley, and the father of Samuel Sebastian Wesley. 
Like his brother Charles, Samuel Wesley was a musical child prodigy. Charles's musical talents attracted the attention of many of the leading musicians of the day, including Samuel Arnold, William Boyce, John Worgan, Thomas Augustine Arne, and Joseph Kelway, many of whom visited the family home, and it was here, by the side of his brother, that Samuel received his first musical experiences. According to his father's account, at just under three he was able to play his first tune, at four had taught himself to read from a copy of Handel's oratorio 'Samson', and at five 'had all the recitatives, and choruses of 'Samson' and the 'Messiah': both words and notes by heart' (Winters, 32). When he was six he had some keyboard lessons from David Williams, a Bristol organist, though his father remarked that 'it was hard to say which was the master and which the scholar' (Lightwood, 20). He also had violin and organ lessons, and at the age of seven played a psalm at a service at St James's Church. His first attempts at composition were also from this time. According to his father he had composed the airs for his oratorio 'Ruth' before he was six, but was not able to write them down until he was eight. Shortly afterwards, the Wesleys were visited by Boyce, anxious to hear the 'English Mozart'. He looked over the score of 'Ruth' and afterwards commented: 'these airs are some of the prettiest I have seen; this boy writes by nature as true a bass as I can by rule and study' (Winters, 35). Wesley's general education was from his father, from whom he gained a good grounding in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, and a wide knowledge of English literature. 
Unlike William Crotch, who spent much of his early childhood on a succession of damaging and demeaning concert tours, Wesley was never commercially exploited as a child prodigy. None the less, his talents made him the object of a good deal of attention and he spent much of his childhood in the company of adults. A major influence at this time was his godfather Martin Madan, chaplain of the Lock Hospital and himself an amateur musician, who took him on many extended visits to family friends, including the painter John Russell (1745-1806), who painted his portrait in 1776, and the scientist James Price, who later left him a house at Epsom and $1000 in his will. 
In 1771 Wesley's father accepted the gift of the lease of a house at Chesterfield Street, Marylebone, then a village on the outskirts of London. For a while, the family lived in both Bristol and Marylebone, but in 1776 they moved permanently to Marylebone. There, Charles and Samuel were able to widen their musical experiences and learn with the best teachers. But their father was initially reluctant for them to perform in public, and their appearance at a concert at Hickford's Rooms on 20 May 1777 under the direction of J. C. Bach appears to have been an isolated occurrence. Between 1779 and 1787 they organized a series of private subscription concerts at Chesterfield Street, in which both performed and for which both composed music. The concerts, intended by Charles Wesley to provide opportunities for his sons to develop their musical skills without the risk of being corrupted by worldly influences, involved a small professional instrumental ensemble and attracted fashionable audiences of sometimes more than fifty. 
Around 1778 Wesley started to attend Roman Catholic services at one or more of the London embassy chapels. As he was later to admit in his 'Reminiscences', his initial involvement with Roman Catholicism was for musical rather than religious reasons, for it was in the embassy chapels that the most elaborate and sumptuous church music in London was to be heard. He would have been made welcome by Samuel Webbe I, the organist of the Sardinian and Portuguese embassy chapels and the central figure in London Roman Catholic church music at the time, and he would also have met Webbe's son Samuel II, less than two years his junior. By November 1780, doubtless encouraged by Webbe and other Catholic musicians, Wesley was composing Latin church music for use in the embassy chapels. 
The attitude of his father to Wesley's involvement with the embassy chapels is not recorded, but it can hardly have been one of equanimity, and it is perhaps an indication of his tolerance that he permitted it to continue at all. By late 1783 Wesley's interest in Roman Catholicism had gone beyond the purely musical, and in May 1784 he converted, marking the event by composing an elaborate setting of the mass which he dedicated to and dispatched to Pope Pius VI. Wesley's conversion caused his father and other members of his family considerable hurt and sorrow, and in the wider Methodist community it was a major scandal which was discussed and agonized over for many years afterwards. 
Wesley's whole-hearted commitment to Roman Catholicism appears to have been brief, and it is possible that adolescent rebelliousness may have been involved to a large extent in his conversion. In later life his attitude to Roman Catholicism was deeply ambivalent: he retained his fascination with its music and liturgy while rejecting its doctrines, remarking in a letter of 1809 that 'if the Roman Doctrines were like the Roman 'Music' we should have Heaven upon Earth' ('Letters', ed. Wesley, 36). According to his obituary in 'The Times' he later denied ever having been a convert, saying that 'although the Gregorian music had seduced him to their chapels, the tenets of the Romanists never obtained any influence over his mind' ('The Times', 12 Oct 1837). 
If Wesley's conversion to Catholicism was the major cause of concern to his family, other aspects of his behaviour were scarcely less worrying. Family letters of the period contain references to wild behaviour which seems to have gone far beyond normal adolescent rebelliousness and may indicate the onset of the bipolar or manic-depressive illness which affected him for the rest of his life. A particular cause of concern was his relationship with Charlotte Louisa Martin (1761-1845), whom he met in October 1782 and was eventually to marry in 1793. Little is known of her: at the time of their initial meeting she was twenty-one to his sixteen, possibly a schoolteacher, and certainly on the evidence of her few surviving letters a well-educated woman. Their relationship was violently opposed by Wesley's family on the grounds of Martin's supposed unsuitability of character and family background. In one revealing letter of November 1792 to his mother, Wesley sought to correct the prevalent view of Martin as being 'of a careless, prodigal Disposition, and as closely resembling an extravagant Father and a vain Mother', pointing out that for several years she had lived 'decently and out of debt', on an allowance of $30 per year (Wesley, to his mother, 7 Nov 1792, John Rylands University Library of Manchester, DDWF/15/5). Wesley's father demanded that he should break off the liaison, and Wesley's refusal to do so exacerbated already existing family tensions. 
Problems arising from Wesley's relationship with Martin continued after the death of his father in 1788. By now the main family preoccupation had moved from attempting to persuade Wesley to break off his relationship with her -- for this was clearly impossible -- to persuading him to regularize it by marrying her. Under different circumstances this might have been a reasonable request, for Wesley and Martin were passionately committed to each other and at this stage fully intended to spend the remainder of their lives together. But Wesley was implacably opposed to marriage: not to the institution, but to any form of marriage ceremony, whether conducted by the church or by the state. His objections derived from arguments put forward by Madan in his notorious 'Thelyphthora' (1780), according to which marriage was established not by any civil or religious ceremony, but by sexual intercourse. On this basis, as Wesley explained to his mother in November 1792 in a letter of perhaps unnecessary frankness, he and Martin were married already and had no need of any official ceremonies to legitimize their union. 
During the later 1780s and early 1790s Wesley's public career as a composer and performer was largely in abeyance. He made a living by giving music lessons at one or more girls' schools in London, but he hated teaching and regarded it as 'A B C drudgery'. His disillusionment with the music profession and with life in London at this time appears to have been total, and he seriously considered the advantages for his health of a permanent move to the country. In 1787 Wesley is said to have suffered a serious head injury as a result of falling into a building site when returning home late one night from a visit to a friend. According to his obituary: 'the medical attendants wished to perform the operation of trepanning; but Wesley obstinately refused his consent, and the wound was permitted to heal. This he ever after regretted; for it is supposed that in consequence of some portion of the skull adhering to, or pressing upon, the brain, those periodical states of high nervous irritability originated, which subsequently checked and darkened the splendour of his career.' Although this anecdote seems to have come from Wesley himself, it is uncorroborated by information from any other source. Its appearance for the first time in an obituary notice fifty years later gives grounds for scepticism about the accuracy of all its details, and in particular its explanation of Wesley's mental health problems. 
On 17 December 1788 Wesley became a freemason and was admitted to the Lodge of Antiquity. On 13 May 1812 he was created grand organist by the duke of Sussex, but resigned this position in 1818 to Sir George Smart. 
In the autumn of 1792 Wesley set up house with Martin in the small village of Ridge, Hertfordshire, some 13 miles from London. At this stage they were still determinedly unmarried, but the discovery of Martin's pregnancy early in 1793 prompted a capitulation to more conventional mores, and they eventually married at Hammersmith parish church on 5 April of that year. Their first child, Charles, was born on 25 September. He was educated at St Paul's School and Christ's College, Cambridge, was ordained in 1821, and later became subdean to the Chapel Royal and chaplain to the royal household at St James's Palace. He died in 1859. A daughter was born in late 1794 and died in December 1797. Meanwhile, Wesley's prophecy to his sister, Sarah Wesley (1759-1828), in a letter that if forced into marriage with Martin he would 'marry her and hate her tomorrow' (Wesley to Sarah Wesley, 5 June 1791, Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge) was proving all too accurate. As early as October 1794, while waiting for his wife's confinement with their second child, he was ruefully confessing to his sister Sarah that she was 'never designed for [his] second self' (Wesley to his sister, 26 Oct 1794, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia), and family letters of the period show that the marriage was already unhappy. 
During his time at Ridge, Wesley continued to teach and carry out other professional engagements in London, staying overnight as necessary at the family home in Chesterfield Street. His one major composition from this period was the 'Ode to St Cecilia' for soloists, chorus, and orchestra, on a text by his grandfather Samuel Wesley, which he completed in October 1794. It was first performed on 22 February 1799. 
In the summer of 1797 Wesley and Charlotte left Ridge and moved to Finchley, probably as a result of their dissatisfaction with the isolation of country life and Wesley's decision to resume his professional career in London. In the summer of 1799 they moved again, to Highgate; their son John William was born around this time. Wesley's relationship with Charlotte continued to be stormy, with frequent quarrels, incidents of domestic violence, extra-marital affairs, temporary separations, and alternating periods of estrangement and reconciliation. A further daughter, Emma Frances, was born in early 1806. 
There is little direct information about Wesley's musical activities in the years around the turn of the century, but his numerous compositions from the period indicate that it was a fruitful time. His Latin church music compositions show that he had renewed his involvement with the world of the Roman Catholic embassy chapels, probably with the chapel of the Portuguese embassy in South Street, South Audley Street, where Vincent Novello had recently become organist. A large number of glees, songs, and duets, mostly unpublished, show Wesley's involvement with the glee club and with other forms of informal and convivial music-making. His major work of the period was his large-scale setting for soloists, chorus, and orchestra of 'Psalm 116', 'Confitebor tibi, domine', which he completed in 1799. As with the 'Ode to St Cecilia', nothing is known about the circumstances of its composition. Its only performance in Wesley's lifetime was on 4 May 1826. 
Wesley was also beginning to establish his reputation as the foremost organist of his day, and on 21 April 1800 he appeared as the soloist in one of his own concertos at one of the first London performances of Haydn's 'The Creation'. In 1802 he organized a series of subscription concerts at the Tottenham Street Rooms of the Concert of Ancient Music with his brother Charles, and it may have been for this series that he wrote his symphony in B[flat]. A turning point was reached in Wesley's life and career with his discovery of the music of J. S. Bach and his subsequent involvement in the English Bach movement. Although he had known some examples of Bach's music earlier, and had made a manuscript copy of the forty-eight preludes and fugues in early 1806, the explosive awakening of his interest seems to have occurred early in 1808. By April of that year he was consulting Charles Burney about the best way to promote Bach's music and was planning a programme of activities which included concerts, lectures, and publications. Wesley's role in the English Bach movement is reflected in his well-known letters to Benjamin Jacob, first published in an edition by his daughter Eliza in 1875. His activities in promoting Bach's music also included his collaboration with C. F. Horn in the publication of the first English editions of the organ trio sonatas and the 'Forty-Eight Preludes and Fugues' and his participation in a series of celebrated recitals of Bach's music at the Surrey Chapel with Crotch, Jacob, Novello, and the violinist Johann Peter Salomon. 
The period inaugurated by the discovery of the music of Bach was the most active, fruitful, and financially profitable of Wesley's career. From 1808 to 1816 he was involved in almost every activity open to a professional musician at the time. He was much in demand as an organist, both as a recitalist and at choral and orchestral concerts. From 1813 he was the regular organist at the Covent Garden oratorio concerts, for which he later remembered that he was paid 6 guineas per concert, or 10 guineas if he played a concerto. He was active in the provinces, directing performances from the organ at a music festival at Tamworth, Staffordshire, in September 1809 and at the Birmingham festival in October 1811; he also gave recitals and played at festivals at Norwich, Great Yarmouth, Ramsgate, Margate, Ipswich, and elsewhere. In 1809, following Crotch and John Wall Callcott, he lectured on music at the Royal Institution. He gave two similar courses at the Surrey Institution in 1809 and 1811. From March 1814 to December 1816 he was the author of the unsigned column of reviews of new musical publications in the 'European Magazine'. He also continued to be involved with Novello in the music of the Portuguese embassy chapel. He became a full member of the Philharmonic Society on 1 June 1815 and a director on 22 November of the same year, and was actively involved with the society's affairs in 1815 and 1816. His motet 'Father of light' was performed at the society's concert of 29 April 1816, but this was the only work by him to be performed by the society, and he never himself appeared in or directed a concert. 
Meanwhile, Wesley's marriage to Charlotte had irrevocably broken down. The final break appears to have been precipitated by Wesley's affair with the fifteen- or sixteen-year-old Sarah Suter, who was living at the time with the family as a servant or housekeeper. Wesley and Charlotte separated in 1810, no doubt following the discovery of the affair and of Sarah's pregnancy. Wesley and Sarah subsequently set up house together, and their first child, Samuel Sebastian, named after Johann Sebastian Bach, was born on 14 August. They continued to live together unmarried until Wesley's death in what appears to have been a loving and mutually supportive relationship. A large collection of Wesley's letters to Sarah and their children is now in the British Library. Seven of their children survived to adulthood: Samuel Sebastian, Rosalind, Eliza, Matthias Erasmus, John, Thomasine, and Robert Glenn, named after the husband of Rosalind. Two further children died in infancy or early childhood, in 1813 and 1816. Wesley's maintenance commitments to Charlotte, initially set at $130 per annum by a deed of separation of 1812, continued to be a heavy drain on his finances, and non-payment resulted in his being briefly imprisoned for debt on at least one occasion, in May 1825. 
Wesley's long run of success came to an end with a series of events triggered by his child's death in August 1816. He collapsed later that month while on a journey to Norwich to fulfil a professional engagement, but was able to make a partial recovery and to continue with his professional commitments until late March of the following year. In early May he threw himself out of a window in what appears to have been delirium, and narrowly escaped permanent injury. He was subsequently confined for a time in a private lunatic asylum. Financial and practical help for Wesley and his family at this difficult time appears to have come principally from his masonic friends, including William Linley. 
Wesley made a slow and gradual recovery. By early 1819 he was picking up some of his former professional activities and had returned to his position as organist of the Covent Garden oratorios. But he was still in low spirits, unable to compose, and financially hard pressed. His breakdown was a watershed in his career. His enforced absence from musical life for almost two years caused him to lose contacts and opportunities, and as a result he was never able to regain the ground he had lost. None the less, he continued to be in demand as an organist and a lecturer on music through much of the 1820s and he was also able to develop his career in new directions. In 1824 he was appointed organist to the recently built Camden Chapel (All Saints, Camden Street); this appears to have been his first paid church appointment, and followed many unsuccessful earlier applications elsewhere. At the same time he had recovered his self-confidence sufficiently to complete and publish by subscription his Anglican service in F, parts of which he had written as long ago as 1808. Wesley had long been a leading practitioner and a respected authority in church music, and the publication of his service inevitably attracted a good deal of critical attention, including reviews couched in respectful but not entirely favourable terms in the 'Harmonicon' and the 'Quarterly Musical Review and Register', the two principal musical periodicals of the time. 
In 1826 Wesley obtained permission from the University of Cambridge to transcribe and publish music from the collection of the Fitzwilliam Museum; a similar permission had earlier been granted to Novello. While on a visit to Cambridge later that year he discovered the autograph manuscript of three hymns by Handel, written in the 1740s to words by Wesley's father, which he immediately edited and published. Encouraged by the success of this venture, he later compiled and published in 1828 a volume of tunes to the hymns by his father in current use by Methodist congregations. 
Wesley's negotiations with the Methodist connexional editor Thomas Jackson over the publication of the Handel hymns may have been the cause of his partial reconciliation with the Methodist community. In May 1827 he was a warmly received guest at the annual breakfast of the Children of the Methodist Preachers, and he was invited to give the opening recital on the organ of the Brunswick Chapel, Leeds, on 12 September 1828. 
Wesley's organ playing and lecturing activities also took him back to Bristol, which he had not visited since 1809. In September and October 1829 he gave a number of organ recitals there, including three at St Mary Redcliffe, when he was joined by his son Samuel Sebastian. The following January he returned and gave a course of lectures at the Bristol Institution. Both of these visits were probably arranged through his friend D. G. Wait, rector of Blagdon, who had also been involved in his activities at the Fitzwilliam Museum in Cambridge. 
Following a further attack of depression in 1830 which effectively brought his career to a close, Wesley's last years were spent in retirement and in conditions of financial hardship. A subscription was arranged in 1830 by a group of his musical and masonic friends, led by John Capel, William Linley, and Vincent Novello. On the death of his brother Charles in 1834 the annuity which had been granted to the Wesley family by the Methodist Book Room in respect of the copyright of Charles Wesley senior's hymns descended to him, and these payments helped to alleviate his financial problems in his final years. 
Wesley made few public appearances in the 1830s. In August 1834, at a Sacred Harmonic Society concert, he accompanied a performance of his anthem 'All go unto one place', written for the memorial service for his brother Charles. 
By 1836, perhaps at the suggestion or with the encouragement of Sarah and his children, Wesley wrote his manuscript 'Reminiscences', in which he recorded all he could remember of his life in music. Although containing much of interest, the 'Reminiscences' lack the sardonic humour and outspoken views of Wesley's letters. It is in no sense a finished document, and its laborious handwriting and repetitiousness show that Wesley's physical and mental powers were by this time failing. Also contained in the same manuscript are passages of historical writing, clearly written with publication in mind, and relating to Wesley's last piece of published work, an article entitled 'A sketch of the state of music in England, from the year 1778 up to the present time', which appeared in the first number of the 'Musical World' on 18 March 1836. 
Wesley's spirits revived shortly before his death. In July 1837 he wrote out from memory the full score of his 'Ode to St Cecilia' of 1794, which he believed to have been lost. On 12 September 1837, less than a month before his death, he attended a recital by Mendelssohn at Christ Church Greyfriars and was afterwards persuaded to play. Mendelssohn was generous with his praise, but Wesley could only say, 'Sir, you have not heard me play. You should have heard me 40 years ago' (quoted in Lightwood, 227). 
Wesley was the most original British composer of his time. His compositions, in almost every genre except opera, reflect and are enriched by his deep knowledge of a wide range of music from the sixteenth century to his own time. Much of his most ambitious and characteristic music, lacking the potential for large sales, remained unpublished in his lifetime, and many of the works that were published were unashamed potboilers, written for the amateur market. But his music had wide exposure through repeated performances at his own concerts, and his obituary notices attest to the high regard in which he was held. 
Wesley was best known as an organist and was particularly famed for his extempore playing. According to 'The Times', 'his resources were boundless, and if called upon to extemporize for half-a-dozen times during the evening, each fantasia was new, fresh, and perfectly unlike the others' ('The Times', 12 Oct 1837). There are many contemporary accounts of his playing; Edward Hodges, who heard him play in Bristol in October 1829, described his performance as 'truly astounding... it was the most wonderful I ever heard, more even than I had before been capable of conceiving; the flow of melody, the stream of harmony, was so complete, so unbroken, so easy, and yet so highly wrought that I was altogether knocked off my stilts' (quoted in Lightwood, 215). 
Despite his brilliance as a composer and organist, Wesley held no official or church appointments of any importance, and was never quite in the innermost circles of London musical life. His lack of advancement is largely explained by his rebellious character, his famous outspokenness, the scandal of his personal life, and the violent mood swings to which he was subject. According to his obituary: 'His passions were exceedingly strong, and from a habit of always speaking his mind, and his having no idea of management or the 'finesse' of human life, he too often by the brilliancy of his wit, or the bitterness of his sarcasm, unthinkingly caused estrangements, if not raised up an enemy. ('The Times', 12 Oct 1837)' With less need of restraint, Mary Sabilla Novello, the wife of Vincent Novello, commented in a letter of around 1842 to the singer Henry Phillips on the 'opposite extremes of mad fun and excessive depression, to which alternations Wesley always was subject', adding: 'I knew him unfortunately, too well; pious Catholic, raving atheist, mad, reasonable, drunk and sober -- the dread of all wives and regular families, a warm friend, a bitter foe, a satirical talker, a flatterer at times of those he cynically traduced at others -- a blasphemer at times, a puleing Methodist at others. (Mary Sabilla Novello, fragment of a letter to Henry Phillips, 'c'.1842, Lbl Add. 31764, fol. 34)' Wesley died at his home at 8 King's Row, Pentonville, on 11 October 1837 after a short illness. His funeral service on 17 October was at old St Marylebone parish church. He was buried in an adjoining burial-ground, in the family plot alongside his father, his mother, and his brother Charles. 


@@@@@


doc= 29073


Wesley, Samuel Sebastian (1810-1876), composer and organist, was born on 14 August 1810, probably at 11 Adam's Row, Hampstead Road, London, the eldest of the seven surviving children of an irregular union between the organist and composer Samuel Wesley (1766-1837) and his housemaid, Sarah Suter (1793/4-1863). He was named after his father's musical idol, Johann Sebastian Bach. His earliest years were passed under the shadow of extreme family disapproval of his parents' liaison. They were also clouded by his father's constant shortage of money (due in large part to the substantial maintenance payments he was required to pay to his estranged wife) and, from 1816, his father's descent into a prolonged bout of severe depression. Acceptance as a child (chorister) of the Chapel Royal, St James's Palace, in November 1817 provided an escape from the poverty-stricken household and also marked the beginning of his formal musical education. Later declared by William Hawes, the master of the children, to have been the 'best boy he had ever had', Wesley was among those regularly chosen to join the small group who travelled to sing at the Royal Pavilion, Brighton, when the king (George IV) was in residence. Here he was a fellow performer with Rossini at one Saturday evening concert and was also presented with a gold watch by the king. 
Shortly after leaving the choir in 1826 Wesley was appointed organist of St James's Chapel, Hampstead Road, London, and during the next six years he held similar appointments at St Giles, Camberwell (1829-32), St John's, Waterloo Road (1829-31), and Hampton parish church (1831-2). By now he was becoming known as an organist -- and particularly as a pedal player -- and was one of the first in England to give a solo performance of one of J. S. Bach's organ fugues when he played the 'St Ann' at a trial for the post of organist at St Stephen's, Coleman Street, in November 1827. He had also continued his association with Hawes and the latter's multifarious musical activities; he acted as pianist and 'conductor of the chorus' at the English Opera House ('c'.1828-32) and as organist at the Lenten oratorio concerts (1830-32). At the former he was responsible for the overture and 'melo-dramatick' music for 'The Dilosk Gatherer', a melodrama by Edward Fitzball produced in July 1832, while his setting of the 'Benedictus' had been given at the latter on 30 March 1832. By now he had also begun to make his mark as a composer of songs and piano and organ music (including a virtuoso set of 'Variations on God Save the King', 1829), and looked to be destined for a promising career in the capital. On 10 July 1832, however, he was elected to the post of organist at Hereford Cathedral (whose recently appointed dean, John Merewether, had formerly been incumbent at Hampton) and shortly thereafter he left London, never to return. 
Notwithstanding his stated wish to be able to devote himself to the composition of church music, the move was one Wesley was to regret ever afterwards: 'Painful and dangerous is the position of a young musician who, after acquiring great knowledge of his art in the Metropolis, joins a Country Cathedral. At first he can scarcely believe that the mass of error and inferiority in which he has to participate is habitual and irremediable. (Wesley, 'Cathedral Music', 11)' Yet the change of circumstances had a remarkable effect on his development as a composer, and resulted in his early masterpiece, the anthem 'The Wilderness', written to commemorate the opening of the rebuilt cathedral organ and first performed on 10 November 1832. Clearly benefiting from its composer's experience in the theatre and concert hall, it remains a remarkable achievement when viewed against the moribund background of contemporary cathedral music. Its up-to-date idiom, however, was not sufficiently of the church to satisfy the three judges for the Gresham prize medal for which Wesley submitted it in 1833, one of whom (R. J. S. Stevens) dismissed it as 'a clever thing, but not Cathedral Music'. With this disappointment, and Wesley's failure earlier in the year to achieve more than a run-through of an overture by the Philharmonic Society, came the realization that for a young and little-known composer from the provinces to achieve success in London was a near impossible task. The award of prize medals for his glees 'I wish to tune my quiv'ring lyre' (1833) and 'At that Dread Hour' (1834) by the Gentlemen's Glee Club, Manchester, offered some recompense, as did the opportunity to perform his overture in E, 'Sanctus', and sacred song 'Abraham's Offering' at the Hereford festival in 1834. But nothing could compensate for Hereford's position as a musical backwater and this, frustration with the low musical standards at the cathedral, and his pitifully small salary ($60 per annum) led Wesley to apply for the post of organist and sub-chanter at Exeter Cathedral, to which he was appointed on 15 August 1835. His marriage three months earlier (on 4 May) to Mary Anne, the sister of Dean Merewether -- presumably without family approval, as it was by special licence and took place in the nearby village of Ewyas Harold -- doubtless provided a further reason to move. 
While at Hereford Wesley had completed another of his best-known anthems, 'Blessed be the God and Father' (1834/1835), and it was during his early years at Exeter that he consolidated his position as the foremost and most innovative composer of church music of his generation. Especially notable are the three outstanding large-scale anthems 'O Lord, thou art my God', 'Let us lift up our heart', and 'To my Request and Earnest Cry' (all written 'c'.1836) and that deeply felt miniature 'Wash me throughly from my wickedness' ('c'.1840). All reflect both Wesley's complete command of a highly coloured and emotionally charged harmonic idiom of great individuality and his consummate handling of contrapuntal writing, yet only one, 'O Lord, thou art my God', received even a single performance at the cathedral. Bearing in mind Wesley's later -- apparently autobiographical -- comment about cathedrals which 'would not go to the expense of copying the parts out for the Choir', one can make assumptions concerning the fate of these works. Certainly the amicable working relationship Wesley had initially enjoyed with the dean and chapter quickly soured after the elevation of the precentor, Thomas Hill Lowe, to the deanery in 1839. For the remainder of his time in the city he was almost constantly at loggerheads with his clerical superiors. It was this, more than anything else, which convinced him that he should qualify himself for an alternative career as a university professor of music. To this end he matriculated at Magdalen College, Oxford, on 3 June 1839 and took the degrees of BMus and DMus by accumulation on 21 June; his exercise, 'O Lord, thou art my God', was performed in Magdalen Chapel on 20 June. Thus equipped, Wesley was a candidate for the Reid chair of music in the University of Edinburgh in 1841, but was defeated by Henry Bishop. Well before the result was known, however, another opportunity to escape from Exeter had arisen: having played at the opening of the organ in the newly built parish church in Leeds on 18 October, Wesley was (according to his pupil William Spark) 'so much impressed with the wealth of Leeds... that bearing in mind his disagreement with Dean Lowe... he forthwith accepted the offer of organist at $200 per annum, guaranteed for ten years' (Spark, 'Reminiscences', 166). With only one daily service and no troublesome dean and chapter with whom to deal, it was an offer he could hardly refuse. 
Although Wesley was ultimately desperate to move away, his early years in Exeter had been among his happiest, with the birth of two sons -- John Sebastian ('b'. 17 June 1836) and Samuel Annesley ('b'. 28 Dec 1837) -- and extensive participation in local music-making. Warmly welcomed on his arrival by the members of the Devon Madrigal Society (whose monthly meetings he regularly chaired), he also organized a series of subscription concerts for the 1836-7 season and attempted to form an orchestral society in 1837 and a choral society a year later. But none of these initiatives was particularly successful, and from thenceforth -- with the exception of the birth of another son, Francis Gwynne, on 29 January 1841 -- he was dogged by misfortune: the death of his two-month-old daughter Mary in February 1840, the destruction by fire of the plates for a collection of anthems in October 1840, and continuing disputes about his attendance and conduct at the cathedral, particularly a notorious unprovoked attack on two choristers in the cathedral song school in September 1840. He received a series of reprimands: had he not chosen to leave of his own accord he could well have suffered the ignominy of being forced to resign. Even his final departure was marred by controversy, as he unilaterally chose to leave Spark to serve out his notice by proxy. This, and subsequent wrangling over money he claimed was owed to him, reveal a less attractive side to his nature; indeed, Wesley was described by the chapter clerk (with whom he had frequently crossed swords) as 'the most to be avoided man I ever met with' (Exeter Cathedral Archives, MS D & C Exeter/7061/Wesley Papers/10). 
Wesley's fame had preceded him, and he was much feted on his arrival in Leeds in February 1842. As at Exeter, the move to new surroundings reinvigorated him, and his first few years in the town were marked by a series of new publications and compositions. Among these were three of his most important keyboard works, the two sets of 'Three Pieces for a Chamber Organ' and the 'March and Rondo' for piano (all issued in 1842), a printed psalter with chants for the parish church choir (1843), and his 'Morning and Evening Cathedral Service' in E (1845). For the publication of the last he was indebted to the generosity of Martin Cawood, who was a wealthy brass-founder and unofficial music adviser to the vicar, Walter Farquhar Hook, and who had already been instrumental in securing his appointment. After hearing the setting of the Nicene creed (written at Hereford), Cawood had 'proposed to the Author the completion of the entire Service, undertaking to remunerate him for his work, and incur the sole risk and responsibility of its publication' (Wesley, 'Preface', vi-vii). With its independent obbligato organ part, resourceful use of harmonic colour, and sense of scale, Wesley's service forms a landmark in the history of the genre and, despite failing to satisfy the critics, served as an inspiration to his contemporaries and successors. Its publication also gave him the opportunity to precede it with an extended preface, in which he outlined his strongly held views on the need for reform in cathedral music. He had first broached the subject in the preface to the second edition of 'A Selection of Psalm Tunes' (1842), and had continued his campaign in two series of lectures on choral music given at the Liverpool Collegiate Institution in 1844 and 1846; its culmination was reached with his lengthy pamphlet 'A Few Words on Cathedral Music and the Musical System of the Church, with a Plan of Reform' (1849), to which the 'Reply to the Inquiries of the Cathedral Commissioners, Relative to Improvement in the Music of Divine Worship' (1854) forms a postscript. To Wesley the Anglican choral service was an art form uniting music, language, and architecture, and the church musician (in other words, himself) was an artist in the service of God. But such a romantically inspired vision was too personal to command wide support, and the immediate impact of his writings was consequently slight (although much of what he had striven for in the raising of musical standards and the better treatment of musicians was gradually achieved during the next three decades). 
Wesley's last two sons, Charles Alexander ('b'. 4 Feb 1843) and William Ken ('b'. 8 July 1845), were both born in Leeds. During this period Wesley was also active in musical life away from the parish church, as player, teacher, and conductor. Foremost among these activities was his involvement in a new Leeds Choral Society, which, after an auspicious start, fell victim to rivalry with the 'old' Leeds Choral Society and was disbanded in 1845. Also worthy of notice was his participation (as pianist) in the first provincial performance of Beethoven's symphony no. 9 at the 1843 annual meeting of the Yorkshire Amateur Musical Society. But it was as an organist that his fame was greatest, and he made two highly praised appearances as solo organist at the Birmingham festivals of 1843 and 1849. Indeed, after the former it was confidently stated by the 'Musical World' that 'Dr. Wesley, as an organist, has no rival now living, except Dr. Mendelssohn' ('Musical World', 18, 1843, 324). 
Notwithstanding the promising start he had made at the parish church, it did not take Wesley long to discover that his own and Hook's aims were rarely identical. 'Disappointed as I was with Dr Hook & his powers to either aid his Church Music or me -- I soon bitterly repented of leaving Exeter' (letter to Henry Ford, Royal School of Church Music, MS album of letters), he was later to write, and the invitation to open the new organ in Tavistock parish church in June 1846 led him seriously to consider accepting the post of organist. His last three years in Leeds were clouded by regular disagreements with the vicar and also by injury: on the evening of 23 December 1847, while returning from a fishing expedition to the River Rye, he fell and badly fractured his right leg, and for the next six months he was laid up at the Black Swan at Helmsley. With unaccustomed time on his hands he turned again to composition and wrote two anthems, 'Cast me not away from thy presence' and 'The Face of the Lord', and a second sacred song with orchestral accompaniment, 'I have been young and now am old' (first performed at the 1850 Gloucester festival). All three set penitential texts, and both anthems contain autobiographical references to injury and accident: few pages of Wesley's music are more affecting than the harsh discords which accompany the words 'That the bones which thou hast broken shall rejoice' in the first. During his convalescence (and unknown to him), Wesley's name had been put forward for the vacant Heather chair of music in the University of Oxford, but he was again passed over in favour of Sir Henry Bishop. Finally, in August 1849, he was successful in his application for the post of organist at Winchester Cathedral. His departure from Leeds was fortunately marred by none of the personal bitterness which had so soured his leaving Exeter, and in February 1850 he was invited back for a farewell dinner and to be presented with his portrait, painted by the local artist and singer W. K. Briggs. 
Something of Wesley's reputation was clearly known in Winchester, and before his appointment was confirmed he was required by the dean and chapter to give a written undertaking to resign should they consider such a step to be advisable. Yet at first such a reassurance must have seemed unnecessary: in the precentor, W. N. Hooper, Wesley found someone willing to defer -- in practice if not in theory -- to his greater musical expertise. As in the past, new surroundings and a new position provided a stimulus to composition, and within two years he had completed his well-known anthems 'Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace' ('c'.1850) and 'Ascribe unto the Lord' (1851). More importantly, he was also able to achieve his long-cherished ambition to publish a collection of anthems. The first announcements for a volume of six anthems had appeared as long ago as 1836 and printing had begun in 1840. But having lost money when the plates were destroyed (and become disillusioned over the failure of the dean and chapter of Exeter to support his music), Wesley had felt in no hurry to proceed further and did not return to the project until his enforced stay at Helmsley. By the time of its eventual publication in 1853 the collection had doubled in size. It represents Wesley's finest achievement and, arguably, the single most important English church music publication of the century. Despite including 'Ascribe unto the Lord', 'Blessed be the God and Father', 'Cast me not away', 'Let us lift up our heart', 'O Lord, thou art my God', 'The Face of the Lord', 'The Wilderness', 'Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace', and 'Wash me throughly', its publication passed largely unnoticed, and this, together with the critical attacks made after the performance of an orchestrated version of 'The Wilderness' at the Birmingham festival a year earlier, can have done little to encourage him. His best years as a composer were in fact already past, and the lack of public appreciation and recognition began increasingly to take its toll: few of his later anthems (among them 'By the word of the Lord', written for the opening of the new cathedral organ in June 1854, and 'Give the king thy judgements', written to celebrate the marriage of the prince of Wales in March 1863) maintain a uniformly high level of inspiration. Only 'Praise the Lord, o my soul', written for the opening of the organ in Holy Trinity Church, Winchester, in September 1861, approaches the standard of his earlier works. 
The mid-1850s were an unhappy period for Wesley, as he was also at the centre of a controversy over the design he had prepared for the organ in St George's Hall, Liverpool. Although not completed by Henry Willis until 1855, it had been conceived a decade earlier, and the delay had magnified its old-fashioned features: for these, and for his insistence on 'G' compass and mean-tone temperament, he was sternly taken to task by the musical press, and a heated public debate ensued. Indeed, in many ways Wesley was becoming a lonely, reactionary figure, unwilling -- or unable -- to adapt to the changing musical conditions. Even his application in 1856 for the vacant chair of music in the University of Cambridge seems to have been half-heartedly made, and he withdrew before the vote. Never one to court the friendship of his fellow musicians, he had relied for companionship on those of his father's generation, and as death now overtook them he found himself increasingly alone. With the appointment of an over-zealous precentor, Henry Wray, in 1858, life at the cathedral also became considerably less comfortable. Reprimands over the dereliction of his duty became more frequent, and when in February 1865 he was asked to adjudicate between candidates for the post of organist at Gloucester Cathedral he offered to take it himself. 
Wesley's stay in Winchester had been the longest of his career, owing, it is said, to his desire to have his sons educated at Winchester College (of which he had been appointed organist in December 1850) and his appreciation of the fishing. His time there also saw his effective withdrawal from most musical activity outside the cathedral, although he maintained his association with the Royal Academy of Music (where he had been appointed the first professor of organ in August 1850) and continued his career as a recitalist. One notable appearance was at the opening of the organ in the Agricultural Hall, Islington, London, on 3 November 1863, when he played his newly written 'Andante cantabile', and he returned to the hall in October 1864 to conduct the only extended choral work of his maturity -- a setting for soloists, chorus, and orchestra of W. H. Bellamy's 'Ode to Labour', written for the opening of the North London Working Men's Industrial Exhibition. 
Although Wesley had had little to do with orchestral or large-scale choral works since leaving Leeds, within a short time of his arrival in Gloucester he found himself having to devise programmes for the forthcoming Three Choirs festival which it was the city's turn to host in 1865. Not surprisingly his choice of music was unadventurous -- Handel's 'Messiah', Mendelssohn's 'Elijah' and 'Hymn of Praise', Mozart's 'Requiem', and Spohr's 'Die letzten Dinge' -- although he also orchestrated 'Ascribe unto the Lord' and for the 1871 festival introduced J. S. Bach's 'St Matthew passion'. Notwithstanding his inexperience as a conductor (exacerbated by his nervousness on the podium), his direction of the Gloucester festivals of 1865, 1868, 1871, and 1874 remains his most significant achievement in the city. Indeed, on the evidence of both the music sung and contemporary comments on the state of the choir, he almost gave up the fight to raise musical standards at the cathedral. Composition, too, seems to have lost its attraction, and most of the works from his last decade were either reworkings of earlier material or commissions which lacked the spark of inspiration; one of the few exceptions was the unaccompanied chorus 'The Praise of Music', written in 1872 for Gounod's Royal Albert Hall Choral Society. 
Yet Wesley still had one important contribution to make to church music, and in 1872 he published his vast collection of hymn and psalm tunes, 'The European Psalmist'. Over twenty years in compilation, it included many of his own compositions as well as the largest number of J. S. Bach's chorale harmonizations yet published in England, but as a separate tune-book it was already obsolescent when issued. By now Wesley was very much a senior figure in the musical establishment and at last receiving the critical and public acknowledgement he had so yearned for in his youth: in 1873 he was offered the choice between a knighthood and a civil-list pension of $100 per annum, and chose the latter. But such recognition, welcome as it must have been, had come too late, and the final years of his life were clouded by ill health and spent (as he wrote in 1870) in an 'objectionable' place where there was 'no great demand for any peculiarly experienced musical ability and I must be content to rank with the low ones' (BL, Add. MS 35019, fol. 168), a sad anticlimax to what had gone before. Only his financial position had improved following the sale in 1868 of most of his copyrights to Novello & Co. for $750. To the end, however, his reforming zeal remained undimmed, and in 1875 he proposed to Joseph Bennett a radical scheme for the abolition of cathedral chapters and their replacement by working clergy. Nothing, needless to say, came of this proposal. Wesley played for his last service on Christmas day 1875, and died from Bright's disease -- a malfunctioning of the kidneys -- on 19 April 1876; he was buried beside his daughter Mary in the old cemetery, Exeter. 
To the world at large Wesley presented an often prickly exterior, but this masked a basic sense of insecurity which made him ever ready to spring to the defensive or imagine a slight where none had been intended -- reactions which particularly coloured his relations with professional colleagues and music critics. By those, like his pupils, from whom he felt no professional rivalry he was seen very differently, and one pupil, J. Kendrick Pyne, summed up his character thus: 'He was kind-hearted, manly, and courageous, though somewhat Utopian in his views. He would have become eminent in 'any' profession' (Pyne, 'Wesleyana', 380). 


@@@@@


doc= 29074


Wessington, John (c.1371-1451), prior of Durham Cathedral priory, was a member of the community of St Cuthbert at Durham and held the office of prior there for almost thirty years, from his election on 5 November 1416 until his resignation in June 1446. Probably born in the village of Washington 10 miles north of his future cathedral city, he was related -- if somewhat distantly -- to the Durham county knightly family of Wessington that included some of the remote ancestors of the first president of the United States of America among its members. John Wessington entered the cathedral monastery at Durham in 1390; and shortly after receiving priest's orders he was sent to Durham College, Oxford. Although Wessington never acquired a university degree, he remained a fellow of his college for the next thirteen years, often serving as one of its two bursars. Apparently never celebrated for scholastic learning himself, Wessington was otherwise a highly regarded 'university monk' of his period: in 1426 he was to serve as president of the provincial chapter of the English black monks at their assembly in Northampton. Soon after returning from Oxford to Durham in 1407 he became both sacrist and chancellor of his mother house. In the latter office he presided over the reorganization of his convent's archives. His fellow monks were probably even more impressed by the skill with which he exploited those muniments to defend the franchises of his community. 
By 1416 Wessington's intense commitment to the preservation of his monastery's privileges against external aggression had already emerged as the most characteristic feature of his career. It was no doubt largely for this reason that in November of that year he was elected prior by the sixty-nine members of his community. Nor is it likely to be a coincidence that Wessington's term of office coincided with a period when the convent's registers, obedientiary account rolls, and other documents were particularly well compiled and conserved. Almost always resident within the county of Durham (he is only known to have visited London three times in thirty years), he made no attempt to perambulate his manors in the fashion of his predecessors. Although Wessington normally spent several weeks every year at his favourite country retreat of Beaurepaire (Bear Park), he was usually to be found in his prior's quarters at Durham itself. It was in this sumptuous set of chambers, largely reconstructed or refurnished by himself, that he spent much of his time entertaining visiting nobles, local clergy, and members of his own convent. Thus between May 1430 and May 1431 the prior invited to dinner at Durham not only Bishop Thomas Langley of Durham but also the bishop of Carlisle, the abbot of Whitby, the prior of Tynemouth, Sir Robert Umfraville, and a large number of local gentlemen and officials. Wessington's continuously cordial relations with Bishop Langley during the latter's long episcopate (1406-37) was indeed crucial to the success of his rule as prior. In return for providing his bishop with valuable written evidence for the defence of his episcopal franchises, notably when the latter were challenged by a powerful group of Durham knights in 1433, Wessington could always rely upon Langley's advice and support on his own economic and political problems. 
By contrast Wessington's relationship with Robert Neville (died 1457), who succeeded Langley at Durham in 1438, began with a dispute about the date of the new bishop's enthronement and was never quite so harmonious. Nevertheless Wessington had been remarkably successful in securing the goodwill of the senior members of the Neville family in extremely difficult circumstances. After the death of Ralph Neville, first earl of Westmorland, in October 1425, the prior played an important and much appreciated role as an unofficial peacemaker during the violent conflict that then erupted between the two branches of the family. Of the two arch-rivals in the dispute, Ralph Neville, second earl of Westmorland (died 1484), regularly chose Wessington as one of his arbiters, while Richard Neville, earl of Salisbury (died 1460), invited him to attend the christening of his son George, the future archbishop of York (died 1476), at Middleham in 1432. 
Throughout his priorate John Wessington's authority was accordingly more usually put at risk by the turbulence of the local gentry than by the feuds of the higher aristocracy of northern England. In the delicate political art of cultivating the friendship of influential knights and esquires within the county of Durham, the prior's appointment of his chief lay steward provided him with his most valuable link with the non-religious world. Both of Wessington's chief stewards, Thomas Langton of Winyard (1416-36) and William Hoton of Hardwick Hall (1437-46), worked strenuously on the convent's behalf, as indeed did many of the other members of the county gentry retained by the convent for legal support in times of need. Such assistance was all the more necessary to the prior because lengthy and expensive litigation with local landlords over such issues as rights to common pasture and watermills was a perennial feature of his rule at Durham. Most of these disputes were eventually settled by arbitration out of court; but the possibility of armed attack on the monks of St Cuthbert was certainly always present. In 1419 Thomas Claxton and Thomas Billingham, two of Wessington's discontented tenants, not only ambushed one of the Durham monks on the highway but placed the convent itself in a state of unofficial siege. Despite the prestige of his position Wessington therefore found it difficult to impose his authority in the face of some of the dangerous pressures which inevitably confronted so large a monastery with so many (nine) daughter houses. During the early 1440s he was faced not only with an alarming new challenge to his monastery's control over its cell of Coldingham in Scotland, but also with the totally unexpected withdrawal of obedience by William Partrike, prior of Lytham, Lancashire. After the severe agrarian crisis of the late 1430s Wessington also had to defend his financial administration of the priory from a variety of serious criticisms, made before and after Bishop Robert Neville's visitation of the cathedral in 1442. But by that year Wessington was over seventy years old and increasingly 'wexit with greyt sekenesse' (Dobson, 'Durham Priory', 110-111). He resigned the prior's office on 8 June 1446 and was assigned five attendants, an annual pension of $40, and attractive living accommodation either at Finchale Priory or within his convent's own monastic infirmary. He died at Durham five years later, on 9 April 1451. 
John Wessington's most distinctive achievements as prior of Durham undoubtedly lay in his personal contributions to learning within his cloister. If not himself a historian in any modern sense of the word, he was nevertheless one of the most historically minded of all late medieval English Benedictine monks. Besides devoting much time and care to the custody and cataloguing of the thousand or so manuscripts within his monastery's various book collections, Wessington was responsible for the building of an entirely new reference library (completed by 1418 at a total cost of over $90) between the chapter house and the south transept of the cathedral church. The range and quality of his own written work, nearly always composed 'for the defence of the church of Durham', was famous in his own lifetime ('Historiae Dunelmensis scriptores tres', cclxviii-cclxxi). As Wessington was never a writer concerned to publicize his personal authorship of the numerous compilations now ascribed to him, it can be difficult to distinguish between what he wrote himself and what he commissioned from other monks. However he was certainly directly responsible for an ambitious, if highly derivative, new history of the church of Durham from its origins at Lindisfarne to at least the year 1356. Among his other major and usually very well-informed enterprises were a series of treatises on the origins and ideals of the Benedictine order. More interesting and voluminous still are the highly miscellaneous smaller 'compilationes' (of which between thirty and forty survive), which demonstrate the prior's remarkable ability to use historical sources within the convent's archives as evidence in defence of the church of Durham's rights, possessions, and incomparable legal status. To cite Wessington's own words to Bishop Robert Neville in 1440, 'I haff doon my diligence and shewid in yees maters such evidence and wrytyng as I haff' (registrum parvum, II, fol. 112). 


@@@@@


doc= 29075


West, Sarah (1790x95-1876), actress, the only daughter of Isaac Cooke, a master upholsterer and amateur actor in Bath, and his wife, Martha, was born in Bath either in 1790 or in 1791 (she died aged eighty-five, according to her death certificate) or on 22 March 1795. Her mother was descended from a Gloucestershire family. Her cousin was the actress Harriet Cooke, later Waylett. On 22 May 1810 she appeared, not very successfully, at the Bath Theatre, for the benefit of her actor uncle James, as Miss Hardcastle in 'She Stoops to Conquer'. In the next year at the same house she was Emily Tempest in the 'Wheel of Fortune'. In the summer of 1812 she played at Cheltenham and Gloucester under Watson. She was seen by Charles and Maria Kemble, who formed a very favourable opinion of her and recommended her to Harris at Covent Garden, where she made her London debut on 28 September 1812 as Desdemona. Various roles followed with mixed success, Oxberry saying that 'she somewhat bordered on the mawkish'. Next season she was Fanny Sterling in the 'Clandestine Marriage' and the first Georgiana in 'Folly as it Flies'. She moved to Edinburgh where she was Juliet on 10 November 1814 for ten nights in succession. The coldness of Scottish criticism was thawed into a tide of approbation. In March 1815 in the English church in Edinburgh she married William West ['see below'], a musician and comic actor who played simple lads and country boys. Stanzas by 'J. M.' on her Edinburgh performances were printed in Oxberry's 'Dramatic Biography'. She proceeded to Bath where she remained for two seasons, in a variety of parts, enjoying patronage and many friendships. On 17 September 1818 she made, as Desdemona, her first appearance at Drury Lane with Elliston. Leading parts, mostly tragic, were assigned to her. Sarah Siddons and Elizabeth Kemble publicly expressed high appreciation of her rendering of Belvidera in 'Venice Preserv'd'. She supported Kean in many parts. In October 1818 she was Lady Macbeth to his Macbeth, but he remarked that he did not think she would shine in characters of that class although she was excellent in the tender parts. She spoke eloquently on 31 October 1820 at the family benefit for Alexander Rae with whom she and Kean had appeared in 'Lear'. From 1820 to 1828 at Drury Lane, with occasional appearances at the Haymarket, she played many different parts, some original. After this time her recorded performances were scanty. In 1835 she was at Covent Garden under Osbaldiston playing only secondary parts. Thereafter she was at minor theatres or in the country. Her last London engagement was at the Marylebone about 1847. She parted early from her husband, with whom she had two sons. She died on 30 December 1876 at 24 St George's Road, Glasgow, the house of her great-nephew Henry Courte Cooke, and was buried at Sighthill cemetery on 2 January 1877. 
Sarah West was of average size, had eloquent eyes, a transparent skin, and brown, luxuriant hair. She was said to be the most beautiful woman of whom the stage of the time could boast and a fine tragic actress. She was, however, not at her best in parts which called for passions other than love. Her Lady Macbeth was tame and unreal, and she was accused of 'ranting' in her later career. In comic parts she was refined but only moderately humorous. 




@@@@@


doc= 29076


West, Benjamin (1738-1820), history painter, was born on 10 October 1738 in Springfield (now Swarthmore), Pennsylvania, the tenth and youngest child of John West (1690-1776), innkeeper, and his second wife, Sarah (1697-1756), daughter of Thomas Pearson of Marple, Pennsylvania. Both parents came from Quaker families. An important source of biographical information on West is John Galt's 'The Life, Studies, and Works of Benjamin West, Esq., President of the Royal Academy of London' published in two volumes in 1816 and 1820. Although West himself read and approved the first volume in manuscript form, the two volumes are full of improbable tales that serve to glorify the artist as a self-taught genius. Perhaps the most quoted myth from Galt is that the local Indians showed West how to make his first colours from wild berries and the young artist plucked hairs from his cat's tail to make his first paintbrush. Yet from a young age West seems to have had an unwavering belief in his own ability and a sense that he was predestined for fame. Both his early artistic training and his basic schooling were, however, quite limited and, while he advanced as an artist with his mother's encouragement, he was always, even in old age, awkward in verbal and written expression. 
In Philadelphia about 1747, West met the young English artist William Williams (1727-1791), who impressed him with his pictures and lent him his first books on art, by Charles Alphonse Du Fresnoy and Jonathan Richardson. West also received some instruction in painting, as he mentioned years later to the painter and diarist Joseph Farington, from a 'Mr. Hide', a German artist who was probably John Valentine Haidt, a substitute preacher in Philadelphia in 1754-5 (Farington, 'Diary', 2.88). 
Among West's earliest documented works are two oil on panel overmantels, 'Storm at Sea' and 'Landscape with Cow' ('c'.1752-3; Pennsylvania Hospital, Philadelphia), and a pair of small portraits, 'Robert Morris' and 'Jane Morris' (both 'c'.1752; Chester County Historical Society, West Chester, Pennsylvania). Although the first two, particularly the second, appear to be based on lost engravings, these works as a group are probably influenced by Williams's lost early paintings. 
While in Lancaster, Pennsylvania, to paint portraits, West accepted a commission from a gunsmith, William Henry, to create his first history picture, the 'Death of Socrates' (priv. coll.). Henry proposed the subject, read the story to West, and urged him to be ambitious enough to attempt a multi-figured composition. Although partly based on the engraved illustration to Henry's text, Charles Rollin's 'Ancient History', West's version of about 1756 is more powerfully expressive than the engraving and sufficiently impressed a Philadelphia visitor, the Revd William Smith, that he offered to give West the rudiments of a classical education tailored for an artist. Thus in summer 1756 West moved to Philadelphia to live with his sister and brother-in-law and become a protege of Smith, a young Anglican minister, classical scholar, and cultural leader in the position of provost at the new College of Philadelphia (now the University of Pennsylvania). West continued to paint portraits, such as 'Thomas Mifflin' ('c'.1758-9; Historical Society of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia), now under the influence of the itinerant English artist John Wollaston, and perhaps under Smith's tutelage, West tried to earn enough money to study in Italy. He spent some time painting portraits for this purpose in New York. Then Provost Smith arranged for him to take passage on a merchant ship bound for Leghorn on 12 April 1760. 
West's trip to Italy, originally intended to be short, was extended to three years when he was advanced funds by wealthy Philadelphians in exchange for copies after old master works. From Leghorn, West travelled on to Rome and there met the artists and connoisseurs (including Anton Raphael Mengs, Gavin Hamilton, and Cardinal Albani) at the centre of the emerging neo-classical movement. As the first American artist ever to have travelled to Italy, he was welcomed as no less than a phenomenon. The 'cognoscenti', he recalled to Galt, accompanied him to the Vatican to see how he would react to the 'Apollo Belvedere' (Vatican Museum, Rome), considered an ancient Greek original and the most perfect male figure in sculpture. At his first sight of it West pleased them all by exclaiming, 'how like it is to a young Mohawk warrior' (Galt, 105). As Mengs advised, he copied antique sculptures and then toured northern Italy, learning by copying old master paintings (especially those of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries) before beginning a commission for a small history picture. In Venice, in 1762, he had met Richard Dalton, librarian to George III, who was on a buying tour for the king and offered him a royal commission for a painting of the lovers Cymon and Iphigenia (1763). The finished work was much admired in Rome. With the encouragement of Dalton and other English friends in Italy, West decided in 1763 to visit London, via Paris, in hope of further commissions from George III. 
Good-natured, well-bred, and capable, West seemed easily to inspire the confidence of others. Portraits of him, such as an early 'Self-Portrait' ('c'.1776; Baltimore Museum of Art) reveal that he was a conventionally handsome man, well-built, athletic, 5 feet 8 inches tall, with regular, refined features and piercing eyes. All his life he was unusually blessed with good fortune, and his arrival in August in London was no exception. He evidently expected to spend a short time there and then return to Philadelphia, but he was so well received as a self-taught prodigy who had studied in Italy, with the potential to become a great history painter in the tradition of Raphael (he was called the American Raphael by 1764), that he stayed for the rest of his life. His fiancee, Elizabeth Shewell (1741-1814), the daughter of a Philadelphia merchant, joined him within a year, after crossing the Atlantic with West's father, and they were married in London at St Martin-in-the-Fields on 2 September 1764. Elizabeth's cousin, the painter Matthew Pratt, also accompanied her and became the first of three generations of American artists (including Gilbert Stuart, John Trumbull, and Washington Allston) to study with West in London. 
West entered two scenes of fabled lovers, his 'Cymon and Iphigenia' (from 'The Decameron') and 'Angelica and Medoro' (from 'Orlando Furioso'), together with a third picture, 'General Robert Monckton' (priv. coll.) as his London debut at the exhibition of the Society of Artists in 1764. While the 'Angelica and Medoro' is an eclectic work that reflects the recent British art historical past in being a typically rococo subject, the military portrait of Monckton, ambitiously full-length, backed by an army, and in a pose recalling the 'Apollo Belvedere', is more indicative, in its combination of realism and neo-classicism, of West's future. The pose is also reminiscent, perhaps flatteringly, of an earlier quotation of the 'Apollo' in a portrait of Commodore Keppel by London's leading painter, Joshua Reynolds (1753-4; NMM). Reynolds, who welcomed West, expounded the view that artists could improve themselves by quoting such superior work and embracing the best of the Italian old masters through combination. 
Despite West's remarkable versatility throughout his career in terms of subject matter, it is as a history painter that he became best known. The most prominent artists in London followed the demand chiefly for portraiture so that the city lacked history painters of his potential stature. West's history picture 'The Choice of Hercules' (1764; V&A) marks the beginning of a more pronounced neo-classical style. It is strongly influenced by Nicolas Poussin's composition for the same subject (Stourhead, Wiltshire), and therefore quotes, in reverse, the famous antique sculpture 'Meleager' (Vatican Museum, Rome). Perhaps because it was so derivative, West did not exhibit it. Instead the archbishop of York Robert Hay Drummond's commission for a history painting led to the picture that established West as a leader of the neo-classical movement. The large 'Agrippina Landing at Brundisium with the Ashes of Germanicus' (1768; Yale University Art Gallery, New Haven, Connecticut), showing an example of heroic courage from Tacitus, is arranged in an antique frieze format after the 'Ara pacis Augustae' (Altar of the Augustan Peace) which West had copied in Rome. Not only the subject but also the style is classicizing. George III was so pleased with the 'Agrippina' that he ordered a similar Roman subject for himself, 'The Departure of Regulus from Rome' (1769; Royal Collection), the first of many royal commissions. 
In 1768, while at work on 'Regulus', West played an instrumental role with the king in obtaining patronage for a Royal Academy of Arts ['see 'Founders of the Royal Academy of Arts]. He also joined other charter members in helping to elect Reynolds as its first president. Eventually, despite his American origins, West became historical painter to the king in 1772, surveyor of the king's pictures in 1791, and second president of the Royal Academy in 1792, after Reynolds's death. 
West's most famous picture, 'The Death of General Wolfe' (1770; National Gallery of Canada, Ottawa), in the neo-classical tradition, was conceived as a history painting with the intention of morally uplifting its audience, but it is painted with the movement, drama, and more vivid colour associated with Romanticism. Furthermore, it marks a major departure in depicting a contemporary event as a highly dramatized (and therefore unusually self-conscious) history painting. Modern history painting had been attempted before, most notably by Francis Hayman, but without the impact of this picture. The subject is Major-General James Wolfe's death in 1759, at the moment when the British announced victory in a decisive battle against the French in Quebec. Reynolds objected strenuously to the use of modern dress, arguing against breeches and in favour of Greek or Roman costume as more appropriate to the content of patriotic self-sacrifice at an exalted level (akin to that of the ancients). Clearly he feared a threat to the status of history painting, within the academy, as the most high-minded form of art. West, however, prevailed, as Reynolds admitted, by producing an electrifyingly inspirational piece, with a Christ-like Wolfe, that was enormously successful when entered in the annual exhibition at the Royal Academy in 1771. Through this precedent, which incorporated portraits with accurate detail and opened up the possibility of contemporary subjects, West introduced a new degree of realism (despite the fictitious grouping) to history painting. The popularity of this picture (purchased by Lord Grosvenor, who eventually owned at least eleven pictures by West) and the engraving that was produced after it by William Woollett in 1766, one of the most commercially successful prints ever produced, served as an inspiration to aspiring history painters for many years. Yet the impression that West's feat could be reproduced by others was largely an illusion. The market for history painting, with a number of exceptions, never really developed beyond commissions from the king, and West was the sole recipient of these. 
From 1779 to 1801 West was engaged in decorative schemes at Windsor Castle which were part of a renovation to make Windsor the chief royal residence. He had already supplied six history paintings to hang with 'The Departure of Regulus' at Buckingham House (later Palace), and several royal portraits, when the king turned his attention to the improvement of Windsor. In the most ambitious undertaking of his life, West eventually completed eighteen large canvases for the royal chapel at Windsor on the biblical theme of revealed religion. The project came to an abrupt halt, however, with the king's illness in 1801, and the paintings (never installed) were finally returned to West's family. Seven of the group, including the large 'Ascension' ('c'.1781-2), were reunited in the War Memorial Chapel at Bob Jones University, Greenville, South Carolina. For the audience chamber at Windsor, West produced eight pictures (1786-9; Royal Collection) from the reign of King Edward III in the fourteenth century, which were remarkable at the time because of their relative accuracy in historical detail. West also provided an altarpiece (Detroit Institute of Arts) and designs for stained glass windows (des.) for St George's Chapel in the lower ward of the castle, and designs for an allegorical ceiling in the Queen's Lodge (des.). Nevertheless, his chief project at Windsor was the royal chapel with its planned works, numbering about thirty-six large pictures. 
It is because of the royal chapel and a second commission in 1796 (also never completed) from the writer and art collector William Beckford to provide scenes from the book of 'Revelation' for Fonthill Abbey, Wiltshire, that West became known as the premier painter of religious subjects in England. Indeed he reinforced this reputation by creating and exhibiting three huge biblical compositions in the last decade of his life: 'Christ Healing the Sick' (1811; Tate collection), for which he received the record sum of 3000 guineas; 'Christ Rejected' (1814; Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts); and 'Death on the Pale Horse' (1817; Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts). The preliminary sketch (1796; Detroit Institute of Arts) for the last, an image of the four horsemen of the apocalypse, as a seeming explosion of energy and colour, is the antithesis of his earlier neo-classical style and much more vibrant than the version of 1817. West's late oil sketches were often justifiably preferred to the resultant large-scale works which, especially during the 1790s, were rather strongly outlined for the benefit of engravers. The sketches are more lively, and on a smaller scale West's deficiencies in training are generally less noticeable. 
With a diverse output of over 700 known works, West clearly ventured in a number of different directions, such as genre painting, for example, 'Drayman Drinking' (1796; priv. coll.), 'historical landscape', as in 'Lot and his Daughters Conducted by Two Angels' (1810; Detroit Institute of Arts), or literary painting, as in 'The Cave of Despair' (1772; Yale Center for British Art, New Haven), precisely to maintain a show of leadership in the London art world. The latter suicide scene taken from Spenser's 'Faerie Queene' is an early effort to evoke the terrible sublime as defined by Edmund Burke. To perpetuate his position West also attempted sequels to his 'Death of General Wolfe', but only one of them, involving collaboration with an engraver, came close to duplicating his earlier success in terms of content. In 1806 he completed a large 'Death of Lord Nelson' (Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool), depicting the popular hero's death, several months before, at the moment of his greatest triumph, as the British under his leadership defeated the combined French and Spanish fleets off Cape Trafalgar. Nelson received the fatal bullet on the deck of his flagship and died, several hours later, below deck in the cockpit, but West dramatically enhanced the moment by placing him on deck with a multitude of supporting figures. He later corrected this inaccuracy in his more effective, probably Rembrandt-inspired, lantern-lit 'Death of Lord Nelson in the Cockpit of the 'Victory'' (1808; NMM). 
West's complacency and even self-puffery offended some of his contemporaries, but these weaknesses were perhaps balanced by an unusual openness, generosity, and kindness particularly towards students. He maintained a friendship with George III that was only occasionally threatened, by, for instance, Queen Charlotte's dislike or his visit to Paris in 1802 and admiration for Napoleon. When offered a knighthood ('c'.1792), he refused it in the mistaken belief that he might gain a hereditary title instead. As president of the Royal Academy he maintained his position with dignity and was re-elected over many years, despite some jealous political manoeuvring that led to his resignation in 1805 and re-election in 1806. West died on 11 March 1820, at his long-term residence, 14 Newman Street, London, and, as its president, lay in state at the Royal Academy before being buried on 29 March with great ceremony in St Paul's Cathedral. 
Angry over West's support of Lord Elgin's seizure of the Elgin marbles, Byron tried to undermine the artist's reputation in his poem 'The Curse of Minerva' (1812), by calling him a 'flattering, feeble dotard'. Nine years later, however, the 'British Press, or, The Morning Literary Advertiser' had reason to claim that West's 'reign in taste is now perfectly established' (Alberts, 393). West's students, many of whom had assisted him in his larger pictures, were even more effusive after his death. William Dunlap predicted that 'his influence on the art he professed will never cease' (Dunlap, 33). Yet by 1840 if not earlier, West's reputation had gone into a precipitous decline. Recent scholarship, most especially Helmut von Erffa's and Allen Staley's 'Paintings of Benjamin West' (1986), with the first 'catalogue raisonne', lent support to the gradual rehabilitation of West during the second half of the twentieth century. This catalogue establishes West as more versatile, in both style and subject, and more influential than most historians had previously acknowledged. His work was important internationally as a developing stimulus to the neo-classical movement. But, in a kind of reversal, his greatest contribution to the development of painting with 'The Death of General Wolfe' was through promoting a new kind of picture, the long-lived modern history painting. More than anyone else in Europe he helped to revive an interest in history painting at the end of the eighteenth century, chiefly through the number and extraordinary popularity of engravings that were done after his work. By the time he died, West was one of the most prominent artists in the English-speaking world. He also changed the course of the history of American art by establishing the need for study abroad, particularly in England. As a teacher and fellow artist he led others by his example rather than through his 'Discourses' (of which only a fragment survives in manuscript) along an optimistic path, encouraging ambition and a certain amount of experimentation and always maintaining a high-minded purpose. 
The elder of West's two sons, 


@@@@@


doc= 29077


West, Charles (1816-1898), physician, was born in London on 8 August 1816, the second son of Ebeneezer West ('b'. 1776) and his wife, Jane (1783-1871), daughter of Major Johnson of the Durham fencibles. In 1821 Ebeneezer West became a Baptist minister at Chenies, Buckinghamshire, and opened a school, which he later moved to Amersham. Here West received his early education, followed by attendance at a private school in Totteridge. In 1831 he was apprenticed to Mr Gray, a local general practitioner who had been apothecary to St George's Hospital. After two years, in which he learned the dispenser's art, he entered St Bartholomew's Hospital as a medical student. In 1835 he went to the University of Bonn where he won a prize for an essay on the female pelvis and its influence on parturition. He then went to Paris and Berlin where he graduated MD in September 1837. 
After returning to London, West bought a partnership in a City practice, which failed. In 1838 he studied midwifery at the Rotunda Lying-in Hospital, Dublin, and also served at the Meath Hospital. He then returned to St Bartholomew's as clinical clerk to Dr George Burrows. In 1842 West gained the MRCP and became physician at the Waterloo Road Dispensary for Women and Children. In the summer of 1844 he married Mary Hester, daughter of N. B. Cartwright of Stroud, Gloucester; they had a son and a daughter. In 1845 he was appointed lecturer on midwifery at the Middlesex Hospital, and physician accoucheur in 1846. His lectures on the diseases of children were published in the 'Medical Gazette' in 1847 and later as a book which saw seven English editions and was translated into several European languages and Arabic. This work made West famous as the father of British paediatrics. In 1848, now an FRCP, he was appointed joint lecturer on midwifery with Edward Rigby at St Bartholomew's Hospital. When Rigby resigned in 1849 West continued the lectures alone. Based on practical experience and expressed in elegant English, the lectures enhanced his reputation. He was designated honorary physician accoucheur with charge of the lying-in department and a ward of thirteen beds. He also gave a weekly clinical lecture, but his work was unrecognized, his name never appearing in the list of physicians of the hospital, despite more than ten years' service. From 1855 on he petitioned the hospital for recognition; it was repeatedly refused and he resigned in 1861. 
In the 1840s West tried unsuccessfully to convert the Waterloo Road Dispensary to a children's hospital. In 1849-50 he investigated the facilities for treating children at other London hospitals and wrote to all the children's hospitals on the continent. He personally visited every London physician to canvass support for a children's hospital. Richard Bright directed him to Henry Bence Jones who lent his house for meetings and used his personal influence to obtain financial support. On 19 March 1851, at a public meeting chaired by Lord Ashley, the Children's Hospital was founded and two weeks later the house at 49 Great Ormond Street, formerly the home of Queen Anne's physician, Richard Mead, was obtained for the hospital. West was its first physician and wrote the early reports. He lectured on children's diseases and wrote a little manual on nursing sick children which was published for the benefit of the hospital. 
In 1874 West joined the Roman Catholic church. His first wife died and he remarried. His second wife was Marie Octavie Agatha Clotilde Flon (died 1923); there were no children. In 1875 West resigned as physician to the Great Ormond Street Hospital which he had served since 1852. He was appointed consulting physician and retained his place on the committee of management. He also donated his extensive medical library to the hospital. But in 1877, following a disagreement with the committee, his connection with the hospital came to an end, though he continued to oversee the building of the school of nursing which he had designed. It was opened in 1878. He continued in private practice, but London's fogs troubled him and from 1880 he wintered annually in Nice. In 1885, with improved health, he moved back to London and many former patients returned to him, but he always wished to resume his life's work with children and sought in vain for a post in a children's hospital. 
Throughout his life West was a prolific writer on medical subjects; he was also one of the finest public speakers of his generation. At the Royal College of Physicians he was Croonian lecturer in 1854, Lumleian lecturer (1871), and Harveian orator (1874). He regarded the profession of medicine as a sacred duty and his strict moral code made him a demanding colleague. On two notable occasions he argued forcefully to prevent the entry of women to the Royal College of Physicians. In 1865 he was elected a corresponding member of the Academie de Medecine, Paris, and in 1892, 'membre etranger', a rare honour attained by very few Englishmen. 
West suffered a severe attack of neuralgia in 1891 from which he never fully recovered. The London fogs had again forced him to winter on the Riviera and in 1897 he went south, although warned that the journey might prove too much. On 20 December in Nice an acute attack of herpes further reduced his strength. He left Cannes for London on 1 March 1898, but at Paris he was forced to break his journey and, after three weeks of increasing weakness, he died peacefully at the Hotel Terminus on 19 March 1898. He was buried at St Mary's Catholic Church, Chislehurst, Kent, on 23 March. 


@@@@@


doc= 29078


West, Charles Richard Sackville-, sixth Earl De La Warr (1815-1873), army officer, born on 13 November 1815, in Upper Grosvenor Street, London, was the second but eldest surviving son of George John West, fifth Earl De La Warr (1791-1869) ['see under 'West, John, first Earl De La Warr], and his wife, Lady Elizabeth, later first Baroness Buckhurst (1795-1870), daughter of John Frederick Sackville, third duke of Dorset. The fifth earl and his sons took the additional name of Sackville on 30 November 1843 by royal licence. After education at Harrow School, Charles obtained the commission of ensign in the 43rd foot on 26 July 1833, and was promoted to a second lieutenancy on 30 August. On 5 June 1835 he became lieutenant in the 15th foot, and on 15 April 1842 captain in the 21st foot. In 1845 and 1846 he served as aide-de-camp and acting military secretary to Sir Hugh Gough during the First Anglo-Sikh War, and was several times mentioned in dispatches. On 3 April 1846 he obtained the brevet rank of major, and in the following year received the Indian medal with three clasps. On 2 August 1850 he attained the brevet rank of lieutenant-colonel, and on 23 April 1852 the regimental rank of major. Following the death of his elder brother, George John Frederick Sackville-West, Viscount Cantelupe, on 25 June 1850, he became heir to the earldom, and from then until his father's death he used the courtesy title Lord West. 
Lord West was sent to the Crimea in 1854, was present at the battle of Inkerman in command of a wing of the 21st fusiliers, and initiated the attack on the battery on Shelf Hill which is believed to have led to General Dannenberg's retreat. On 28 November 1854 he was promoted colonel. On 18 June 1855 he commanded the reserve in the unsuccessful assault made against the west flank of the Redan, and after the death of Sir John Campbell (1816-1855) assumed the command of the attack. In the same year he received the Crimean medal with four clasps, and on 27 July was made CB. On 24 July 1856 he obtained the local rank of major-general. On 2 August 1856 he was made an officer of the Legion d'honneur. He also received the Military Medal of Sardinia, and was made a knight of the third class of the Mejidiye on 2 March 1858. On 29 October 1864 he became a major-general. He succeeded his father as sixth Earl De La Warr on 24 February 1869, and on 20 May 1871 was created KCB. He was a Conservative peer, but supported Irish disestablishment in 1869. On 30 September 1871 he was appointed a commissioner to carry out the abolition of purchase in the army. On the morning of 22 April 1873 he left The Bull inn, Cambridge, and drowned himself in the River Granta; the coroner's jury's verdict was 'temporary insanity'. He was unmarried, and was succeeded by his brother Reginald Windsor Sackville-West, seventh earl. 


@@@@@


doc= 29079


West, Sir Edward (bap. 1782, d. 1828), judge and political economist, was baptized on 5 April 1782 at St Marylebone, Middlesex, the son of John Balchen West, the receiver-general for Hertfordshire, and his wife, Elizabeth. His parents died early in his life, and he was brought up by his uncle Sir Martin Brown ffolkes (died 1821), MP for King's Lynn in Norfolk, and his aunt Fanny Turner (died 1813), daughter of Sir John Turner bt of Warham. He was educated at Harrow School and University College, Oxford, where he obtained his BA in 1804. Between 1804 and 1807 he studied classics and mathematics, and was elected a fellow in 1807. He then turned to the law, and was called to the bar at the Inner Temple in 1814. He wrote the 'Essay on the Application of Capital to Land' (1815) as a contribution to the early corn law debates, then in 1817 published a legal work, 'A Treatise of the Law and Practice of Extents'. This was a reforming work addressed to indemnities against direct or indirect debts to royalty, and their use in the court of chancery. West was appointed recorder of Bombay in 1822, and following customary practice was knighted. He married his first cousin Lucretia G. B. ffolkes at Marylebone church on 26 August 1822, and they left for India six months later. They were never to return to Britain, and both in 1828 fell to the fate of so many aspiring young professionals seeking to make careers in India, that of an early death. 
Soon after he arrived in Bombay, West was appointed chief justice of the crown, or one of the king's judges appointed to act as a check on the East India Company and to protect the interests of the Indian people. The role was a difficult one, as most of the European community in Bombay was connected to the East India Company. Despite his isolation he took his position seriously, and set out to check corruption, and to take up in the courts grievances of Indian servants and labourers against their masters. He wrote reports and letters, and made speeches on native legal rights, on the failings of the company magistrates, and on the irregularities of the police magistrates. He died before his reforms could be implemented, and was replaced by a chief justice seen to favour the company. 
Lucretia West, an educated woman of the lesser gentry, took great interest in the politics of the day. Before her marriage she canvassed for her brother for the seat of Lynn in Norfolk against Colonel Walpole. Her journals in Bombay recounted her husband's long sessions in court, in the intervals of which he worked on his tracts of political economy, first on 'The Price of Corn and Wages of Labour' (1826), then on a treatise which was never completed. She vividly set out the day-to-day lives of the British middle classes in India in her account of their own problems of adaptation. She described their friendships, the social ostracism they encountered during West's reform of legal practice in Bombay, and the almost daily deaths among those they knew. She had a daughter, Fanny Anna, in June 1826 and just over two years later she died in childbirth in Bombay a few months after the death of her husband. Fanny Anna was taken back to Britain after the death of her parents, and on coming of age went to live at her parents' childhood home of Hillington Hall, Lynn. 
Sir Edward West is remembered for proposing a theory of differential rent based on diminishing returns in his pamphlet 'Essay on the Application of Capital to Land' (1815). This was published just before David Ricardo's 'Essay on Profits' (1815) and virtually at the same time as Thomas Malthus's 'An Inquiry into the Nature and Progress of Rent' (1815). Ricardo in his 'Principles of Political Economy and Taxation' (1817) attributed to both West and Malthus the 'true doctrine of rent'. West's pamphlet was followed by a book in 1826, 'The price of corn and wages of labour, with observations upon Dr. Smith's, Mr. Ricardo's and Mr. Malthus's doctrines upon those subjects'. West's contributions to political economy, though on a subject of enduring interest to him, were written in the interstices of a distinguished legal career, practised mainly in Bombay. 
West's contributions to political economy were particularly striking for insights which so closely anticipated Ricardo's analysis, and for the intellectual isolation in which he appears to have written them. He argued the case for the principle of diminishing returns in much the same way as Ricardo was to do independently, and developed a theory of the falling rate of profit which might only be postponed by the repeal of the corn laws. West inferred from his theory of diminishing returns that rents would fall, with the result of universal benefit from free trade. Ricardo's 'Essay on Profits' (1815), by contrast, argued that rents would fall, with the implication that landlords had a selfish interest in supporting the maintenance of the corn laws. West later changed his argument when he published 'The Price of Corn' (1826). He did, however, take the debate on the corn laws to a new stage by arguing that there was no danger in free trade leading to extreme specialization between manufacturing and agricultural countries. Diminishing returns would apply as much to foreign food producers as it had to domestic, and so provide limits to international specialization. 
West's 'The Price of Corn and Wages of Labour' (1826), though written in India, was remarkably up to date in its deployment of recent accounts of distress in the British manufacturing districts. He used these to provide an alternative to Smithian, Malthusian, and Ricardian price and wage theory. West's was a demand theory, based in turn on the consumption of the manufacturing classes. Manufacturing, he argued, in becoming an increasingly dominant sector, was more subject to international price fluctuation. Those in the manufacturing districts were more subject to alternations of luxury and distress: 'at one time... the wives and daughters of journeymen used the most expensive articles of dress, such as silk stockings, etc; at other times... there were troops of the manufacturers wandering about the country for want of employment, ragged, apparently wasted from want of sufficient food' ('The Price of Corn and Wages of Labour', 50). The division between luxuries and necessities also affected demand; the demand for necessaries might be tied to the level of wages and incomes; that for luxuries was also dependent on the vagaries of taste. With the international division of labour the price uncertainties experienced in luxury markets now extended to all markets. Yet, just as he argued in 'Essay on the Application of Capital to Land' (1815), the adverse impact of this international specialization would be checked, in this case by the proliferation of markets, and reduced dependence on any single market. 
West drew on his experience in India. He argued that the low rates of wages in India might entail lower production costs and prices, but not necessarily so. The higher productivity, and especially intensity of labour in Britain yielded even lower production costs ('The Price of Corn and Wages of Labour', 71). He also drew attention to the uncertainties of international markets from India to South America, predicting, however, greater stability with more international integration (ibid., 141). Writing from the extremities of the empire, West developed a much more global perspective than many contemporary political economists on the determinants of prices and wages. He died at Poona on 18 August 1828, and was buried there. Hindus, Parsis, and Muslims combined to fund a scholarship in West's honour. 


@@@@@


doc= 29080


West, Francis (1586-1633/4), colonial governor, was born on 28 October 1586, probably at the family seat of Wherwell Abbey, Hampshire, the fourth but second surviving son of Thomas West, second Baron De La Warr (1555/6-1602), nobleman, and Anne, daughter of Sir Francis Knollys. West arrived in Virginia in 1608 with the second expedition under Captain Christopher Newport to provide the colony with supplies. That autumn he accompanied Newport in his fruitless exploration some 30 miles beyond the falls of the James River, and at the end of the year went with Captain John Smith, who had recently become the president of the colony's council, on his successful quest for food supplies from the Powhatans. With twenty men West then went back to the falls, seeking corn but finding only berries and acorns. 
In May 1609 the Virginia Company secured a new royal charter which, 'inter alia', replaced the elected president of the council in the colony by a governor (and captain-general) appointed by the company in London. Thomas West, third Baron De La Warr, West's elder brother, was to be the first governor, and Sir Thomas Gates was sent immediately as his deputy with a fleet of nine ships. In late summer 1609 six of the vessels straggled into the Chesapeake, and almost at once there was trouble. Among those arriving was Gabriel Archer, an old opponent of Captain Smith. The latter gained the support of the mariners, but the gentlemen, egged on by Archer, wanted the young Francis West as Smith's successor and secured his appointment to the Jamestown council. Henceforth he was, if not a leader, at least a figurehead of the gentry who sought autonomy within the colony. Smith, however, was still president of the council, and to avoid the prospect of starvation in the coming winter, just before his departure from the colony that autumn he dispersed the colonists up and down the river, sending West to the falls with more than a hundred men, where West Fort was established. But West was not there long. During the 'starving time' that winter he commanded one of the colony's three vessels and sought food for Jamestown. That done, deserting the colony, he sailed for England at the very time his brother Thomas was 'en route' for Virginia. 
West soon returned to the colony. In 1612 he succeeded George Percy as commander at Jamestown, and in 1617 was appointed master of the ordnance. By 1614 at the latest he and his younger brothers were in possession of 500 acres at Westover on the north bank of the James near the falls. The exact bounds of the estate were uncertain, and in 1619 there was a dispute with the new governor, Sir George Yeardley, when, according to the Wests, Yeardley assigned part of their holding to the associates of Berkeley hundred. Visiting England in 1620, West joined with other 'ancient planters' who were also there seeking the appointment of a governor of 'Eminence, or Nobillytie' (Kingsbury, 3.231). 
Yeardley's successor, Sir Francis Wyatt, was instructed in July 1621 to reappoint West to the Jamestown council despite his absence from the colony. Indeed West may at that time have considered abandoning it altogether, for in November 1622 Sir Ferdinando Gorges appointed him admiral of New England and a member of the council there advising the governor-general. Briefly in Virginia in March 1623, West then spent the summer in New England waters, but, finding 'the fisher men to be stuberne fellows' ('History of Plymouth Plantation', 1.312), he was back in Virginia by the end of the year. 
Participating thereafter in council activity, West married late in 1625 or in 1626 Margaret (died 1627/8), the widow of Edward Blaney. They had a son, Francis, and a daughter, Elizabeth -- who was apparently dead by 1629. Margaret herself died in the winter of 1627-8. In 1626 Wyatt had returned to England and Sir George Yeardley became interim governor, but Yeardley too died in little more than a year, whereupon West became governor and on 28 March 1628 married Yeardley's widow, Temperance (died 1628), daughter of Anthony Flowerdew. She died at the year's end, and three months later, perhaps to settle her estate, West left for England, where before the end of the year he had married Jane, daughter of Sir Henry Davye, and had made his will. While there he opposed Lord Baltimore's plan for a colony within Virginia's boundaries. Back in Virginia by the end of 1631, he resumed his seat on the council, where he sat for the last time on 9 February 1633. His widow proved his will in England on 28 April 1634. A family tradition alleges that he had been drowned. 
Politically West's career was of minor significance; but socially, following George Percy's departure, he and his brothers were indisputably the first family in Virginia. Perhaps his career is most noteworthy, however, as an example of the frequency with which early Virginians took to the water. In addition to cruising Chesapeake Bay in search of corn, West crossed the Atlantic seven times in twenty-four years, and made at least one round voyage to New England. 


@@@@@


doc= 29081


West, Francis (d. 1652), parliamentarian army officer, was born in London, the eldest son of George West of London (probably a silkman) and his wife, Margaret Bradborne, from near Northampton. On 16 May 1626 he married in All Hallows, Bread Street, Margaret Gooding, daughter of John Gooding, a London haberdasher, with whom he had two sons and four daughters. West was a principal inhabitant of Bread Street, where he traded as a silkman, and was described as an esquire in an official listing of 1642. He is not to be confused with his namesake, and fellow parishioner and silkman from the junior branch of the family, 
Francis West of the senior branch became a common councillor for the ward of Bread Street in 1641 and in 1644-5 served on the important City lands committee. By the spring of 1642 he had also become senior captain in the Blue regiment of the London trained bands under its colonel, Alderman Thomas Adams; he subsequently rose to the ranks of sergeant-major and lieutenant-colonel in 1642-3. West demonstrated an early commitment to parliament, subscribing one of the radical petitions of December 1641, acting as a collector and assessor for parliamentarian levies, contributing to the cavalry, and serving on the 1643 subcommittee for new subscriptions. At the same time he joined with other godly zealots in All Hallows, Bread Street, in a petition of September 1642 for the appointment of Lazarus Seaman as their rector. When a presbyterian structure was later erected in the London province, he was appointed one of the lay triers for vetting elders. 
A good performance as commander of the Blue regiment (in the absence of their colonel, Adams) at Gloucester and at the first battle of Newbury in September 1643 brought West to the attention and favour of the earl of Essex, who promoted him to the rank of colonel. However, this promotion was made on Essex's own authority and hence enraged the London militia committee, which claimed the right to appoint all officers in its forces. The insistence that Adams remained the legitimate colonel led to clashes with some of West's local supporters within the regiment and an intervention by the committee of both kingdoms in August 1644. Shortly afterwards West became an agent of the committee for compounding employed to extract money from sequestered royalists. 
But West finally achieved a pre-eminent London position in May 1645 when he replaced Isaac Penington, forced out by the self-denying ordinance, as lieutenant of the Tower. West was to retain the lieutenancy until the summer of 1647, when his control of the Tower was seen as a vital element in London's attempted counter-revolution. Consequently, when Fairfax occupied the capital in August, West was removed from the lieutenancy in favour of the army's candidate, Robert Tichborne. Yet in May 1648 he was reappointed to the lieutenancy, and he retained the post until his death in the Tower, after a short illness, on 11 August 1652. His funeral was attended by militia from the Blue regiment and Tower Hamlets as the Tower's guns sounded a final salute; he was buried in London some time after 17 August. His eldest son, John West ('b'. 1628), succeeded to his estate. 


@@@@@


doc= 29082


Francis Robert West (c.1749-1809), drawing-master, also studied in Paris as a pupil of Vanloo, and worked in the French Academy. On 11 October 1770 he succeeded his father as master of the Dublin School of Design; his pupils included the portrait painter Martin Archer Shee. A talented draughtsman in crayon, Francis West painted little in oils. Ten plates of moral emblems were engraved after his designs. He died in Dublin on 24 January 1809. The National Gallery of Ireland holds six portraits in charcoal and pastel by F. R. West. 


@@@@@


doc= 29083


George John Sackville-West, fifth Earl De La Warr (1791-1869), politician, was born in Savile Row, London, on 26 October 1791. He was educated at Harrow School and Brasenose College, Oxford, and graduated BA in 1812 and MA in 1819. He was appointed a lord of the bedchamber to both George III and George IV and served from July 1813 to March 1828. He was created LLD of Cambridge in 1828, and DLC of Oxford in 1834. On 21 June 1813 he married Elizabeth (1795-1870), the daughter of John Frederick Sackville, third duke of Dorset, and in November 1843 acquired a royal licence to put his wife's surname of Sackville before his own. In September 1841 he was sworn of the privy council and appointed lord chamberlain by Sir Robert Peel, a post he held until 1846. He held the same office under Lord Derby from February 1858 to June 1859. De La Warr, who met Byron while at Harrow, was the 'Fair Euryalus' of the latter's 'Childish Recollections' and the inspiration behind two further poems. He died at Knole Park, Kent, on 23 February 1869; he was succeeded by his eldest son, Charles Richard Sackville-West, sixth Earl De La Warr, and was survived by his wife, who in April 1864 had been created Baroness Buckhurst in her own right. She died at 17 Upper Grosvenor Street, London, on 9 January 1870. 


@@@@@


doc= 29084


West, Gilbert (1703-1756), author, was the eldest son of Richard West DD (1671-1716) and his wife, Maria (died 1763), daughter of Sir Richard Temple (1634-1697), and sister of Richard Temple, Viscount Cobham. West's father was a fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford, from 1697 to 1708, prebendary of Winchester from 1706, and archdeacon of Berkshire from 1710 until his death on 2 December 1716. He published an edition of Pindar in 1697 and an edition of Theocritus in 1699. West's younger brother was Vice-Admiral Temple West. His sister Maria married Alexander Hood, later Viscount Bridport. The John West, scholar of Eton and King's College, Cambridge, who was born on 5 February 1713 and died of smallpox in Cambridge in 1732, may have been another brother. 
West was educated at Eton College, and Christ Church, Oxford, where he matriculated on 16 March 1721, and graduated BA (1725). He served for some time in the army, and was afterwards employed under Lord Townshend (1674-1738). About 1729 he married Catherine Bartlett (died 1757), and retired to the village of West Wickham in Kent where he devoted himself, in Johnson's words, 'to learning and to piety'. He had close family connections with George Lyttelton, first Baron Lyttelton (1709-1773), and William Pitt, first earl of Chatham (1708-1778), both of whom visited him frequently. One of the walks in West's garden was known as 'Pitt's walk'. West was a correspondent of Philip Doddridge and a friend of Pope, who left him $5 for a ring and a reversion of $200 at the death of Martha Blount (who outlived West). Fifty-four letters are preserved in the Huntington Library, mostly to Elizabeth Montagu, also a family connection, who became a close friend in the last five years of his life. West had one son, Richard, who matriculated at Merton College, Oxford, on 20 November 1752 and died about December 1754. 
West's first poem, addressed to Pope and published anonymously in 1732, described his uncle's gardens at Stowe. He published imitations of Spenser ('A Canto of the Fairy Queen' in 1739 and 'Education: a Poem' in 1751), and 'The Institution of the Order of the Garter: a Dramatick Poem' in 1742. Though apparently a doubter in earlier years, in 1747 he published 'Observations on the History and Evidence of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ', which earned him the Oxford degree of DCL (30 March 1748), and a reputation as 'the miracle of the moral world, a Christian poet' (Montagu, 1.278). By 1749 the work had gone through four editions and had been translated into French and German. Towards the end of his life he was engaged on a work to prove the authenticity of the 'New Testament'. In 1749 West published his translation of a selection of the odes of Pindar, together with a dissertation on the Olympic games. While the translation itself is conventionally elegant, West's notes mark a breakthrough in the reading of the odes in terms of their historical occasion, and the dissertation, praised by Gibbon, offers a rare eighteenth-century appreciation of the cultural and political significance of sport. West's miscellaneous poetry and his translations were included in Johnson's collection. 
On 20 May 1736 West was granted an annual pension of $250, and in 1752 he was given a clerkship of the privy council. On 16 April 1754 he was made paymaster to Chelsea Hospital. He suffered severely from gout (and translated Lucian's 'The triumphs of the gout'). West died of 'a stroke of the palsy' in Chelsea on 26 March 1756 and was buried in West Wickham. His widow was allowed a pension of $200 a year from 5 July 1756; she died in 1757. A memorial tablet to West and other members of the family was placed in St John's Church, West Wickham, by his brother's grandson, Admiral Sir John West, in 1846. 


@@@@@


doc= 29085


West, James (1703-1772), politician and antiquary, was born on 2 May 1703 and baptized on 21 May at St Swithin's, London Stone, the only son of Richard West, of London and Prior's Marston in Warwickshire, and his wife, Mary Russell, of Strensham, Worcestershire. He was educated from 1720 at Balliol College, Oxford, where he graduated BA (1723) and proceeded MA (1726), and from 1721 at the Inner Temple. He was called to the bar in 1728, and on 23 January 1738 was admitted at Lincoln's Inn. He was elected a bencher of the Inner Temple in 1761, reader in 1767, and treasurer in 1768. 
From a young age West engaged in the study of antiquities and science. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society on 23 November 1726, acted as the society's treasurer from 30 November 1736 to 30 November 1768, and served as its president from the latter date until his death. He became FSA on 23 November 1726, and on 19 February 1729 was elected a member of the Spalding Society. As a trustee of Lady Oxford's estates, he completed the sale of the Harleian manuscripts to the British Museum in 1753 for $10,000. 
West collected books, manuscripts, pictures, prints, plate, coins, and medals, but lost many items, valued at almost $3000, through a fire in his chambers at the Inner Temple on 4 January 1737. Undaunted, he subsequently gathered around him a marvellous library and curiosities of all kinds at his town house, situated at the west end of the piazza in King Street, Covent Garden. His country seat was at Alscott, Preston-on-Stour, Gloucestershire. 
West reputedly revived the 'love of black-letter lore and of Caxtonian typography' (Dibdin, 376-84). He greatly assisted James Granger in his biographical work on portraits, and he subscribed for Hearne's books and gave him a plate for Domerham's 'Glastonbury' (1727). He also assisted in Walter Hemingford's 'History of Edward I, II, and III' (1731). 
On 15 August 1738 West married Sarah (died 1799), the daughter and heir of Sir Thomas Steavens, a timber merchant at Southwark and of Eltham in Kent. Ultimately, the marriage brought him $100,000 to add to the $1000 per annum left to him by his father. The couple had a son, James (died 1795), and two daughters: Sarah (died 1801), who became the wife of Andrew, second and last Lord Archer, and Henrietta (died 1815). 
At the general election in 1741 West was returned as MP for St Albans, Hertfordshire, and continued to represent the borough until 1768, when he was elected for Boroughbridge, Yorkshire. Between 5 April 1758 and July 1760 he was recorder of St Albans and from 23 November 1759 its high steward. From 1746 he was also recorder of Poole, Dorset. In December 1743 he was appointed secretary to the chancellor of the exchequer, an office he held until May 1752. He was also joint secretary to the Treasury from May 1746 until November 1756, when he resigned with his patron, the duke of Newcastle, who secured for him a pension of $2000 per annum. He returned to government as joint secretary in July 1757, and once again resigned with Newcastle in May 1762. When Rockingham began forming an administration in July 1765, Newcastle pressed for the reinstatement of many of his former adherents. West became the unfortunate victim of Rockingham's decision to assert his independence, being turned down for a return to the Treasury as treasurer to the navy, and even for a consolatory groomship of the chamber for his son. All this he bore uncomplainingly, and in January 1768 he was formally reconciled with Rockingham. He continued to send Newcastle frequent and valuable reports of parliamentary proceedings. 
West died on 2 July 1772. In the early months of 1773 his extensive collections were all sold. The manuscripts, including many which had belonged to Bishop Kennett, were purchased by Lord Shelburne, and now form part of the Lansdowne manuscripts at the British Library. Horace Walpole considered that the prints went for a 'frantic sum', while the books were 'selling outrageously' ('Letters', 5.439, 455). The books alone realized $2927 1's'. Gough bought many of them, particularly those with Kennett's annotations, and they afterwards went to the Bodleian Library. 


@@@@@


doc= 29086


West, Jane (1758-1852), writer and poet, was born on 30 April 1758 in a building which afterwards became St Paul's Coffee House, London, the only child of Jane and John Iliffe. Her parents moved with her when she was eleven to Desborough in Northamptonshire. A useful source for West's early life is her letter of 1800 seeking Bishop Percy's patronage in order to support her 'rising family' which is reprinted along with other biographical and literary information in her obituary ('GM', 2nd ser., 38.99-101). West states that she was 'self-instructed' and began writing poetry at the age of thirteen, having by the age of twenty a 'formidable' catalogue of compositions: 'I scorned corrections, and never blotted' (ibid., 99). By 1783 she had married Thomas West (died 1823), a yeoman farmer from neighbouring Little Bowden, Leicestershire, members of whose family had been rectors of the parish for a century and a half. Thomas West was related to Vice-Admiral Temple West and to Gilbert West, a minor poet. They had three sons: Thomas (1783-1843), John (1787-1841), and Edward (1794-1821). Jane West was to outlive them all (Lloyd). In 1810 she paid a visit to Bishop Percy at Dromore in Ireland. After Percy's death, she continued to write but her popularity seems to have suffered from the loss of her patron and of influential subscribers. West was also a correspondent of Sarah Trimmer, the educational and children's writer. 
All of West's works are didactic and conservative in their ethical judgements regarding political change and women's role in society. Her first novel, 'The Advantages of Education' (1793), written under the pseudonym Prudentia Homespun, aims 'to enstruct rather than entertain' (preface). This was followed by what is now her best-known novel, 'A Gossip's Story' (1796), also published under the facetious pseudonym, and written to expound 'The Advantages of Consistency, Fortitude and Domestic Virtue'. Critics have noted how 'A Gossip's Story' with its anti-sentimental plot line anticipates the themes and judgements of Jane Austen's fiction, particularly the latter's 'Sense and Sensibility'. Her third novel, 'A Tale of the Times' (1799), addresses her familiar theme of the necessity for young women to make the right marriage choice, but expands on this with its expression of anxieties of the day, particularly fears of revolutionary upheaval. In its anti-Jacobin, tory, and reactionary emphasis 'A Tale of the Times' forms a counterpoint to the Jacobin novels of the period. 
West's other novels include 'The Infidel Father' (1802) which attacks atheism; 'The Refusal' (1810); 'The Loyalists: an Historical Novel' (1812), credited as a possible influence on Walter Scott's first novel 'Waverley'; and 'Alicia de Lacy: an Historical Romance' (4 vols., 1814). 'Ringrove, or, Old Fashioned Notions' (1827), her last novel, written when West was sixty-nine, broke a silence of over ten years. Pamela Lloyd has also identified a children's story, 'The Sorrows of Selfishness' by Prudentia Homespun, as the work of West. 
West's conservative views on woman's role are particularly strident in her popular conduct literature: 'Letters to a Young Man' (1801), written to her son and dedicated to Percy, went through six editions by 1818. This was followed by 'Letters to a Young Lady' (1806), which was dedicated to Queen Charlotte and addressed to Miss Maunsell, who died in 1808. In many respects 'Letters to a Young Lady' forms an ideological counterpart to Mary Wollstonecraft's 'Vindication of the Rights of Woman' (1792). Where Wollstonecraft advocates 'Rights', West insists on 'Duties'. However both, as feminist critics have pointed out, were involved in the debate on the 'Woman's question' and foregrounded the necessity of improved education for women, although not for the same ends. 
Jane West wrote poetry from a young age, much of it in a didactic vein. Roger Lonsdale, editor of 'Eighteenth Century Women's Poetry' (1990), considers her best poetry to be that written in a familiar manner rather than her more polished, consciously literary verse. Her poetic works include 'Miscellaneous Poetry, Written at an Early Period of Life' (1786), her least interesting collection; 'The Humours of Brighthelmstone: a Poem' (1788); 'Miscellaneous Poems and a Tragedy' ['Edmund'] (1791); 'An Elegy on the Death of the Right Honourable Edmund Burke' (1797); 'Poems and Plays' (vols. 1 and 2, 1799; 3 and 4, 1805); and 'The Mother: a Poem in Five Books' (1799). 'Miscellaneous Poems, Translations and Imitations' (1780), previously attributed to her, is now known to be the work of Benjamin West. West's poems also appeared in journals and anthologies of the day. She also wrote 'Select Translations of the Beauties of Massillon' (1812) and 'Scriptural Essays Adapted to the Holy Days of the Church of England' (2 vols., 1816). West's dramatic works have now been largely forgotten. A contemporary commentator attributes her lack of dramatic success to the vogue for German sentimental drama ('GM', 1st ser., 69.1129). West was herself a contributor for many years to the 'Gentleman's Magazine'. 
West's reputation in her own day was for the clear didacticism of her texts. It was reported that Queen Charlotte purchased her novels, and Bishop Percy, who had praised West's writing and character in the 'British Critic' (1801), complained of his delay in obtaining a copy of 'A Tale of the Times' from the circulating libraries at Brighton owing to its popularity. Her works were recommended for 'their pure morality, and forcible arguments', and her character described as 'a model of imitation' in her roles as 'a wife, a mother, and a daughter' ('GM', 1st ser., 69.1128). Her obituarist took great pains to dispel any inference of lowly status associated with the author insisting that her 'gentlewoman' status was concurrent with her literary accomplishments (ibid., 1st ser., 72.99). Little is known of West's actual social status during her lifetime, although Pamela Lloyd has uncovered her will and other papers which reveal that West, as sole beneficiary of her parents, inherited in 1805 property which, when sold in 1812, produced $3000. West's descriptions of herself reinforce a linking of domesticity and morality with female literary authority: she insists that 'My needle always claims the preeminence of my pen. I hate the name 'rhyming slattern'' ('GM', 1st ser., 72.99). However later critics (Lonsdale, 1990, Shattock, 1993) have pointed out that West was not above self-promotion and exploiting the media of the day; about 1800 there seems to have been a conscious campaign to obtain a wider audience for her. 
West's life and writing career were long but towards the end of her life she felt herself to be out of kilter with the times. This sense of isolation was increased by her failing sight. She describes herself as 'an old Q. in the corner whom the rest of the world has forgotten' (Lloyd, 470). West died on 25 March 1852 at Little Bowden aged ninety four, having lived most of her adult life there, in a 'retired situation with few connections', as she described her circumstances, and never achieving the wider literary fame that she courted. She was buried at St Nicholas's Church, Little Bowden. Her estate was divided among her six grandchildren; her manuscripts and letters were originally left to her grandson the Revd Edward West, but these have not been traced. 


@@@@@


doc= 29087


West, John, first Earl De La Warr (1693-1766), politician and army officer, was born on 4 April 1693, the son of John West, sixth Baron De La Warr ('c'.1663-1723), and his wife, Margaret (died 1738), the daughter and heir of John Freeman, a London merchant. He was educated at Eton College and then went on the grand tour, from which he returned in 1712. On 18 August of that year he was appointed clerk-extraordinary of the privy council, a post he held until 1723. He was elected as MP for Grampound in Cornwall on 27 January 1715. A loyal government whig, he voted with the ministry on all but one occasion, and did not stand for re-election in 1722. 
West continued to serve in the army, rising to the rank of lieutenant-colonel in December 1717. On 25 May 1721 he married, in secret, Lady Charlotte Maccarthy (died 1735), the daughter of Donough Maccarthy or MacCarty, fourth earl of Clancarty, with whom he had two sons and two daughters. On his father's death in May 1723 he became seventh Baron De La Warr. He was made lord of the bedchamber to George I on 3 June 1725, became KCB in the same year, and on being assigned treasurer of the household in 1731 he was sworn of the privy council. In March 1736 he was sent to Saxe-Gotha to accompany Princess Augusta to England, where she was to marry Frederick, prince of Wales. According to Lord Hervey, De La Warr was chosen on account of his unprepossessing figure and awkwardness in company. This, it was hoped, would prove unattractive to the princess and curb the prince's jealousy. 
On 2 July of the following year De La Warr was appointed captain-general and governor of New York and New Jersey, though he remained in England, where he continued to play an active role in politics from the Lords. In February 1732 he criticized the reintroduction of Samuel Sandys's 'Pension Bill'. He served as speaker during the absence of Peter, Lord King, in 1733, actively promoted legislation against Edinburgh following the Porteous riots in 1736, and criticized in February 1739 those who petitioned against the recent convention with Spain. In the same month he attempted to have the author and publisher of an anti-government satire, 'Manners' (1739), questioned in the Lords. His bid to arrest the author, Paul Whitehead, for non-attendance was at first opposed but then supported in the house. 
De La Warr's eclectic but always pro-government political career continued in the 1740s. In June 1742 he spoke against a measure to secure trade and navigation rights for merchants in wartime. He later defended the ministry's 'Spirituous Liquors Bill' and criticized a bill proposing increased trade to the Levant (May 1744) while defending the Turkey Company -- of which he was governor -- against charges of being a monopoly. He also took an active part in debates over the political responsibilities of the House of Lords. In February 1740 he defended the ministry's decision to request war finances from the Commons alone. This was a position he later came to regret, as a speech on 12 March 1742 makes clear. Later in the same year he introduced several changes to procedures in the Lords, notably on the issue of proxy voting. In December 1747 he was appointed governor of Tilbury, and on 29 April 1752, of Guernsey. In March 1754 he was for a second time elected speaker of the house, during Lord Hardwicke's absence. 
On 15 June 1744 De La Warr married his second wife, Anne Nevill, 'nee' Walker (died 1748), the widow of George Nevill, thirteenth Baron Abergavenny. In May 1749 he made an appearance at the jubilee masquerade at Ranelagh dressed as Queen Elizabeth's porter, a costume he wore again at a Russian masquerade at Somerset House on 6 February 1755. He also pursued his military career in the 1740s: he commanded a brigade at the battle of Dettingen (1743) and was promoted to the rank of major-general (March 1745), lieutenant-general (September 1747), and general (March 1755). In March 1761 he was created Earl De La Warr and Viscount Cantelupe by George III. He died on 16 March 1766 and was buried on 22 March at St Margaret's, Westminster. 
His son, 
The fourth earl's son, 


@@@@@


doc= 29088


John West, second Earl De La Warr (1729-1777), politician and army officer, entered the army in 1746 as an ensign in the 3rd infantry guards and rose to the rank of colonel (May 1758), major-general (8 March 1761), and lieutenant-general (30 April 1770). From 1761 to 1766 he was vice-chamberlain to Queen Charlotte, and served as master of the horse from 1766 to November 1768, when he was named lord chamberlain. He died in Audley Square, London, on 22 November 1777, and was buried on 30 November at St Margaret's, Westminster. He married on 8 August 1756 Mary (died 1784), the daughter of Lieutenant-General John Wynyard. They had two sons, William Augustus (1757-1783), who became third Earl De La Warr, and John Richard (1758-1795), fourth earl, who married Catherine (died 1826), the daughter of Henry Lyell and Catherine Allerstree of Bourne, Cambridge. 


@@@@@


doc= 29089


West, Sir John (1774-1862), naval officer, was born at Twickenham, Middlesex on 28 July 1774, the eldest son of Lieutenant-Colonel Temple West (died 1783), of the Grenadier Guards, and his wife, Jane, daughter of Pitt Drake. He was the grandson of Vice-Admiral Temple West and, through his grandmother, great-grandson of Admiral Sir John Balchen; his father was the second cousin of William Pitt the younger; his grandfather's sister was the first wife of Alexander Hood, Viscount Bridport. West entered the navy in June 1788 on board the 'Pomona', with Captain William Domett, himself a follower of Alexander Hood. He was afterwards in the 'Salisbury', flagship of Vice-Admiral Mark Milbanke, and in the 'London', flagship of Alexander Hood. He was promoted lieutenant on 27 July 1793, and in 1794 was a lieutenant of the 'Royal George' in the battles of 1 June 1794 and 23 June 1795. On 7 September 1795 he was made commander; in December was appointed to the sloop 'Diligence' in the West Indies, and on 15 November 1796 was posted to the frigate 'Tourterelle' (30 guns). From 1807 to 1809 he commanded the 'Excellent' (74 guns), in the Mediterranean, and from 1809 to 1814 the 'Sultan' (74 guns), in the Mediterranean and on the home and West Indian stations. 
West married, in May 1817, Harriett (died 1858), only daughter of John Adams of Northamptonshire; they had three sons and two daughters. West became a rear-admiral on 12 August 1819, vice-admiral on 22 July 1830, and admiral on 23 November 1841; he was made a KCB on 4 July 1840. From April 1845 to April 1848 he was commander-in-chief at Devonport, with his flag in the 'Queen' (110 guns). He was made admiral of the fleet on 25 June 1858, and a GCB on 18 May 1860. He died, at his residence, 99 Eaton Square, London, on 18 April 1862. West's career was made by family connections, and distinguished largely by longevity. 


